Integrating Science and Writing in Multimedia Science Fictions:Investigating Student Interactions in Role-takingShiyan Jiang, Ji Shen, and Blaine E. Smiths.jiang@umiami.edu, j.shen@miami.edu, blaine.smith@miami.eduUniversity of MiamiAbstract: We explore characteristics of group interactions in an afterschool program designedfor middle school students to practice integrated STEM learning and digital literacies. In theprogram, students self-selected roles (e.g., writers, scientists, artists, and engineers) and workedin small groups to create multimedia science fictions. In order to understand the high integrationlevel between science and writing in one focus group’s final product, this study examinesstudents’ collaborative learning processes, the characteristics of their interactions, and theirrole-changing patterns. We found that the high integration level between science and writingmay be explained by (a) the interactions between the writer and the scientist during discussionand multimodal composing, and (b) the catalyst role of the artist in the group discussion.Keywords: interdisciplinary learning, role-taking, multimodality, science literacy, digital literacies,collaborative learningIntroductionScientific literacy lies in the intersection between the literacy skills of speaking, listening, reading, and writing,and scientific practices such as evaluating science ideas and communicating science ideas to others (Glynn &Muth, 1994; Norris & Phillips, 2003). While there is still no universal agreement on the definition of scientificliteracy, the literature explains that writing is one critical tool for promoting scientific literacy. Along with theneed for developing literacy skills on traditional print texts, many have called for an expanded view of literacywhere the learner is supported as both a critical consumer and skillful producer of digital multimodal texts(NCTE/IRA, 2012). Consuming, integrating, and creating multimodal texts in digital environments involves newways of thinking (Leu, Kinzer, Coiro, & Cammack, 2004; Mayer, 2008), including the task of making meaningbetween the interactions of multiple media and modes (e.g., visuals, sound, text, and movement) and movingbeyond disciplinary constraints (Jewitt, 2009).Deep learning requires an environment in which students take on identities they value and becomeheavily invested (Gee, 2005). This perspective on identity has been broadly studied in the scientific literacy field.For instance, Reveles, Cordova, and Kelly (2004) found that students could be supported in scientific literacywhen they were provided with opportunities to enact the identity of scientist in reading, writing, speaking, andthinking about science. The same perspective on identity was applied to digital literacies education. For example,Vasudevan, Schultz, and Bateman (2010) analyzed the multimodal storytelling composing process of fifth gradersand found that the students experienced meaningful learning by taking the role as writers and building literateidentities on authorship and authority towards stories they wrote. However, there has been much less work devotedto support developing students’ discipline-specific identities in interdisciplinary environments. In particular, thereis a paucity of research examining the collaborative learning processes of adolescents embodying different reallife identities (e.g., writer, scientist, and designer) while working in small groups.Integrating perspectives from science literacy and digital literacies, we developed an afterschool programaimed at engaging middle school students in collaboratively learning through making multimedia science fictions.The learning objectives for participants included developing digital literacies and STEM practices, formingcreative and collaborative habits of mind, and learning about different STEM careers. In an earlier analysis, wedeveloped a matrix to examine if the student-generated fictions integrated science and literacy well (Jiang, Shen,& Smith, 2015). In this study, we focused on student collaboration processes in order to understand themechanisms that contributed to the varied integration levels of their final products. The following researchquestion guided this study: What are the key characteristics of group interactions related to student roles thatcontribute to high integration between science and writing?MethodsProgram designICLS 2016 Proceedings346© ISLSOur afterschool program was first piloted in spring 2015 in a public middle school in an urban Southeastern cityin the United States. The research team included two university professors (one focused on STEM education andthe other on literacy education), three doctoral students, and one undergraduate student. The two professors taughtthe program and the other team members assisted with the program development and research. Sixteen students(grade 6-8) participated in the study initially. Students worked in small groups of three to four to create digitalmultimodal science fictions. Each team member could self-select one of the following roles (with the requirementthat each team has to have a writer and a scientist): (1) Writers were in charge of developing the science fictionnarrative based on brainstorming sessions and discussions with group members; (2) Scientists were responsiblefor monitoring the inclusion and accuracy of science vocabulary, concepts, and background knowledge, as wellas linking their story to “science entries” where they elaborated on science concepts; (3) Artists led the creationof visual and audio representations for all main characters and/or scenes in the story; (4) Engineers wereaccountable for designing buildings, vehicles, and settings for the story. Despite the differentiated roles, the teammembers were asked to collaborate with each other on their individual tasks. For instance, the artist may create adrawing of a character and the writer can write a paragraph to describe the character. The pilot study includednine weekly sessions (approximately 1 hour each). Table 1 outlines the session plans. Throughout the sessions,students were introduced to several technological tools, including Scratch, Bitstrips, and other tools for creatingmultimodal artifacts.Table 1: Session plansDateJan 15Jan 29(Sessionthree)Research Team-Introduce the project-Prepare some sciencefiction topics for discussion-Science topic/resourcespresentations-Tutorial on iKOS forwriting science fictions-Scratch training session-Tutorial on story writing-Share ZEE’s story (andelaborate on the roles)Feb 12-Bitstrips Training sessionFeb 19-Tutorial on how to includedifferent science resourcesFeb 26-Milestone checks with eachgroupMar 5(Sessionseven)-Role debriefMar 12NAMar 19-EvaluationJan 22(Sessiontwo)Student Activity-Understand the different roles forthe project-Brainstorm/share fiction topics-Create iKOS accounts-Learn Scratch for creatinganimations-Students form groups withguidance-Small group works on their plotand further discuss each person’srole and responsibility-Small group debrief-Small group discusses their story-Peer feedback session-Learn Bitstrioops for creatingcharacters-Small group works on theirstory/final product-Science knowledge check, searchand sharing-Peer feedback session-Small group works on theirstory/final product-Group progress check-Small group works on theirstory/final product-Role debrief (with groups ofstudents of the same roles)-Small group works on theirstory/final productFinal PresentationExpected outcome-Students understand whatparticipation in this projectentails.-Student groups formed-Student roles decided-User accounts created-Students learn how to andScratch-Each group has an outlineof a story-Each group learns whattheir peer group works on-Students learn to useBitstrips-Each group learns whattheir peer group works on-Students understand thescience involved in theirfictions-Students meet themilestone check (Need toprovide specificcriteria/guidelines)-Students refineunderstanding of their rolesin relationship to their teamwork-Finish final products-Present final productsAll students used iKOS (ikos.miami.edu), an online knowledge building platform (Shen, Jiang, Chen, & Namdar,2014), to create knowledge entries and multimodal science fiction stories. Figure 1 shows some screen shots fromstudent artifacts.ICLS 2016 Proceedings347© ISLSFigure 1. Sample screen shots from student artifacts including uploaded student drawing related to their fiction(a), story in a lab log style (b), and graphics included in the story (c).Data collection and analysisThree of the four groups completed their final stories, entitled “Teleportation”, “ReptilianKing”, and“SuperSoldier”. Our earlier analysis (Jiang et al. 2016) examined the integration level of students’ multimodalscience fictions. One of the integration aspect indicated how well science concepts were interwoven into thescience fiction story line. For example, here was a sentence that was coded as high integration in story“ReptilianKing”: “The rebels released a gas Exavier had produced called Antidotum that could render Vennenumuseless by having it combine with the Anidotum producing a harmless gas (a new substance) instead, in a chemicalreaction”. The sentence demonstrated that an imaginary chemical reaction was incorporated in its key plot:Exavier, the main character, developed a material called Antidotum to protect the rebels from chemical weaponattack. It could form chemical reaction with Vennenum (a substance mined and used by the army of the ReptilianKing as a chemical weapon) and release harmless gas. In contrast, story “SuperSoldier” had only included sciencevocabulary such as “clone” but did not weave these scientific ideas in their story narrative.Among the three stories, the story “ReptilianKing” had the highest integration between science and storybased on the aforementioned analysis. In this study we examined students’ group interactions and team dynamicsthat could have contributed to high integration in their final fictions. Our analysis drew on the multiple sources ofdata we collected: Screen captures together with audio records of students’ conversations; video records ofstudents as they collaborated in small groups; knowledge entries including the science fiction chapters created iniKOS; semi-structured individual interviews with students to better understand their learning experience in theprogram.Table 2: Coding categories that focus on examining whether students were enacting presumed rolesCodeDescriptionExampleExpected role = In-action roleStudents act as roles that are thesame as their self-selected roles(i.e., writer, scientist, artist, andengineer) during their speakingturns.Student A: “what is the setting?How about in an alternatedimension?” (Student A, theexpected “writer”, was discussingthe story setting.)Expected role ≠ In-action roleStudents act as roles that aredifferent from their self-selectedroles during their speaking turns.Student B: “Patrik (the name of acharacter), how about Logan?”(StudentB,theexpected“scientist”, was discussing thestory characters.)In-action role is generalRoles that students act as aregeneral or obscure.Student C: “what’s your idea?”(This statement from student Cdoes not entail any role-specificinformation.)ICLS 2016 Proceedings348© ISLSWe examined program sessions when the students had an opportunity to discuss and work on their projectin small groups. We transcribed the discussion and removed off-task turns. We then coded the transcripts turnby-turn using Atlas.ti 6.2 following the coding categories emerged from the analysis (Table 2). We specificallyexamined if the students were enacting their presumed roles in the project. Meaningful episodes were then selectedto illustrate issues pertaining to the research question on investigating key characteristics of group interactions.Each episode consisted of a small set of consecutive turns among the group members. We focused mainly on theinteraction between the scientist and the writer since the integration between science and writing was the focus ofthe study. In this paper, we only report findings from the group that demonstrated the highest integration level(group “ReptilianKing”).FindingsThe analysis described in this section examined key characteristics of group interactions that related to studentroles that contribute to high integration between science and writing in story “ReptilianKing”. The storyline ofthe science fiction was centered on two characters who travel through a wormhole to rescue a partner only to getcaught in a war between the Reptilian King and his rebels. The story had 2938 words in 160 sentences, amongwhich 21 sentences contained science ideas. Students represented three roles in the group while creating“ReptilianKing”. According to the first session survey, the scientist and the artist picked their first preference astheir roles and the writer picked his second preference as his role.The process: characteristics of group discussionWe selected three sessions to analyze student interactions because these sessions provided opportunities for themto work in small groups on their fiction writing and they also represented different phases into the project. Insession two students formed small groups, picked preferred roles, and brainstormed fiction topics. In session three,students further brainstormed details in their story. In session seven, they worked toward finishing up their mainstory line.Turn and time distribution across rolesWe first looked at each member’s contribution through turns they took. A turn is defined as the time period fromthe speaker starts talking to either a new speaker stops the speaker, or the speaker is cut-off, or the speaker finisheshis or her turn in an overlapped transition, talking simultaneously with a new speaker who takes the subsequentturn (Silverman, 2006). There were 51, 105, and 59 turns in sessions 2, 3, and 7 respectively (Table 3).Table 3: Distribution of participation in terms of number of turns and time in secondsSession #S2S3S7Writer16 (46.1)41 (351.0)22 (63.0)Scientist16 (73.3)33 (130.3)14 (47.6)Artist19 (82.5)31 (100.1)23 (76.0)Total51 (201.9)105 (581.4)59 (186.6)We also tolled the time each speaker took (see Figure 2). In session 2, there was no notable difference in both thetime and turn distributions across different roles. In session 3, the writer dominated the group discussion accordingto the time distribution illustrated in Figure 2. He tried to describe the whole story (e.g., plots and characters), andthe scientist contributed science ideas and some plots most of which were included in the final story. The artistalso wanted to add some plot ideas, but most of them were not included in the final story. In session 7, most ofthe time the artist explained her designs of characters and the writer gave some suggestions on the designs.However, the scientist rarely engaged in the discussion of designs. Instead, he pointed out that the writer’s entrywas less scientific and proposed to write another entry based on the writer's entry but in a more scientific way.That’s why the scientist took the least talking time in session 7.Figure 2. Time distribution according to role among the team members across sessionsICLS 2016 Proceedings349© ISLSInteraction patterns between the scientist and the writerWhile examining and reflecting on the interactions between the scientist and the writer, we derived threeinterrelated themes that point to why this group produced a high science integration story. One thing to note isthat this group had 3 members only; so only writer, scientist, and artistic were represented.Theme 1: Adding science vocabulary to the story by the scientist. The scientist helped to addscientific vocabulary into the story while the writer described the plot. In the following excerpt from session 3,the writer explained that the main character developed a new technology that had the ability to make travelingpossible to an alternate universe and then the scientist brought up the term “wormhole technology” without furtherscientific explanation.Writer:Scientist:Writer:No, he is a human who is trying to use a new technology, a portal technologyWormhole technology.Yeah, wormhole technology. To use it to transport, two porters, one in thenorthern part and one in the southern part…In their final story, there were some sentences coded as low integration, such as the following one: “Rogue …activated the device and created a wormhole of gigantic proportions”. These sentences contained sciencevocabularies, but they were not central to the story development.Apparently, this kind of interaction between the scientist and the writer may not directly improve theintegration level of the story. However, we want to stress that adding scientific vocabulary increases the potentialfor high integration since it can trigger the discussion about the science idea.Theme 2: Building on each other’s ideas to co-develop the story line. In this group, the writer and thescientist also frequently built on each other’s ideas. For instance, the following excerpt occurred in session 3:Writer:Scientist:Writer:Scientist:Writer:It is kind of like an alternate universe, where, let's see, where men did notevolve, its species dominated. It took its place. Like the reptilian.Yeah. The meteor did not hit the earth. And it did not die out.The dinosaursBut that means that they have evolved eventually because it has been a longtime.Yeah, it's intelligent. So our characters should be intelligent but looks likedinosaurs.The writer thought that the setting was an alternate universe where human did not evolve and the scientistexplained that the alternate universe should be a place that was different from the earth because it was hit by themeteor. Enlightened by the scientist’s explanation, the writer set the species in the alternate universe to be speciesevolved from dinosaurs. This discussion was reflected in their final story with the following high integrationsentence: “Yes, for you see the meteor you said was supposed to hit our planet as it did your Earth never quite hitus, therefore our species (species evolved from dinosaurs) didn’t become extinct and we managed to survive andevolve.’ said Muktav”. These sentences not only contained science vocabularies with explanations but alsoelaborated on key elements in the story (in this case, the origins of key characters in the story).Theme 3: Rewriting the writer’s entry to elaborate on the science aspect. The scientist rewrote thewriter’s entry that contained a brief explanation on science ideas from the perspective of story plots and the writerhyperlinked the scientist’s entry with their group final story. As shown in the following excerpt, the scientistproposed to rewrite the writer’s entry in a more scientific way. The writer agreed and promised to hyperlink hisentry with the scientist’s entry. The rewriting behavior could also explain why the integration level is high becausethe scientist and the writer had a common understanding on the science idea in this context.Scientist:Writer:How about making an entry about the science? The entry you created is moreabout the story. I will make it more scientific.And when you finish everything, I will hyperlink to that one (I created whichis less scientific) and it will be a hyperlink on a hyperlink.The writer hyperlinked the scientist’s entry “particle collider” with their final story. The following highintegration sentence in the final story reflected their discussion: “[Now nicknamed MOMENTUM, due to itcausing molecules to bump into each other at an accelerated rate, causing a large dense mass to be created similarICLS 2016 Proceedings350© ISLSto particle collider (hyperlink to the scientist’s entry) creating both black holes and wormholes] had reached itsand further use would cause it heat up and shut down”. In addition to providing an intensive description of thescience idea, these sentences explained the functionality of the key device in the story: the “MOMENTUM”.Role-changing patternsFigure 3 shows students’ different role-changing patterns across sessions. Data points above (below) the x-axisrepresent that the student's in-action role is the same as (different from) his/her expected role. Data points on thex-axis represent that the student's in-action role is obscure or general.Figure 3. Role-changing pattern. Red represents writer; green represents scientist; yellow represents artist.The writer. Overall, the writer played a leadership role in the group to coordinate with team membersto push the story line for the group. He was also flexible at times to act as either a scientist or an artist. In session 2,the student mainly played the role of a coordinator. For instance, he invited other team members to express theirideas by stating sentences like “What type of Sci-Fi you want to write about?” He also started to take the role ofscientist but gradually switched to be the writer. In session 3, he dominated the whole group discussion as a writerto discuss details of their story. For a couple of times he changed his role to be a scientist to respond to thescientist's suggestions. In session 7, he first worked as a coordinator and then he enacted as an artist to providesuggestions on the artist's designs. The writer’s coordinating behavior might make the other group members feelthat he was the dominator. He remarked in his post interview, “Although she [the artist] would probably say I amthe leader, but I don’t know, maybe I am”.The scientist. Overall, the scientist was faithful to his expected role to a great extent; he was also flexibleto enact other roles. In session 2, the student started the group collaboration by taking his expected role to providescience ideas. He also enacted as a writer a few times later in the session when discussing with the team membersabout the story. In session 3, he constantly switched from scientist to writer to discuss the plot besides providingscience concepts for the story. Recall on that session, a writing workshop was provided to all the students. Insession 7, he worked more as a scientist and coordinator, but also contributed a few times as a designer. Thescientist’s role changing pattern was consistent with his interview response. He stated in the post interview, “Iwas supposed to be the engineer and scientist but turned out I did more work as a scientist or a writer sort of inbetween”. Intuitively, the student’s changing roles between scientist and writer helped contribute to the highintegration of their final story.The artist. Overall, the artist was very clear about her role in the group. At times, she enacted as a writerin order to join the conversation between the other two members. At the beginning of session 2, the student’s inaction role was the same as her expected role, but later she changed her role into a writer to join the discussionbetween the writer and the scientist on brainstorming topics that they could write about. In session 3, she startedas a writer to engage in the group discussion on describing plots and characters. Later, she disengaged herselffrom discussing the plots of the story since she was more interested in designs. Therefore, she changed back to bean artist to describe characters and search for pictures that match the descriptions online. In session 7, she showedher designs to the other two members and shared her insights about the designs. The observations also matchedher interview responses: “My role is the artist and I animate everything. And I make sure the animations gosmoothly and all of the visual effects. (Researcher: So did your role change?) Kind of, because I also did some ofthe other information and stuff, mostly I’m the artist”.ICLS 2016 Proceedings351© ISLSEven though the artist’s clear self-identification did not necessarily enhance an efficient interactionbetween the writer and the scientist, she served as a catalyst that initiated their interaction.Artist:Scientist:Writer:Scientist:Writer:It could be interesting if her age reversed. And her appearance will lookdifferently.Ok. The trick is due to wormholes, it works with time staff, and she has agedsignificantly than they should be. Significantly less, orYeah, let's do it.So Rogue reversed her age.She was originally 30 years old.The artist brought up the idea of reversing age when discussing what would happen after one of the characterswent through the wormhole. The scientist justified that it could be caused by the fact that the wormholes workedwith time stuff, and the writer agreed on the idea and described that the character was originally 30 years old.It is reasonable to argue that the high integration between science and writing for this group’s final fictionwas instantiated in their group interaction patterns. Specifically, the writer and the scientist enacted each other’sroles frequently in order to carry out a fruitful conversation on both the story line and the science component. Attimes, the artist served as the catalyst for the interaction between the writer and the scientist.DiscussionOur study examined how students’ small group discussions and interactions were linked to their final products.We found that there were three different interaction themes between the writer and the scientist that possiblycontributed to the high integration of their multimodal science fiction story: (1) The scientist adding scientificvocabulary into the story line; (2) team members building on each other’s ideas to develop the story line; and (3)the scientist rewriting the writer’s entry in a more scientific way. It is important to note that these themes wereinterrelated during their collaborations. The first theme is the base for the other two because the group would havescience ideas to discuss and explore further only if someone brings in science vocabularies. The second and thethird themes represented interactions from different angles: one from students’ interaction on oral discussion andthe other from students’ interaction on composing artifacts.We believe that these themes have practical implications in facilitating student collaboration beyond thespecific context of our study. For instance, collaboration among learners can be facilitated at the surface level(e.g., bringing in different vocabularies) or at a deeper level (e.g., co-constructing artifacts). The key challenge ishow to move the team members from the surface to the deeper level (e.g., using the surface level as a base formore fruitful collaboration). In addition, our themes also suggest that there are different objects students can coconstruct (e.g., the conceptual storyline vs. the concrete knowledge entries in iKOS). A key research question ishow to exploit the affordances and constraints of (and bridge accordingly) these different types of objects so thatthey mutually support each other.Our research also examined the three students’ role-changing patterns to explain the high integrationlevel of the final story. Students self-selected their roles (accepted roles) as a writer, a scientist, or an artist at thebeginning of the project, while their in-action roles were changing over time during their discussion. They tendedto adopt and traverse their roles based on their interests, group dynamics, and the needs of the group. By comparingstudents’ role-changing patterns across sessions, we see how the writer played a leadership role in addition to hisexpected role; the scientist was flexible in changing roles while fulfilling his expected role; and the artist wasclear on her interest and utilized her advanced skills to be an artist. These observations pointed to the nuanced,dynamic, and complex processes in a collaboration environment. Besides team members understanding andenacting their specific roles in the collaboration process, our case hinted certain productive role-taking patterns:team members need to be flexible to flow between roles at times, (some) are willing to take on a leadership role,and (their participation) can elicit further interactions between other team members. Future empirical researchshould be devoted to understanding how we can design specific mechanisms to support these (or other) productiverole-taking/changing patterns.ReferencesGee, J. P. (2005). Learning by design: Good video games as learning machines. E-Learning and DigitalMedia, 2(1), 5-16.Glynn, S. M., & Muth, K. D. (1994). Reading and writing to learn science: Achieving scientific literacy. Journalof Research in Science Teaching, 31(9), 1057-1073.ICLS 2016 Proceedings352© ISLSJewitt, C. (2009). The Routledge handbook of multimodal analysis. New York, NY: Routledge.Jiang, S., Shen, J., & Smith, B. (2016, April). Assessing students’ scientific literacy in collaborative science fictionwriting. Poster presented at the 2016 Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association(AERA), Washington, D.C.Leu, D.J., Jr., Kinzer, C.K., Coiro, J., & Cammack, D.W. (2004). Toward a theory of new literacies emergingfrom the Internet and other information and communication technologies. In R.B. Ruddell & N.J. Unrau(Eds.), Theoretical models and processes of reading (5th ed., pp. 1570–1613). Newark, DE: InternationalReading Association.Mayer, R. E. (2008). Multimedia literacy. In J. Coiro, M. Knobel, C. Lankshear & D. J. Leu (Eds.), Handbook ofresearch on new literacies (pp. 359-376). New York, NY: Lawrence Erlbaum.National Council of Teachers of English/International Reading Association. (2012). NCTE/IRA standards for theEnglish language arts. Retrieved from http://www.ncte.org/standards/ncte-iraNorris, S.P., & Phillips, L.M. (2003). How literacy in its fundamental sense is central to scientific literacy. ScienceEducation, 87 (2), 224–240.Reveles, J. M., Cordova, R., & Kelly, G. J. (2004). Science literacy and academic identity formulation. Journalof Research in Science Teaching, 41(10), 1111-1144.Shen, J., Jiang, S., Chen, G., & Namdar, B. (2014). Designing the Innovative Knowledge Organization System(iKOS) for Science Learning. Poster presented at the Annual International Convention of the Associationfor Educational Communications and Technology (AECT), Jacksonville, FL.Vasudevan, L., Schultz, K., & Bateman, J. (2010). Rethinking composing in a digital age: Authoring literateidentities through multimodal storytelling. Written Communication, 27(4), 442-468.ICLS 2016 Proceedings353© ISLS