Fostering Deliberative Discourse in Schools Towards theConstitution of a Deliberative DemocracyBaruch Schwarz (co-chair), The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, baruch.schwarz@mail.huji.ac.ilAntti Rajala (co-chair), University of Helsinki, antti.rajala@helsinki.fiCarolyn P. Rosé, University of Pittsburgh, cprose@cs.cmu.eduSherice Clarke, University of Pittsburgh, sclarke@pitt.eduElizabeth Fynes-Clinton, University of Queensland, e.fynesclinton@uq.edu.auPeter Renshaw, University of Queensland, p.renshaw@uq.edu.auAnne Solli, University of Gothenburg, anne.solli@gu.seThomas Hillman, University of Gothenburg, thomas.hillman@gu.seÅsa Mäkitalo, University of Gothenburg, åsa.mäkitalo@gu.seTsafrir Goldberg, University of Haifa, tgoldberg@edu.haifa.ac.ilTuure Tammi, University of Helsinki, tuure.tammi@helsinki.fiRupert Wegerif (discussant), University of Exeter, R.B.Wegerif@exeter.ac.ukAbstract: This symposium focuses on forms of classroom discourse that have the potential tolead to societal change. The deployment of these forms of discourse that we designate asdeliberative discourse provides unique moments during which a communicative rationalizationis realized. We present very different programs in civic education, science, philosophy orhistory that realize this communicative rationalization. The common denominator of theseprograms is that they all provide long-term learning experiences. Through iterative enactmentof collaborative inquiry and/or argumentative moves, students acquire norms that prepare themfor the constitution of a deliberative democracy.Introduction35 years ago the German philosopher Jürgen Habermas faced the critique of subject-centered reason initiated byNietzsche and forcefully expounded by the post-modernist movement. Habermas vision of communicativerationalization was further developed by Amy Gutmann as the ideal of deliberative democracy. They saw inargumentative forms of discourse, in which power relations could be made visible and contested, the realizationof communicative rationalization.Engaging students in joint reasoning and resolving of disagreements through argumentation have gainedincreased attention in education (Schwarz & Baker, 2016). Accumulating evidence shows that structured andsocially supported argumentation can produce substantive learning gains in many school subjects and in generalreasoning (Resnick, Asterhan, & Clarke, 2015; Wegerif et al., 1999). However, in this symposium, we go beyondthe productivity of social argumentation in terms of learning gains to investigate whether and how classroomdiscourse can realize democratic participation, or in Gutmann’s terms instantiates moments of deliberativedemocracy. In particular, the symposium asks: How can deliberative democracy be conceptualized as a form ofclassroom discourse? How can deliberative discourse be fostered in school education?This symposium argues that, unfortunately, in democratic education, a lack of attention to the structuringof social interactions between teachers and students has crucially contributed to a failure of schools to engagestudents in democratic participation. For example, interaction in school democratic meetings are regularlydominated by a ‘control discourse’ that effectively delimits students’ possibilities to voice opinions andsuggestions outside a predefined agenda (e.g, Thornberg, 2010). We will delve into the actual forms of talk thatare at the same time productive in terms of learning gains and that realize the ideals of deliberative democracy.Moreover, the symposium argues that deliberative democracy can be fostered in schools by giving studentsopportunities to engage with complex and controversial topics characterizing democratic social life. Opening upspaces to engage with uncomfortable, current and historical issues triggers emotionally-loaded discussions that,with adequate tools, can potentially be turned to valuable learning experiences.The five symposium contributions will shed light on how schools can function as sites of deliberativedemocracy through promotion of diverse forms of deliberative discourse. Rosé and Clarke discuss the problemof deliberative democracy in terms of providing students in low-performing urban schools access to a specificform of deliberative discourse, Accountable Talk, in which accountability to reasoning and to knowledge iscounterbalanced by the accountability to the other (Michaels, O’Connor, & Resnick, 2008). Rosé and Clarke seekto tackle this problem by instilling Accountable Talk in science education. They developed teachers’ use ofAccountable Talk as well as series of student-level interventions designed to prepare students to engage in thewhole group teacher-led discussions in online CSCL activities and face-to-face activities. Tammi and RajalaICLS 2016 Proceedings1106© ISLSilluminate how what counts as deliberative discourse can be renegotiated in unfolding classroom interactionsbetween students and teacher. They present a program that sought to foster deliberative discourse in democraticclassroom meetings. They show how the rules of classroom discourse shifted from rules that stress the teacher’sauthority to more democratic rules. They also show how deliberative communication led to democratic decisionmaking. Fynes-Clinton and Renshaw focused on a multicultural school community that participated incollaborative philosophical inquiry (CPI). CPI has been established as the pedagogical method that underpins allcurriculum planning, development and implementation at the school. Although the involvement of students inCPI created a more democratic culture in the school, Fynes-Clinton and Renshaw show that inquiry was firstbased on “paper doubt” rather than on “genuine doubt” where students are authentically engaged in open-endedinquiry for an extended period of time. These expressions of genuine doubts in collaborative inquiry are discussedas expressions of democratic deliberation.Solli, Hillman, and Mäkitalo bring democracy at a place which is generally reserved to elite: scientificcontroversies generated by technoscientific innovations in a world that relies heavily on digitized information.They show that students can engage in deliberative discourse addressing scientific, societal, ethical and culturalperspectives in issues such as global warming, by using digitized information. The collaborative mapping of thesecontroversies involving tools for navigating support students’ engagement in complex issues. Schwarz andGoldberg create dialogue spaces in history in a multicultural context on hot issues that usually exacerbatedivergences among discussants. Through on-line discussions, Arabs and Jews discuss controversial issues aboutModern History of Israel. They show that through a meticulous design, they can harness emotions to productivedeliberative argumentation. The fact that deliberative discourse is sustained in long-term learning experiences onvery hot historical issues that generally divide these groups indicates that the students are ready for the constitutionof a deliberative democracy in a country with presently conflicting identities.Finally, Wegerif provides his reflections on the topic and opens the discussion.Fostering a culture of active deliberation through accountable talkCarolyn P. Rosé and Sherice Clarke, University of PittsburghA culture of active deliberation would be one in which students own their reasoning, and thereby see themselvesas sources of knowledge and insight within a community of other reasoners. As reasoners within a community ofreasoners, students would value both their own reasoning as well as the reasoning of others. A discourse cultureof this kind is ripe for inducing cognitive conflict, which can create opportunities for self-reflection and cognitiverestructuring. In our story, teachers play a guiding role, but students are the key agents of change. And technologyserves as a catalyst for change. We report on a longitudinal teacher development study with the goal of supportingteachers in their work to embed active deliberation through talk in urban schools.There is growing evidence that teachers can play an important role in fostering and supporting aclassroom culture of active deliberation. Specifically, when teachers lead students in classroom discussions wherethe goal of talk is collaborative sense-making about subject matter, and students are positioned as ‘knowers’within these discussions, students benefit in terms of steep increases in learning, long-term retention, transferacross subject matter and the development of reasoning (Resnick et al., 2015). Yet, we find that some populationsnever get access to the kind of active deliberation that grows the mind and society (Oakes, 1990; Kelly, 2008).Thus, the ideal of deliberative democracy is largely unrealized where it concerns populations of the highest need,e.g., students in low-performing urban schools. In this symposium talk we report on several studies embeddedwithin a five-year longitudinal project that sought to disrupt this pattern by embedding Accountable Talk (AT) inscience instruction in an urban school district (Michaels et al., 2008).In our work, we sought to target populations of teachers that were not yet experts in AT, and worktowards developing their use of AT discourse moves. Likewise, we focused on student populations that have nototherwise experienced rich discursive instruction. We conducted a longitudinal design study in an urban schooldistrict that had failed to meet national standards for achievement on standardized tests for 5+ years.The teacher-level intervention focused on developing teachers’ use of AT in whole class discussionsthrough professional development workshops and one-on-one coaching. Training focused on how to embed ATin their curriculum, plan a discussion, and engage in AT simulations. In addition to the teacher-level intervention,we developed a series of student-level interventions designed to prepare students to engage in the whole groupteacher led discussions. Some of these activities were online CSCL activities focused on collaborative inquiry,while others were face-to-face activities focused on developing reading comprehension skills. We expected theseactivities to increase student responsiveness to attempts by the teacher to engage them in active discussion andtherefore serve a reinforcing effect of the teacher-level intervention. Each of the CSCL interventions werethemselves experimental studies (e.g., Dyke et al., 2013; Clarke et al., 2013)ICLS 2016 Proceedings1107© ISLSThe guiding role of teachers is highlighted in a study of student agency in teacher led whole classdiscussions. Here we took an in-depth examination of student participation in these discussions to unpack thenature of students’ agency (Clarke et al., 2016). Examining the classroom discussions at the turn level tounderstand what gives rise to students’ participation, we found a pattern whereby if a student exercises theiragency to participate in discussion, the teacher solicits that student to participate again later in the discussion, andvice versa. This finding suggests a dynamic duality of student agency in discussions: students are responsive tothe teacher’s guidance, and teachers are responsive to students’ agency in discussion. So while students may havegeneral profiles with respect to their participation in discussions (e.g., high participators and low participators)and enacted agency (i.e., highly agentive and marginally agentive), students’ sense of agency is not a stable.Students require some support.While this story suggests an essential role for instructors to keep the discussion active, a further analysisprovides evidence of the extent to which even the teacher’s behavior is supported by the agency taken by students.Here we recount an analysis of teacher growth in AT appropriation in the experience of one instructor with severalof his classes. The students participated in online small group activities facilitated by intelligent conversationalagents several times in Years 1 and 2, immediately prior to a teacher-led whole class discussion on the diffusionand Punnett Squares respectively. A conversational agent-as-facilitator must be able to manage severaldifferently-scoped supports and behaviors concurrently. In all three studies, students worked in groups of three tomake predictions, discuss observations, and generate interpretations of their observations. Intelligent computeragents supported student groups providing a macrolevel structuring of the task and some level of micro-levelsupport, which in some cases included AT facilitation moves. Across the three studies, we found positive effectson student learning of the agent that engaged in AT facilitation (Dyke et al., 2013).The most striking result was the effect of the students (returning to the classroom after these activities)on the teacher facilitation of AT. Using growth modeling techniques applied to a series of 57 transcripts codedfor the prevalence of AT using an automated technique, we determined that teacher growth was very slow overtime, but a spike in uptake of AT was concentrated in lessons immediately following collaborative activities, withan effect size of 1.7 standard deviations. We concluded, that the scaffolding for students’ AT in the CSCLenvironment had an impact on how the teacher intellectually positioned students in the subsequent discussion.Thus the technology served as a catalyst for change and the students as agents of change in the discourse cultureof these classrooms.Thus, students can play a particularly important role in shaping the discourse culture of classroomstowards deliberative, if the teacher creates an opportunity space for students to enact agency in discussions. Wecount the technology as a catalyst for change, as our evidence shows that intelligent agent support in groupactivities had a facilitative effect on students’ active deliberation in subsequent discussion.Fostering deliberative communication in democratic classroom meetingsTuure Tammi and Antti Rajala, University of HelsinkiResearch in the learning sciences has established that the structuring of classroom interactions has a significantimpact on students’ learning (e.g., Resnick et al., 2015). Some research goes further to suggest that guidingstudents in using talk as a tool for reasoning not only supports their academic learning but can equip them withresources necessary for democratic participation (Michaels et al., 2008). Yet, empirical research on naturallyoccurring classroom interactions during school democratic meetings shows that the structuring of theseinteractions counteract attempts to engage students in democratic participation (Thornberg, 2010). Theseinteractions have been characterized as ‘control discourse’ that feature the teacher controlling the classroominteractions through limiting the students’ possibilities to pose questions and through evaluating their responses.In this presentation, we put the research on deliberative democratic education into dialogue with theresearch on academically productive talk (Wegerif et al, 1999). We will demonstrate how teachers and researcherscan change classroom interactional patterns to foster deliberative communication and democracy. Deliberativecommunication not only involves active listening and resolution of disagreements through argumentation, but alsoallows the questioning of authorities and conventional views (Englund, 2006). We zoom in on the interactions ofone fourth-grade classroom in Finland in which the researcher and the teacher had conducted an intervention tofoster deliberative communication over three school terms (2008-2009). We ask: Can deliberative communicationbe introduced in an elementary classroom? How does the introduction of deliberative communication contributeto students’ opportunities to engage in democratic participation?The intervention was based on action-research methodology through which material artifacts andinteractional norms were negotiated with the class. First, the students could communicate their suggestions andinitiatives and suggest a format for dealing with these. Second, time was allotted weekly to discuss and decide onICLS 2016 Proceedings1108© ISLSthe issues to be dealt with collectively. Third, ground rules for talk were negotiated with the students, followingthe procedures based on the Thinking Together program (Wegerif et al., 1999), which is a method for fosteringacademically productive talk. Fourth, the chosen issues were dealt with in the chosen format.The data for this presentation comprise the video recording of one deliberative meeting in which theclass was negotiating and deciding on what to do for a field trip. We decided on the basis of our preview of thevideos and earlier analysis of the data that this particular discussion, which occurred in the last meeting recordedin the data set, constituted a rich case illustrating the enactment of deliberative communication in this classroom.The analysis proceeded as follows. First, the video recording was transcribed. Second, to create an overview ofthe nature of the classroom interactions during the meeting we coded each speaking turn with respect to who wasthe speaker (teacher/student) and what was its interactional function. Third, we conducted a qualitative interactionanalysis of the classroom interaction by comparing its features with the criteria for deliberative communicationthat emerged from our review of the theoretical literature on the topic. In particular, we paid attention to referencesto the ground rules for deliberative communication negotiated with the students as part of the intervention. Fourth,we carried out a thematic analysis of the contents of the classroom talk to identify any connections with thestudents’ opportunities for democratic participation.Our findings show that establishing and negotiating communicative ground rules fostered a shift in thepattern of classroom interaction that enabled the emergence of deliberative communication. Our analysis of theinteractions indicated that the students had become acquainted with deliberative discursive norms, and thesenorms were put into practice to explore personal experiences and interests and to draft collectively acceptableconclusions. The students built on each other’s views either by supporting them or constructively refuting them.Disagreements were resolved through argumentation. Moreover, our findings indicate that the introduction ofdeliberative communication provided the students with new opportunities for democratic participation. Firstly,the students could not only evaluate, support and question each others’ views, but also those of the teacher. Likethe students, the teacher was also made accountable to the communicative ground rules. Secondly, throughdeliberation the class explored their relations to social practices in and out of school and made visible the ways inwhich the broader social conditions posed constraints for them and on the decision making. Thirdly, the studentsdid not only debate the topic but also the way the decision making process was unfolding. Consequently, thedecision making was made transparent instead of being treated as given by the authorities or as being beyondalternatives (cf., Thornberg 2010).There is great potential in democratic classroom meetings to create space and time for students to explore,debate and take action on issues they consider important. The relevance of these discussions reflects the fact thatthey may help students (and teachers) to reflect upon the complexity inherent in the lives of different peopleregarding common issues, as well as to question and redefine how they relate to social practices in and out ofschool. From this perspective, democratic education is not reduced to the provision of knowledge, skills anddispositions, but is a site for the development of political ways of being, doing and seeing that transcend predefinedand reproductive categories of what it means to be a student, a teacher or a citizen.Genuine doubt and collaborative philosophical inquiry: Towards a moredemocratic school cultureElizabeth Fynes-Clinton and Peter Renshaw, The University of Queensland, AustraliaThis paper draws upon an extended design-based investigation (2010 through 2015) into collaborativephilosophical inquiry (CPI) in an inner-city primary school that serves a multicultural community in BrisbaneAustralia. CPI in the classroom is a deliberative, dialogic process that aims to develop complex thinking andprepares students to become critical, creative and caring thinkers and reasonable, active citizens throughout theirlives. The first author (Fynes-Clinton) established CPI as the pedagogical method that informed curriculumplanning, development and implementation at the school. The CPI approach at the school was based on theoriginal work of Lipman (1980) and later adaptations incorporated by practitioners in the context of Australianschools (e.g., Chesters et al., 2013). Over the past six years, the school had undergone a significant cultural shiftin thinking and behaviour. There has been an identifiable lift in students’ engagement in learning and academicoutcomes as assessed through the national literacy and numeracy program of assessment (NAPLAN). Moreovera recent review of the school in 2015 by an external evaluator identified CPI as playing a key role in creating amore peaceful, caring and respectful community.This paper examines a particular feature of CPI, namely genuine doubt, which was identified as crucialto episodes of high quality student talk (Hilderbrand, 1996). The notion of genuine doubt, was proposed by thepragmatist Charles Sanders Peirce (1877) as key to collaborative inquiry. Peirce maintained that inquiry formsthe space between genuine doubt and a fixed or settled belief. Peirce contrasted genuine doubt with ‘paper doubt,’ICLS 2016 Proceedings1109© ISLSa term he coined to reject Descartes’ position on doubt as grounded in the theoretical rather than in practice. Peirceperceived genuine doubt to occur when an action or ‘real’ experience brings about a feeling of disequilibrium,resulting in one’s need to revise an existing belief, thus initiating an inquiry process. Later he reviewed his originalideas about genuine doubt, proposing that philosophical inquiry may commence with ‘cultivated doubt’ that leadsonto genuine doubt. (Hilderbrand, 1996; Pardales & Girod, 2006; Peirce, 1877).This paper draws upon a corpus of data from specific groups of students which included transcripts ofshared dialogue during CPI, student interview transcripts, student artefacts and teacher reflections. Data collectionwas implemented over two key phases. Phase one commenced with the school’s introduction of CPI in 2012 intwo multi-age classes: a Year 2/3 and a Year 4/5 class. The key focus of this phase was on the students’development of intellectual habits of thinking and learning that included for example, analogic reasoning,distinction making, justification of viewpoints, criteria building and testing reasoning with counterexamples. Thesecond phase of the study was implemented in mixed year level classes during the second semesters of 2013(students from years 2 to 7) and 2014 (students from years 4 and 5). The student participants were selected forthese classes due to their interest or skill in the learning area of philosophy. Students were introduced to theallegory of Plato’s Cave and specific philosophers’ theories of knowledge, wisdom, reality, existence and identity.The key focus of the research was students’ reconstruction of thinking habits in response to authentic inquiriesbased on students’ questions and connections they made to key philosophical theories (Dewey, 1957). Thisenabled students to reach beyond the intent of the school curriculum and provided opportunities for the cultivationof genuine doubt amongst the young inquirers. The following is an example of the kind of dialogue associatedwith an episode of genuine doubt. During this inquiry, the students were considering the possibility that peopleoften fear the unknown and this fear may prevent one from gaining wisdom about the world.Year 7 student 1: As I was listening to everyone it made me think a bit more – and think abouthaving wisdom. I don’t think you can be afraid if you have no wisdom because what leads tobeing afraid is you think about something and that leads to fear – like you are scared ofsomething that you think of – and I think – I – wisdom is the key that can open any door – likeif you have wisdom you can open the door to fear – you can open the door to like, questioningthe things you think in your mind and you become a lot more wise.Teacher: What do you think about that idea? (Student) doesn’t think you would be fearful ifyou didn’t have wisdom. It’s not possible to be fearful without wisdom?Year 4 student: (Student) said that wisdom opens many doors. Does it start fear or stop fear?(Further questioning and comments by students and teacher)Year 7 student 2: I want to extend on Josh’s idea. I think wisdom is like the key to unlock,like, fear. You have fear of the unknown – fear of that which you do not understand andknowledge takes away the cloak of misunderstanding...The initial analysis indicates that genuine doubt creates opportunities for students to build upon eachother’s contributions and creates a sense of a community of inquiry where students’ concerns and values can beshared and interrogated within the community. Students become invested in the establishment of a democraticcommunity of learners within their classroom (Dewey, 1916). This forms the basis of a more democratic andcaring school community. Genuine doubt arising from authentic inquiry within the classroom enables students toconsider ideas from a range of perspectives and thus gain a deeper understanding of the value and significance ofdemocracy.Engaging with issues through controversy mapping in a school sciencecontextAnne Solli, Thomas Hillman and Åsa Mäkitalo, University of GothenburgPublic debates of science and technoscientific innovations rely heavily on digitized information; they are availablethrough digital media and are generative of new uncertainties in the everyday lives of citizens. In concrete termsthey concern issues such as global warming, GMO, hydraulic fracturing etc. The field of science education haveresponded to the concern for scientific citizenship by introducing so called socioscientific issues (SSI) in schoolthat invite students’ engagement with scientific, societal, ethical and cultural perspectives on such issues (Zeidler& Nichols, 2009). For teachers who wish to engage their students in ongoing debates, it is a challenge to invitethe complexity of such issues as they rely on digitized information. As students turn to the Internet, such debatestake place in a mixed stream of website-genres, modalities and difference of opinion (Lemke, 2006). TheirICLS 2016 Proceedings1110© ISLSchallenge is to navigate their way through a vast amount of disparate voices, claims, arguments, insights andexperiences. In this situation, ways of mapping controversies through the extraction and analysis of digital data(Venturini & Latour, 2010) may provide a means to display such information in a more condensed and readableform – a map to be used for further exploration (Venturini, 2010).Controversy mapping has been claimed to provide alternative routes for students to engage withtechnoscientific issues of concern. While SSI projects typically have emphasized the exploration andappropriation of different scientific forms of reasoning and ethical considerations to support individual decisionmaking (Sadler, 2011; Nielsen, 2013), controversy mapping sees new forms of technical mediation as the key toimproved science literacy and public engagement. Whatever might be the case, we know that there is a rich varietyof digital tools and applications available and that there is a need to focus on their actual use before drawing anyconclusions about their implications for student learning. The precise manners in which tasks are initiated, whatresources are available and how students’ work will be assessed, have clear implications for their ways of engagingwith such issues (Furberg & Ludvigsen, 2008; Åberg, Mäkitalo, & Säljö, 2010). This calls for empirical studiesthat scrutinize how controversy mapping with digital tools constrain and/or support students’ learning aboutcurrent matters of concern for citizens, which is the aim of our study.Our conceptualization of learning as appropriation is analyzed through mediated interaction, whichfocuses the ways that semiotic means are entangled in student’s sense making as material sign vehicles (Wertsch,2007). Appropriation implies that students familiarize themselves with the mediating means that are salient intheir environment and learn to use them through interaction with others and in response to local concerns. In thisparticular study, we explore the heterogeneity of genres and social languages (Bakhtin, 1981) that become salientin students’ activities as they navigate complexity with the map as a point of departure.Empirically we have followed two classes (grade 11 and 12) in an upper secondary school were theyworked with controversy mapping as part of a project concerned with science-in-society lasting 3 weeks. Thestudents begin by selecting a controversy, they are introduced to scraping data from the Internet usingNavicrawler, and then learn to re-present that data in visual form using Gephi (creating a digital map of a networkof actors involved in the controversy). Our data for this study consist of video recordings of two groups of studentsin an activity where they are to explain the controversies they are exploring to fellow students, using the mapsthey have created. We analyze how they negotiate meaning, relevance and reliability and handle the many voicesand different accounts they encountered through their map-making.Our preliminary analysis show how the digital maps support the discussion by visually stabilizing thestakeholders and positions, making them publicly and jointly available for discussion. It also supports and sustainsa dialogic space in which students can orient to multiple perspectives. The students engage in questioning claimsof their fellow students and of stakeholders in their controversy. They also engage in justifying positions,explaining together, evaluating sources, and used the maps for understanding conflicting versions of the issue.The students also need to account for the processes of making their maps; how they were constructed and whatthey re-present. This implies that these students both negotiate and rely on these resources as vehicles forscrutinizing, reasoning and arguing. The students were challenged in appropriating the tools, but seemed toestablish a space of reflection. This space provided possibilities for the students to question their own assumptionsand submit themselves to the tension of conflicting viewpoints (Wegerif, 2013). We will conclude our paper bydrawing on what the discussion of these students imply, in terms of fostering a young citizen agency.Computer-supported deliberation about hot historical topics in a multi-ethniccontextBaruch Schwarz and Tsafrir Goldberg, The Hebrew University of JerusalemHistory began to be taught as a school discipline in Western countries from the middle of the nineteenth centuryonly. At the time of the Spring of Nations, the newly born Nation-State needed its citizens to share common valuesand beliefs. The most natural candidate for commonality was the official narrative that told the story of a nation.For a long time, textbooks provided indisputable narratives from which students were expected to extract facts orinterpretations. The History of the 20th century is a tremendous slap in the face of values in Western NationStates. Except for citizens who identify with radical right wing parties, there is a general consensus on somedegree of opening up to other cultures. Waves of immigration have also changed the cultural background of manyschools in Western countries to include students from different countries with different cultures and values. Thesechanges are particularly challenging for History teaching, especially in countries where conflicts are still alive (oreven memories of them). In this context, educators have adopted different pedagogical approaches. Goldberg(2013) identified three pedagogical approaches that are implemented nowadays in history classrooms. Theauthoritative-conventional approach (by far the most frequent approach) presents to the student a unique narrativeICLS 2016 Proceedings1111© ISLSthat reflects the point of view of the nation-state. This approach is often presented as a way to apply a ‘meltingpot’ policy for increasing shared values and beliefs among future citizens of the same country. The criticaldisciplinary approach consists in the appropriation of the concepts, practices and reasoning skills characterizinghistory as an academic domain. Contextual thinking (which denies an attitude toward the past dominated bypresent-day attitudes and experiences), evaluation of sources, and syntheses based on multiple (and conflicting)texts, are central according to this approach. Historical sources are referred to as testimonies to be treated withcircumspection. The third approach is the empathetic-narrative approach. It consists of organising encountersbetween students from groups with conflicting narratives, and encouraging them to express and listen toalternative interpretations of events. This approach is particularly suitable in countries where conflicts are stillvivid, but not only in such countries. It is characterized by the absence of judgmental expressions, and of defensivereactions.Goldberg (2013) compared the three approaches in Israel – a country involved in a conflict with respectto national identity, commitments to in-group narratives, interest in out-group perspectives and conceptions of theconflict, for a unit on modern history focusing on the 1948 war of independence between Jews and Arabs. Jewsand Arabs participated in small group discussions in the study. He showed the superiority of the criticaldisciplinary approach and of the empathetic-narrative approach, and the inferiority of the authoritative- traditionalapproach. These results are even more surprising in the light of the fact that students perform poorly when invitedto argue about dormant historical issues (Pontecorvo & Girardet, 1993), and that students often treated sources asinformation and only used the information that supported their claim (Lee & Ashby, 2000). The reasons for theproductivity of progressive approaches for emotionally-charged, ethnicity-related historical controversy historicalissues partly originates from meticulous argumentative design (evaluation of multiple texts, individualargumentative essay, dialectical argumentation in small groups and final essay) (Goldberg, Schwarz & Porat,2009).The dimension generally scrutinized in the context of group learning generally concerns the conceptualor the ideational. However, other dimensions the epistemological and the interpersonal dimensions are crucial,especially in long-term learning experiences (Schwarz & Baker, 2016). Our research shows that the approachadopted for history teaching impinges on the nature of discussions in class (teacher-led, or in small groups) isinfluential both to the construction of group identity and to improvement or deterioration of intergroup relations.Differences in effects of the approaches we study are salient not only in outcomes but in the quality of discussionsbetween groups (Schwarz & Shachar, in press). We have shown that the role of emotions according to the criticaldisciplinary and the empathetic-narrative approaches can often be beneficial in small-group discussions. Analysisof some discussions amongst students representing conflicting groups, who read and evaluated conflictingsources, revealed that emotions were intense but did not impair the deployment of rich argumentative moves(Schwarz & Goldberg, 2013). On the contrary, in certain cases, emotions fuels small group argumentation anddoes not impair clear thinking in a case where the conflict had already been settled but had left emotional scars.Research done so far on small group emotionally-loaded discussions in History in a multicultural contexthas been conducted in short-term interventions. We have currently engaged in research on discussions betweenArabs and Jews about controversial issues in the Modern History of the State of Israel. The on-line modality ispropitious for such a context. Students typically interact in dyads in consecutive activities (evaluation of sources,preparation for debate in same ethnicity group, critical discussion, collaborative writing). Through the use ofscripts that encourage a disciplinary, empathetic or authoritative approach, we manipulate the emotions of theparticipants. Also, in the course of the consecutive activities, we introduce historical issues for which collectivememory has different levels of vividness. This setting is intended to check changes of viewpoints fromepistemological deontic, conceptual and interpersonal perspectives in the long-term. If our first impressions willbe confirmed, the prolonged learning experiences based on a combination of critical- disciplinary and empatheticnarrative approaches may lead to argumentative forms of deliberation, in which epistemological andintersubjective dimensions will develop positively. Such envisioned outcomes might lead the students involvedin these learning experiences to be ready for the constitution of a deliberative democracy.ReferencesÅberg, M., Mäkitalo, Å., & Säljö, R. (2010). Knowing and arguing in a panel debate. Speaker roles andresponsivity to others. In K. Littleton & C. Howe (Eds.), Educational dialogues: Understanding andpromoting productive interaction (pp. 13–31). London: Routledge.Bakhtin. M. M. (1981). The dialogic imagination. Four essays. Ed. by Michael Holquist. Austin: Texas UniversityPress.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1112© ISLSChesters, S. D., Fynes-Clinton, L., Hinton, L., Scholl, R., & Australian Curriculum Studies Association. (2013).Philosophical and ethical inquiry for students in the middle years and beyond. Deakin West, A.C.T:Australian Curriculum Studies Association.Clarke, S. N., Howley, I., Resnick, L. B., Rosé, C.P. (accepted) Student Agency in Dialogic Instruction. Learning,Culture and Social Interaction.Clarke, S. N., Chen, G., Stainton, K., Katz, S., Greeno, J., Resnick, L., Dyke, G., Howley, H., Adamson, D., Rosé,C. P. (2013). The Impact of CSCL Beyond the Online Environment, Proceedings of Computer SupportedCollaborative Learning.Dewey, J. (1916). Democracy and Education. New York: The Free Press.Dewey, J. (1957). Reconstruction in philosophy. Boston, Mass: Beacon Press.Dyke, G., Adamson, A., Howley, I., & Rosé, C. P. (2013). Enhancing Scientific Reasoning and Discussion withConversational Agents, IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. Science Teaching, 6, 240–247.Englund, T. (2006). Deliberative communication: a pragmatist proposal. J of Curriculum Studies, 38, 503–520.Furberg, A., & Ludvigsen, S. (2008). Students' Meaning-making of Socioscientific Issues in Computer MediatedSettings: Exploring learning through interaction trajectories. International Journal of Science Education,30(13), 1775–1799.Goldberg, T., Schwarz, B. B., & Porat, D. (2009). Changes in narrative and argumentative writing by studentsdiscussing 'hot' historical issues. Cognition and Instruction, 29(2), 185–217Hildebrand, D. L., (1996). Genuine doubt and the community in Peirce’s theory of inquiry, Southwest PhilosophyReview, 12, 33–43.Kelly, S. (2008). Race, social class, and student engagement in middle school English classrooms. Social ScienceResearch, 37, 434–448.Lemke, J. L. (2006). Towards Critical Multimedia Literacy: Technology, Research and Politics. In M. McKenna,L. Labbo, R.D. Kieffer & D. Reinking (Ed.), International Handbook of Literacy and Technology Vol.II (pp. 3–15). New York: Routledge.Lipman, M., Sharp. A.M. & Oscanyan, F.S. (1980). Philosophy in the classroom. Philadelphia: TUP.Michaels, S., O’Connor, C., & Resnick, L. B. (2008). Deliberative discourse idealized and realized: Accountabletalk in the classroom and in civic life. Studies in philosophy and education, 27, 283–297.Nielsen, J. A. (2013). Delusions About Evidence: On Why Scientific Evidence Should Not Be the Main Concernin Socioscientific Decision Making. Canadian Journal of Science, Mathematics and TechnologyEducation, 13(4), 373–385.Pardales, M.J., & Girod, M. (2006). Educational Philosophy and Theory, Community of Inquiry: Its past andpresent future, 38(3) 299–309.Peirce, C.S., (1887). The fixation of belief, Popular Science Monthly, 12, 1–15Pontecorvo, C., & Girardet, H. (1993). Arguing and reasoning in understanding historical topics. Cognition andInstruction, 11, 365–395.Resnick, L. B., Asterhan, C. S. C., & Clarke, S. N. (Eds.). (2015). Socializing Intelligence through Academic Talkand Dialogue. Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.Schwarz, B. B. & Baker, M. J. (2016). Dialogue, Argumentation and Education: History, Theory and Practice.Cambridge University Press.Sadler, T. D. (2011). Socio-scientific Issues in the Classroom. Teaching, Learning and Research. Germany:Springer.Schwarz, B. B. & Goldberg, T. (2013). “Look who’s talking”: Identity and emotions as resources to historicalpeer reasoning. In M. J. Baker, J. E. B. Andriessen & S. Järvelä (Eds.), Affective learning together (pp.272–292). New Perspectives in Learning and Instruction. Routledge.Thornberg, R. (2010). School democratic meetings: Student control discourse in disguise. Teaching and TeacherEducation, 26(4), 924–932.Venturini, T. (2012). Building on faults: how to represent controversies with digital methods. PublicUnderstanding of Science, 21(7), 796–812.Venturini, T., & Latour, B. (2010). The social fabric: Digital traces and quali-quantitative methods. Proceedingsof Future En Seine, 15–30.Wegerif, R. (2013). Dialogic: Education for the internet age. Routledge Taylor & Francis Group.Wegerif, R., Mercer, N., & Dawes, L. (1999). From social interaction to individual reasoning: an empiricalinvestigation of a possible socio-cultural model of cognitive development. Learning and instruction,9(6), 493–516.Zeidler, D. L., & Nichols, B. H. (2009). Socioscientific issues: Theory and practice. Journal of Elementary ScienceEducation, 21(2), 49–58.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1113© ISLS