Grappling with the Not-Yet-KnownChristoph Richter, Heidrun Allert, Julia Albrecht, and Elisa Ruhlrichter paedagogik.uni-kiel.de, allert paedagogik.uni-kiel.de, albrecht paedagogik.uni-kiel.de,ruhl@paedagogik.uni-kiel.deChristian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Institute of Educational Science, GermanyAbstract: The importance of shared artifacts as means for learning has been widelyacknowledged in the learning sciences as well as within the field of CSCL. However, there isno consensus on the actual roles these artifacts are playing in processes of (collaborative)knowledge creation. In this paper we argue that the prevailing theoretical accounts block sightfor important epistemic processes and also hinder a deeper understanding of the materialqualities of use as they focus on the explication of what is known rather than on what is notknown yet. Drawing on an ethnographic study in a design studio course on industrial design,we depict the use of design artifacts in a set of epistemic patterns. Based on the conclusionthat these artifacts can be understood as objects used to come to terms with the unknown, wediscuss potential implications for CSCL systems aimed to foster collaborative knowledgecreation.Keywords: knowledge building, knowledge artifact, case study, tool designIntroductionThe development of tools in support of collaborative knowledge creation cannot be decoupled from the strivingfor a better understanding and theorization of the ways people actually work together to produce new knowledge(e.g. Farooq, Carroll & Ganoe, 2005) as well as the role of the artifacts used in these processes (e.g. Eckert &Boujut, 2003). Many recent computer-supported collaborative learning scenarios engage learners in working onill-structured and open-ended problems, be it in the fields of research, engineering, or design. Respectivescenarios have challenged pre-established conceptions of the artifact, as a resource of information or as a meansfor communication (cf. Enyedy & Hoadley, 2006) and raised the question of the epistemic role artifacts areplaying in processes of inquiry, design, and knowledge creation. Stahl, Ludvigsen, Law & Cress (2014) mostrecently positioned artifacts as central to CSCL as, among others, collaborative learning essentially might beoriented towards and result in the creation of knowledge artifacts. However, despite the recurrent call for adeeper understanding of the function of artifacts for collaborative knowledge creation, there is an inclination toconceive respective artifacts, be them a theory, a model, a research paper, or a designed object, as anexternalization or embodiment of what is known (cf. Bereiter, 2002; Stahl, 2006; Kimmerle et al., 2010). Even ifit is emphasized that the respective artifacts “are in the process of being developed” (Paavola & Hakkarainen,2009, p. 84) and therefore tentative, incomplete, or ambiguous, they are primarily understood as means toexplicate, reify, and convey ideas about what is or should be. However, these conceptions inevitably foregroundissues that are already expressible, or even agreeable, including the problems to be solved and the questions tobe answered. In doing so these conceptions bracket out all those instances in which artifacts are created and usedto actually figure out what is not known yet, where people engage in situations that are essentially uncertain andopen-ended, and where artifacts cause puzzlement and surprise.Against this background we argue in this paper that to deepen the understanding of the role of artifactsin processes of knowledge creation, we have to overcome representational notion of artifacts but to reconsiderthem as artifacts of inquiry, essentially aimed to come to terms with what is not known yet. Drawing on thenotion of epistemic artifacts as suggested by Knorr-Cetina (2001) and Rheinberger (1997, 2006) as well asrelated work in fields of scientific modeling (Knuuttila, 2005) and design research (Gedenryd, 1998) we willsketch a conception of epistemic artifacts as objects in and through which participants circumscribe, raiseawareness, and bring to the fore the limitations and lack of knowledge they deem of relevance for the inquiryprocesses they are engaged in. To illustrate the fact that representational conceptions of knowledge artifacts arenot capable to account for a variety of processes that are essential to certain forms of knowledge creation, wedepict and discuss a set of epistemic patterns we found in an ethnographic study of a design studio course onindustrial design. Based on the theoretical considerations and empirical findings, we finally discuss potentialimplications for CSCL systems aimed to foster knowledge creation.The contributions of this paper to the field of CSCL are threefold. First, on the theoretical level thepaper delineates some of the limitations inherent to representational notions of knowledge artifacts. Second, inCSCL 2015 Proceedings284© ISLSproviding examples on the use of artifacts in an educational setting it raises awareness for the commonlyintricate nature of an artifact’s use and its material entanglement. Third, the paper challenges current approachesto the design of CSCL systems that downplay or bypass the material nature of many artifacts and respectiveknowledge practices.Knowledge artifacts: Two incompatible conceptionsIn the following we briefly review the theoretical accounts of knowledge artifacts that figure prominently in thefield of CSCL and then contrast these with a non-representational account of artifacts. Our focus is on thosetheories that explicitly deal with the notion of knowledge artifacts. Even though these accounts do so undersomewhat different labels, they all posit that a particular type of artifact is at the center of collaborativeknowledge creation.Knowledge artifacts in theories of CSCLIn his theory on knowledge building Bereiter (2002) develops the notion of conceptual artifacts, “which arehuman constructions like other artifacts, except they are immaterial and, instead of serving purposes such ascutting, lifting, and inscribing, they serve purposes such as explaining and predicting” (p. 58). These conceptualartifacts, which include for example “ideas, facts, theories, algorithms, designs, problem formulations andproblem solutions” (p. 64), are conceived as immaterial yet objectively existing entities. While Bereiter arguesthat it is the “thing-like” nature of these artifacts, which “makes it possible to treat them as objects of study anddiscussion” (2002, p. 66), he makes a clear distinction between conceptual artifact as such and its materialrepresentation, e.g. in the form of text or graph. This distinction becomes most evident when he states that:“When we argue about a theory or design we are not arguing about a piece of paper or about the particularwords or lines on the piece of paper. We are arguing about the abstract knowledge object of which those wordsor lines are but one possible representation” (ibid, p. 64). This conception however implies that a conceptualartifact is essentially independent of both the conditions of its own production as well as the material carriersthat embody or represent it. Thus the material artifacts (physical or digital) are seen as partial representations ofsome abstract conceptual artifacts the students or knowledge workers are trying to create or improve.A quite similar figure can be found in the accounts provided by Stahl (2006) as well as Kimmerle et al.(2010). Stahl (2006) also emphasizes the role of artifacts and argues that “the knowledge-building process canbe conceptualized as the construction of knowledge artifacts, involving physical and symbolic artifacts asstarting point, as medium, and as product” (p. 239). Stahl avoids to make a strict distinction between conceptualartifacts and their material embodiments as suggested by Bereiter. In fact, content and form appear to besomehow intermingled in Stahl’s conception of knowledge artifacts when he introduces “a verbal problemclarification, a textual solution proposal, or more developed theoretical inscription” (p. 3) as examples.However, when turning to the role of artifacts he conceives them as “embodiments of meanings that have beenembedded by the artifact designers or creators; new users of the artifact must bring those meanings back to life”(p. 294). Hence, also in this account there is supposed to be a meaning embodied or represented in theknowledge artifact that is independent of its material carrier.Kimmerle et al. (2010) in their co-evolution model of cognitive and social systems more recently alsoemphasized the role of what they labeled as epistemic artifacts. In focusing on social software such as wikis andsocial-tagging system they stipulate that “collective knowledge manifests itself in shared digital artifacts” (p.10). They conceptualize the work around these epistemic artifacts as continuous processes in which individualson the one hand externalize cognitive concepts and articulate their knowledge while on the other hand theyinternalize and draw on the information entailed in the epistemic artifact. Both internalization andexternalization require a translation in which people have “to couch their cognitive concepts in words” and “toconsider the information which is already available in an artifact in order to integrate their own thoughtsadequately“ (Kimmerle et al. 2010, p. 11). Again the material artifacts such as wiki pages and tags are basicallyunderstood as more or less arbitrary carriers of some information articulated and retrieved by its users.In their model of trialogical learning Paavola and Hakkarainen (2009), finally, explicitly emphasizedthe concrete and material nature of the shared objects knowledge creation processes are targeted towards. Theyhighlight the evolving nature of what they call trialogical objects, which comprise of such diverse things as“knowledge artefacts, practices, ideas, models, representations, etc.“ (p. 84), and the iterative processes throughwhich these objects are developed and modified. However, the relation between knowledge artifacts, practicesand externalized ideas and representations remains opaque in this account. If, for example, a joint researcharticle qualifies as a shared object of knowledge creation (ibid. p. 86) we have to concede either that the researcharticle is a self-contained entity or that it refers to and in this sense provides a representation of some otherobject, be it an empirical phenomenon or a conceptual artifact. Even though it is contrary to Paavola’s andCSCL 2015 Proceedings285© ISLSHakkarainen’s stated intentions, their conception of trialogical objects easily boils down to a representationalaccount of knowledge artifacts as something “that embodies the understanding, meaning, or knowledge that hasbeen constructed“ (Damşa, 2014, p. 254).	  	  In summary, despite the different schools of thought the above concepts of knowledge artifacts arebased on, they all imply that the material objects that are produced and used in the processes of knowledgecreation are essentially representational devices, be it that they represent some conceptual artifact, somemeaning, understanding or knowledge. In this sense, all of them are inherently focused on what is alreadyknown rather than on what is not known yet. The underlying claim, that in our understanding renders theseaccounts problematic, is that there is a kind of knowledge that can be effectively separated from the conditionsof its own production and its material embodiments.Knowledge artifacts as embodiments of the not-yet-knownAiming to sketch an alternative perspective on the role of knowledge artifacts in processes of knowledgecreation we draw on the conceptions of epistemic objects developed by Rheinberger (1997, 2006) and KnorrCetina (2001).Based on the assumption that scientific research essentially takes place at the borders of the known andthe unknown, Rheinberger (1997, 2006) introduced the concept of epistemic objects, which embody what onedoes not yet know. In Rheinberger’s conception these epistemic objects, which he alternatively labels as theobjects of the research or epistemic things, are a part of historically evolving experimental systems theresearchers are engaging in. These experimental systems, in which epistemic and technical objects areintrinsically entangled, are not conceived by him as apparatuses to test ideas or provide answers but essentiallyas arrangements in which questions, which are not yet raised beforehand, materialize. In this senseRheinberger’s main intent is to position epistemic objects in the context of discovery rather than justification.In building on Rheinberger’s ideas, Knorr-Cetina (2001, p. 181) stresses the epistemic object’s“changing, unfolding character – or its lack of ‘object-ivity’ and completeness of being, and its nonidentity withitself” and introduced the notion of “partial objects” as material instantiations of the unfolding epistemic object.For Knorr-Cetina these “partial objects” might take the form of “partial simulations and calculations, technicaldesign drawings, artistic renderings, photographs, test materials, prototypes, transparencies, written or verbalreports, and more” (p. 182). However in her conception, the “partial objects” are neither a referent to nor arepresentation of the epistemic object but they have a “signifying force” due to their “internal articulation”(Knorr- Cetina, 2001, p. 183). The upshot of this conception is that the epistemic objects we are interested incannot be separated from the partial objects used to imagine, simulate, represent, measure, or realize just theseobjects. Hence, we are inclined to conceive all those material artifacts that are produced and used in processes ofknowledge creations as “partial objects” rather than as representations of some knowledge object. FollowingKnorr-Cetina (2001) we concede that the significance of the respective artifacts is not so much in the meaningor information inscribed into them, but in “the pointers they provide to possible further exploration” (p. 183).Similar notions of artifacts as means to come to terms with what is not yet known have been putforward in the fields of scientific modeling and design research. For example, Knuuttila (2005) suggested to reconsider scientific models as “investigative instruments” or “productive things” which are partially independentof both the domain theory (or formal domain knowledge) and the world. As purposively created artifacts, sheargues, modelling should not be treated as an isolated activity but as an integral part of more overarchingpractices of scientific inquiry or product development. In turn that implies that the models itself are entangledwith the object of inquiry. Furthermore, she argues, models have, besides their conceptual, a material form and,therefore, are subject to the affordances and constraints of the medium used for modelling. For example, toolsmight enforce a certain degree of formality but also afford and constrain certain forms of expression. Finally, thecreation and manipulation of models, under this conception, can itself result in new knowledge and evenconstitute new realities. Knuttilla points out that models are often not just used to abstractly represent a targetsystem but to actively design or intervene in the target system.Being concerned with the apparent gap between prescriptive accounts of the design process and actualfinding of empirical studies Gedenryd (1998) came to quite similar conclusions. Rather than understandingdesign artifacts as intermediate outcomes or end products of the design process, he conceives them as “inquiringmaterials: working materials with a cognitive purpose“ (p. 149). For Gedenryd design artifacts, be themsketches, prototypes, scenario or simulations, are “means for the inquiry that design is”. Just as in Knuuttila’snon-representational conception of models Gedenryd also stresses that the design artifacts are the very means ofworking on a problem, that the material they are made of severely matters and that they are closely entangledwith evolving design objects themselves.CSCL 2015 Proceedings286© ISLSIn a nutshell, what sets the latter accounts apart from the conceptions of knowledge artifacts in currenttheories of CSCL is (a) that the significance of these artifacts, be them questionnaires, models, sketches orprototypes, is their incompleteness and uncertainty that opens up room for surprise and future explorations, (b)the emphasis on the material qualities of these artifacts as well as (c) the constitutive entanglement with theobject of inquiry.A case study on the use of artifacts in a design studio courseTo illustrate the fact that representational conceptions of knowledge artifacts are not capable to account for avariety of processes that are essential to certain forms of knowledge creation, we draw on an ethnographic studyof a design studio course on industrial design. The case study was carried out in a design studio setting at theMuthesius Academy of Fine Arts and Design in spring 2013. The course we followed was part of the studyprogram on industrial design with a specialization on Interface Design. It was conducted by a professor and aresearch assistant. Eleven bachelor students in their 5th semester and six master students took part in the coursethat lasted from April to July, spanning a period of 14 weeks. Under the overall theme “simulation/simulator”the students were asked to define and carry out individual design projects. All students enrolled in the coursewere included in the study. We assume, that creative design can be understood as a proper form of knowledgecreation, in that it is inherently geared towards the creation original and novel artifacts, systems and services.To develop an understanding of the creative practices enacted within this setting we drew on acollection of data sources, including (a) observations of the interactions between the students and the teachingstaff during the contact hours, (b) students’ narrative accounts of their working process, either voiced instudents’ interactions with the teaching staff or in informal interviews carried out by the research team, and (c)the material arrangements and artifacts present and utilized in the design studio. Data was recorded in the formof extensive field notes supplemented by photos and audio-recordings when feasible. A total of three observersconducted over 64 hours of site observations, taking part in more than 90 individual feedback sessions as well asthe students’ final presentations. In parallel, the observers wrote memos following the sessions they attendedand conducted a workshop with the students and the professor aimed to elaborate on the utilization of designartifacts in the middle of the term. Each of the observers has at least two years of teaching experience in adesign related domain. Informed consent was obtained from all participants including the teaching staff.To identify common practices within the setting but also to trace variability, each of the students’projects has been treated as a distinct case in the analysis. Field and interview notes were organized intochronological case logs. Using an abductive approach, case logs and memos were used to surface patterns ofinteractions, which were then iteratively tested against the other cases until a stable set of patterns was found.We took patterns of interaction as a descriptive format in the attempt to shed light on the constantly unfoldingnetwork of interactions between actors and artifacts in the given setting. They describe recurring ways of howactors cope with and transform the situations they are facing. Towards this end patterns are supposed to providemiddle-level abstractions in that they capture (situated) regularities in a form that is potentially verifiable andintelligible to other practitioners (Dearden & Finlay, 2006).Patterns geared towards the advancement of ideasThe analysis of the case logs resulted in the formulation of twelve patterns, which synthesize the observationsthroughout the 14 weeks of students’ project work. Even though not every pattern was observed in each case,the set of patterns was assumed to be characteristic for this context in that each of the patterns was instantiatedin at least 50% of the projects, often repeatedly. In the following we focus on a subset of these patterns, namelythose four that were most directly related to the advancement of students’ project related ideas. For an overviewof the entire set of patterns the reader is referred to Richter, et al. (2014).Playing with ideasEspecially in the early stages of the design process the students and the teaching staff were recurrently engagedin highly explorative discussions on yet tentative design proposals. These discussions were not unlikebrainstorming sessions in that they were associative and non-judgmental. Yet, the discussions were primarilygeared to open up different perspectives rather than to produce a wealth of ideas. In sharing and taking up these“half-baked” ideas in an explorative and playful manner, the design proposals were widened and approachedfrom multiple perspectives. In doing so the potential of the yet vague idea was collaboratively checked, not assomething to be approved or rejected, but as a stimulus and springboard for more advanced ideas.The students reported on similar kinds of explorative discussions also with fellow students, friends,relatives and other acquaintances outside the course setting. In the course context these situations occurred whenCSCL 2015 Proceedings287© ISLSsomething was discussed, which was „not fleshed out, but just mulled over“ as a student put it, or after anofficial feedback in an informal follow-up discussion. This kind of exchange about ideas was usually triggeredby the students and assessed as crucial for the concept phase, both by the students as well as the instructor. Infact the instructor recurrently asked the students to share even preliminary ideas and strive for feedback.Figure 1. A student ponders with the instructor and the research assistant on an ideaIn the concerned but also playful exploration of ideas, artifacts were used in two main ways. On the onehand sketches, scribbles or found objects were used to supplement the verbal presentation of the initial idea,often riddled with gestures and metaphors. On the other hand, the presented artifacts were frequently edited,commented, augmented or juxtaposed with newly created artifacts, esp. sketches, in the course of the subsequentdiscussions. The artifacts were used to ground the discussion but also to express ideas more directly as theyevolved in the process. As the ideas to be discussed were fuzzy and preliminary, even to the studentsthemselves, the artifacts were able to provide tentative and approximate objectifications at best.Yet rather than being precise and definite, their value seems to be based on their capability to triggerassociations and open up alternative options and perspectives. In fact highly elaborated presentations repeatedlyblocked the exploration and scrutinization of the underlying ideas. The vagueness and ambiguity of artifactshence provides an important resource to explore the design space and avoid fixation on premature solutions.Making ideas tangibleThroughout the various stages of the design process the students have tried to make their ideas tangible, be it theform of interface sketches, moodboards, mockups, interactive prototypes or video recordings and animations.The phenomena the students were concerned with ranged from visual aesthetics, over haptic and auditoryimpressions, to modes of interaction and their integration of all these into coherent experience. The need tomake ideas tangible especially arose when participants were dealing with concepts or ideas that entailedcomplex and often bodily experiences, which were hard to grasp and communicate otherwise. For example, astudent working on an interactive installation realized that the physical setup, which was meant to be surprisingwas in fact assessed as partially frightening by the test users, prompting him to do further experiments withdifferent setups. Or a student working on a mobile app was searching for a proper visual metaphor conveyingthe message “I am glad [that you contacted me] and that’s why I tell you how you can come to me.”Figure 2. A student explains the envisioned interactive mechanisms with a paper mock-upThe materialization of a concept or idea usually took the form of some kind of (rapid) prototyping, inwhich the students learned about the experiential qualities they wanted to preserve or avoid. The tangibleoutcomes were then introduced to their fellow students, the instructor or some test users and tested. The actualtry-out was then followed by a debriefing, in which the interlocutors tried to couch their experiences andimpressions verbally. In some instances the student as well as the lecturer also used gestures and bodily posturesto mimic certain experiences in the absence of tangible artifacts.CSCL 2015 Proceedings288© ISLSThe production of tangible artifacts enabled participants to experience certain qualities of the designconcept and hence added to the grounding of the design process and the interactions among the participants.This common ground, based on shared experiences, provided reference points for design decisions and furtheredthe development of relevant qualities of the design product and its use. Asking the students to materialize theirideas the instructor explicitly took account of the fact that many phenomena relevant to the quality of a (new)product are only insufficiently captured in abstract representations but require first-hand experience.While the tangible objects are at best proxies for the envisioned design product, their epistemic value inthis context seems to be due to the kind of first-hand experiences they provide, experiences that are moreconcrete and precise than any (verbal) representation would be. These experiences, which are to some extentpartial, are also bound to the materials used.Reflective prototypingAs the design concepts matured most of the students also started to develop various kinds of interactiveprototypes. These prototypes ranged from simple click-through dummies, over interactive installations towardsfunctional hard- and software-systems. While some of the prototypes where used for presentation purposes, themajority of prototypes were created to probe into the effects a certain design decision would have or whether acertain idea would be feasible at all. The issues that gave rise to the development of the prototypes were usuallyquite specific to the design concept, rendering existing know-how or expertise more or less futile, so thatpractical experimentation appeared to be a useful if not the only viable approach available. The instructorstressed the probing function of prototypes also in the discussions with the students: „When you developprototypes] it is particularly important, that you can say that there is something that you can figure out.“Figure 3. A student presents his most recent prototype: “This is just a prototype, so that it’s possible to see howit is to steer or to change speed.”Rather than providing a means to communicate or showcase a design idea, this kind of reflectiveprototyping was understood as an open-ended yet also focused form of inquiry in that the prototype should shednew light on issues relevant to the project. While in some cases the prototypes were used to collect feedbackfrom others, the creation of the prototypes itself recurrently turned out be a source of insight itself, be it that thestudents where unsatisfied with the result, or that new issues and ideas turned up.To retrieve timely results, prototypes were often made of malleable materials such as cardboard,styrofoam or recycled material which are at the students’ disposal. Describing the components of a physicalinterface prototype a student explained: “I used hair gel, it was the only thing I had at hand.“ Nevertheless,students often spent considerable resources on the production of the prototypes and also engaged their fellowstudents in the production process.The prototypes, as used here, are not just deliberate attempts to embody some abstract design conceptbut means to deepen the understanding of the design space. In this respect, a particular challenge for the studentsis to find materials and formats that provide proper answers to the questions they are concerned with.Imaginative walkthroughsIn all stages of the design process the students and the teaching staff carried out imaginative walkthroughs inwhich they talked through the different steps a potential user might encounter when interacting with theenvisioned design product. Aspects of the design that were covered in these walkthroughs ranged from usersactivities, emotions and experiences, over the coherence, adequacy and usability of the suggested interfaces tothe expected outcome and impact of the entire product. A primary aim of these walkthroughs was to develop anunderstanding of the scenarios a potential user might find him/herself engaged in and check the implications ofthe respective design decision made or to be made.CSCL 2015 Proceedings289© ISLSFigure 4. A student and the instructor talk through an envisioned usage scenario.Imaginative walkthroughs were either carried by the students themselves or in a collaborative mannerwith the teaching staff or fellow students. In the first case, the students created personas, scenarios andstoryboards or engaged in some form bodystorming or self-experiment to push their concept. The insights werethen presented to others later on. In the other case, the imaginative walkthrough was used as an ad hoc approachto further the mutual understanding of the intended scenarios and explore design implications.To carry out an imaginative walkthrough, at least a minimal account of the design or the foreseeninteraction sequence was used as a prompt, which eventually was expanded or altered in the course of thewalkthrough. If tangible artifacts were used, they were often quite partial. For example in one of the sessions theinstructor engages with a mockup of an interactive pen-device, he holds it in different positions and draws in theair while talking through an envisioned scenario. In other cases the walkthroughs were carried out without anytangible props in a purely verbal manner or based on a sequence of interface sketches.Due to their narrative nature the imaginative walkthroughs are neither definite nor comprehensive, butitself open to interpretation. However, just because of their scrappiness and subjectivity they appear to beversatile means to develop a more empathetic understanding of a user’s situation as well as to identify potentialproblems and bottlenecks.DiscussionBeing aware of the fact that the patterns of interaction we described above are quite sketchy and do not fullyaccount for the overall complexity of the design efforts the students have been engaged in, these patternshowever closely match the kind of inquiring engagement with design artifacts that Gedenryd (1998) hasemphasized. In the patterns we also see recurrent references to the inquiring materials that he mentions, be itsketches, prototypes, scenarios or various forms of simulations. What all the four patterns have in common isthat they explore into the design space aiming at new insights regarding potential constraints or potentialities.Even though the patterns address somewhat different situations, they all entail a momentum of uncertainty andlack of knowledge. In playing with ideas, the participants typically start from a vague idea or incident, which isthen explored in an open-ended, associative, and non-judgmental manner. In making things tangible, they try toexpress ideas and experiences that are hard to couch in words and formula. In developing prototypes theyexplore into the feasibility of an idea as well as unforeseen (side-)effects of different design options and in theimaginative walkthroughs they simulate an assumed usage scenario trying to develop an empathic understandingof the foreseen target population and their experiences.Trying to reduce all these efforts to the development of a clearly identifiable knowledge object in theform of a project report, presentation or the designed product itself, consequently is misleading as it implies thatthe insights gained throughout the design process would essentially crystalize in any of these artifacts. It ignoresthe epistemic value of all the sketches and prototypes that were consciously dismissed, it implies that a designartifacts has a specified meaning independent of its actual enactment in a certain usage scenario and that there issome underlying idea that could be separated from its material form. The idea that there are some artifacts inwhich knowledge becomes “frozen” (Damşa, 2014) discounts the inherent “‘situatedness’ [which] locates thedesign process in a world which is already crammed with people, artifacts, and practices, each with their ownhistories, identities, goals and plans” (Fallman, 2003, p. 227).Implications for CSCLWhile the focus of our case study has been on (collaborative) design, we believe that the findings apply to amuch boarder class of knowledge-creation processes. Irrespective of whether we talk about the design of aninnovative product, some basic research carried out in a laboratory or an ethnographic field study, we cannotseparate the knowledge object from all the partial objects that are created and used along the way.CSCL 2015 Proceedings290© ISLSApart from theoretical implications, we belief, the conception of knowledge artifacts as partial objectsalso has more direct implications for CSCL systems aimed to foster knowledge creation. First, in addition totools that foster rational discourse and argumentation, there is a need for tools that allow for open explorationsand surprise in that they allow collaborators to express and ponder on ideas that are inherently incomplete,uncertain and ambiguous. Second, CSCL systems have to carefully account for the material qualities of thepartial objects that are used in the kind of knowledge-creation processes to be addressed. In particular it has tobe acknowledged that textual accounts as well as means for visual inspection and analysis are often insufficientto come to terms with the complexity and subtlety of the phenomena and ideas often at stake in processes ofresearch and design. Towards this end new means are needed allowing collaborators to elaborate on and sharetheir ideas in a variety of media irrespective of whether these are physical or digital. Finally, attention needs tobe drawn to the close entanglement of the technical and epistemic objects. Technical tools, including CSCLsystems, are by no means neutral to the ideas we express and the phenomena we describe. This not only entailstheir semantic and syntactical affordances, but also their aesthetical and experiential qualities.ReferencesBereiter, C. (2002). Education and Mind in the Knowledge Age. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Damşa, C.I. (2014). The multi-layered nature of small-group learning: Productive interactions in object-orientedcollaboration. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 9(3), 247-281.Dearden, A., & Finlay, J. (2006). Pattern languages in HCI: A critical review. Human-Computer Interaction, 21,49–102.Eckert, C. & Boujut, J.-F. (2003). The Role of Objects in Design Co-Operation: Communication throughPhysical or Virtual Objects. Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 12, 145-151.Enyedy, N., & Hoadley, C.M. (2006). From dialogue to monologue and back: Middle-spaces in computermediated learning. Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(4), 413-439.Fallman, D. (2003). Design-oriented Human–Computer Interaction. Proceedings of the Conference on HumanFactors in Computing Systems, CHI 2003, ACM Press, pp. 225–232.Farooq, U., Carroll, J. M., & Ganoe, C. H. (2005). Supporting creativity in distributed scientific communities. InProc. of the 2005 international ACM SIGGROUP, ACM, pp. 217-226.Gedenryd, H. (1998). How Designers Work: Making Sense of Authentic Cognitive Activities. PhD-thesis. LundUniversity.Kimmerle, J., Cress, U., Held, C., & Moskaliuk, J. (2010). Social Software and Knowledge Building:Supporting Co-Evolution of Individual and Collective Knowledge. In Proceedings of the 9thInternational Conference of the Learning Sciences - Volume 1, International Society of the LearningSciences, pp. 9-16.Knorr-Cetina, K. (2001). Objectual Practice. In T. R. Schatzki, K. Knorr Cetina, & E. von Savigny (eds.). ThePractice Turn in Contemporary Theory (pp. 175-188). London and NY: Routledge.Knuuttila, T. (2005). Models as Epistemic Artefacts: Toward a Non-Representationalist Account of ScientificRepresentation. PhD Thesis. University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.Paavola, S., & Hakkarainen, K. (2009). From meaning making to joint construction of knowledge practicws andartefacts: A trialogical approach to CSCL. In Proceedings of CSCL 2009, Rhodes, International Societyof the Learning Sciences, pp. 83-92.Rheinberger, H.-J. (2006). Experimentalsysteme und epistemische Dinge. Göttingen: Suhrkamp.Rheinberger, H.-J. (1997). Toward a history of epistemic things: Synthesizing proteins in the test tube. Stanford,CA: Stanford University Press.Richter, C., Lembke, J., Ruhl, E., & Allert, H. (2014). Creativity as Practice(d) in a Design Studio. InProceedings of the 11th International Conference of the Learning Sciences – Volume 1, InternationalSociety of the Learning Sciences, pp. 238-245.Stahl, G., Ludvigsen, S., Law, N., & Cress, U. (2014). CSCL artifacts. International Journal of ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, 9(3), 237-245.Stahl, G. (2006). Group Cognition: Computer Support for Building Collaborative Knowledge. Cambridge, MA:MIT press.AcknowledgementsWe would like to thank the students and the teaching staff at the Muthesius Academy of Fine Arts and Design inKiel who made this study possible. The research leading to these results has received funding from the EuropeanUnion’s Seventh Framework Programme FP7/2007-2011 under grant agreement n° 318552.CSCL 2015 Proceedings291© ISLS