Fostering and Reflecting on Diverse Perspective-Taking inRole-Play Utilizing Puppets as the Catalyst Material under CSCLToshio Mochizuki, Senshu University, tmochi@mochi-lab.netRyoya Hirayama, Senshu University, ne220151@senshu-u.jpTakehiro Wakimoto, The University of Tokyo, wakimoto@kals.c.u-tokyo.ac.jpHiroshi Sasaki, Kobe University, sasaki@kobe-u.ac.jpYoshihiko Kubota, Utsunomiya University, kubota@kubota-lab.netHideyuki Suzuki, Ibaraki University, hideyuki@suzuki-lab.netAbstract: Role-play is a powerful strategy that helps learners broaden their perspectives in agiven subject area through communication. As a vehicle of role-play, puppetry achieves thisbenefit while creating a psychological distance from the role-player’s actual identity, meaningthat the player’s anxiety or apprehension toward evaluation is reduced. EduceBoard is atangible system that enables participants to conduct role-play using puppets and fosterreflection based on the diverse perspectives of the characters in the role-play. Preliminaryevaluation of EduceBoard demonstrated that it allowed participants to play various roles inrole-play and helped them reflect on their role-play from a variety of perspectives. In thispaper, we also discuss how we can foster successful transfer of what they have learned to theirself-performance in role-play or in real-life context.Keywords: role-play, puppetry, perspective-taking, reflectionRole-play has been researched widely from various perspectives and is still an active topic in CSCL research(Strijbos & De Laat, 2010). Role-play provides a very effective way for students to “dive in” (Resnick &Wilensky, 1997) to a particular situation, and has been established to address a wide range of learning needsfrom interpersonal or group communication skills to various concepts in history, economics, and sociology(Forsyth, 1999) and science. Participants in role-play learn to adopt another perspective, often that of anotherperson in a simulated situation.Role-play is a particularly powerful learning strategy in that it involves improvisation, which helpsovercome biases through the development of new beliefs (Friedman, 2004). This is because in role-play,participants are sometimes required to behave counter-attitudinally, and the improvisations by which they do soare often based on the role-players’ experience and reflections in areas of their daily lives.However, some participants still cannot play their roles very well due to excessive self-consciousness(Ladrousse, 1989) or evaluation apprehension (Cottrell et al., 1968). For example, microteaching role-play, thatis, role-play that trains teachers to engage in communication and decision-making in the classroom, requiresparticipants to play the roles of teacher and young pupils in a realistic way. However, the reactions and feedbackprovided by student teachers acting as young pupils tend to be unrealistic when they self-perform, especially inthat they disproportionally often play honest students who follow the teacher’s instructions.When we consider the matter of providing scaffolding to achieve more realistic role-play, we can beinspired by Holzman (2009)’s ideas about the possibilities of play as imitation in learning, which can elicit anactive, creative and fundamentally social process that is essential to creating a zone of proximal development(Vygotsky, 1978). Holzman pointed out that through play, children often imitate what is beyond them in theirenvironment and relationships, and that this enhances their learning. She noted that even adults can learnthrough play.Mochizuki et al. (2013) proposed that puppetry can serve as a powerful device for allowing people toovercome emotional or interpersonal obstacles to face-to-face role-play and for eliciting reactions includinginner emotions or unconscious experiences that they have had in a problematic situation. Puppetry is a familiarform of play from infancy through adulthood, a fact that helps participants anticipate and prepare for a numberof possible, even unusual, roles. The most important function of puppetry in this regard is that it allows eachparticipant to obtain participant–observer balance by creating a clear separation between self (puppeteer) andnon-self (puppet) as well as character (puppet) and observer (puppeteer) while playing a puppetry story. Playinga role distinct from one’s own personae can encourage social interaction among shy or passive students whonormally have trouble learning from or with their peers (Aubusson et al., 1997). The puppet containsrecognizable elements of the self that the puppeteer can identify with. Such projection in puppetry provides aCSCL 2015 Proceedings509© ISLS“margin of safety,” a balance between underdistance and overdistance (Aronoff, 2005). Thus, puppetry canfacilitate the taking of various perspectives by playing roles that rarely appear in self-performed role-play.EduceBoard: A tangible puppetry role-play support systemWe have previously presented the EduceBoard system (Wakimoto et al., 2013), which is a tangible puppetrybased role-play support system intended to enable users to achieve and dramatize possible insights of variouscharacters in the role-play. The system has two functions: 1) engaging in and recording puppetry-play on thetable and 2) playing the recordings online to help participants reflect on their performance and choices.The system records the actions and conversations of the participants (hereinafter, the “actors”) on topof a glass table (Figure 1 (a)). In Figure 1, photo (a) shows the system when it is ready to implement. Eachpuppet or prop is attached to a transparent box with an AR marker on the bottom. In addition, there are red andblue LED lights in the box, and each actor can express his or her puppet’s condition by manipulating a switch tochange the color of the LED (Figure 1 (b)); for example, in a microteaching role-play, a red LED may representa sleeping/careless student, and a blue LED an attentive/note-taking student. A web camera and microphoneunder the table record the puppets’ movements and conversations (i.e., the behavior of the actors), by detectingthe AR markers. After the role-play (Figure 1 (c)), the system sends the recorded data to a server; the actors canview it online to inspire reflection (Figure 1 (d)). The webpage displays the role-play in animated form, from abird’s-eye view; the actors exchange comments in the box at right and reflect further on their conversations andactions.This presentation reports the results of a preliminary evaluation of EduceBoard, observing whether theactors can concoct an effective improvisational role-play that dramatizes a variety of reactions to theconversation and whether they can then reflect fruitfully on it from a variety of perspectives using the system.(a)(b)(c)Figure 1. The EduceBoard System(d)Preliminary evaluation: Methods and analysisThe evaluation was conducted using a microteaching role-play because that is a common means of role-playtraining useful especially when informal discourse appears during the role-play, and there are many schemes toanalyze communication among a teacher and students (see Table 1 below). Six university sophomores majoringin informatics and training to get teaching licenses participated. They formed two triads; each of them playedonce as a teacher and twice as pupils using puppets. Each puppetry session took 10 minutes; then, studentswatched the recorded role-plays and gave mutual feedback in the comment box on the webpage. Furthermore,they discussed three sessions based on the feedback while watching the recording, and the feedback appearedalongside the animations. All the discussions were video-recorded and transcribed.Table 1: Definition of codes for utterances in the role-play simulation of microteaching (Fujie (2000))UtterancesTeacher-FormalTeacher-InformalTeacher-Double barreledStudent-FormalStudent-InformalStudent-Double barreledDefinitionA teacher’s utterance that follows his/her lesson plan or is academic relatedA teacher’s utterance based on his or her individual experience and reaction to the studentsA teacher’s utterance reflecting the features of both “formal” and “informal” typesA student’s utterance that follows the teacher’s instructions or is academic relatedA student’s utterance based on his or her individual experience and intention (not academic)A student’s utterance reflecting the features of both “formal” and “informal” typesIn addition, to examine the impact of puppetry role-play on self-performed role-play, the studentsconducted self-performed microteaching role-play in the same group after the puppetry. All the self-performedrole-plays had the same topics as the puppetry and were video-recorded. After the role-play, students againCSCL 2015 Proceedings510© ISLSwatched the videos, and gave mutual feedback on paper. Then they discussed three role-plays based on thefeedback. All of the discussions were video-recorded and transcribed.Table 2: Definition of codes for participants’ comments on the recorded role-play (Rosaen et al. (2008))CommentsFocus on Teacher-ManagementFocus on Teacher-InstructionFocus on Student-ManagementFocus on Student-InstructionStudent AchievementOtherDefinitionManaging students’ behavior, role in organization for a smooth lesson flowInstructional strategy that facilitates the cognitive and social interaction around thegoals of the lesson; focuses on the teacher’s roleManaging students’ behavior, organization for a smooth lesson flow; focuses onthe children’s behavior or attitudesInstructional strategy that facilitates the cognitive and social interaction around thegoals of the lesson; focuses on how the students responded to the instructionPreservice teacher indicates attention to student learning and achievement orassesses student learningOther comments or utterances to maintain the conversationAdapting Fujie (2000)’s coding scheme for teacher-student discourse (Table 1), we coded all of theutterances in the puppetry and self-performed role-plays to examine how the students performed. This schemewas designed to study how classroom discourse is organized, especially focusing on formal academic utterancesversus informal or everyday utterances. We wished to identify any differences in role-play discourse that weredue to puppet use. Two of the authors carried out independent ratings (κ =.791). In addition, we analyzed thepaper and online feedback, adapting Rosaen et al. (2008)’s coding scheme (Table 2) in order to examine howthe students reflected on their role-playing in both conditions (κ =.869). The student discussions after givingmutual feedback were coded with the same scheme. Coding discrepancies were reconciled by mutual agreement.FindingsThe discourse analysis shows that the coding categories “Teacher-Formal,” “Teacher-Informal,” “StudentFormal,” and “Student-Informal” are found to have significant differences (Table 3). This explains that theparticipants tended to use informal discourse more in the puppetry than in the case of normal self-performedrole-plays where they rarely used informal one. Consistent with our previous study (Wakimoto et al. 2013), thisresult indicates that puppetry can allow an improvisational role-play that elicits a variety of reactions from theactors.Table 3: Total number of categorized utterances in the discourse in the role-playUtterancesPuppetryNormalTeacher-Formal353(-)309(+)Teacher-Informal88(+)9(-)Teacher-Double barreled2314χ2(2) = 50.956, p < .01Student-Formal121(-)88(+)Student-Informal55(+)8(-)Student-Double barreled2616χ2(2) = 17.780, p < .01Note: (+)(-) are the results based on the residual analysis.The analysis of the mutual feedbacks and the student discussions finds that the participants tended togive more feedbacks focusing on “Student-Management” and less on “Teacher-Instruction” in the mutualfeedbacks and the discussion (Table 4). The participants also talked in the discussion less focusing on teachermanagement. These results indicate that the EduceBoard system has possibility to allow the participants to shifttheir points of view from teacher-centric to student-inclusive even during the reflection.Also there is an interesting finding is that the participants tended not to play their roles with a variety ofinformal reactions as is expected in everyday conversations, even after the puppetry. This indicates that thecharacteristics of normal or self-performed role-play are robust and that there is need of some additionalintervention in addition to the use of EduceBoard in order to conduct successful learning transfer.CSCL 2015 Proceedings511© ISLSTable 4: Total number of categorized ideas in comments and discussionCommentsCommentsEduceBoardNormal(Paper)Focus on Teacher-Management109Focus on Teacher-Instruction26(-)56(+)Focus on Student-Management39(+)0(-)Focus on Student-Instruction810Student Achievement00Other00Fisher’s exact test, p < .001Note: (+)(-) are the results based on the residual analysis.DiscussionEduceBoardNormal75(-)91(+)147(-)161(+)112(+)282932211481107χ2(5) = 50.305, p < .01DiscussionThis study shows how the use of puppets as transitional objects that elicit a projection of self (puppeteer) to nonself (puppet) elicited a variety of informal discourse that is rarely used in self-performance but is useful forlearning communication in role-play. The EduceBoard system, which records the puppetry role-play, alsofacilitates reflection from the viewpoints of each of the actors. However, there are some procedural issuesremaining with this approach.One important issue is transfer to the self-performed role-play or actual practice. On the basis of theself-performed role-plays we found that transfer was not effective even immediately after the puppetry role-playwith EduceBoard. Hence, more intervention to broaden and deepen students’ perspective-taking ability isneeded, including development of new curriculum materials. One promising way to foster deep perspectivetaking may be through the use of new media, for example virtual environments. Lindgren (2012) indicated thatexperiencing a first-person perspective on a virtual world can generate a person-centered learning stance andperspective-taking. We consider this to be a potentially effective way to elicit more discussion about not onlythe performance of a variety of characters in role-play but also the content of reflection and conversation on thisperformance from the viewpoints of diverse characters. The EduceBoard system can introduce suchtechnologies in order to foster participants’ reflection more effectively.ReferencesAronoff, M. (2005). Puppetry as a therapeutic medium. In M. Bernier & J. O'Hare (Eds.) Puppetry in educationand therapy (pp. 109–115). Bloomington, Indiana: Authorhouse.Aubusson, P., Fogwill, S., Barr, R., & Perkovic, L. (1997). What happens when students do simulation-role-playin Science. Research in Science Education, 27(4), 565-579.Cottrell, N., Wack, D., Sekerak, G., & Rittle, R. (1968). Social facilitation of dominant responses by thepresence of an audience and the mere presence of others. Journal of Personality and SocialPsychology, 9(3), 245–250.Forsyth, D. R. (1999). Group dynamics (3rd ed.). Belmont: Wadsworth.Friedman, S. (2004). Learning to make more effective decisions: changing beliefs as a prelude to action. TheLearning Organization, 11(2), 110 – 128.Fujie, Y. (2000). Children’s In-Class Participation Mixing Academic and Personal Material: Teacher’sInstructional Response. Japanese Journal of Educational Psychology, 48, 21-31 (in Japanese).Holzman, L. (2009). Vygotsky at Work and Play. New York: Routledge.Ladrousse, G. P. (1989). Role play. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Lindgren, R. (2012). Generating a learning stance through perspective-taking in a virtual environment.Computers in Human Behavior, 28, 1130-1139.Strijbos, J. W., & De Laat (2010). Emerging and scripted roles in computer-supported collaborative learning.Computers in Human Behavior, 26, 491–494.Mochizuki, T., Sasaki, H., Wakimoto, T., Hirayama, R., Kubota, Y. & Suzuki, H. (2013). Puppetry as a Catalystin Role-Play: A Device to Facilitate Gaining New Insights into the Perspectives of Others. In N.Rummel, M. Kapur, M. Nathan, & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), CSCL 2013 Conference Proceedings(Vol.2), pp. 317-318. Madison, WI: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Resnick, M., & Wilensky, Y. (1997). Diving into Complexity: Developing Probabilistic Decentralized Thinkingthrough Role-Playing Activities. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 7(2), 153-172.CSCL 2015 Proceedings512© ISLSRosaen, C. L., Lundeberg, M., Cooper, M., Fritzen, A., & Terpstra, M. (2008). Noticing noticing. How doesinvestigation of video records change how teachers reflect on their experiences? Journal of TeacherEducation, 59(4), 347–60.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Wakimoto, T., Mochizuki, T., Sasaki, H. & Hirayama, R. (2013). The Development and Evaluation ofEduceBoard: A Tangible Teaching Simulation System through Playing Puppet Shows. In T. Bastiaens& G. Marks (Eds.), Proceedings of E-Learn 2013 (pp. 2547-2556). Chesapeake, VA: AACE.AcknowledgmentsThis research was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (B) (Nos. 26282060,26282045, and 24300286) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.CSCL 2015 Proceedings513© ISLS