GroupWork: Learning During Collaborative Assessment ActivitiesWilliam T. Tarimo, Brandeis University, wtarimo@brandeis.eduTimothy J. Hickey, Brandeis University, tjhickey@brandeis.eduAbstract: The positive benefits of collaborative and cooperative learning are welldocumented in educational literature and research. In this paper, we present GroupWork - agroup-based assessment tool within TeachBack, and an evaluation of our experience in usingit as part of an interactive flipped classroom. GroupWork was used to facilitate real-timegroup-based formative assessment and other problem-based activities in the classroom.Specifically, we examine the short-term and long-term impact of this implementation onstudents’ learning outcomes and experiences compared to performing formative assessmentswhere students work individually. Results show significant performance improvement foreach student and for each assessment question when students are allowed to discuss theirsolutions with peers. The formative assessment grades after collaborative problem solving areshown to have a strong correlation with final course grades, suggesting that collaborativeproblem solving may have a lasting benefit.IntroductionThis paper presents a case study and the results of an experiment where students collaborated in small groupsduring in-class formative assessment activities. The experiment studies whether collaboration during formativeassessment activities has better learning outcomes for the participants compared to when they work individually.In assessing the immediate effects on the learning outcomes, we compared students' overall performance whenresponding individually to formative assessment problems and their corresponding performance when workingin collaborative groups. In assessing the impact of collaboration on overall learning outcomes on the course, welooked for evidence of correlations between performance in these assessment activities and final performance inthe course. We also surveyed students at the end of the course to get their perspectives on their learning andexperiences during group-based formative assessments. All the assessment activities were done using theGroupWork tool within TeachBack (Hickey & Tarimo, 2014; Tarimo, Deeb, & Hickey, 2015; Tarimo, Deeb, &Hickey, 2016; Tarimo & Hickey, 2016; Tarimo, 2016) and the majority of the activities were real-timeformative assessments during class time. TeachBack is an in-class web application that offers various interactivetools for active and interactive learning and teaching in the classroom.Over the last three years of empirical studies using TeachBack, the Questions feature (a lightweightclicker functionality) has been used to facilitate assessment activities in the classroom where students respondindividually followed by class-wide discussions. For example, a previous study (Tarimo, Deeb, & Hickey,2016) has shown statistically significant correlation between levels of participation and performance in in-classformative assessments and overall mastery of the material and concepts in a course. In this experiment, wewanted to see whether adding collaboration to these activities would lead to better learning outcomes andexperiences for the students.Conducting this experiment would also inform us on the feasibility and practicality of using web basedinteractive tools like GroupWork in facilitating collaborative and cooperative learning and assessment activitiesin classroom settings. The findings would also provide the evidence necessary to propose whether pedagogydesign should include collaborative and cooperative activities.Literature reviewThe proposed implementation of collaborative formative assessment using GroupWork is based on variousinstructional activities and learning theories that empirical research and educational literature have shown tosupport improved learning and teaching outcomes.First, is the opportunity for students to work collaboratively and cooperatively during learning.Presently, competitive and individualistic (Roger & Johnson, 1988) are the more dominant modes of studentstudent interactions during learning. However, compared to competition and individualism, cooperation andcollaboration have been shown to result in students achieving better learning outcomes, more effectivenessinterpersonally and students developing positive attitudes towards learning, each other, instructors and subjectareas. This practice is also referred to as Peer Instruction (PI), (Crouch & Mazur, 2001; Crouch, Watkins,Fagen, & Mazur, 2007), where class time includes assessment and learning activities where students workindividually and in groups.CSCL 2017 Proceedings463© ISLSSecond, having activities that allow a group of students to work together stresses the idea of coconstruction of knowledge and mutual engagement of participants. A constructivist classroom focuses onstudent-centered discourse, over the typical teacher centered classroom, where students drive discussions andthe teacher serves as a guide on the side (Palincsar, 2005).Third, our extended use of formative assessment activities is a form of problem-based-learning basedon cognitive apprenticeship (Collins, Brown & Newman, 1987) where students learn in the context of solvingcomplex and meaningful problems. The role of instructor is to create appropriate questions, and then guidestudents on the learning process by encouraging them to think deeply through discussions in evaluatingresponses to the problems.And finally, GroupWork is closely modeled on the Think-Pair-Share methodology of classroom-basedcollaborative active learning (Lyman, 1981; Lyman, 1987; McTighe & Lyman, 1988; Kagan, 1989). In a typicalThink-Pair-Share activity, students work on a problem posed by the instructor, first individually, then in pairs orsmall groups, and finally all participate in a class-wide discussion. Some of the benefits of this strategy includepromoting engagement, allowing students to express their reasoning, reflect on thinking, and obtain immediatefeedback on their understanding and misconceptions (Kothiyal, Majumdar, Murthy & Iyer, 2013). Moreover,the Think-Pair-Share technique is recommended as an instructional activity that engages learners in higher-orderthinking, and as a feedback mechanism, both for students and teachers (Cooper & Robinson, 2000).Experimental designThe classThe experiment was carried out during the fall semester of 2015 in a flipped advanced level Computer Graphicscourse with enrollment open to undergraduate and graduate students. The course exposes students through ahands-on introduction to the science and practice of rendering three dimensional (3D) images using bothresource intensive ray-tracing methods and real-time techniques using the GPU. The course was also intensivein mathematics and programming content and exercises in Java and JavaScript. The course was a typical flippedclassroom where class meetings started with pre-class reading assignments and reflections, and class times weredevoted to interactive teaching and learning activities.During that semester, 41 students completed the course which consisted of 26 interactive classmeetings, with each class lasting for 80 minutes and meeting twice in a week. TeachBack was used in the classto facilitate some of the instructional activities and interactions in the classroom, and this required all students tobring laptops or tablets to class. This included formative assessments, students giving feedback to the instructor,the back-channel assistance forum for asking and answering questions as well as discussions on class materials,and taking notes by students.Collaborative assessment using GroupWorkThe majority of the exercises were given one-by-one in real-time during classes as a way to assess students'understanding and to inform the instructor on whether to reiterate the just covered concepts or move on to newmaterial. The exercises also counted as an active activity during classes in getting students to actively engagewith the material, gauge their own learning, reveal misconceptions, and more importantly engage in discussionsand share the learning with others in the class.Answering questions in GroupWork follows three steps. During the first step, each student takes thetime to think and attempt the problem individually and then submit a personal answer which cannot be changed.During the second step, group members share their personal answers and have a collaborative discussion wherethe team attempts to improve on their initial answers and perhaps reach an agreement on better responses.Groups are made of three students, and they are created using a random assignment of members for each classmeeting based on attendance for the day. During the group discussions, the team members can each create oneor more new answers based on the level of agreement in the group. Afterwards, each group member is requiredto submit a final answer by voting on any of the answers from the team. Students are not forced to agree on asingle group answer, and that's why a voting system is used, requiring each team member to vote/indicate a finalanswer. This strategy is intended to encourage a sense of individual accountability and autonomy as shown incooperative learning theories.Figure 1 shows a students' view of a question in GroupWork with access to answers panel and thegroup mini-forum. The interface is designed to include a group discussion area for each question so that groupmembers can still have a discussion in the cases where members are not physically seating next to each other orsome members are attending class remotely. In a related study reported in (Tarimo & Hickey, 2016), we studiedthe effects of offering optional remote attendance to class meetings where students are required to follow alongCSCL 2017 Proceedings464© ISLSwith a live-streaming of the class and participate in all class activities (including the group activities reported inthis paper) using TeachBack. This hybrid style was practical and feasible; however, we did not implement anentirely online mode.Figure 1. TeachBack: Students' question view in GroupWork.An important design feature in GroupWork is making sure that group members attempt to answerquestions individually before engaging with other group members, or see each other’s attempts. In order toachieve this, the interface is designed such that a group member cannot see answers or messages from the rest ofthe group until that student has submitted his/her individual answer. This design closely models the Think-PairShare methodology.Figure 2. The main GroupWork page listing questions with participation and grading summaries.In the main GroupWork page, shown in Figure 2, each listed question displays the response counts andgrading summary for individual and in-group answers. During class, the counts update in real-time as studentsrespond to questions, this allows instructors to more easily gauge and manage the progress of the assessment.During the course reported in this experiment, an instructor would review the answers and a teaching assistant(TA) would do the actual grading at the same time.The final stage in a GroupWork exercise is a class-wide discussion that is led by the instructor to goover responses to questions. The interface is designed such that instructors can view and grade both types ofanswers, see Figure 3. After a question is graded, the percentage of correct answers is also displayed for theCSCL 2017 Proceedings465© ISLSindividual and group answers. As seen in Figure 2, this detail provides a convenient way to see and compare thestudents' performance when responding individually and in groups.Data collectionThe first analysis involved looking for the evidence to support whether students perform better in formativeassessment activities when they work collaboratively in small groups compared to when they work individually.For this, we used the grading data from GroupWork for all graded problems that were given throughout thesemester. Each individual and in-group problem response was graded using the same rubric. The correctness ofeach answer was assessed on the scale of either being fully correct (2.0 points), partially correct (1.0 points) orfully incorrect (0 points), this can be seen in Figure 3.Figure 3. A GroupWork page showing group responses to a question.The second analysis looked for evidence of correlation between performance in collaborative formativeassessments and overall mastery of concepts covered in the course. Overall learning was measured as the coursegrade earned at the end of the semester which included cumulative grades from weekly or bi-weekly smallprogramming assignments, three major programming projects, and a final written exam. The final exam was acumulative exam which was administered at the end of the course and covered most of the materials taught inthe course. 20% of the official course grade accounted for class participation (based on participation inTeachBack activities and pre-class readings), however, we omitted this participation component in the coursegrade that was used in our analysis as it didn't exactly reflect mastery of concepts.At the end of the course a survey was given to students in order to gather their perspectives andevaluation of their learning experiences from the use of collaborative formative assessment and how it wasimplemented using the GroupWork feature of TeachBack.ResultsLearning during collaborative formative assessmentsFor each student, we looked at the average performance when the student responded individually and when thestudent responded after the group collaboration stage. Average performance was calculated as the averagenumber of points earned; that is, the sum of points earned divided by the number of questions attempted.Figure 4 shows a scatter plot of average points earned by each student when responding individuallyversus when working in groups. The plot demonstrates that, on average, most students tend to earn more pointsas a result of group collaboration, and this is true even for students who score highly during the individual part.CSCL 2017 Proceedings466© ISLSWe used a two-tailed t test to compare the mean of the average number of points from the individualand in-group populations. The class average in points when working individually is 0.995 points per question,and the average while working in collaboration is 1.223. The improvement in the mean of 0.228 is statisticallysignificant with a P value of less than 0.0001, with a 95% confidence interval of 0.170 to 0.286. Thisimprovement represents an effect size of 0.618, which is calculated as a Cohen's d Effect Size (Cohen, 1988).According to Cohen, an effect size of 0.618 is just above the 'medium' range. And according to a survey ofacademic research on instructional interventions, an effect size of 0.5 or higher would represent significant gainsas it is higher than the results found in most instructional interventions (Albanese, 2000; Dubin & Taveggia,1968).Figure 4. A scatter plot of average individual points vs average in-group points for all students.Figure 5. Average improvement in points from individual to in-group responses.Looking at the improvement in performance resulting from collaboration, Figure 5 shows that studentswho tend to do poorly when working individually are the ones who take the most advantage of groupcollaboration. For example, a student with an average individual performance of 0.85 (out of 2.0) pointsimproved performance by 0.28 points, whereas a student with individual performance of 1.7 points onlyimproved by 0.02 points. This is contrary to, for instance, the hypothesis that collaboration would affect allstudents in the same way.Secondly, for each GroupWork problem, we compared the average class performance from individualresponses and in-group responses. Figure 6 shows a scatter plot of average points earned in each GroupWorkquestion when students responded individually versus when they responded within groups. In only one of the 60questions asked we see no average improvement in students' performance when they worked in groups.Therefore, regardless of the question type or difficulty, students' performance for each questionimproved as a result of collaboration compared to working individually. Again, a two-tailed t test was used tocompare the means of the average number of points for the two populations representing individual and ingroup performances. The mean of average number of points earned increased by 0.233 from 1.003 points perCSCL 2017 Proceedings467© ISLSquestion to 1.236, and the t-test test showed this difference to be statistically significant with a P value of lessthan 0.0001. The 95% confidence interval is 0.190 to 0.276. The corresponding effect size of the improvement iscalculated as 0.609, which is again considered an impressive gain from an instructional intervention.Figure 6. A scatter plot of average individual points vs average in-group points for all GroupWork questions.Correlation with overall learning in the courseIn this analysis, we looked for evidence of correlation between performance in collaborative formativeassessments and overall mastery of concepts covered in the course. Mastery of the material was measured as thecourse grade earned at the end of the semester which included cumulative grades from weekly or bi-weeklysmall programming assignments, three major design and programming projects, and the final written exam.Linear regression was used to test the hypothesis that performance in collaborative formative assessment couldpredict the learning outcomes in the course. Separate regression analyses were used to study the correlationbetween the final course grade and each of the individual and in-group average points in GroupWork problems.The results of the analyses are shown in Table 1. Both regression models indicate statistically significant, (P <0.0001), positive correlation between course grade and each of the individual and collaborative performances informative assessment. Indeed, the correlation coefficients are 0.647 and 0.568 between course grade & averageindividual points, and course grade & average in-group points, respectively.Table 1: Linear Regression Analysis: Course Grade vs. Average Individual Points and Course Grade vs.Average In-Group PointsAverage PointsR2P-ValueCoefficientIndividually0.4188< 0.000113.074In Group0.32320.000114.429Figure 7 shows a visual representation of the regression analysis using scatter plots. On the left is ascatter plot of course grade versus average individual points, and on the right, is a scatter plot of the coursegrade versus average in-group points. And even though both models are statistically significant, performancewhile working individually is a slightly stronger predictor of course performance compared to performancewhen working in groups. This observation is still consistent with an earlier study which found significantpositive correlation between performance in a course and performance in formative assessment activities wherestudents worked individually. For this class, final course grade is comprised of summative assessments in whichstudents worked individually, this explains why there is a stronger correlation between course grade andindividual performance in the GroupWork exercises compared to in-group performance. Moreover, despite thefact that each group member is required to submit a personal answer after group discussions, the groupdiscussions and collaboration has a significant influence on subsequent group answers which in turn averagesdown the differences in mastery levels among group members.CSCL 2017 Proceedings468© ISLSStudents’ opinionsStudents were given a survey at the end of the course in order to get their learning experiences and evaluation ofGroupWork and its use in facilitating formative assessment exercises. 37 of the 41 students participated in thesurvey. Using a range of 1 (not useful) to 5 (very useful), students were asked to assess the extent to which theuse of GroupWork based collaborative assessment activities was useful towards their learning. 80.5% of thestudents responded with a rating of 3 or above, with 55.5% believing that it was useful with a rating of 4 - 5.Moreover, using a scale of 1 (not satisfied) to 5 (very satisfied), 75% of the respondents reported being satisfiedwith how GroupWork tool was used in the course with a rating of 3 - 5. 44.4% of the respondents reported asatisfaction rating of 4 - 5.Figure 7. A scatter plots of course grade vs. average individual points, and course grade vs. average in-grouppoints for all students.Among the aspects of the implementation that students liked were how it forces them to start byattempting problems individually before engaging with a group in discussion and collaboration. Therequirement to attempt problems individually was commented to be especially useful in tackling complexconcepts as it revealed various personal misconceptions and confusions that would then be corrected duringgroup and class discussions. Moreover, enforcing individual attempts results in many alternative answers toproblems which would then be refined to fewer in-group answers. Students pointed out that having access tovarious alternative answers to a problem opens a new opportunity to learn from seeing how others think andapproach answering questions.Students also appreciated the introduction of group-based formative assessment using GroupWork as it“provided the opportunity for collaborative activities in class”. GroupWork activities were part of most of theclass meetings during the semester, and as a result, student collaboration and formal discussions were part of theclass routine. This introduced the component of collaboration to the pedagogy that would otherwise not be thereas in traditional classrooms. Working with ever changing groups of classmates was pointed out by students inthe survey as enabling them to “get to know other(s)” in the class.ConclusionsThe findings of this experiment demonstrate the benefits of cooperative, collaborative and problem-basedlearning in group-based formative assessment activities. The data analysis compared students' performance informative assessment activities when they worked entirely individually and when they worked in small groupsusing the Think-Pair-Share methodology. Results showed that students reached a significantly higher level ofachievement when formative assessment activities included collaboration. In general, all students performedbetter when they worked in groups than when they worked individually alone. Similarly, students' performancewas higher for each assessment problem when students worked in collaboration.Furthermore, the results show that students benefit in various amounts from collaboration based onindividual student's mastery levels. Even though all students gather benefits from collaboration, it is the studentswho would usually do poorly when working individually who benefit the most. This sounds like a trivialoutcome but in this case the benefit comes from having heterogeneous groups where groups are randomlygenerated for each class meeting. When it comes to choosing students assignment into groups based onindividual capabilities, heterogeneous groups tend to be more powerful than homogeneous groups (Roger &Johnson, 1988). This is because in collaboration learning comes from discussion (presentation and arguing ofCSCL 2017 Proceedings469© ISLSdifferent perspectives and alternatives), explanations (to other group members, especially those in need of help),justification of answers, and shared resolutions.The results demonstrated positive correlation between overall performance in the course and students'average performance in formative assessments when working individually and in groups. Performance workingindividually has a slightly stronger correlation compared to in-group performance. And since we were interestedin studying the impact of collaboration on overall learning, a better study approach would have been comparingcourse performances between experimental and control populations of students, one with collaborativeformative assessment and the other with only the traditional individualistic formative assessment.In this work, we have shown an implementation of collaborative formative assessment that is practicaland feasible. Students thought the implementation of was beneficial and useful towards their learning. Studentswere generally satisfied with the technical implementation of GroupWork even though they hadrecommendations for improvement. The demonstrated benefits to the teaching and learning outcomes imply thatthis instructional approach is worthy of further adoption, investigation and testing in various subject areas andcurriculum designs.ReferencesAlbanese, M. (2000). Problem‐based learning: why curricula are likely to show little effect on knowledge andclinical skills. Medical education, 34(9), 729-738.Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences Lawrence EarlbaumAssociates. Hillsdale, NJ, 20-26.Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1988). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the craft of reading,writing and mathematics. Thinking: The Journal of Philosophy for Children, 8(1), 2-10.Cooper, J. L., & Robinson, P. (2000). Getting started: Informal small-group strategies in large classes. Newdirections for teaching and learning, 2000(81), 17-24.Crouch, C. H., & Mazur, E. (2001). Peer instruction: Ten years of experience and results. American journal ofphysics, 69(9), 970-977.Crouch, C. H., Watkins, J., Fagen, A. P., & Mazur, E. (2007). Peer instruction: Engaging students one-on-one,all at once. Research-based reform of university physics, 1(1), 40-95.Dubin, R., & Taveggia, T. C. (1969). The teaching-learning paradox: A comparative analysis of collegeteaching methods. Eugene; Center for the Advanced Study of Educational Administration, Universityof Oregon, 1968. 78 pp.Hickey, T. J., & Tarimo, W. T. (2014). The affective tutor. Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges, 29(6),50-56.Kagan, S. (1989). The structural approach to cooperative learning. Educational leadership, 47(4), 12-15.Kothiyal, A., Majumdar, R., Murthy, S., & Iyer, S. (2013, August). Effect of think-pair-share in a large CS1class: 83% sustained engagement. In Proceedings of the ninth annual international ACM conference onInternational computing education research (pp. 137-144). ACM.Lyman, F. (1981). The responsive classroom discussion: The inclusion of all students. Mainstreaming digest,109-113.Lyman, F. (1987). Think-pair-share: An expanding teaching technique. MAA-CIE Cooperative News, 1(1), 1-2.McTighe, J., & Lyman, F. T. (1988). Cueing thinking in the classroom: The promise of theory-embedded tools.Educational Leadership, 45(7), 18-24.Palincsar, A. S. (2005). 12 Social constructivist perspectives on teaching and learning. An introduction toVygotsky, 285.Roger, T., & Johnson, D. W. (1988). Cooperative learning: Two heads learn better than one. TransformingEducation: Awakening the Full Human Potential... in Everyone, Context Institute, Langley, WA, 34-36.Tarimo, W. T., Deeb, F. A., & Hickey, T. J. (2015, May). A flipped classroom with and without computers.In International Conference on Computer Supported Education (pp. 333-347). Springer InternationalPublishing.Tarimo, W. T., Deeb, F. A., & Hickey, T. J. (2015). Computers in the CS1 Classroom. In Proceedings of the 7thInternational Conference on Computer Supported Education (CSEDU) (2), 67–74.Tarimo, W. T., Deeb, F. A., & Hickey, T. J. (2016). Early detection of at-risk students in CS1 usingTeachBack/Spinoza. Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges, 31(6), 105-111.Tarimo, W. T., & Hickey, T. J. (2016, October). Fully integrating remote students into a traditional classroomusing live-streaming and TeachBack. In Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE), 2016 IEEE (pp. 18). IEEE.Tarimo, W. T. (2016). Computer-Supported Agile Teaching (Doctoral dissertation, Brandeis University).CSCL 2017 Proceedings470© ISLS