Coordinating Collaborative Chat in Massive Open Online CoursesGaurav Singh Tomar, Sreecharan Sankaranarayanan, Xu Wang, and Carolyn P. Roségtomar@cs.cmu.edu, sreechas@cs.cmu.edu, xuwang@cs.cmu.edu, cprose@cs.cmu.eduCarnegie Mellon UniversityAbstract: An earlier study of a collaborative chat intervention in a Massive Open Online Course(MOOC) identified negative effects on attrition stemming from a requirement for students to bematched with exactly one partner prior to beginning the activity. That study raised questionsabout how to orchestrate a collaborative chat intervention in a MOOC context in order toprovide the benefit of synchronous social engagement without the coordination difficulties. Inthis paper we present a careful analysis of an intervention designed to overcome coordinationdifficulties by welcoming students into the chat on a rolling basis as they arrive rather thanrequiring them to be matched with a partner before beginning. The results suggest the mostpositive impact when experiencing a chat with exactly one partner rather than more or less. Aqualitative analysis of the chat data reveals differential experiences between theseconfigurations that suggests a potential explanation for the effect and raises questions for futureresearch.IntroductionThe field of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) has a rich history extending for nearly twodecades, covering a broad spectrum of research related to learning in groups, especially in computer mediatedenvironments. In contrast, a major limitation of the current generation of Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs)is a lack of social presence. Analyses of attrition and learning in MOOCs both point to the importance of socialengagement for motivational support and overcoming difficulties with material and course procedures. Effectivecollaborative learning experiences are known to provide many benefits to learners in terms of cognitive,metacognitive, and social impact (Kirschner, Paas, & Kirschner, 2009; Webb & Palinscar, 1996). Theseexperiences offer a potentially valuable resource for MOOCs, if affordances can be provided that facilitate highquality collaborative learning interactions in the absence of human facilitators that can keep up with the highenrolment in such courses.Traditionally, MOOC platforms, including team based MOOC platforms like NovoEd, have not offeredsynchronous interaction opportunities or even instantaneous forms of social awareness. MOOC contexts allowfor asynchronous interaction and possibly even collaboration. However, the asynchronous nature leads to someunsavory experiences. For example, sometimes participants spend time posting a thoughtful post but get only acursory reply. Participants sometimes have to wait days or even weeks to get a response to a question or receivefeedback on completed work. This lack of immediacy implies that information can be out of date by the timesomeone views it, or worse, that the student needing help or feedback gave up and dropped out before the responsewas posted. These types of issues can hinder motivation. These limitations at the interface level stem fromlimitations at the architecture level due to challenges in scaling immediate update protocols. Through integrationprotocols such as the Learning Tools Interoperability protocol (LTI) chat tools and other forms of synchronousinteraction have found their way into a few MOOCs. However, just the ability to integrate a synchronous chatroom into a MOOC does not solve the problem. Challenges remain regarding coordinating the times of thediscussions as well as supporting the functioning of an ongoing discussion.The proposed solution to this problem is to support synchronous interaction within the MOOC context.Students may prefer synchronous activities because it offers them a greater experience of active involvement andsocial connection. Coordinating synchronous social engagement in a MOOC is challenging, however, and thechallenges that arise can be frustrating for students. An earlier study identified positive and negative effects onattrition of a collaborative chat intervention that required students to be matched with exactly one partner prior tobeginning the activity (Ferschke et al., 2015b). Negative effects occurred when students had to return multipletimes in an attempt to be matched with a partner. That study raised questions about how to provide the benefit ofsynchronous social engagement without the coordination difficulties. In this paper we present a careful analysisof an intervention designed to overcome coordination difficulties by welcoming students into the chat on a rollingbasis as they arrive rather than requiring them to be matched with a partner before beginning. This design raisesquestions about how the impact of the experience differs depending on conditions within the less controlled socialenvironment within the chat.ICLS 2016 Proceedings607© ISLSIn the remainder of the paper, we describe the motivation for the study from the Computer SupportedCollaborative Learning (CSCL) literature. We then describe the intervention we evaluate in this paper. Next wepresent both quantitative and qualitative analyses of our intervention. Finally, we conclude with discussion andfuture directions.Theoretical foundationThe fact that conversational interaction may provide an opportunity for (collaborative) learning has beenunderscored by many learning theories ranging from cognitive to socio-cultural perspectives (Kirschner, Paas, &Kirschner, 2009; Webb & Palinscar, 1996). However, it is well known that without support, many instances ofcollaborative learning fail. In light of this fact, the field of collaborative learning has produced a wide variety offorms of scaffolding often referred to as scripts. Collaboration scripts may operate at the macro level, providingtask structuring and role assignment. Or it may operate at the micro level, structuring the nature of the flow ofcontributions to the discourse.Our goal is to find the best ways to provide learners with a space to interactively hone their understandingof concepts related to a specific domain so that they have the chance to display their own reasoning, experiencehow others display their reasoning, challenge and be challenged by others. In order for the interactions to providea meaningful learning experience for students, it was essential for these activities to be well integrated into theinstructional design, and not treated as an afterthought or an appendage. This leads to more authentic, andecologically valid learning experiences for students (Tudor, 2000; Van Lier, 2004). In addition to this embedding,interactions are mainly meaningful for learning when they are structured and scaffolded in an appropriate manner.In this paper, we build on a paradigm for dynamic support for group learning that has proven effectivefor improving interaction and learning in a series of online group learning studies conducted in classroom settings.In particular we refer to using tutorial dialogue agent technology to provide interactive support within asynchronous collaborative chat environment (Kumar et al., 2007; Chaudhuri et al., 2008; Chaudhuri et al., 2009;Kumar et al., 2010; Ai et al., 2010; Kumar & Rosé, 2011). Introduction of such technology in a classroom settinghas consistently led to significant improvements in student learning (Adamson et al., 2014), and even positiveimpacts on the classroom environment outside of the collaborative activities (Clarke et al., 2013). While it wouldseem to be desirable to import such technology into a MOOC setting to provide a learning experience that is bothmore instructionally valuable and socially supportive, such an introduction comes with its technical,methodological, and theoretical challenges.In our setup, the goal is for the agent to aid the students in integrating their respective understandings ofthe concepts they previously encountered individually in the video lectures and other assignments that precedethe chat activity. On the other hand, it also provides an opportunity to develop their collaborative skills(O’Donnell, 1999).Collaboration platformThe chat tool system deployed in the MOOC study reported in this paper is Bazaar (Adamson et al., 2014), whichis used to provide interactive support within online synchronous collaborative chat activities. Reflection activitieswere authored by the instructor team to provide students the opportunity to reflect substantively about the materialthey learned in each unit. Each chat activity included several specific reflection topics to provide a consistentmacro level structure to the chats for each unit. Very little micro-level support was offered in addition to themacro-level structuring.The most similar previously published study regarding a collaborative chat intervention in a MOOC waspublished by Ferschke and colleagues (Ferschke et al., 2015a). In that study, in order to facilitate the formationof ad-hoc study groups for the chat activity, Ferschke and colleagues (Ferschke et al., 2015b) made use of a simplesetup referred to as a Lobby. Students entered the Lobby with a simple, clearly labeled button integrated with theedX platform. Upon entering the Lobby, students were asked to enter a username that would be displayed in thechat. Once registered in the Lobby, the student waited to be matched with another participant. If the student wassuccessfully matched with another learner who arrived at the Lobby within a couple of minutes to interact with,he and his partner were then presented with a link to click on to enter a chat room created for them in real time.Otherwise they were requested to come back later. Some students needed to make up to 15 attempts in order tobe successfully matched for a chat. Thus, many students were frustrated. A follow up analysis (Ferschke et al.,2015b) reports a negative impact on commitment to the course for students who experienced this frustration. Animportant lesson learned from this study was that whereas providing the opportunity for synchronous chat waspositive for students for whom it was possible to be matched for a chat easily, this positive effect was balancedwith a negative effect in the case where the lack of critical mass despite the total enrollment of 20,000 studentsfrom their MOOC was not sufficient to enable a quick match.ICLS 2016 Proceedings608© ISLSIn order to address the difficulties reported in the earlier study (Ferschke et al., 2015b), we did not employan intermediate Lobby interface in our design. Instead we exposed a single, continuous chat room that multiplestudents could join at any time on a rolling basis, rather than beginning all at the same time, and without havingto be matched with a particular peer student. The conversation continues as long as there is at least one person inthe room. The architecture is able to facilitate a chat with only one student present and keeps the conversationgoing for any number of participants. That way, students can enter the chat on their own schedule and join otherstudents who are engaged in the activity. The chat room automatically resets once all participants have left thechat.In order to provide a very light form of micro-level script-based support for the collaboration, thecomputer agent facilitator in our design kept track of the students in the room and prompts that had been given tothe students. For each student, it tracked the events of their joining and leaving the chat room. For topic prompts,it tracked the times they were given and the students who were present in the chat room at that time. This trackingwas done to make sure each student could engage with all question prompts of the reflection exercise and nostudent saw the same question prompt twice unless the activity script restarted and students decided to repeat it.Another design consideration was to address a difficulty identified in the earlier study, which was thatthe students did not always stay on topic and sometimes engaged in goalless interactions or neglected to interactat all. One possible explanation is that these students may have misunderstood the question. To address this issuein the current design, the agent kept track of any student and group inactivity that went on for more than twominutes. It also kept track of how many utterances each student contributed. It aggregated students' messages andcomputed a similarity score between student messages and the topic prompt to test whether the students were ontopic. This was also done over a two-minute window. If the group was dormant or did not say anything that isrelevant to the topic in that two-minute window then the agent generated a poke message, which rephrased thequestion again by providing timely hints that make it more explicit what is expected from a contribution. Acontentful group discussion on a question prompt was observed to last for about 10 minutes on average.Although a single, continuous chat room provides the capacity to solve the problems with synchronouscollaboration in a MOOC observed in the earlier study, it may also entail additional coordination challenges. Forinstance, a student may not be motivated to join in the middle of the discussion or might feel lost due to a lack ofa frame of reference for where to start upon joining an in progress discussion. To address this issue, we introduceda prompt for the agent to ask the group to summarize the state of the conversation for incoming students in orderto help ramp up new participants and encourage current participants to voice their understanding of discussedconcepts. Alternatively, sometimes an agent-generated summary is given, mentions a list of topics alreadydiscussed as well as a summary of the current topic. To ensure the agent does not interrupt the discussion withrepeated summarization requests, these requests were issued only if at least two topic prompts had been discussed.ResultsThe most positive result of the earlier Ferschke et al. study (Ferschke et al. 2015b) was the observed reduction inattrition associated with participation in a collaborative chat as measured through a survival analysis. For ourwork, it is important to determine not only whether we have accomplished the specific changes to studentexperiences that motivated our design work. We also want to ensure that we maintain or even enhance the positiveimpact observed with the earlier approach. In order to measure the impact of participation in a collaborative chaton attrition, we adopt a survival analysis approach. Survival analysis is a statistical modeling technique used tomodel the effect of one or more indicator variables at a time point on the probability of an event occurring on thenext time point. In our case, we are modeling the effect of participation in a collaborative chat on probability thata student ceases to participate actively in the course on the next time point.MethodologySurvival models are a form of proportional odds logistic regression, and they are known to provide less biasedestimates than simpler techniques (e.g., standard least squares linear regression) that do not take into account thepotentially truncated nature of time-to-event data (e.g., users who had not yet ceased their participation at the timeof the analysis but might at some point subsequently). In a survival model, a prediction about the probability ofan event occurring is made at each time point based on the presence of some set of predictors. The estimatedweights on the predictors are referred to as hazard ratios. The hazard ratio of a predictor indicates how the relativelikelihood of the failure (in our case, student dropout) occurring increases or decreases with an increase or decreasein the associated predictor in the case of a continuous variable, or presence vs. absence of the factor in the case ofa binary variable. A hazard ratio of 1 means the factor has no effect.If the hazard ratio is a fraction, then the factor decreases the probability of the event. For example, if thehazard ratio was a number of value .4, it would mean that for every standard deviation greater than the average ofICLS 2016 Proceedings609© ISLSthe continuous predictor variable (or where a data point has value 1 for a binary predictor variable), the event is60% less likely to occur (i.e., 1 - n). If the hazard ratio is instead greater than 1, that would mean that the factorhas a positive effect on the probability of the event. In particular, if the hazard ratio is 1.25, then for every standarddeviation greater than the average of the continuous predictor variable (or where the data point has value 1 for abinary predictor variable), the event is 25% more likely to occur (i.e., n - 1).Survival analyses are correlational analyses, and as such they do not provide causal evidence for an effect.However, lack of an effect in a survival analysis would suggest that the data fail to provide causal evidence aswell. A positive effect in a survival analysis would suggest that it makes sense as a next step to manipulate theassociated factor so that causal evidence for a positive effect could be measured.Specifying the modelIn our survival model we include control variables, independent variables, and a dependent variable. Our primaryinterest is how the independent variables related to participation in collaborative chats make predictions about thedependent variable, which indicates course dropout. However, control variables are essential in accounting forvariances in the participants that may influence attrition. For example, some students are more active in the coursein general, indicating a priori greater commitment to the course. If we do not account for this in our model, wecannot say whether it’s the intervention we are introducing that is leading to the observed difference in thedependent variable, or it’s because other confounding variables such as the difference priori commitment level ofstudents’ drives their participation in the intervention that leads to the effect.Unit of analysis. In order to assess the impact of measured factors at each time point during a student’strajectory through the course, it is necessary to decide what the unit of analysis is. In other words, it is necessaryto determine what the time interval to use in the survival model is. Even the most active participants in the coursedid not participate every day. However, very active participants returned to the course more than once within aweek. Based on preliminary exploration into the dataset, we chose our unit of analysis to be a 7-day period oftime.Student population. We conducted our analysis in an edX MOOC called Big Data in Education(BDEMOOC), which was taught by Ryan Baker from Teacher’s College, Columbia University. The MOOC waslaunched in the fall of 2015.We included in our analysis all students who had at least clicked once during the course to enter a chat.There were 401 such students in our dataset. The collaborative chat activities were positioned as enrichmentactivities after the individual work for the week was completed. In order to enter a chat, students clicked on abutton in the courseware page. We expect that students who attempted to participate in a chat were more activeon average than students who did not since the chat activities were positioned at the end of the unit, so they wouldbe mainly consumed by students who had completed the other assignments of the course. However, students whodid not complete the other activities were not prevented from participating. The baseline data points in our modelare the ones when students did not click to enter a chat during the corresponding time interval.Control variables. An important indicator of a priori commitment to active engagement was the numberof clicks on course videos. We included a standardized count of video clicks during the time period between twoconsecutive data points as a control variable in our analysis.Independent variables. As mentioned, the baseline for our comparison is data points that did not includeany attempt to enter into a chat. There were 21,968 of these. If a student clicked to enter a chat, four possiblethings could happen. 1) Some number of students experienced technical difficulties due to their Internetconfiguration, which didn’t allow them to connect to the chat server port from their network. There were 145 suchdata points, which we label as Malfunction data points. 2) Another possibility is that the student entered the chat,but no other student joined them there. There were 349 such data points. We label these as alone data points. 3)There were 145 data points where students entered a chat and there was exactly one partner student. We labeledthese as Pair data points. 4) Finally there were 15 data points where there were more than two students present.We refer to these as Group data points. We included binary independent variables in our survival model forMalfunction, Alone, Pair, and Group.In order to assign these binary variables, it was necessary to compute the maximum number of peers thatthe student interacted with in a particular chat session. We calculated this number by counting the number of peerspresent each time the student performs an event (join, leave, post a message). From the set computed during achat session we take the maximum. This number reflects the largest group size the student can possibly haveactively interacted with during the session.Dependent variable. We referred to the dependent variable as Drop. This was a binary variable that was1 for the last time interval of a student’s active participation in the MOOC and 0 otherwise.ICLS 2016 Proceedings610© ISLSSurvival model resultsThe main results of the analysis (summarized in Table 1) are consistent with those of the earlier study (Ferschkeet al., 2015b) in that we see a consistent trend suggestive of positive impact when students participated in a chat.The most positive impact is in the case where students chat with exactly one partner student. There the hazardratio is .6 indicating a 40% increase in probability that the student will still be active at the next time point.However, the effect is only marginal (p= .06). The trend for data points where students chat alone or with morethan one partner student is also positive, however the effect is not significant. There is a significant negativeimpact of experiencing a malfunction due to network connectivity issues. However, even this is less strong thanthat reported by (Ferschke et al., 2015b) for students who were required to click multiple times in order to bematched for a chat. Ferschke et al. (2015b) report a hazard ratio of 2.33 for a standardized count of match attempts.Overall, the results suggest that welcoming students into the chat on a rolling basis rather than requiring them tobe matched with a partner student in order to enter is a more advantageous strategy since students who experiencea pair chat benefit, and those who chat alone or with more than one student are not harmed.Table 1. Survival table with estimates that measure the impact of control variable (Video Clicks), andindependent variables (Malfunction, Alone, Pair, and Group) on probability of survivalIndependent VariableHazard Ratiop-valueStandardized Video Clicks.97p= n.s.Malfunction1.7p < .001Alone.89p= n.s.Pair.6p =.06Group.8p = n.s.Taking a closer look: Post hoc analyses of resultsThe results of the survival model suggest that students who participated in the BDEMOOC and chatted withexactly one partner student experienced more benefit. In our Post Hoc analysis we attempted to better understandwhat was different in their experience. We find evidence that students experienced a richer interaction when theyparticipated in the chat with a single partner student. One strong indicator of this richness is in comparing amountof time spent in the chat based on how many students were participating. We see a significant difference in theaverage time spent in the chat between students who had a partner in the chat and student who didn’t (F(2,563) =3.1, p < .05). Chats with more than two students were not significantly longer or shorter in the average time of thesession than either. Informally, we also see less frustration and more exchanged reasoning in the chats containingexactly two students.Table 2. Comparison of average time of chat sessions in relation to the number of students participating.Number of students in the chat roomMean time spentStandard deviationMedian time spent1389.44755.670.02501.58874.231920.03582.86586.311560.0In order to further investigate what is the difference between dialogues in chat rooms that contain onlyone person, two people, and more than two people, we manually coded frustration in the dialogues and comparedthe difference between different conditions. Since frustration was a factor that influenced dropout in the Ferschkeet al. (2015b) study, we believed this would offer a useful lens on the chat processes at work in our study.ICLS 2016 Proceedings611© ISLSTwo coders coded 100 dialogue turns generated by learners in the collaborative chats as expressingfrustration or not in order to check the inter rater reliability of frustration coding. The coders achieved a kappa of0.784. The two coders then continued to code the rest of the dataset, which contains 2917 dialogue turns in total.The coders then computed the average number of contributions coded as expressing frustration in each condition.The trend in proportion of contributions expressing frustration across sets was consistent with expectations. Theproportion of contributions expressing frustration was lowest in the chats with exactly two participants. The roomswith single student generate the highest concentration of messages expressing frustration (5.78%), and the roomswith more than two students rank second (3.59%), while the rooms with pairs generate the lowest concentrationof messages expressing frustration (2.86%). In testing the significance of the difference between the threeconditions, we found that only the difference in the proportion of frustration messages expressed between thecondition of single students and that of pairs is marginally significant (Z-score = 1.7662, p= 0.077).We then took a closer look at what happened in the chat room in different conditions. When there is onlyone person in the chat room, the student tends to check whether others are present, and sometimes expressesboredom and disappointment at being alone. Here are examples from several different chats with individualstudents:Student 1:Student 2:Student 3:shrugs shouldersIs it just me and VirtualRyan?Am I missing anything? I feel silly just chatting into space! :PAnother student was excited in the beginning, and he talked to himself for a while, nobody responded tohim, and then he left.Student 4:Is anyone here?Anyone wants to discuss learning curves and other visualization methods?This was the best week so far. The discussion about the various curves gave insightinto how these techniques can be use to understand the impact of curriculum orhow to help students directly.I’ll try again another time.leaveAbove we reported that students in pairs remained in the chat room longer than individual students.Informally we observed a higher concentration of expressed reasoning in the chats with pairs. Here are someexamples of conversation when exactly two people are in the room. The examples below show that when thereare two people in the chat room, they frequently exchanged perspectives, and offered positive comments on eachother’s ideas. We underlined the parts that they are exchanging, referring to, building upon and commenting oneach other’s ideas.Example 1:P: The dataset I looked at included more than time-related variables, so I would think yes.There are grades received at different stages, reason why a student took a class, etc.D: Hmm, I agree with the baseline idea that the decision tree works better at categorical data.D: Good. Thanks for the inspiration.Example 2:T: Well, to continue our theme, I would use data mining to predict MOOC dropout in ChinaE: That sounds interesting. What type of predictors were you thinking you may use?T: I am going to use the “assignment accomplishment” predictor.T: The reason I chose the predictor is based on my own experience. So how about yours?E: I am working to develop new online programs and have access to all of the data in our LMSso thought I may be able to help tell students what they should be doing to increase theirchance of success.ICLS 2016 Proceedings612© ISLSE: It may also help us check use of the LMS and flag students who may have persistenceissues....just a thought. I don’t have experience in data mining before.T: And I would like to add a second feature: some complaints in the discussion area, to predictthe dropout, as well.E: Good thoughts! What all is included in the assignment accomplishment predictor?T: Thanks. but just a thought, not very detail. I believe the more assignment accomplished,the more successful the subject may reach the endline.DiscussionIn this paper, we presented an analysis of results from a collaborative chat intervention that suggests positiveimpact of the intervention when students experienced the chat with exactly one partner. A post hoc analysissuggests that students had a richer interaction when they were in the chat with exactly one partner. One possibleexplanation is that the support offered to groups was not sufficient to scaffold the interaction for more than twostudents. However, the number of chats with more than two students was small. And our analysis is merelycorrelational. Thus, we are unable to make strong claims about the reason for the pattern we found with this study.One limitation of the current study is that some students experienced a negative impact from technicaldifficulties, namely the port connection issues discussed earlier. Though we carefully isolated the data pointsdirectly impacted by this issue in our analysis, we cannot eliminate the possibility that the negative impact of thisissue on the students who directly experienced it may have affected others through hearing about the issues in thediscussion forums. This issue has now been resolved in our infrastructure.More substantively, despite the positive impact of collaborative chats when the conditions were ideal(e.g., where exactly one partner student was present), we identified some challenges with the intervention. Forexample, we observed that many students who were chatting with agent in the absence of peers felt that agent wasnot a good listener, felt bored, and sometimes left room in the middle of the discussion. They expressed a desireto be able to discuss the questions with the agent instead of just giving their reflections on the question promptbeing asked. Another issue was that some dynamics of the agent were tuned to the situation where multiple humanstudents were present and thus were not appropriate in the case where only one student was present. Thus, a moredynamic timing strategy for the task structuring may have been received better.In our follow up work, in order to alleviate the boredom felt by individual students in the chat room, weare developing a design that supports a more substantive exchange between a student and the agent in the absenceof other human partners in the interaction. Specifically, we will make use of tutorial dialogue agent technology,such as Knowledge Construction Dialogues (KCDs) (Rosé & VanLehn, 2005; Kumar & Rosé, 2011), which mayprovide more intensive engagement. Thus, if a single student is present in the room, the facilitation agent maylead the student step by step to construct substantive explanations related to the issues targeted by the collaborativechat exercise. Adaptive time of task structuring will also be employed.ConclusionsThis paper addresses questions on how to effectively orchestrate synchronous discussion activities in MOOCsdespite practical coordination challenges. It presents an evaluation of a specific collaborative chat interventionintegrated within an edX MOOC. While an earlier study offered results associating participation in a chat sessionwith reductions in attrition over time (Ferschke et al., 2015b), that study was not able to separate the effect of thechat activity from the effect of synchronous interaction with a peer. In this paper, we present a correlationalanalysis suggesting differential effects of a chat experience depending upon the number of peers present. Thepositive impact associated with interaction with a single partner student is consistent with the results presented inthe earlier study, though slightly weaker, and thus provide more confidence in the finding that interaction with apeer is associated with at least temporary elevation in commitment to the course. The study also suggests furtherdirections to improve the intervention for future MOOCs.ReferencesAdamson, D., Dyke, G., Jang, H., & Rosé, C. P. (2014). Towards an agile approach to adapting dynamiccollaboration support to student needs. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 24(1),92-124.Ai, H., Kumar, R., Nguyen, D., Nagasunder, A., & Rosé, C. P. (2010, January). Exploring the effectiveness ofsocial capabilities and goal alignment in computer supported collaborative learning. In IntelligentTutoring Systems (pp. 134-143). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.ICLS 2016 Proceedings613© ISLSChaudhuri, S., Kumar, R., Joshi, M., Terrell, E., Higgs, F., Aleven, V., & Rosé, C. P. (2008, January). It’s noteasy being green: Supporting collaborative “green design” learning. In Intelligent Tutoring Systems (pp.807-809). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.Chaudhuri, S., Kumar, R., Howley, I. K., & Rosé, C. P. (2009, July). Engaging Collaborative Learners withHelping Agents. In AIED (pp. 365-372).Clarke, S., Chen, G., Stainton, K., Katz, S., Greeno, J., Resnick, L., Howley, H., Adamson, D., Rosé, C.P.: Theimpact of CSCL beyond the online environment. In: Proceedings of Computer Supported CollaborativeLearning (2013)Ferschke, O., Howley, I., Tomar, G., Yang, D., & Rosé, C. P. (2015a). Fostering Discussion acrossCommunication Media in Massive Open Online Courses. In Proceedings of the 11th InternationalConference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning. Gothenburgh, Sweden.Ferschke, O., Yang, D., Tomar, G., & Rosé, C. P. (2015b, June). Positive Impact of Collaborative ChatParticipation in an edX MOOC. In Artificial Intelligence in Education (pp. 115-124). SpringerInternational Publishing.Greybeard, A. P. & Wizwoman, B. Z. (2009). Designing our way to new learning: Two decades of innovationand improvisation in the classroom. New York, NY: Scholarly Publishers, Inc.Kirschner, F., Paas, F., & Kirschner, P. A. (2009). A cognitive load approach to collaborative learning: Unitedbrains for complex tasks. Educational Psychology Review, 21(1), 31-42.Kumar, R., Rosé, C. P., Wang, Y. C., Joshi, M., & Robinson, A. (2007). Tutorial dialogue as adaptivecollaborative learning support. Frontiers in artificial intelligence and applications, 158, 383.Kumar, R., Ai, H., Beuth, J. L., & Rosé, C. P. (2010, January). Socially capable conversational tutors can beeffective in collaborative learning situations. In Intelligent tutoring systems (pp. 156-164). SpringerBerlin Heidelberg.Kumar, R., & Rose, C. P. (2011). Architecture for building conversational agents that support collaborativelearning. Learning Technologies, IEEE Transactions on, 4(1), 21-34.O’Donnell, A. M. (1999). Structuring dyadic interaction through scripted cooperation. Cognitive perspectives onpeer learning, 179-196.Webb, N. M., & Palincsar, A. S. (1996). Group processes in the classroom. Prentice Hall International.Tudor, I. (2001). The dynamics of the language classroom. Ernst Klett Sprachen.Van Lier, Leo. The ecology and semiotics of language learning: A sociocultural perspective. Vol. 3. SpringerScience & Business Media, 2004.AcknowledgementThis work was funded in part by grants from Google and the Gates foundation and NSF grant ACI-1443068.ICLS 2016 Proceedings614© ISLS