Learning Environments to FacilitateStudents’ Regulation in Knowledge BuildingJin Michael Splichal, Shizuoka University, gs15031@s.inf.shizuoka.ac.jpJun Oshima, Shizuoka University, joshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jpRitsuko Oshima, Shizuoka University, roshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jpAbstract: We designed a project-based learning environment with Knowledge Forum tofacilitate students’ regulation of collaboration and examined how they developed regulationscripts through their experience. Jigsaw activity structure was implemented in the PBL designas a macro script. In addition, micro-scripts were provided for students to reflect on their groupwork and individual contribution in KF notes. A clustering analysis of students’ regulationscripts revealed that they developed scripts through a variety of trajectories. Further case studiessuggested: (1) that students develop their scripts when they recognized meaningful challenges,(2) that they construct scripts of socially shared regulation when they recognize epistemicchallenge whereas they do co-regulation scripts when they recognize socio-emotional challenge.Keywords: scripts, regulation of collaborative learning, epistemic challenge, socio-emotional challengeIntroductionScardamalia and Bereiter (2003) explain the nature of knowledge building as one of the prominentmodels of the knowledge-creation metaphor by referring to two modes of learning: the belief mode and the designmode. In the belief mode, learners are concerned with what they or others believe or ought to believe, namely,with the mental states of individuals. On the contrary, in the design mode, learners are concerned with theusefulness, adequacy, improvability, and developmental potential of ideas. Learners in the design mode should beaware of whether their ideas are good enough to solve the problems to be addressed, and how they shouldcontribute to improving those ideas. Knowledge building is a social process that engages both modes of learning.The belief mode is used by learners to investigate the current state of their community knowledge level in orderto highlight any problems. Learning in the design mode thus enables the creation of knowledge to solve problems.Exchange between the learning modes is iterative, such that learners continuously participate in social practicesof knowledge creation, and individuals generate knowledge that not only directly contributes to the advancementof community knowledge but also determines how best to contribute to this advancement.Although the knowledge-creation practices have been emphasized in many CSCL studies (Stahl,Koschmann, & Suthers, 2014), few studies have been focused on and examined students’ regulation of their owncollaboration (e.g., Järvelä & Hadwin, 2013). When contributing to a collaborative task, learners have to regulatethemselves, others, and the group as a whole. In self-regulated learning, learners regulate their own learning tocontribute to group performance, based on their individual perception of tasks and their strategic knowledge. Inco-regulated learning—another layer of metacognition—learners also regulate themselves in relation to others.Each learner in a group monitors the task perception, goals, and standards of other group members and considersways their actions and interactions influence one another and the task. In the final layer of metacognition, learnersengaged in a collaborative task collectively regulate their group cognition: this is socially shared regulation oflearning (SSRL). In SSRL, learners are collaboratively involved in the planning, monitoring, evaluation, andregulation of social, cognitive, and behavioral aspects of their learning.A promising approach to support and develop students’ regulation of their collaboration is scripting(Fischer, Kollar, Stegmann, & Wecker, 2013). In their script theory of guidance, Fischer et al. discussed dynamicrelations between learners’ internal collaboration scripts and external scripts as instructional support. The internalcollaboration scripts are students’ internal representations of how to conduct collaboration. The scripts aredescribed from the abstract level (“play”) down to very concrete action level (“scriptlets”). Learners are expectedto develop their internal collaboration scripts through their experiences in collaboration and other instructionalinterventions. The external scripts are used to scaffold learners’ engagement in their collaboration and lead themto more productive collaborative outcomes. For the external scripts to be effective to improve students’ internalscripts, we have to avoid the situation of over-scripting (Dillenbourg, 2002). An external collaboration script ismost effective for students to develop their own internal scripts when it is directed at the highest possiblehierarchical level of internal script and subordinate components are already available to the learner. Miller andHadwin (2015) propose a conceptual design of CSCL environment for helping students to learn to regulate theirown group work providing external scripts and awareness tools. Few studies, however, have discussed howICLS 2016 Proceedings831© ISLSstudents develop their internal regulation scripts through their collaborative learning experiences under such anenvironment.In this study, therefore, we attempted to design Knowledge Forum for supporting students to developtheir regulation scripts and examine how their scripts are developed through their experiences of collaboration. Itwas used as a digital portfolio where students collaboratively reflect on their face-to-face project-based learningwith an ill-structured task from the perspective of regulation. As a macro script (i.e. external scripts which looselyorchestrates the engagement in PBL), jigsaw activity structure was implemented. Students were first divided intofour different expert groups where they studied the same problem from four different perspectives. Then theyfurther continued their collaboration in jigsaw groups where students who studied four different resourcescollaboratively worked on their ideas to solve the problem. Micro-scripts were implemented as question promptsto support students' reflection on their group progress and individual contribution. We assessed students’regulation scripts before and after their jigsaw group work and examined how their scripts were changed throughtheir collaboration experiences through case studies.MethodsDesign descriptionForty-eight university freshmen (24 female) took the course for learning how to manage their collaborativelearning through participating in project-based learning. They were randomly divided into groups of four or fivethen given a task to propose new solutions to reduce wastes at convenience stores for conservation.Students’ group work was designed based on the jigsaw activity structure as a macro script. They wereprovided with four sets of documents related to their solution task. Then students for the same sets of documentsgathered and discussed in expert groups (from week 1 to 4). After learning documents, they further continuedtheir projects in jigsaw groups (from week 5 to 11) by integrating knowledge resources from the four sets ofdocuments and searching for new information to create their solutions. In this jigsaw group work, we implementedmicro-scripts for them to reflect on their collaboration at SRL, CoRL, and SSRL level in Knowledge Forum.Before students started their group work in the jigsaw group work, a pre-questionnaire was conductedfor evaluating students’ internal scripts of regulating collaboration. Based on their experiences in the expert group,students were asked to describe their own evaluation of group work and individual contribution to it. During thejigsaw group work, students came to the classroom every week to discuss their work in progress and spend timefor searching new resources and collaboratively integrating their ideas from different resources. At the end ofclass every week, students reported work in progress as a group note on Knowledge Forum and their individualevaluations on their group progress as “build-on” notes (Figure 1). When writing their group notes, scripts forplanning, monitoring, evaluating and revising were provided as scaffolds in Knowledge Forum notes (“What wastoday’s plan to do as a group?” “How much did you as a group achieve?” “Did you decide each individual’stask(s) for the next week?” “Plan to do in the next class”). In their individual “build-on” notes, scripts formonitoring, evaluating and revising were provided for facilitating each student’s involvement in her group work(e.g., “Was the goal shared among members?” “Were members aware of their own roles?” “Did you have rulesfacilitating group work? Did you follow them?”). Another post-questionnaire was again conducted as theirreflection-on-action after the jigsaw group work.Analysis planFirst, based on students’ writing of collaboration in their group work in the pre- and post-questionnaire, weassessed each student’s regulation script with respect to which aspects (planning, monitoring, and revising) andlevels (SRL, CoRL, and SSRL) were represented. When a student referred to an aspect (planning, monitoring, orrevising) at each level of regulation (SRL, CoRL, or SSRL) in her writing, we assigned 1 for that category, andwe aggregated three numbers at each regulation level. So when students wrote all aspects at all levels, they weregiven 3–3–3. With this procedure, we coded students' pre-questionnaire as pre-script, and pre- and postquestionnaire collectively as post-script. Two authors (the first and the second) independently coded students’writing and reached 80% agreement. The disagreement was resolved through their discussion. After thisassessment, we conducted a clustering analysis for categorizing students’ scripts into different types.ICLS 2016 Proceedings832© ISLSFigure 1. Jigsaw activity structure represented in Knowledge Forumas macro script and scaffolds in KF notes as micro-scripts.Second, to further examine how students constructed their regulation scripts through their experiencesof jigsaw group work, we conducted case studies of students: (1) who did not change their scripts from the preto the post-questionnaire, (2) who successfully constructed their scripts across SRL, CoRL and SSRL, and (3)who constructed their scripts in different orientations based on the same socio-emotional challenge. In our casestudy, we constructed narratives of what challenges the students attempted to solve based on their group progressreports, individual reflection, and the mentors’ field notes.Results and discussionStudents’ regulation scripts after their jigsaw group workForty-three students appropriately answered both the pre- and post-questionnaire. Thirty-nine students were foundto construct new category of scripts in their post-questionnaire and the proportion was significant by Binominaltest (p < .01). We further conducted a clustering analysis with Ward method for the forty-three students’ postscripts and divided them into the following five categories: (1) SSRL-oriented (N = 5), (2) SSRL-, CoRL- andSRL-oriented (N = 11), (3) insufficient (N = 8), (4) SRL-oriented (N = 7), and (5) CoRL- and SRL-oriented (N =12). When they described more than two aspects of planning, monitoring, and revising at the level of regulation,students were identified as being oriented at a level of regulation (SRL, CoRL or SSRL).Case studies: How students constructed their scripts through their experiencesAs we expected, development trajectories of students’ regulation scripts were various even within the same groupsbecause of differences in students’ pre-scripts and recognition of collaboration experiences. For examining howtheir pre-scripts and their experiences influenced students’ construction of regulation scripts, we analyzed theirgroup progress notes and individual reflection notes in Knowledge Forum during their jigsaw group work.Why students’ scripts were not changedAmong four students who did not manifest any change in their regulation scripts, two students (A1 and A3)worked in the same group. Their group progress reports revealed that they had an epistemic challenge that theirgroup had not agreed on any solution ideas among members and failed to collect evidence to back up their solution.Whereas two other members (A2 and A4) described the problem and considered how to solve the epistemicICLS 2016 Proceedings833© ISLSchallenge by revising their regulation in their reflection notes, A1 and A3 did not show any notion of the problemin their notes.How students could reconfigure their regulation scripts through engaging in their group challengesIn a group, three of four students successfully reconfigured their regulation scripts at SRL, CoRL and SSRL levels.In this group, they recognized an epistemic challenge in sharing their ideas among members because they decidedto work separately as subgroups of two students each. In their individual reflection notes, they were so muchconcerned with this epistemic challenge by describing their group work from the perspective of goal and planning,monitoring, and revising.How students’ regulation scripts were reconfigured in different orientationsIn groups of students who reconfigured their regulation scripts in different orientations, we found that studentsrecognized different challenges (epistemic or socio-emotional) and did not share their recognition in the articulateways. They did not discuss in their group work and report their challenges (or problems) in their group progressnotes. Each individual recognized different challenges in their individual reflection notes. When they recognizedepistemic challenges, they attempted to apply regulatory strategies at SSRL level. On the other hand, they didmore individual (SRL or CoRL) regulatory strategies when they recognized the socio-emotional challenge.DiscussionThis study was aimed at investigating how students’ regulation in collaboration could be facilitated by designinga learning environment with CSCL as a digital portfolio. Based on studies of regulation in collaboration (Järvelä& Hadwin, 2013) and script theory of guidance (Fischer et al., 2013), we designed activity structure as a macroscript and scaffolds in students’ group progress report and individual reflection notes as micro-scripts. Resultsrevealed that significantly more students reconfigured their regulation scripts through their collaborationexperiences in this learning environment. Although the external scripts we designed were effective for students,further studies are needed for examining the effectiveness more rigorously. First, our assessment of students’regulation scripts was focused on aspects (planning, monitoring and revising) at three levels (SRL, CoRL, andSSRL) but not an elaboration of each script (i.e., play, scene, roles and scriptlets). We must further conduct studiesof how hierarchical structure of regulation scripts is reconfigured through students’ experiences in theircollaboration. Second, from our case studies of students’ group progress reports and individual reflection notes inKnowledge Forum every week, we found a hypothetical relationship between the reconfiguration of regulationscripts and types of challenges students faced in their collaboration. Results of our case studies suggest thatstudents would reconfigure their regulation scripts at SSRL level when they recognized epistemic challenges andshared them among members. Although it is difficult to control kinds of challenges as a design element, we needto further consider how students’ reports during collaboration can modify our design in progress.ReferencesDillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructionaldesign. In P. A. Kirschner (Ed.), Three worlds of CSCL. Can we support CSCL? (pp 61–91). Heerlen:Open Universiteit Nederland.Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Stegmann, K., & Wecker, C. (2013). Toward a Script Theory of Guidance in ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning. Educational Psychologist, 48(1), 56–66.Järvelä, S. & Hadwin, A. F. (2013). New Frontiers: Regulating Learning in CSCL. Educational Psychologist,48(1), 25–39.Miller, M. & Hadwin, A. (2015). Scripting and awareness tools for regulating collaborative learning: Changingthe landscape of support in CSCL. Computers in Human Behavior, 52, 573–588.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge building. In J. W. Guthrie (Ed.), Encyclopedia of education(2nd ed., pp. 1370–1373). New York: Macmillan.Stahl, G., Koschmann, T., & Suthers, D. (2014). Computer Supported Collaborative Learning. In R. Keith Sawyer(Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (2nd ed., pp. 479-500). Cambridge UniversityPress, 2014AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 24240105.ICLS 2016 Proceedings834© ISLS