Researchers and Practitioners Co-Designing for ExpansiveScience Learning and Educational EquityPhilip Bellpbell@uw.eduUniversity of WashingtonSamuel Severance, William R. Penuel, Tamara Sumner, Wagma Mommandi, David Quigley, Katie Van Horne,and Raymond Johnsonsamuel.severance@colorado.edu, william.penuel@colorado.edu,tamara.sumner@colorado.edu,wagma.mommandi@colorado.edu, david.quigley@colorado.edu,katie.vanhorne@colorado.edu, raymond.johnson@colorado.eduUniversity of Colorado, BoulderShelley Stromholt, Heena Lakhani, Katie Davis, Adam Bell, and Megan Bangstromhos@uw.edu, hlakhani@uw.edu, kdavis78@uw.edu, abell42@uw.edu, mbang3@uw.eduUniversity of WashingtonAbstract: This symposium addresses the design and enactment of learning environments insupport of the new vision for K-12 science education (NRC, 2012) and the related collaborativeco-design practices of research-practice partnerships (Coburn, Penuel & Geil, 2013) as we focuson how to promote and understand cognitively and culturally expansive learning experiencesfor youth from culturally and linguistically diverse communities. Each study in our symposiumis focused on “developing and testing innovations that can improve the quality and equity ofsupports for implementation of reforms” in real-world contexts (Penuel & Fishman, 2012, p.282). The research projects in this symposium document practices and findings of variousresearch practice partnerships that allow participants to work together to imagine and bringabout new possibilities for educational improvement that reflect new goals and arrangementsfor learning. Our aim is to explore responsive co-design methods for collaborative design teamsof researchers, teachers, and teacher leaders accountable for transforming student learning.IntroductionThis symposium brings together threads of research related to the design and enactment of learning environmentsin support of the new vision for K-12 science education (NRC, 2012) and the collaborative co-design practices ofresearch-practice partnerships (Coburn, Penuel & Geil, 2013) as we focus on how to promote and understandcognitively and culturally expansive learning experiences for youth from culturally and linguistically diversecommunities. We approach this work from an ecological perspective on how people learn within and across socialsettings as a strategy related to promoting educational equity and social justice (Bell, 2012).In ideal terms, educational standards can be viewed as an equity-focused policy strategy for changing theeducational system to ensure that all students have access to a baseline level of rigorous academic learning goalsrelated to educational achievement. In pragmatic terms, standards-based implementation leads quickly tocomplicated problems of educational practice that need to be better understood and attended to. At of the time ofthis writing, the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) have been adopted by 17 states and the District ofColumbia—with almost 35% of U.S. youth living in states working to support this new vision for K-12 scienceeducation. The new vision includes strategies and perspectives associated with cultivating culturally expansivelearning opportunities for youth. There is a significant opportunity associated with working to promote those ideasat broader scale. Our work supports human capacity-building and educational tool development in STEM contentareas and supports teachers within disciplinary-specific communities of practice, enabling equitableimplementation of the NGSS, as envisioned in the NRC Framework for K-12 Science Education (NRC, 2012).The learning sciences have long embraced collaborative design as a feature of design research (Brown,1992; Cobb, Confrey, diSessa, Lehrer, & Schauble, 2003; Voogt et al., 2015). Many of the NGSS implementationprojects to be reported on are engaged in design-based implementation research (DBIR) with deep attention tosystemic scaling and sustainability (Penuel et al., 2011), while others are engaged in traditional design-basedresearch (DBR) to explore possibilities in specific settings (Bell, 2004). Collaborative design within researchpractice partnerships presents both expanded possibilities and new challenges. Research-practice partnerships arelong-term collaborations between practitioners and researchers that are organized to investigate problems ofICLS 2016 Proceedings1128© ISLSpractice and solutions for improving the outcomes of educational systems (Coburn, Penuel, & Geil, 2013). Theyhave the potential for broader impacts, because designs aim to impact practice in larger systems and networks(Cobb, Jackson, Smith, Sorum, & Henrick, 2013). In addition, they have potential to develop important “contexttheories” related to learning (Cobb et al., 2003), focused specifically on the conditions for broad and equitableimplementation of innovations. In addition, they require organizing partnerships to address concerns acrossmultiple levels of systems and settings where differences of power and inequity deserve attention (Bang, Medin,Washinawatok, & Chapman, 2010). Our aim is to explore responsive co-design methods for collaborative designteams of researchers, teachers, and teacher leaders accountable for transforming student learning experiences.Scholarly significance of the symposiumCo-design with teachers is intended to support cycles of expansive learning that transform the collective agencyof teachers (Voogt et al., 2015). Working from an educational equity perspective, Guitiérrez and Vossoughi (2010)recently outlined an important new model of design-based research focused on exploring what is possible inlearning environments using a grammar of hope, possibility, and resilience. In expansive learning, participantslearn collectively by creating something that does not yet exist (Engeström & Sannino, 2010). Participants imagineand bring about new possibilities for action that reflect new goals and arrangements for learning. When they areable to “break away” from the give frame of action and take initiative to change it, their collective agency becomestransformative (Virkkunen, 2006, p. 49). To this end, we will take up social justice perspectives as we explore theco-design efforts of researchers and practitioners working to implement these NGSS-related projects.Co-designing with teachers for student agency in scienceSamuel Severance, William R. Penuel, Tamara Sumner, Wagma Mommandi, David Quigley, Katie Van Horneand Raymond JohnsonCurriculum materials that expand student agency can positively influence student affect, interests, and learning.Past research has found that units foregrounding student agency yield more positive affective responses fromstudents (Morozov et al., 2014). In the context of long-term partnerships among researchers, educational leaders,and teachers, engaging teachers in the co-design of curriculum materials aims to transform the historicalrelationships of authority for curriculum while expanding student agency and learning opportunities (Penuel,2014). When teachers co-design with researchers, however, student voices may be left out, and the team can missopportunities to expand student agency in the design and implementation process. We elaborate on three strategiesfor soliciting student input into curriculum design and foregrounding student agency during co-design processes.Teacher and student sampleStudy data comes from 783 students of 13 teachers from 8 schools in a large urban school district in theMidwestern United States. Data were collected during the co-design of curriculum for high school biology. In thiscurriculum, 8-week project-based units are organized around a design challenge. These units are intended toembody the principles of the Framework (NRC, 2012) and address the performance expectations of the NGSS.Strategies tested for promoting student agency in design and implementationWe employed three strategies to expand student agency within co-design processes and implementation: (1)linking the unit to larger community initiatives; (2) eliciting student interests in exploring different phenomena;and (3) using data on student perspectives on the design challenge and their classroom experiences.Linking design challenges to larger community initiativesWe sought to enhance the likelihood that students would experience science as contributing to community bylinking design challenges that anchored units to larger community initiatives. For the ecosystems unit, thechallenge was to select and plant a tree that contributed to the biodiversity of the tree canopy and the life it supportsin the city. This effort was linked to the city’s tree planting initiative, which provided the recommended trees forthe students to plant in collaboration with park department personnel. We assessed student interests andengagement with this design challenge using weekly mini-surveys administered throughout the 8-week unitimplementation. For the majority of days in this unit, 65% of days (n = 1,225), students reported that the class’lesson was “relevant to their community,” while 29% said the lesson was personally relevant to them.Eliciting student ideas about phenomenaICLS 2016 Proceedings1129© ISLSProject-based science units that embody the vision of the Framework need to be anchored in explainingphenomena in the natural world (Krajcik, Codere, Dahsah, Bayer, & Mun, 2014). Not all phenomena are likely tocapture and sustain students’ interest, however. We designed a survey that asked current ninth grade students torate their interest in 10 potential phenomena to investigate in the unit; they could also suggest alternativephenomenon. Teams chose to develop the design challenge around students’ first choice and to develop supportingstrands in the unit around students’ other top interests. Initial surveys suggest that students perceive the selectedtopics as meaningful and relevant: in responses from two classes piloting this unit (n=110), 72% of students reportthat the class’ lesson was “relevant to their community,” while 36% said the lesson was personally relevant.Using data of student perspectivesWe gather evidence on a weekly basis on students’ experiences of the challenge. This “practical measure” (Yeageret al., 2013) provides information to inform our iterative process of improving the intra-unit coherence of lessons.But the data we collect do more than hold us to account for coherence; they also include items about students’affective response to the unit, their judgment about whether what they learned that day was useful, and the personalrelevance for lessons. Evidence shows we can still improve excitement and the perceived utility value of lessons,as 65% said what they learned on a given day was useful.ImplicationsStudent voice is challenging to integrate into collaborative design with teachers, but a concern with expandingstudent agency demands that we discover ways to incorporate student ideas into curriculum. We do so byconnecting design challenges to community endeavors, eliciting student ideas about projects, and collecting dataon student experiences of units that inform the design. These different strategies revealed a pattern of variation instudent responses to curriculum but enabled the design team to strengthen efforts to expand student agency.Co-designing a digital badge system: Supporting learners’ science identitiesthrough participatory designKatie Davis and Adam BellThis study employed participatory design (PD) to develop a digital badge system that recognizes the skills andachievements of a diverse group of high school students who participate in an out-of-school science educationprogram. Documentation of the design sessions illustrates the benefits of engaging students, program supervisors,and researchers in co-design activities aimed at articulating the learning pathways available to students in theprogram. By providing students with opportunities to reflect on their learning experiences, these co-designactivities supported their developing science identities. This work offers best practices for directly engaginglearners and supervisors in the design of a technology-based learning management system.Conceptual framework and project designThis study is grounded in situated theories of learning, which emphasize the social, contextualized nature oflearning. According to this perspective, learning is an inherently relational process that takes place as peoplenegotiate meaning in specific social contexts (Lave & Wenger, 1991). Evidence of one’s learning is similarlynegotiated among actors who are embedded in distinct social systems, each with its own set of norms, values,artifacts, and practices. When new artifacts are introduced into a social system, there is an opportunity to callattention to existing practices and possibly alter them.In the current study, students, program supervisors and researchers worked together to design a specifictype of new artifact—digital badges—to recognize the learning that takes place in an out-of-school scienceeducation program. We employed a sociotechnological participatory design (PD) approach (Pazmino et al., 2015)that leveraged the expertise of the program supervisors and the researchers in order to focus student ideation forcreating a digital badge system. Each design session incorporated one or more PD techniques informed by existingpractice (e.g., rapport building, mixing ideas, stickies, layered elaboration) (Druin, 2002).All PD sessions were recorded using a digital video camera and microphone. During the design sessions,researchers collected field notes that were later used for analysis (Merriam, 2009). Each session yielded designartifacts (photographed in situ). The analysis of the design sessions was completed in four phases: (1) after eachdesign session, a researcher produced a narrative summary using a grounded theory approach (Merriam, 2009);(2) the researchers reviewed the summaries to identify critical events that occurred during each session (Derry, etal., 2010); (3) the researchers independently reviewed the video data corresponding to the critical events (Landis& Koch, 1977); and (4) the researchers viewed the critical events together for discussion and analysis (Bell, 2004).ICLS 2016 Proceedings1130© ISLSFindingsBy employing PD to create a digital badge system, students: (1) articulated science knowledge by displaying anunderstanding of science-related phenomena; (2) constructed learning pathways by mapping the structure ofscience domains; (3) analyzed work practices by stabilizing expectations for workplace success; and (4) developedscience identities by embodying the epistemological orientation of science experts.Implications of developing digital badges to promote STEM identitiesThis research offers evidence of successful sociotechnological participatory design with students as a method fordesigning a digital badge system and encouraging student reflection on their learning experiences. We show howPD techniques can be used to support the values and goals of an out-of-school, science-based learningenvironment. This project identifies the unique benefits of a digital badge system as a mode for wide-rangingThe co-design of professional learning experiences for teachers through aresearch-practice partnershipPhilip BellIn this design-based implementation research (DBIR) project (Penuel, et al., 2011), researchers partnered withstaff from two urban school districts to support implementation of the vision of the NGSS and the underlyingFramework (NRC, 2012). The partnership is focused on supporting approximately 100 teachers per year fromthese districts as they adapt, test, and refine existing instructional materials. I propose a model of design-focusedresearch-practice partnerships (RPPs) called lines of partnering—and present an analysis of the co-designpractices of researchers and practitioners conceptualizing, designing, delivering, analyzing, and refiningprofessional learning experiences for this network of teachers.Conceptual framework and study designThe partnership is engaging teachers in the adaptation of existing curriculum materials as the strategy forsupporting teacher learning aspects of the new vision. This paper focuses on the co-design work of professionallearning experiences for the teachers. We use the 'theory of persons' perspective to interpret human behavior ashappening within a nexus of impinging structures of sociomaterial practice across places and over time (Dreier,2009; Bell, et al., 2012). Partnering across practice communities is conceptualized as laying down and bringinglines of action into correspondence through the enactment of various sympathies (Ingold, 2015)—which areidentified through empathetic investigations. In Design-RPPs, people interweave lines of activity related to theshared endeavor in the context of prevailing and generated forces from the nexus of social practices at play.Six researchers partnered with six district staff and two staff from a science industry non-profit to engagein this work. Over three years the partnership has worked with 200 teachers from these urban districts to negotiateproblems of practice associated with implementing the NGSS through curriculum adaptation. Ethnographicfieldnotes, audiorecordings, artifacts, and surveys were analyzed across multiple levels of the partnership(management, program design, program implementation, classroom).FindingsI conceptualize such efforts as engaging in four different dimensions of necessary work—two of which are mostrelevant to this analysis. The shared work associated with lines of purpose involves inquiring into and articulatingoverlapping and synergistic goals for the collaborative work from multiple perspectives in ongoing ways. Linesof collaboration and cooperation involves taking programmatic action within such shared endeavors, togetherand apart, as practice-focused groups (e.g., to engage in co-design). Cross-cutting dimensions involve: mutualismby identifying sympathies in the work through empathetic stances, pragmatism by working within systems totransform them, equity by focusing on the learning of learners from non-dominant communities and by positioningteachers as developing experts, and orienting to historicity in the practices, values, and priorities involved.Based on an analysis of the co-design work focused on the professional learning experiences of teachers,a range of findings have resulted at different levels of the partnership. First, political considerations of the worksometimes need to trump epistemological goals. Districts need scarce professional development projects to besuccessful. Setting pedagogical learning goals too high can result in teachers opting out and threatening the successof the effort. Second, teacher agency and leadership in the work is promoted by positioning teachers as developingexperts doing meaningful work in educational improvement projects. Teachers report how curriculum adaptationallowed them to engage in meaningful work and leverage and expand their expertise in ways that served theirimmediate instructional goals and the goals of the broader educational organization. Third, co-design work withinICLS 2016 Proceedings1131© ISLSthe partnership led to emergent problems of educational practice that require unanticipated research-relatedexpertise that the research team needs to develop and leverage from their professional network—in addition tothe existing expertise they hold. Fourth, sustained partnerships between researchers and practitioners—withgrowing levels of mutual trust—allow for an increased exploration of values and ethics that relate to the sharedco-design work from an equity perspective (Bang et al., 2015). A growing interest in promoting culturally andlinguistically diverse students participation in epistemic practices resulted in co-design work foregroundingpedagogical discourse strategies for linguistically minoritized students as a leading project-level activity.ImplicationsOur field has often operated through research-practice partnerships, but we have not adequately theorized andstudied how they operate and influence educational improvement. Design focused research-practice partnershipsrepresent a promising approach for building equity-centered human capacity and developing theory aboutprofessional learning as large-scale implementation unfolds within complex educational systems. The proposedmodel for partnerships as it relates to the co-design work of partnerships allows us to understand and cultivatemore work of this kind centered on improving promoting equity in education.The development of practical measures for teachers to inform the co-design ofeducational improvement effortsShelley Stromholt, Heena Lakhani, and Philip BellThrough an ongoing partnership of educational researchers, practitioners, and STEM professionals, our work isfocused on collaboratively adapting curriculum and developing relevant strategies and tools to support bothteachers’ and students’ learning of STEM through engagement in disciplinary practices. We take a responsiveapproach to practitioners’ curricular and collaborative goals and learning needs using design-basedimplementation research methodology (Penuel, Fishman, Cheng, & Sabelli, 2011). In this context we explore howpractical measures can “act as sensing mechanisms at the level at which work is carried out,” producing richopportunities for identifying improvement targets and continuous learning (Russell & Grunow, 2015).This study examines an approach for the co-design and implementation of practical measures, those thatcan be “collected, analyzed, and used within the daily work lives of practitioners” (Russell & Grunow, 2015)relative to a theory of implementation for a shared vision of K-12 science education and inclusive participationstructures (NRC, 2012). This paper presents a case study of an effort to develop emic accounts of the productiveapproaches, problems of practice, and resulting design implications for professional development as teachersshifted their teaching toward practice-focused instruction through curriculum adaptation in response to the NGSS.Conceptual framework and study designIn the context of improvement research, Bryk et al. (2015) distinguish measurement for improvement from otherforms of educational measurement traditionally focused on accountability or theory development. Measurementfor improvement entails the frequent measuring of high leverage work processes in order to inform change effortsin everyday practice. We leveraged an experience sampling approach, in which participants respond to a shortsurvey about their immediate activities in the moment, frequently over several days or weeks (Zirkel, Garcia, &Murphy, 2015). This approach allows access to settings and experiences otherwise inaccessible to researchers andgenerates frequent and timely data that can be triangulated with other data sources related to the processes targetedfor improvement. Through iterative co-design we developed a “mini-survey” for teacher reflection on classroominstruction and student engagement in disciplinary practices as instruction unfolded over the school year. As partof our research practice partnership, we then use the results to convey outcomes to our partners which informedsubsequent interventions through professional development.Sources of dataTeachers were surveyed weekly for 12 weeks over the 2015-2016 school year. We conducted a thematic analysisof the teacher responses using open coding to identify productive approaches and problems of practice teachersencountered at various stages of implementation across the school year. These results were compared withfieldnotes and other data collected as part of the larger research project to develop claims and design implicationsfor effective professional development related to equity-focused, practice-focused instruction (Erickson, 1986).ImplicationsICLS 2016 Proceedings1132© ISLSA growing focus in educational research on learning in and through practice necessitates a focus on measurementfor improvement, but there are few accounts of how research practice partnerships have engaged in developmentand implementation of practical measures and the resulting improvements. This case study offers insights intopractical measures as an approach for blending rapid, disciplined cycles of inquiry with traditional researchactivities to inform our understanding of educational improvement.Axiological innovations in an ArtScience participatory design experimentMegan BangAs we continue to try to understand the complexity of learning and development in the evolving “throwntogetherness” of life (Massey, 2005) - which she describes as politics of the event of place including the politicsof difference, identity, affect, connectedness and relations -- creating interventions that contribute to just andsustainable change demands engagement across disciplinary fields both within and across the social and physicalsciences to develop new designs, narratives, and possibilities of encounter and making relations (Aitken, 2010).This paper examines the ways in which designers engage in epistemic navigation in the context of an ArtScienceproject called Expansive Meanings and Makings in ArtScience (EMMAS). EMMAS is a participatory designresearch project investigating the untapped potential of an ArtScience approach to learning andteaching. EMMAS aimed to foster creative trajectories into meaningful STEM learning for Native Americanyouth. The project engaged community members, artists, scientists, and learning scientists to develop learningenvironments for youth and their families that engage investigate complex ecological change, interpret artisticand scientific visualizations, and respond creatively to questions by integrating scientific and artistic concerns,materials and processes. An artscience repertoire (cultivating attention, making, critique, and exhibition)underlies the learning experience.Conceptual framework and study designBuilding on Lave & Wenger (1991), EMMAS frames learning as a social phenomenon constituted in theexperienced, lived-in world, through participation in the ongoing practices of social communities. As a creativemovement, artscience highlights commonalities in thinking and making practices across social communities(Brown et al., 2011; Heath, 1986). Artscience emphasizes coming to know phenomena deeply—a process ofmaking and re-making relations with phenomena, tools, materials, histories, and people (Ingold, 2013).Using participatory design methods, specifically community based design (Bang et al., 2010) narrative,cognitive, and discourse analytic methods, I study the conceptual ecologies, identity narratives, and artsciencerepertoires that youth and designers develop through their participation in EMMAS inquiries. Data sourcesinclude 12 hours of video and transcriptions of program implementation and especially group conversations aboutjuxtaposed artistic and scientific visualizations focus on students engaged in making artistic responses, interviewswith 15 students, and 15 design meetings. All of the data were transcribed. The design of these programs intendedto cultivate attention across multiple epistemologies, scales, modalities, and perspectives, using protocols thatfacilitated sustained engagement across multiple interpretive pathways, openness to emergent and uncertainmeanings, and knowing as movement (Ingold, 2013) particularly as they related to complex ecological systemsand students’ cultural ecologies. Further community members were very interested in supporting students’ senseof identity and community throughout the programming. Transcripts were initially open coded to identifyemergent themes (Creswell, 2007). Drawing from this initial thematic analysis, moments of navigation wereidentified and further coded using critical discourse analysis (Gee, 2011). As part of this analysis I analyze theways in which epistemic navigation and ways of knowing are constructed. I focus on how these constructions areboth around disciplinary boundaries and expansions as well as around western and indigenous ways of knowing.FindingsThe findings of this study expand recent work on axiological innovations in learning environments (Bang et al.,2015). I argue axiologies are reflected in the theories, practices, and structures of values, ethics, and aestheticsthat shape current and possible meaning, meaning making, positioning and relations in cultural ecologies. In thispaper I work to uncover the ways in which axiological normativity is inscribed in moments when settled and oftenincomplete notions of disciplines are employed in design decisions and in implementation. I juxtapose thesemoments with interactions that “desettled” expectations and resulted in the disruption of axiological normativityand produce what I call axiological innovations. I specifically examine how these interactions reflect an artsciencepedagogy and epistemic navigation across cultural ecologies. I track how students interviews reflect more nuancedand sophisticated understandings of complex ecological systems connected to the activities that accomplishedICLS 2016 Proceedings1133© ISLSthese more expansive axiological innovations. Specifically, students reasoned through problems in ways thatreflected awareness of Massey’s thrown togetherness and the need to attend to a valuing of diversity of life.ImplicationsThese findings suggest that deliberate work to cultivate axiological innovations in the design and implementationof learning may support ore equitable and expansive learning environments – particularly in participatory designcontexts that engage a range of perspectives and expertise. Further the forms of ecological reasoning and problemsolving reflect a kind of sophistication that reflects the demands of the 21st century.ReferencesAitken, S. (2010). Throwntogetherness: Encounters with difference and diversity. The Handbook for QualitativeMethods in Geography. London, 46-69.Bang, M., Medin, D., Washinawatok, K., & Chapman, S. (2010). Innovations in culturally based science educationthrough partnerships and community. In M. S. Khine & M. I. Saleh (Eds.), New science of learning:Cognition, computers, and collaboration in education (pp. 569-592). New York, NY: Springer.Bang, M., Faber, L., Gurneau, J., Marin, A., & Soto, C. (2015). Community-based design research: Learningacross generations and strategic transformations of institutional relations toward axiological innovations.Mind, Culture, and Activity, 1-14.Bell, P. (2004). On the theoretical breadth of design-based research in education. Educational psychologist, 39(4),243-253.Bell, P. (2012). Understanding how and why people learn across settings as an educational equity strategy. In B.Bevan, P. Bell, R. Stevens, & A. Razfar (Eds.), LOST Opportunities: Learning in Out of School Time(pp. 95-98). London: Springer.Bell, P., Tzou, C., Bricker, L. A., & Baines, A. D. (2012). Learning in diversities of structures of social practice:Accounting for how, why and where people learn science. Human Development, 55(5-6), 269-284.Brown, A., Snelson, K., Root-Bernstein, R. & Siler, T. (2011). An ArtScience Manifesto. Leonardo Journal ofArt, Science, Technology, June 2011.Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.Bryk, A. S., Gomez, L. M., Grunow, A., & LeMahieu, P. G. (2015) Learning to improve: How America’s schoolscan get better at getting better. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press.Cobb, P. A., Confrey, J., diSessa, A. A., Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educationalresearch. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9-13.Cobb, P. A., Jackson, K., Smith, T., Sorum, M., & Henrick, E. C. (2013). Design research with educationalsystems: Investigating and supporting improvements in the quality of mathematics teaching at scale. InB. J. Fishman, W. R. Penuel, A.-R. Allen, & B. H. Cheng (Eds.), Design-based implementation research.National Society for the Study of Education Yearbook. (pp. 320-349). NY, NY: Teachers College Record.Coburn, C. E., Penuel, W. R., & Geil, K. E. (2013). Research-practice partnerships: A strategy for leveragingresearch for educational improvement in school districts. William T. Grant Foundation, New York, NY.Creswell, J. W. (2007). Qualitative enquiry and research design: Choosing among five approaches.Derry, S. J., Pea, R. D., Barron, B., Engle, R. A., Erickson, F., Goldman, R.,…Sherin, B. L. (2010). Conductingvideo research in learning sciences: Guidance on selection, analysis, technology, and ethics. Journal ofLearning Sciences, 19(1), 3-53.Dreier, O. (2009). Persons in Structures of Social Practice. Theory & Psychology, 19(2), 193-212.Druin, A. (2002). The Role of Children in the Design of New Technology. Behaviour and InformationTechnology, 21(1), 1-25.Engeström, Y., & Sannino, A. (2010). Studies of expansive learning: Foundations, findings and future challenges.Educational Research Review, 5, 1-24.Erickson, F. (1986). Qualitative methods in research on teaching. In M. C. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of researchon teaching (3rd ed., pp. 119–161). New York: Macmillan.Gee, J. P. 2011. Discourse analysis: what makes it critical? In An introduction to critical discourse analysis ineducation. 2nd ed., ed. R. Rogers, 23–45. New York: Routledge.Heath, S.B. (1986). Good science or bad art? Or both? In D. Baker, J. Clay and C. Fox (Eds.), Challenging waysof knowing: In English, mathematics and science, pp. 13-18. London: Falmer Press.Ingold, T. (2013). Making: Anthropology, archaeology, art and architecture. New York: Routledge.Ingold, T. (2015). The Life of Lines. New York: Routledge.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1134© ISLSKrajcik, J. S., Codere, S., Dahsah, C., Bayer, R., & Mun, K. (2014). Planning instruction to meet the intent of theNext Generation Science Standards. Journal of Science Teacher Education, 25(2), 157-175.Landis, J. R., and Koch, G. G. (1977). The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics,33(1), 159-174.Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge [England]; NewYork: Cambridge University Press.Merriam, S. B. (2009). Qualitative research: Guide to design and implementation. San Francisco, CA: JosseyBass.Morozov, A., Herrenkohl, L., Shutt, K., Thummaphan, P., Vye, N., Abbott, R. D., & Scalone, G. (2014).Emotional engagement in agentive science environments. In J. L. Polman, E. Kyza, K. O'Neill, & I.Tabak (Eds.), Proceedings from The 11th ICLS (pp. 1152-1156). Boulder, CO: ISLS.National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. Washington, DC: National Research Council. NGSS Lead States. (2013). NextGeneration Science Standards: For states, by states. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Pazmino, P. F. J., Slattery, B., Lyons, L., and Hunt, B. (2015). Designing for youth interpreter professionaldevelopment: A sociotechnologically-framed participatory design approach. IDC2015. Medford, MA. 110.Penuel, W. R. (2014). Emerging forms of formative intervention research in education. Mind, Culture, andActivity, 21(2), 97-117.Penuel, W. R., & Fishman, B. J. (2012). Large‐scale science education intervention research we can use. Journalof Research in Science Teaching,49(3), 281-304.Penuel, W. R., Coburn, C. E., & Gallagher, D. (2013). Negotiating problems of practice in research-practicepartnerships focused on design. In B. J. Fishman, W. R. Penuel, A. R. Allen, & B. H. Cheng (Eds.),Design-based implementation research: Theories, methods, and exemplars. National Society for theStudy of Education Yearbook. (pp. 237-255). New York, NY: Teachers College Record.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development at theintersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331-337.Penuel, W. R., Roschelle, J., & Shechtman, N. (2007). The WHIRL co-design process: Participant experiences.Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 2(1), 51-74.Rogoff, B. (1994). Developing understanding of the idea of communities of learners. Mind, culture, and activity,1(4), 209-229.Russell, J., & Grunow, A. (2015, July). Using practical measures to gather implementation evidence. Presentationat the Design-Based Implementation Research Workshop, Boulder, CO.Virkkunen, J. (2006). Dilemmas in building shared transformative agency. Activités, 3(1), 43-66.Voogt, J. M., Laferrière, T., Breuleux, A., Itow, R. C., Hickey, D. T., & McKenney, S. E. (2015). Collaborativedesign as a form of professional development. Instructional Science, 43(2), 259-282.Yeager, D., Bryk, A. S., Muhich, J., Hausman, H., & Morales, L. (2013). Practical measurement. Palo Alto, CA:Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.Zirkel, S., Garcia, J. A., & Murphy, M. C. (2015). Experience-sampling research methods and their potential foreducation research. Educational Researcher, 44(1), 7-16.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1135© ISLS