Which Visualization Guides Learners Best? Impact of AvailablePartner- and Content-Related Information on CollaborativeLearningMelanie Erkens, University of Duisburg-Essen, melanie.erkens@uni-due.deDaniel Bodemer, University of Duisburg-Essen, daniel.bodemer@uni-due.deAbstract: A large body of research covers the positive impact of cognitive group awarenesstools on implicitly guiding learners. However, the impact of visualizing partner-relatedinformation and content-related information in such tools is barely investigated separately.Thus, we compared the impact of both types of information on collaborative learning in anexperimental study (N = 120) by systematically varying partner-related information (given ornot) and content-related information (given or not) in a 2x2 design. Concerningcommunication behavior, we found no effect of content-related information, but a main effectof partner information indicating that the visualization of a learning partner’s knowledgedeficit implicitly guides learners to give longer explanations. A qualitative comparisoncontrasting learners with the highest and lowest knowledge gain indicate that content-relatedinformation could still be relevant for implicit guidance, since successful learners seem to usethis information for addressing topics in their explanations.IntroductionThe positive impact of implicit guidance on collaborative learning was widely demonstrated (cf. Janssen &Bodemer, 2013). Implicitly guiding learners means to only suggest them certain ways of thinking,communicating, and behaving, without directly instructing them to perform specific activities (cf. Hesse, 2007;Dillenbourg, 2002). Such guidance can be implemented with the help of cognitive group awareness tools.Following Bodemer and Scholvien (2014), these tools utilize three functions for suggesting specific behaviors:First, they can cue and list essential information, e.g. specific content, which helps learners to organize theirknowledge and structure their communication with the learning partner. Second, they provide information onthe whole group or single members of the group to facilitate important grounding and partner modelingprocesses. Third, they facilitate comparison processes to trigger discussions that are focused on relevant topics.In order to automatize these functions, the “Grouping and Representing Tool” (GRT) was developed (Erkens,Bodemer, & Hoppe, 2016). This tool extracts different information from written text (e.g. students’ homeworkor essays): on the one hand, it transforms content-related information by forming clusters of concepts that areinterpreted as topics and visualized as a list. On the other hand, it provides partner-related information, since theclustering results in quantitative values on the extent of how intensively these topics are debated in each text.These values can be visualized as bars per topic illustrating a learning partner’s cognitive information separateor side-by-side with a learner’s own cognitive information to facilitate a comparison, which is particularlyuseful in collaborative learning scenarios applying complementary group formation The GRT was evaluatedbeneficial for classroom learning (Erkens et al., 2016), but due to their confounding both types of informationstill need to be investigated separately to know about their single effects. Since said confounding is given formost group awareness tools, the current study is guided by the pending question: What and how much impacthas partner- and content-related information on learning behavior? In the following, we present results from acurrent study combining quantitative and qualitative measures to answer this question.Instructional purposes of cognitive group awareness toolsCognitive group awareness tools fulfill several instructional purposes by providing learners with relevantcognitive information. Visualizations with content-related information can unfold their effects by informationcueing (e.g. highlights) or by visualizing only selected information (e.g. topics). Information cueing refers backto the signaling principle which means that learners focus their attention and learn more deeply, when cues areadded that highlight the organization of essential material (Mayer, 2005). In the context of collaborativelearning, Scholvien and Bodemer (2013) found that learners supported by a cognitive group awareness toolprioritized content that was highlighted blue to reveal dissimilarities between them and their learning partner.Concerning the visualization of selected information, the effect of information clustering is based on the ideathat visual representations that include organized labels, names, and graphics group relevant information(Hyerle, 2000), thereby focus learners’ attention (Mayer, 1979) and provide better orientation, especially incooperative learning scenarios (Purdom & Kromrey, 1992). Regarding this, Erkens, Bodemer and Hoppe (2016)CSCL 2017 Proceedings127© ISLSfound indicators that a list of contents created by the GRT might influence learners in selecting topics to bediscussed: one observed strategy was that learners scanned the list of content to check for topics about whichthey did not write in their essays (independent of the information given on a learning partner’s knowledge) andfinally added concepts visualized to their essays.The visualization of partner-related information, either visualized separately or side-by-side with theinformation of a learner, supports comparison processes. The comparison between learning partners isassociated with relevant learning mechanisms such as partner modeling, conflict solution, and (self-)explication(Dillenbourg, 1999). The concept of cognitive conflict goes back to Piaget (1977) and is based on the idea thatinteractions with physical or social environments can lead to a disequilibrium. In the case of a partner modelcontradicting the model of a learner’s own knowledge, intrapersonal (Piaget & Inhelder, 2008) or interpersonalcognitive conflicts (Doise & Mugny, 1984) might occur. A learner can solve such conflicts by selecting specifictopics and discussing them with the learning partner. Bodemer and Scholvien (2014) found that learnersprovided with partner-related information by a group awareness tool search for and prioritize topics visualizingcognitive dissimilarities to their learning partners before discussing less relevant topics. The concept ofexplication can be associated with audience design which means that speakers design each utterance for specificlisteners (Clark & Murphy, 1982). In the case of visualizations supporting learners to estimate their partner asless knowledgeable, they might explain more to this learning partner. Regarding this, Dehler, Bodemer, Buder,and Hesse (2011) found that learners supported by a comparative visualization of learners’ own and theirrespective partner’s knowledge explained more in a discussion than learners without support, when a learningpartner’s deficit was visualized.Overall, we can summarize that the visualization of combined content- and partner-related informationcan determine learners’ focus and induce them to explain more to a learning partner. However, while both typesof learner support have been evaluated separately, they have not been tested yet in one experiment that allowsfor comparing the impact of both. Thus, it is our objective to separate content- from partner-related informationand investigate their single effects on learning behavior exemplarily for the GRT. We can conclude from theabove that learners knowing more than their learning partner give longer explanations, if partner-relatedinformation is given. Further, we could assume that this effect might be especially strong, if content-relatedinformation is also given, since this combination was used in most tools that showed an effect on explainingbehavior. Further, it is plausible that a list of several sub topics might evoke more detailed explanations thanonly being aware of the main topic, since a summary of principal issues could remind learners of relevantaspects that might be forgotten while explaining without such support. However, Erkens, Schlottbom andBodemer (2016) found that learners gave more explanations without the visualization of content-relatedinformation. So it is still an open question, if there is an interaction effect of both partner- and content-relatedinformation on the length of explanations. Finally, we ask, which visualization of the given informationsupports elaboration or rather selection of topics best.MethodTo conduct our laboratory experiment lasting one and a half hours we recruited a total of 120 university students(42 men; 78 women; mean age: M = 23.84, SD = 4.40). The participants were either paid 12 Euro, or received acertification on their contribution, and were randomized in a 2x2 factorial design to ensure evenly distributedknowledge on the topic to be learned prior to the collaboration (p = .71). As can be seen in Figure 1, wedeployed four different visualizations to support the four groups during the collaboration: (1) one visualizationneither displaying content- nor partner-related information, (2) another one displaying no content- but partnerrelated information, (3) one displaying content- but no partner-related information, and (4) one displaying bothcontent- and partner-related information. Consistent with the GRT’s functions, content-related informationstands for displaying a list of topics (bold text listed in (3) and (4)) with related concepts (normal text listed in(3) and (4)) generated from the texts used in the study. Partner-related information stands for visualizingpartner’s topical extent(s) as a grey bar. Own topical extent(s) was visualized as black bar. Said topical extents(bars) were based on the knowledge that was imparted to the participants by a text on climate change.As dependent variable, we captured communication behavior that was operationalized as the length ofexplanations given to a partner and we controlled for time of text re-reading as a covariate. Further, wequalitatively examined the behavior of particularly successful or unsuccessful learners more closely andcontrasted the best and worst learner of the most contrasting experimental groups, (1) and (4), to learn moreabout the quality of explanations.CSCL 2017 Proceedings128© ISLS(1) No content- & no partner-relatedinformation visualized(2) No content- but partner-relatedinformation visualizedmeme(3) Content- but no partner-relatedinformation visualizedpartner(4) Content- and partner-relatedinformation visualizedmemepartnerAnthropogenic greenhouse effect (T2)Anthropogenic greenhouse effect (T2)carbon dioxide emissions, increase in carbondioxide, economic interests, combustion of fossilenergy sources, changes in land usecarbon dioxide emissions, increase in carbondioxide, economic interests, combustion of fossilenergy sources, changes in land useBiomass imports (T8)Biomass imports (T8)emerging and developing countries, woodclearing, competition for land, foodstuff,overall carbon footprintemerging and developing countries, woodclearing, competition for land, foodstuff,overall carbon footprintBiofuels (T6)Biofuels (T6)bioethanol, biodiesel, biogas,hydrogen, synthesis gasbioethanol, biodiesel, biogas,hydrogen, synthesis gasCarbon cycle (T4)Carbon cycle (T4)inorganic carbon, organic carbon, carbon sinks,shift of carbon sinks, balanceinorganic carbon, organic carbon, carbon sinks,shift of carbon sinks, balanceNatural greenhouse effect (T1)Natural greenhouse effect (T1)short-wave radiation, reflection, absorption,long-wave radiation, greenhouse gasesshort-wave radiation, reflection, absorption,long-wave radiation, greenhouse gasesCarbon neutrality (T7)Carbon neutrality (T7)questionability of compensation, fertilization,nitrogen, nitrogen emissions, operating energyquestionability of compensation, fertilization,nitrogen, nitrogen emissions, operating energyEcosystem (T3)Ecosystem (T3)biotope, biocenosis, producer,consumer, decomposerbiotope, biocenosis, producer,consumer, decomposerBioenergy (T5)Bioenergy (T5)photosynthesis, biomass production, renewableenergy, biomass combustion, biomass conversionphotosynthesis, biomass production, renewableenergy, biomass combustion, biomass conversionFigure 1. Four visualizations with different content- and partner-related information. Content-relatedinformation is given in (3) and (4) with topics in bold text and concepts in normal text. Partner-relatedinformation is given in (2) and (4) with the partner’s knowledge visualized as grey bar(s).Procedure and instructionsThe idea of our study was to reconstruct a real collaborative scenario with learners asking and answeringquestions instead of triggering a real discussion in order to ensure controlled framework conditions. Althoughthis article presents only results related to the phase of answering questions or rather explicating, we outline thewhole procedure in the following (cf. Figure 2) for better comprehension. The experiment was conducted witheach participant working on a single computer. After welcoming and declaration of consent, the participantswere informed that they had to read and memorize a text on climate change within 15 minutes forming a basisfor their later explanations and to simulate a collaboration with two other participants, of whose non genuinenature they were aware. Following a pre-test to evaluate their knowledge, they were instructed to ask their firstlearning partner (A) questions. During the simulated collaboration they were provided with a visualizationillustrating a scenario in which they had less overall knowledge than their learning partner A (similar to Figure 1but with other values or rather shorter bar lengths). The participants were supported by a representation showingtheir own knowledge status and visualizing (or not) a list of topics and main concepts presented in their own andpre-testPreparation:read text onclimate changeCSCL 2017 Proceedingspost-test1. collaboration:ask partner Aquestions1. collaboration:read text ofpartner A1292. collaboration:give explanationsto partner B© ISLSFigure 2. Graphical overview of the experiment’s procedure.their learning partner’s text and visualizing (or not) bars that represent their learning partner’s extent ofknowledge allowing for comparison to the partner status. They should write down then a minimum of threequestions as open text. After this first learning phase, they were informed that learning partner A had not thetask to ask questions but to write a text about his knowledge on climate change and that they should carefullyread this contribution within 10 minutes. Following this phase, participants were requested to give explanationsto questions of their second learning partner (B) (cf. Figure 3) to simulate a discussion with a partner that mightdisclose a possible adaption to the available partner’s knowledge. This time, the participants were supported bya visualization based on a scenario in which they had a higher overall knowledge than their learning partner B(cf. Figure 1), which means that they had the same availability of content- and partner-related information as inthe first collaboration, but the lengths of bars was mainly longer in the respective visualization. The learningenvironment offered to make their contributions as open text again. Finally, participants had to take a post-test.Instruments and variablesLength and topical scope of explanationsDuring the second collaboration, we presented the participants three questions of the bogus learning partner:(1) “What are the decisive advantages of energy from biomass against the background of global warming?”,(2) “What are the decisive disadvantages of energy from biomass against the background of global warming?”,and (3) “What are your conclusions regarding energy from biomass against the background of globalwarming?”. Under each question, we presented the respective visualization on the left, a possibility to access thetext on climate change on the right, and a scalable input window for answering the question with an explanationof any chosen length in the middle (cf. Figure 3). Subsequent to this bogus collaboration, we counted thenumber of words for each answer and cumulated them to calculate the total length of explanations. Further, theelaborations were investigated concerning included topics to contrast the best and worst learners in theexperimental group with no visualization of content- and partner-related information and in the experimentalgroup with partner- and content-related information given. Therefore, we counted the occurrences of each topicwithin the three explanations per participant and summed them up.Time spent re-reading the text on climate changeOn each of the three pages for answering the learning partner’s questions, learners had the possibility to accessthe text on climate change (cf. Figure 3) and read it as long as they wanted. We herewith wanted to create asituation with all participants being able to fall back on the same content knowledge. We measured the timebetween opening and closing the text each time it was opened. Finally, we summed up all values per person toestablish the total time of re-reading while explaining. We chose this total time as control variable, since it isprobable that more time of re-reading the material might come along with less time for writing explanations,and might also be predictive for the length of explanations.meAnthropogenic greenhous e effect (T2)carbon dioxide emis s ions , increas e in carbon dioxide,economic interes ts , combus tion of fos s il energys ources , changes in land us eBiomas s imports (T8)emerging and developing countries , wood clearing,competition for land, foods tuff,overall carbon footprintanswer:Seetext onclimatechangeBiofuels (T6bioethanol, biodies el, biogashydrogen, s ynthes is gasCarbon cycle (T4inorganic carbon, organic carbon, carbon s inks , s hift ocarbon s inks , balanceNatural greenhous e effect (T1s hort-wave radiation, reflection, abs orptionlong-wave radiation, greenhous e gas esCarbon neutrality (T7ques tionability of compens ation, fertiliz ation, nitrogennitrogen emis s ions , operating energyEcos ys tem (T3biotope, biocenos is , producercons umer, decompos eBioenergy (T5photos ynthes is , biomas s production, renewableenergy, biomas s combus tion, biomas s conversionFigure 3. Participants’ view on the learning environment during the collaboration.CSCL 2017 Proceedings130© ISLSScore of knowledge test pre and post the collaborationThe knowledge test consisted of 36 statements related to four topics in the text on climate change and to twotopics of the first bogus learning partner’s text. We presented the statements (e.g. “Photosynthesis ensures thatplants gain energy to produce dead matter” or “The total carbon content of the earth is constant) prior to thecollaboration (pre-test) and afterwards in randomly rotated order (post-test). Participants had to state whetherthe answer was true or false. In order to calculate the total score of the knowledge test, we checked for eachitem, whether the given answer was correct or not. Finally, we summed up all points for both times of measure(pre and post). Thus, both total scores could range from 0 to 36 points. They were needed to identify the learnerswith the highest and lowest knowledge gain in the different experimental groups.ResultsFor answering the question of how partner- and content-related information affects learning behavior, weobserved the impact of different visualizations on the length of explanations and on learning results. All effectsare reported as significant at p < .05.Impact of partner-related and content-related information on explanationsWe hypothesized that learners supported by the visualization of partner-related information explain more aboutsubject matters than learners without partner-related information. Further, we investigated if this effect isparticularly strong, if additional information on the content is given. For investigating these assumptions, weused a two-factorial ANCOVA with availability of partner-related information and content-related informationas between-subject factors and the number of total words in explanations per person as dependent variable.Further, we controlled for the time of re-reading the learning material to keep the prior knowledge constantacross learners. This covariate was suitable to be included in the analysis, since it fulfilled all preconditions.The covariate re-reading time was significantly related to the count of words in explanations,F(1, 115) = 12.16, p < .001, ηp² = .096. The longer the time of re-reading, the shorter the explanations.Regarding the assumption that available partner-related information triggers longer explanations, resultsindicated a significant main effect of partner information on the number of words used in explanations,F(1, 115) = 3.97, p = .049, ηp² = .033. Further, results yielded no significant main effect of content-relatedinformation on the number of words used in explanations, F(1, 115) = 0.12, p = .725, ηp² = .001. Finally, therewas no interaction effect of partner- and content-related information on the number of words in explanations,F(1, 115) = 0.13, p = .716, ηp² = .001. Table 1 shows related descriptive statistics.Table 1: Number of words in explanationscontent-relatedinformation given(n = 61)content-related informationnot given(n = 59)overall(N = 120)MSDMSDMSDpartner-relatedinformation given(n = 61)256.0095.05249.9078.07253.0086.45partner-relatedinformation not given(n = 59)225.0398.65224.9785.75225.0091.74240.7797.29237.6482.19239.2389.82overall(N = 120)Contrasting cases: Comparison of successful and unsuccessful learnersTo learn about the quality of elaborations, we examined the behavior of particularly successful or unsuccessfullearners more closely and contrasted the best and worst learner of experimental group (1) with neither partnerrelated nor content-related information and experimental group (4) with both types of information available.Against the theoretical background, we assumed that the availability of content- and partner-related informationmight improve the selection of topics used in explanations, since the visualization of selected information fromCSCL 2017 Proceedings131© ISLStext should focus learners’ attention and the scenario displaying the learning partner to be less knowledgeablemight evoke deeper elaborations. To investigate whether learners in the experimental group with both awarenessinformation available might be better supported concerning the selection of topics to be discussed than thegroup with less information, our special interest were the matches between knowledge test items that learnersimproved from pre- to post-test and the topics used in their explanations. We observed, how often they wererelated to each other in two ways of matches: (a) topics addressed within explanations (T1 to T8) did matchtopics addressed in knowledge test items (topical matches), and (b) concepts addressed within explanations didmatch concepts addressed in knowledge test items (conceptual matches). In Table 2, you can see an overview ofour findings including knowledge gain and information on improvements and worsening.Table 2: Characteristics of learners in contrasting cases.(1) No content- & no partnerrelated information visualized(4) Content- and partner-relatedinformation visualizedlearnerID 102learnerID 27learnerID 3learnerID 62score pre-test126182224score post-test119261829knowledge gain-7+8-4+5# improvements2855# worsening9090improved topicsfrom pre- to post-testT2(1x), T7(1x)worsened topicsfrom pre- to post-testT1(1x), T2(2x),T4(2x), T5(1x),T7(1x), T8(2x)# topical matchesT1(2x), T2(2x),T5(2x), T7(1x),T8(1x)-25T2(3x), T4(1x),T5(1x)T1(1x), T2(1x),T5(2x), T7(1x)T1(1x), T4(1x),T5(2x), T7(1x),T8(3x)14# conceptual matches01031Tx = topic (cf. Figure 1). Numbers in brackets = count of occurrences. scoring from 0-36.Comparison of the best and worst learner without content and partner informationTo contrast cases in the experimental group in which learners had neither partner-related nor content-relatedinformation we chose the learner with the highest and the lowest knowledge gain in the knowledge test. Wefound that learner 27, who improved her/his score by 8 points, showed a huge amount of topical matches. Infive cases she/he wrote about topics having errors in the pre-test, but only in one case the concept was actuallycongruent: Concerning the test item “The chemical transformation of carbonaceous compounds runs completelyindependent of the nitrogen cycle.” (which is wrong, since both cycles depend on each other), learner 27 whochecked this answer as “right” in the pre-test explained in the second collaboration to her/his learning partner: “Ido not consider this [generating energy from biomass] as beneficial, if the cultivation and growing of biomassentails the warming of the atmosphere caused by nitrogen und carbon dioxide.” Thus, she/he understood thatboth nitrogen and carbon cycle interact in the context of global warming. In contrast to learner 27 with thehighest improvements in this experimental group, learner 102 dropped off 7 points in the score of the post-testor to be more precise she/he dropped 9 points and gained 2 points. In this case, the learner wrote about 5 topicsthat were improved from pre- to post-test, but the concepts did not match to concepts in the improved test items.To give an example: Learner 27 stated “Likewise, during the production of biomass, dead matter is bound anddecreases in the atmosphere…” what is part of topic 4 (concept: dead matter) and topic 5 (concept: biomassproduction). On the one hand, this utterance is wrong, since it is CO2 that is bound and reduced in theatmosphere. On the other hand, the concept does not match the concepts of the improved items in the post-testthat instead were related to the topics T1, T5 and T7. Thus, learner 102 seemed to decrease her/his knowledgecaused by misconceptions that emerged during the explanation process.CSCL 2017 Proceedings132© ISLSComparison of the best and worst learners with content and partner informationIn this case, we contrasted the best and the worst learner with a visualization available that combines partnerand content-related information. We found that learner 3, who dropped off 4 points from pre- to post-test, hadno matches of concepts in his/her explanation and concepts in the test items, only once a topical match wasgiven. In contrast, we found that learner 62 who improved his/her score by 5 points had a good topical matchbetween test items and explanations. She/he met 4 times the topical scope of test items and even thoughmentioned 3 times concepts in her/his explanations that were part of improved test items. For instance, learner62 scored better at the test item “The photosynthesis enables plants to produce energy and dead matter” (whichis wrong, since the plant produces organic matter). Accordingly, she/he explained to his/her learning partner“Renewable energy using biomass is energy that stems from non-fossil algal or vegetable biomass.” and“Biomass first needs to be produced by photosynthesis”. Both utterances show that she/he understood thatphotosynthesis does not produce dead matter. Precisely because learner 62 improved his/her knowledge aftergiving explanations to the learning partner, it is noteworthy how the learners evaluated the visualization in anopen question following the collaboration: while learner 3 reported that she/he used the visualization “partially”which is in line with his/her behavior, learner 62 reported that the “visualization was not helpful to answer thequestions”. However, from the five improvements of learner 62 (in T1, T2, 2xT5, T7), she/he consequently gaveonly explanations when it was displayed that she/he is more knowledgeable than her/his learning partner (in T5and T7). Since she/he further reported that she/he used the visualization to scan for cases in which his/herknowledge was displayed being less than the learning partner’s knowledge and to ask questions exactly in this,we can assume that she/he (implicitly) did the same concerning explanations (although described differently bylearner 62).ConclusionWe conducted this empirical study to systematically investigate the impact of partner- and content-relatedinformation on collaborative learning, or rather on explaining behavior and on the selection of topics to bediscussed. Consistent with previous research (Dehler et al., 2011) we found that the visualization of partnerrelated information implicitly guides learners’ communication behavior and makes them give longerexplanations if they are more knowledgeable than their learning partner. In contrast, content-related informationthat is inherent to most such tools seem to have no effect on adapting explanations to the learning partner’sknowledge in terms of explaining more to a less knowledgeable learning partner. Erkens, Schlottbom, andBodemer (2016) assumed that too many topics might overstrain learners’ cognitive system. Further, visualizingpartner-related information without content-related information might suggest learners assuming the role of anexpert and explaining as much as possible. Both these assumptions need to be further investigated. Also it is stillunclear, whether shorter explanations could nevertheless show a better quality. Learners supported by thevisualization of both partner- and content-related information might better elaborate the contributions of alearning partner than learners without this support, since their prior knowledge could be better activated. Afterall, activation of prior knowledge is known as the most important antecedent for learning (Glasersfeld, 1984;Resnick, 1983; Ausubel, 1960), since it supports learners to successfully add new concepts learned from thepartner to the existing knowledge base. Finally, learners only provided with content-related information aremost likely unable to precisely detect their learning partner’s knowledge gaps and might thus not adapt theirbehavior to the knowledge of their learning partner.In a second step, we investigated qualitatively how improvements from pre- to post-test were supportedby implicit guidance. Here, our focus was on the usage of given information to explain learners’ improvements.We found that successful learners across experimental groups frequently discussed relevant topics, whileunsuccessful learners did not discuss such topics. But only the successful learner provided with partner- andcontent-related information also wrote more often about concepts relevant to get better in a test item than thesuccessful learner with none of this information. Based on this, we can first assume that content-relatedinformation might have helped to be reminded of concepts relevant to understand a topic. Thus, displayingcontent-related information still seems to be helpful to implicitly guide the learner in terms of influencinglearning behavior. Although said learner mentioned that the visualization was not needed for answeringquestions, we further found that this learner especially explained relevant topics, when it was displayed thatshe/he is more knowledgeable than her/his learning partner (in T5 and T7). Thus, we can further assume thatpartner-related information might have helped her/him to select topics to be discussed. However, both theseaforementioned assumptions were not captured with the length of explanations and further qualitative researchis needed to tell more about the quality of elaborations within the explanations.Overall, the support by visualized partner- and content-related information seems to fulfil differentfunctions. Partner-related information leads to longer and possibly more detailed explanation. Concerning theCSCL 2017 Proceedings133© ISLSrole of content-related information, we have to further investigate whether their visualization influences thequality of explanations by activating prior knowledge or by determining the selection of topics. This researchmight offer answers on how to appoint cognitive information in a task-oriented way and on how to even bettersupport collaborative learning processes.ReferencesAusubel, D. P. (1960). The use of advance organizers in the learning and retention of meaningful verbalmaterial. Journal of Educational Psychology, 51(5), 267–272. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0046669Bodemer, D., & Scholvien, A. (2014). Providing knowledge-related partner information in collaborativemultimedia learning: Isolating the core of cognitive group awareness tools. In Proceedings of the 22ndInternational Conference on Computers in Education ICCE 2014 (pp. 171–179). Nara, Japan.Clark, H. H., & Murphy, G. L. (1982). Audience design in meaning and reference. In Advances in Psychology(Vol.9,pp.287–299).Elsevier.Retrievedfromhttp://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0166411509600595Dehler, J., Bodemer, D., Buder, J., & Hesse, F. W. (2011). Guiding knowledge communication in CSCL viagroup knowledge awareness. Computers in Human Behavior, 27(3), 1068–1078.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2010.05.018Dillenbourg, P. (1999). What do you mean by collaborative learning? Collaborative-Learning: Cognitive andComputational Approaches, 1–19.Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructionaldesign. Three Worlds of CSCL. Can We Support CSCL?, 61–91.Doise, W., & Mugny, G. (1984). The social development of the intellect. (W. Doise & G. Mugny, Eds.) (Vol.10).Amsterdam,Netherlands:Pergamon.Retrievedfromhttp://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978008030215750010XErkens, M., Bodemer, D., & Hoppe, H. U. (2016). Improving collaborative learning in the classroom: textmining based grouping and representing. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-016-9243-5Erkens, M., Schlottbom, P., & Bodemer, D. (2016). Qualitative and quantitative information in cognitive groupawareness tools: Impact on collaborative learning. In U. Cress (Ed.), Transforming Learning,Empowering Learners: The International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) 2016.Singapore: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Glasersfeld, E. v. (1984). An introduction to radical constructivism. In P. Watzlawick, (Ed.), The inventedreality. New York, NY: W.W. Norton.Hesse, F. W. (2007). Being told to do something or just being aware of something? An alternative approach toscripting in CSCL. In Scripting computer-supported collaborative learning (pp. 91–98). Springer.Retrieved from http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-0-387-36949-5_6Hyerle. (2000). A Field Guide to Using Visual Tools. Alexandria, Va: Association for Supervision &Curriculum Deve.Janssen, J., & Bodemer, D. (2013). Coordinated computer-supported collaborative learning: Awareness andawareness tools. Educational Psychologist, 48(1), 40–55.Mayer, R. E. (1979). Twenty years of research on advance organizers. Technical report series in learning andcognition.ReportNo.79-1.Retrievedfromhttp://eric.ed.gov/?q=Mayer+advance+organizer&id=ED206691Mayer, R. E. (2005). The Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia Learning: Principles for Reducing ExtraneousProcessing in Multimedia Learning : Coherence, Signaling, Redundancy, Spatial Contiguity, andTemporalContiguityPrinciples.Retrievedfrom/chapter.jsf?bid=CBO9780511816819A020&cid=CBO9780511816819A020Piaget, J. (1977). The development of thought: equilibration of cognitive structures. Viking Press.Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (2008). The psychology of the child. New York, NY: Basic Books.Purdom, D. M., & Kromrey, J. D. (1992). A comparison of different instructor intervention strategies incooperative learning groups at the college level. Retrieved from http://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED344898Resnick, L. B. (1983). Mathematics and science learning: A new conception. Science, 220(4596), 477–478.https://doi.org/10.1126/science.220.4596.477Scholvien, A., & Bodemer, D. (2013). Information cueing in collaborative multimedia learning. In N. Rummel,M. Kapur, M. Nathan, & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), To See the World and a Grain of Sand: Learningacross Levels of Space, Time, and Scale: CSCL 2013 Conference Proceedings Volume 2 — ShortPapers, Panels, Posters, Demos & Community Events (Vol. 2, pp. 149–152). Madison, WI.CSCL 2017 Proceedings134© ISLS