Uncovering the Rich Club Phenomenon in an Online ClassTianhui Huang, Fudan University, Yunnan University, 15110460001@fudan.edu.cnBodong Chen, University of Minnesota, chenbd@umn.eduAbstract: Social interaction is key for learning. In this study on student interaction in a sociallearning environment, we identified two student groups with contrasting levels of socialprestige—defined as the level of discursive attention one receives in relation to one’s discursiveactivities. The higher-prestige group was found to form a densely connected “rich club” lesslikely to interact with the lower-prestige group. Further network analysis linked thisphenomenon with the timing of students’ relationship formation and weekly participation.IntroductionSocial interaction is an important element of learning. The present study explored a so-called “rich clubphenomenon” in an online discussion environment. Members of the rich club have higher social prestige, areclosely connected with each other, and are more capable of constraining information flows and idea exchanges.In this study, we applied social network analysis (SNA) to answer three questions: (1) To what extent did studentsdemonstrate varied levels of prestige in their online discussion? (2) Can a rich club be observed in the network?(3) Which factors might explain the emergence of varied prestige or the rich club phenomenon?MethodsThe research context was an undergraduate, fully-online course participated by 20 undergraduate students. Thecourse was taught on Yellowdig, a social learning platform with features similar to Facebook. On Yellowdig,students could contribute pins (similar to Facebook posts), which can be reacted to (e.g., “Like”) or commentedon. Compared to a traditional discussion forum, Yellowdig provides richer features for social learning.Discussion data used to answer research questions included 274 pins, 514 comments, 36 mentions, and74 reactions exported from Yellowdig. Conceptualizing prestige as the level of discursive attention one receivesin relation to one’s discursive activities, we constructed a social network based on their replies and dividedstudents into two groups based on the ratio of weighted indegree to weighted outdegree in the network. Weexamined differences between the high- and low-prestige groups in a number of network measures and probedthe possibility of a rich club phenomenon in the course. Finally, we examined temporal dynamics and egonetworks to explore factors potentially contributing to the varied prestige and the rich club phenomenon.FindingsCharacterizing prestige in the reply networkTo characterize prestige, students were divided into two groups according to the ratio of one’s weighted indegreeto weighted outdegree. The categorization resulted in two groups: Group A (n=8) constituted by students with aratio greater than 1; and Group B (n=12) comprised of students with a ratio equal or smaller than 1. We foundstudents from two groups initiated equivalent amount of interactions with equivalent number of peers, but GroupA students received more replies than others, occupied more favorable network positions, and maintained strongerties with peers they became connected with.Uncovering the rich club phenomenonTo examine a possible “rich club” in the network, we focused on the direction of student interactions, breakingall interactions into four categories: A→A, B→B, A→B, and B→A. We found that Group A students seldomreplied to Group B students (9.61%), even though Group B were actively initiating contact with them (37.77%);Group A students were essentially more likely to launch interactions with other Group A students (33.18%). Thesenetwork characteristics provided initial evidence of a rich club phenomenon (Vaquero & Cebrian, 2013).Explaining the emergence of prestige and the rich clubTo address the third research question, we inspected two aspects—the timing of student posts and the temporalevolution of the network. For the timing of posts, we found most Group B students’ pins were barely on time,whereas most Group A students posted their pins one day in advance. Group A students contributed their initialposts significantly earlier than Group B students (t(180)= -6.520, p<.001); the same happened for comments.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1375© ISLSAs for the temporal evolution of the network, we investigated how those four categories of interactions(i.e., A→A, B→B, A→B, and B→A) accumulated over the course. Figure 1 shows the saturation curves of fourinteraction types. As the curves indicated, Group A students did not only establish nearly 90% of all possibleconnections among themselves, they also built their connections quickly. Group B students were trying to connectwith Group A throughout the course and made more than 80% of all possible B→A connections. However, theyreceived much less attention from Group A students.Figure 1. The saturation curves of four types of connections. The y-axis represents the percentage ofaccumulated unique ties in comparison with all possible ties for a connection type.Analysis of temporal ego networks of all students told a complementary story at the local level.Comparisons found Group A students’ ego networks had larger network sizes and lower dyadic constraints thanGroup B students. In other words, Group A students were immediately connected with more peers and they weremore likely to broker or constraint others’ connections. These findings indicated Group A students were not onlybetter connected but also had stronger brokerage presence in their local neighborhoods.ConclusionsSocial participation figures as an important aspect of online learning. This study contributes to the literature,especially to the line of work on using online discussion to support student interactions. In this study, we dividedan online class into two groups in light of an operationalization of social prestige based on SNA. Analysis of thedirectionality of student interactions showed students from the high-prestige group connected more frequentlywith similar prestige peers, and students from the low-prestige group received few interactions from the highprestige group. Further analysis was conducted to explain these findings. Preliminary results pointed out thesignificance of temporality. The high-prestige group established inner-group connections much faster than thelow-prestige group in the first four weeks; they also generally posted earlier in weekly discussions, leaving peersample opportunities to react to their ideas.Findings regarding network prestige and the rich club phenomenon build on prior work on studentinteraction patterns in online discussion (Dawson, 2010) and course communication (Vaquero & Cebrian, 2013).While earlier research using course performance data found low-performing students more likely to connect withsimilarly low-performing peers, this study found lower-prestige students in online discussion were willing toconnect with higher-prestige peers, but their attempts were not reciprocated. The explicit recognition of such anengagement gap in online discussion, together tentative explanation of its emergence offered by the study,contributes to the literature and calls for future research and design efforts to mitigate this gap.ReferencesDawson, S. (2010). “Seeing” the learning community: An exploration of the development of a resource formonitoring online student networking. British Journal of Educational Technology, 41(5), 736–752.Scott, J. (2012). Social Network Analysis. SAGE. https://doi.org/10.5040/9781849668187Vaquero, L. M., & Cebrian, M. (2013). The rich club phenomenon in the classroom. Scientific Reports, 3, 1 .ICLS 2018 Proceedings1376© ISLS