Cultural Repertoires:Indigenous Youth Creating With Place and StoryKristin A. Searle, Utah State University, kristin.searle@usu.eduTeresa Casort, Utah State University, teresa.casort@aggiemail.usu.eduBreanne K. Litts, Utah State University, breanne.litts@usu.eduBryan McKinley Jones Brayboy, Arizona State University, bryan.brayboy@asu.eduSequoia Lynn Dance, Arizona State University, sdance@asu.eduYasmin Kafai, University of Pennsylvania, kafai@upenn.eduAbstract: In this paper, we present an example of culturally-responsive making in the contextof developing location-based community stories. Working with members of an Indigenouscommunity in the Southwestern United States, we co-designed and implemented a two-weeksummer camp in which middle school youth used Augmented Reality and InteractiveStorytelling (ARIS), a narrative-based programming tool, to create virtual community tours forthe purpose of sharing the information they learned about tribally owned locations with others.We developed case studies of two groups of students who incorporated culture into theircommunity tours of a tribally-owned golf course complex and stadium complex to address thefollowing question: How did small groups of youth conceptualize culture and how did theyintegrate it into their community tours? In the discussion, we address what can we learn fromyouths’ design processes and completed products about designing culturally responsive learningexperiences.IntroductionThe increased interest in promoting the development of maker culture in education is strongly connected to agrowing need to expand youth interest and knowledge in STEM disciplines and careers (Dougherty & Conrad,2016). Maker activities are particularly promising alternatives to traditional STEM pathways, because they notonly engage youth with authentic disciplinary knowledge by generating creative solutions to important problems,but also connect with a culture of entrepreneurship and manufacturing by bringing solutions to market (e.g.,Peppler, Halverson & Kafai, 2016a; 2016b). Even though research on maker activities, technologies, and spaceshas expanded significantly over the last few years, some have raised critical concerns about what types of makeractivities are promoted, how maker technologies are used, and who participates in making (e.g., Calabrese Barton,Tan, & Greenberg, 2017; Vossoughi, Hooper, & Escude, 2016). With all the interest and promise of the makermovement, these shortcomings highlight the need for more intentional efforts toward equity, access, andbroadening participation, in particular for indigenous communities who have complex histories and contemporaryrelationships with the cultures of schooling and technology.One approach to address these shortcomings has been the development of culturally responsivecomputing and making, which grow out of the research on culturally responsive schooling (Ladson-Billings,1995). At the most basic level, culturally responsive schooling connects youth’s out-of-school cultural repertoiresto academic content. While most curricular examples of culturally responsive schooling for Indigenous youthhave been developed in the context of literacy and language education (Castagno & Brayboy, 2008), culturallyresponsive computing focuses on connecting computing content with heritage and vernacular cultural practicesthat are familiar to students (Eglash, Gilbert, & Foster, 2013). These cultural connections are also present inculturally responsive making which moves beyond the screen, with a particular focus on connecting to artifacts,activities, and spaces to improve educational experiences for indigenous youth and meet community needs (Searle& Kafai, 2015).In this paper, we examine culturally responsive making in the context of developing location-basedcommunity stories. Working with members of an Indigenous community in the Southwestern United States, weco-designed and implemented a two-week summer camp activity using the Augmented Reality and InteractiveStorytelling (ARIS) platform (Holden, Gagnon, Litts, & Smith, 2014.). In this context, ARIS was a promising fitbecause it allowed youth to engage in thinking about place and narrative, two central aspects of how Indigenousknowledges are located and transmitted (Brayboy, 2005). Knowledge is often connected to particular places andstories are used to communicate community history and values (Basso, 1996; Brayboy & Maughan, 2009; Smith,2012). Middle school youth (12-14 years-old) visited important locations throughout their community and, withthe assistance of a community relations tour guide to point out key features, documented the kinds of culturalICLS 2018 Proceedings697© ISLSknowledge located at each site. Youth were then asked to create a virtual community tour to share the informationthey learned with others, with an ultimate goal of sharing their tours with the community’s public relationsdepartment for their use. The sites youth visited varied in their cultural significance from a series of large metalsculptures designed by a local artist to a skydiving facility. For this paper, we developed case studies of two groupsof students who incorporated cultural elements, such as signs with words in both English and the community’sheritage languages, into their community tours of a tribally-owned golf course complex and stadium complex. toaddress the following question: How did small groups of youth conceptualize culture and how did they integrateit into their community tours in ARIS? In the discussion, we address what can we learn from youths’ designprocesses and completed products about designing culturally responsive learning experiences.BackgroundDuring the last decade, indigenous scholars have argued for a broader view of technology as tools. Tools havealways been adapted by Indigenous peoples and serve as vehicles in service of self-expression, as well as tribalsovereignty and self-determination (Bang et al., 2013; Duarte, 2017; Kawagley, 2005). Further contemporaryIndigenous identities for individuals and communities are complex: economic success is often accompanied bypressure to prove cultural distinctiveness (Cattelino, 2008). As Deloria articulated in an interview:Everyone doesn’t have to do everything the old Indians did in order to have a modern Indian identity.…We need a larger variety of cultural expression today. I don’t see why Indians can’t be poets,engineers, songwriters or whatever. I don’t see why we can’t depart from traditional art forms and donew things. Yet both Indians and Whites are horrified when they learn that an Indian is not followingthe rigid forms and styles of the old days. This is nonsense to me but it has great meaning to a lot ofpeople who have never considered the real meaning of cultural change and national development” (qtd.in Warrior, 1995, pp.93-94).In his analysis of this quote, Warrior highlights that “the real meaning of cultural change” refers to its adaptabilityto change. We also think it is important to consider what it means to be Indigenous in the 21st century, bringingnotions of “modern Indian identity” into stark light.Culturally responsive computing (Eglash, Gilbert, & Foster, 2013) is one promising approach to makingconnections across youths’ multiple repertoires of practice by incorporating heritage and vernacular culturalpractices into technological engagements. For example, the culturally situated design tools developed by Eglashand his colleagues connect practices from Shoshone beadwork to skateboarding to mathematical concepts. Eachweb-based design tool is accompanied by a page that describes its cultural origins and connections to math. Inthis example, the focus is on using culture as a way to engage youth in both identity work and school-basedcurriculum. Scott, Sheridan, & Clark (2015) have pushed theories of culturally responsive computing to includea more explicit focus on youth’s intersectional identities and youth as creators rather than consumers oftechnology. Rather than close ties to school-based curricula, they suggest we would be better served to payattention to “who creates, for whom, and to what ends” (p. 421). Technology in this vein serves as a vehicle foryouth to investigate their intersectional identities. While such work can be challenging in formal schoolingenvironments where teachers and students are held accountable to standards, out-of-school learning contextsprovide opportunities to engage youth in more open-ended problems, such as designing a tour of importantcommunity sites for use by the community.In the work we present here, we assume that technology is a tool of youth self-expression and communityself-determination. Youths’ ARIS games highlight aspects of heritage culture, but also culture’s adaptability tonew contexts as it is intertwined with economic development projects and youths’ exploration of their owninterests and intersectional identities. Research in the learning sciences recognizes that learning is culturallypatterned and that individuals may acquire multiple, sometimes overlapping and even competing or conflictingrepertoires of practice (Bell, Van Horne, & Cheng, 2017). By making connections between repertoires of practicevalued in youth’s lives (i.e., cultural artifacts and tools, community norms, division of labor, social relations, andhistorical development of individuals and communities) and the kinds of disciplinary approaches valued inscience, technology, engineering, and math (STEM), research has shown that youth more easily identify with andpersist in STEM disciplines. One approach to making connections across multiple repertoires of practice inyouth’s lives has been to develop culturally responsive learning environments. Often, such learning environmentshave relied upon a material connection to heritage culture (e.g., using beadwork to learn about Cartesiancoordinates in math) or upon particular linguistic practices (e.g. hip-hop literacies). While these approaches havean important place especially in Indigenous communities in the United States where linguistic and culturalICLS 2018 Proceedings698© ISLSrevitalization are crucial (McCarty & Lee, 2014), they do not represent the whole spectrum of practices thatIndigenous individuals and communities engage in today.MethodsThe work presented in this paper is part of a larger research project to understand how we co-design culturallyresponsive making activities and makerspaces with two distinct Indigenous communities in the SouthwesternUnited States. This present paper presents findings from a two-week camp that took place during the summer of2017 in a small Native American community (10,000 enrolled members) in the Southwestern United States andfocuses on understanding (1) how small groups of youth conceptualized and documented cultural elements and(2) how they integrate these elements into their community tours using the ARIS platform. Summer camps likethe one described here allow us to more fully explore youth's design processes as they work to create somethingmeaningful for themselves and their communities over a more extended time period.Our research team worked with the community’s education, cultural resources, and public relationsdepartments, as well as staff from the American Indian program at the community college where the program tookplace, to co-design an activity in which youth visited a series of significant artistic and economic developmentsites in their community and used the ARIS platform to make location-based community tours that sharedinformation about these places in a fun, interactive way (DiSalvo, Yip, Bonsignore, & DiSalvo, 2017). Ultimately,our goal was that the youths’ games would become something used by the community’s public relationsdepartment to share information with community visitors.Over the course of a two-week summer camp, forty-seven Native American youth participated in ourARIS workshop and thirty eight (12-14 years old; 23 females, 15 males) fully consented to be part of the research.ARIS is an open-source, location-based programming platform. Individuals with no prior programmingexperience can use ARIS to create narratives with interactive characters, items, and media placed in real-worldlocations. We met with our participants over seven days, with each day consisting of 1-2 sessions of 1-2 hourseach. After introducing the project to the whole group on day 1, we randomly divided the youth into 15 smallgroups (2-4 students). On day 2, youth visited their community sites using iPads and a paper and pencil“investigation checklist” to document their site visits in words, photos, and videos (see Figure 1). Five groupswent on each field trip: Groups 1-5 visited a series of large metal sculptures created by a local artist, groups 6-10visited a tribally-owned golf facility and raceway/virtual reality facility, and groups 11-15 visited a tribally-ownedstadium complex and an indoor skydiving facility located on tribal lands. On day 3, participants began a paperand pencil storyboarding process, with youth continuing to add to their storyboards in an iterative fashion as theybuilt out their games in the ARIS editor (see Figure 2). Days 4-7 were devoted to translating their storyboards intodigital form in the ARIS editor, iterating on their storyboards, and play testing their own games and those of othergroups.Figure 1. Youth using iPads to document the golf course during the field trip on Day 2.Data collection and analysisICLS 2018 Proceedings699© ISLSThe research team collected a range of qualitative data, including field notes, final reflective interviews,photographs documenting the groups’ making processes, and artifacts produced by each group (storyboards, inprocess screenshots, and completed games).To demonstrate the range and variation in how youth conceptualized cultural elements and integratedthem into their community tours, we developed two case studies (Stake, 1995): Groups 6 and 11. We selectedthese groups because of the distinct ways in which culture was incorporated into their tours, from very little in thecase of group 6 to a lot in the case of group 11. Both of these cases also illustrate how locations that might not beimmediately deemed culturally responsive within a narrow framing of culture as material culture or heritageculture are, in fact, cultural. Group 6 consisted of two girls and one boy, Hope, Carla, and Eddie, who exploredthe community golf course and raceway. Group 11 was comprised of two girls, Selma and Tess, and a thirdindividual who was not part of the research. On their field trip, they visited the stadium complex and indoorskydiving facility. All participant names are pseudonyms.FindingsCulture as backdrop: World politics at the tribal golf courseBased on an idea by group member Eddie, Group 6 configured their community tour as a game where worldpolitics play out on the community-owned golf course. Though they did not name their game, the opening screendescribes it as “has something to do with World War 3, Kim Jong-un, Donald Trump, and a hero guy namedRobert.” In a reflective interview, Eddie described the freedom to design their own narrative as his favorite partof the task, “I would say that the best part of this project, as of right now, is that we—it’s not a full straightforwardthing where you have to choose your particular topic. We just got to choose the weirdest thing. Yeah” (06/13/17,p.6). Here, we see Eddie and his group members taking advantage of the opportunity to exercise design agency(Eglash & Bennett, 2009) over their community tour, something which more than likely would not have beenpossible within their day-to-day formal school environment. Choosing the weirdest thing is rarely the optionavailable to them in school.Like other groups, Group 6 began their design process by visiting the golf course and raceway on a fieldtrip, where they took 66 photos and 13 brief video recordings. The majority of the photos and the two videosGroup 6 took at the community golf course document natural phenomena (22 photos). Group members snapped14 pictures of the water features and both videos capture footage of running water. Overall, this group documentedthe water features the most (second only to selfies and goof off pictures), but they also took photos of waterfowl,trees, and the greens. Moreover, Group 6 took several pictures of the signs indicating the name and number ofeach hole on the two golf courses at the site, which included names in the community’s two heritage languages.At the raceway, they took 11 photos and 11 short videos of the raceway demonstration and 1 photo of a virtualreality suit. They also documented their peers holding racing trophies. To the best of our knowledge, this groupdid not make use of their paper and pencil investigation checklist.When it was time to begin storyboarding on day 3, Group 6 struggled to come up with a narrative thatwould set their community tour apart from the others and, in reflective interviews, both Hope and Carla noted thatthey struggled to come up with unique ideas and “figuring out a good storyline” (Int., Hope, 06/15/17, p.5) wasone of their biggest challenges. As Hope elaborated in her reflective interview, “[W]e didn't wanna be likeeverybody else with the characters and with all pictures. We wanted to figure out something different” (06/15/17,p.5). Additionally, group members did not want to make themselves characters in their game so they “decided tomake other characters to be different” (Int., Hope, 06/15/17, p.2), ultimately choosing two controversial worldleaders and a classmate, Robert, as characters. At the end of day 3, their storyboard was hardly built out at all,with only two characters (Trump & Jong-un) and one item (the VR suit) that could be acquired by a player in thegame. Over days 4-6, they added one character (Robert), one quest, two informational plaques, two conversations,and three items. Interestingly, while group members expressed in reflective interviews that creating the dialogbetween the world leaders was one of their favorite parts of storyboarding, they did not develop extensiveconversations on the paper cards and only one substantive conversation in their game. As Carla refelcted, “Funparts were probably trying—fun parts would be making your character’s own conversations with anothercharacter, because you can be creative in your own mind that way. A few weeks ago, I would have never thoughtthat I would be making a game with Donald Trump, Kim Jong-un, Robert, and at [tribally owned] Golf Course”(6/13/17, p.7). Time and again, member of Group 6 stressed that the creative aspects of the project were whatmade it fun. From a programming standpoint, most youth also found conversations to be the easiest narrativeelement to program.Ultimately, the group developed their narrative to include a main character named Robert, after a summercamp classmate. In the game, players help Robert get Donald Trump to specific locations at the community golfICLS 2018 Proceedings700© ISLScourse to meet Kim Jong-Un. They used media downloaded from the Internet for each of these characters. In theirfinal reflective interviews, group members collectively described three quests that comprised their game: (1)Robert meets Donald Trump and takes him to the golf course to discuss peace, (2) the player must navigate Trumpto Hole 15 on the golf course where Kim Jong Un and Donald Trump get into a fight about golfing things andmust come to an agreement, and (3) a quest where Robert must acquire a virtual reality suit. This third and lastquest did not make it into their ARIS game due to time constraints. Further, the group only incorporated one photothat we might describe as having heritage cultural elements, a photo of one of the hole signs from the golf course.The other photo they took themselves was of their classmate, Robert, holding a trophy. and the conversation theydetailed in their game consists of a brief exchange with little content. Generally speaking, Group 6’s game remainssomewhat undeveloped as they neglected to incorporate elements from their storyboard in the ARIS editor. In thisgame, what is compelling is the overall narrative and the way in which community cultural elements (the holesign with heritage languages) and economic development projects (the golf course) serve as a backdrop againstwhich youth were able to explore their interest in world politics and their desire to make “the weirdest thing”(Eddie, Int., 06/13/17, p. 6). Their mere foray into world politics runs counter to popular narratives aboutIndigenous youth as disengaged in school or uninformed about the world around them (McCarty, Romero-Little,Warhol, and Zepeda, 2009; McCarty & Wyman, 2009; Quijada Cerecer, 2013).Figure 2. Youth engaged in the paper and pencil storyboarding process and close-up from Group 11’sstoryboard.Culture as key: Escaping the stadium through knowledgeGroup 11 created a fantastical narrative in which players were locked in the tribal stadium complex and, with adog named Milo (depicted by a photo of a German Shepherd downloaded from the Internet) as their guide, had toacquire various pieces of cultural knowledge in order to escape the stadium and their official, evil tour guide. AsTess explained, “We could’ve just left it as a boring thing, like, ‘Okay, go here, and you’ll learn this.’ We addedstuff that we had in our imagination. Just adding off each other’s ideas until we got this whole story and plot”(Int., 6/15/17, p. 4). In their desire to make their community tour more exciting, the group members highlight animportant point about culture, and especially material culture. Culture matters in context, when it is lived, and thisis what the members of Group 11 work towards when they integrate the cultural knowledge embedded in signageat the stadium complex into a fantastical game of their creation (Hermes, 2005).Group 11 began their game design process with a visit to the tribally-owned stadium complex where twoMajor League teams conduct spring training and an indoor skydiving facility, both of which are located on triballands. The members of this group made extensive use of their investigation checklist, writing several sentencesfor each question, and identifying picture taking as a favorite part of their field trip experience. Group memberstook 20 photos at the stadium complex and none at the skydiving facility, reasoning that “there wasn’t that muchcultural” there (Selma, Int., 6/15/17, p.4). Later, in her reflective interview, Selma expressed that her least favoritepart of the field trip was visiting the stadium complex because, “we weren’t really having that much time to goaround and try to get [the] pictures that we needed cuz there was only certain places where they had most of thecultural elements” (Int., 6/15/17, p.1).In their photo documentation, group members took pictures of signs that had community meaning, eitherthrough the use of specific symbols or tribal languages. Examples include a wall-mounted sign displayingbasketwork from the community, a series of symbols on the scoreboard, and bathroom signs with “male” and“female” written in both heritage languages used in the community, each of which became the central feature ofa knowledge quest in their game. As Selma described the bathrooms signs, “It’s just like—it looks like a regularone, and then on the bottom of it, it has restrooms male or whatever, and then on the bottom it has the differentICLS 2018 Proceedings701© ISLSlanguages with the language on the side” (Int., 6/15/17, p.1). They also took more general establishing shots,including section markers, the bullpen, and dining options. In their investigation checklist, group memberscollectively reflected, “Pictures we took were of the important ^ designs of the interior and exterior. We’ll usethese pictures to try explaining/showing parts of the culture using the locations.” In addition, group members wereaware of the economic significance of the site, writing, “[A]t games/spring training, many people come to watchthe teams play. The money that is earned then goes into economic growth/development.” In the pictures they tookand their reflections written on the investigation checklist, Selma and Tess make evident that they are aware ofboth the cultural and the economic significance of the stadium complex.cultureFigure 3. A conversation from Group 11’s game, where the players meet their guide Milo.Group 11 went on to develop one of the most robust storyboards of the entire camp, with 16 cards ontheir storyboard at the end of day 3 and 31 cards at the end of the camp. These cards included the full complementof game elements available to them, including 3 characters, 8 conversations, 12 informational plaques, 5 quests,and 3 items that had to be picked up by the player in order to escape the stadium. Their robust storyboard thentranslated into a fully-developed game with a beginning, middle, and end. Of the 5 quests, 4 involve demonstratingsome sort of cultural knowledge, such as learning heritage language words by visiting the restrooms, reading thecaptions on the basketwork display, and deciphering the symbols on a sign for the stadium complex. Ultimately,players in the game, upon acquiring three knowledge points by completing the various quests, are given a key thatwill let them out of the stadium complex. If they don’t use the key to escape, they risk getting turned into dogslike Milo, their tour guide in acquiring the various knowledge items needed to escape the stadium and win thegame. In contrast to Group 6, members of Group 11 were primarily focused on learning about the cultural elementsat their designated sites from day 1 so that they could create a virtual tour that would teach others. At the sametime, they couched this cultural knowledge within a fun, fantastical game with a magical dog as a tour guide.Thus, while culture was a key element, it is not the only element, providing space for youth to explore multipleaspects of their identities.DiscussionOften, when we think about designing culturally responsive learning spaces, we focus on heritage culturalpractices, particularly as they are instantiated in material culture and the act of making, such as weaving a basketor a rug (Dewhurst et al., 2013). While there is meaning in the completed artifact (Hill, 1997), there is also meaningin the process of making. As Tess from Group 11 described, “It was pretty cool, because … you’re like, I’mmaking this. I’m helping to make this. Then when you actually see the final product, it’s really cool because you’relike, ‘I made that’” (Int., 6/15/17, p.5). In this quote, we see Tess taking ownership of her own learning. Similarly,when Eddie guided his group to make “the weirdest thing.” (06/13/17, p.#), we see them collectively exercisingagency and taking ownership over their own learning, as well as narratives about Indigenous peoples. In otherwords, we see youth exercising both self-education and self-determination (Brayboy & Castagno, 2009), two ofthe three pillars of how sovereignty is exercised (Wilkins & Lomawaima, 2000).In the workshop described here, we began from two central tenets of many Indigenous KnowledgeSystems (Barnhardt & Kawagley, 2005) and emphasized the process of learning and creating. First, we beganICLS 2018 Proceedings702© ISLSwith the idea that knowledge is connected to particular places and we tasked youth with visiting, learning about,and documenting places that community members had identified as important. Sites like the tribally-owned golfcourse and stadium complex speak to both the community’s present and future, but also to its past, as evidencedin the cultural details that both members of Group 6 and Group 11 incorporated into their games. Second, wedesigned the ARIS workshop and community tour assignment from the premise, central to most IndigenousKnowledge Systems, that stories matter. They are used to communicate community history and values (Basso,1996), but they are also how we build relationships and connect with one another (Williams, 1997). Indeed, youthnot only learned stories about the cultural significance of various symbols or places, but they also worked withother community members, some of whom they did not know at the beginning of the camp, to author their ownstories about what it means to be young people in an Indigenous community in the Southwest who are interestedin world politics and also like fantastical stories about magical creatures. Further, they authored these stories notusing pencil and paper, but through programming a computer to create interactive games/tours.Another aspect of making the ARIS workshop culturally responsive was in providing youth with anauthentic, community-based audience for their virtual tours (Magnifico, 2010). As Scott, Sheridan, and Clark(2015) remind us in their conception of culturally responsive computing, it is important to consider “who creates,for whom, and to what ends” (p. 421). In her final reflective interview, for instance, Selma expressed that makingher group’s virtual tour was different than other video game kinds of things, which she wasn’t really into, “becauseit had actual knowledge, and it had real-life things into it instead of just playing a game that has some made-upstuff in it and stuff like that” (Int., 6/15/17, p.6). Similarly, youth who participated in visiting a series of largemetal sculptures created by a local sculptor, many of which had stories associated with them, felt tremendousresponsibility to get “the facts” right (Searle et al., 2017).In conclusion, we suggest designing computational making activities that focus not only on thecompleted artifact, but also on the process of making and on the less tangible ways of knowing, being, and valuingthat undergird how cultural communities operate, such as beginning with the significance of narrative and place.While here we focus on these principles as they relate specifically to Indigenous communities and IndigenousKnowledge Systems, place and narrative are significant to most, if not all, cultural communities. In future work,we hope to also explore the pedagogical choices made in culturally responsive computational making activitieslike the one described here.ReferencesBang, M., Marin, A., Faber, L., & Suzokovich, E., III. (2013). Repatriating Indigenous technologies is an urbanIndian community. Urban Education, 48(5), 705-733.Barnhardt, R. & Kawagley, A.O. (2005). Indigenous Knowledge System and Alaska Native Ways of Knowing.Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 36(1), 8-23.Basso, K.H. (1996). Wisdom Sits in Places: Landscape and Language Among the WesternApache. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.Bell, P., Van Horne, K. & Cheng, B.H. (2017). Special issue: Designing learning environments for equitabledisciplinary identification. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 26(3), 367-375.Brayboy, B.McK. J. (2005). Toward a Tribal Critical Race Theory in Education. The Urban Review, 37(5), 425446.Brayboy, B. McK. J. & Castagno, A.E. (2009). Self-Determination through Self-Education: CulturallyResponsive Schooling for Indigenous Students in the U.S. Teaching Education 20(1), 31-53.Brayboy, B.M.J. & Maughan, E. (2009). Indigenous knowledges and the story of the bean. Harvard EducationalReview, 79(1), 1-21.Calabrese Barton, A. Tan, E., & Greenberg, D. (2017). The Makerspace Movement: Sites of Possibilities forEquitable Opportunities to Engage Underrepresented Youth in STEM. Teachers College Record, 119(6),1-44.Castagno, A.E. & Brayboy, B.M.J. (2008). Culturally responsive schooling for Indigenous youth: A review ofthe literature. Review of Educational Research, 78, 941-993.Cattelino, J.R. (2008). High stakes: Florida Seminole gaming and sovereignty. Durham, NC: Duke UniversityPress.Dewhurst, M., Keawe, L., MacDowell, M., Okada-Carlson, C.N.K., & Wong, A.K. (2013). Ka ulana ‘ana i kapiko (In weaving you begin at the center): Perspectives from a culturally specific approach to artseducation. Harvard Educational Review, 83(1), 136-146.DiSalvo, B., Yip, J., Bonsignore, E., & DiSalvo, C. (Eds.). (2017). Participatory Design for Learning:Perspectives from Practice and Research. Taylor & Francis.ICLS 2018 Proceedings703© ISLSDougherty, D. & Conrad, A. (2016). Free to make: How the Maker Movement is changing our schools, our jobs,and our minds. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books.Duarte, M.E. (2017). Network Soverignty. Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press.Eglash, R. & Bennett, A. (2009). Teaching with hidden capital: Agency in children’s explorations of cornrowhairstyles. Children, Youth, and Environments, 19(1), 58-73.Eglash, R., Gilbert, J., & Foster, E. (2013). Broadening participation: Toward culturally responsive computingeducation. Communications of the ACM, 56(7), 33-36.Hermes, M. (2005). “Ma’iingan is just a misspelling of the word wolf”: A case for teaching culture throughlanguage. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 36(1), 43-56.Hill, S.H. (1997). Weaving new worlds: Southeastern Cherokee women and their basketry. Chapel Hill: Universityof North Carolina Press.Holden, C. L., Gagnon, D. J., Litts, B. K., & Smith, G. (2014). ARIS: An Open-Source Platform for WidespreadMobile Augmented Reality Experimentation. In Technology Platform Innovations and ForthcomingTrends in Ubiquitous Learning (pp. 19-34). IGI Global.Kawagley, O. (1995). A Yupiaq Worldview. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.Ladson-Billings, G. (1995). Toward a theory of culturally relevant pedagogy. American Educational ResearchJournal, 32(3), 465-491.Magnifico, A. (2010). Writing for whom? Cognition, motivation, and a writer’s audience. EducationalPsychologist, 45(3), 167-184.McCarty, T.L. & Lee, T.S. (2014). Critical culturally sustaining/revitalizing pedagogy and Indigenous educationsovereignty. Harvard Education Review, 84(1), 101- 124.McCarty, T. L., Romero-Little, M. E., Warhol, L., & Zepeda, O. (2009). Indigenous youth as language policymakers. Journal of Language, Identity, and Education, 8(5), 291-306.McCarty, T. L., & Wyman, L. T. (2009). Indigenous youth and bilingualism – Theory, research, praxis. Journalof Language, Identity, and Education, 8(5), 279-290.Peppler, K., Halverson, E.R., & Kafai, Y.B. (2016a). Makeology: Makerspaces as learning environments (Vol.1). New York: Routledge.Peppler, K., Halverson, E.R., & Kafai, Y.B. (2016b). Makeology: Makers as learners (Vol. 2). New York:Routledge.Quijada Cerecer, P. D. (2013). The policing of native bodies and minds: Perspectives on schooling from AmericanIndian youth. American Journal of Education, 119(4), 591-616.Scott, K.A., Sheridan, K., & Clark, K. (2014). Culturally responsive computing: A theory revisited Learning,Media & Technology. DOI: 0.1080/17439884.2014.924966Searle, K.A., Casort, T., Litts, B.K., & Benson, S. (2017). Connecting Space and Narrative in CulturallyResponsive Making in ARIS with Indigenous Youth. In Proceedings of 2017 FabLearn Conference onCreativity and Fabrication in Education. ACM.Searle, K.A. & Kafai, Y.B. (2015). Culturally responsive making with American Indian girls: Bridging the identitygap in crafting and computing with electronic textiles.In Proceedings of the Third Conference on Genderand Information Technology (Gender IT ’15), pp.9-16. Philadelphia, PA: ACM.Smith, L.T. (2012). Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous Peoples (2nd ed.). Auckland: ZedBooks.Stake, R. (1995). The art of case study research. Sage Publications Inc.Vossoughi, S., Hooper, P., & Escude, M. (2016). Making through the lens of culture and power: Towardstransformative visions for educational equity. Harvard Educational Review, 86(2), 206-232.Warrior, R.A. (1995). Tribal secrets. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.Wilkins, D.E. & Lomawaima, K.T. (2001). Uneven ground: American Indian sovereignty and federal law.Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press.Williams, R.A. (1997). Vampires Anonymous and critical race practice. Michigan Law Review, 95(4), 741-765.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by a collaborative research grant (#1623453/1623404) from the National ScienceFoundation to Bryan Brayboy, Kristin Searle, Breanne Litts, & Yasmin Kafai. Any opinions, findings, andconclusions or recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect theviews of the National Science Foundation, Utah State University, Arizona State University, or University ofPennsylvania.ICLS 2018 Proceedings704© ISLS