Science Through Technology Enhanced Play: Designing toSupport Reflection Through Play and EmbodimentJoshua A. Danish, Indiana University, jdanish@indiana.eduNoel Enyedy, UCLA, enyedy@gseis.ucla.eduAsmalina Saleh, Indiana University, asmsaleh@indiana.eduChristine Lee, UCLA, christine.lee.ucla@gmail.comAlejandro Andrade, Indiana University, laandrad@indiana.eduAbstract: We describe the design of the Science through Technology Enhanced Play (STEP)project. In STEP, we explore the potential for dramatic play, a form of activity that is familiarto early elementary students, in promoting meaningful reflection about scientific content. Wereport on the first round of design experiments conducted with 18 second-grade students whoexplored states of matter within the STEP environment. Pre-post analyses indicate that themajority of students learned the content and demonstrate how the design promotes distinctforms of reflection. In particular, it appears that students attended to the projected simulationat key moments in play and then reflected on the underlying rules of the content.Keywords: science education, technology, embodiment, elementary school, reflectionIntroductionIn recent years, growing recognition of the role of embodiment in cognition coupled with the increasingavailability of technologies that track bodily movement has led to a proliferation of instructional designsintended to support learning through embodiment (Lindgren & Johnson-Glenberg, 2013). These designsfrequently rely on the mapping between specific bodily motions and related content, such as using a swingingarm gesture to reflect a pendulum (Segall, 2011 as cited in Lindgren & Johnson-Glenberg, 2013) or looking atdata of one’s own motion for mathematical trends (Lee & DuMont, 2010). However, focusing narrowly uponthe alignment between an individuals’ embodied activity and a concept in this way obscures how groups ofstudents might interact to collectively embody more complex phenomena, and how the organization of activitymay influence student learning. To address these contexts, we build upon sociocultural theories of learning(John-Steiner & Mahn, 1996) which highlight the importance of the sociocultural context in individual learningand cognition, and thus suggest that there is value in moving beyond embodied actions to examine how theorganization of activity impacts the value that students glean from their actions. To demonstrate the value of thisapproach, we describe the design of the Science through Technology Enhanced Play (STEP) project, whichbuilds on our previous work with the Learning Physics through Play (LPP) environment. STEP explores thepotential for dramatic play, a form of activity that is familiar to early elementary students, in promotingmeaningful reflection about scientific content. To illustrate this process, we also report on the first round ofdesign experiments conducted with 18 second-graders using STEP to explore states of matter.Background and design approachOur design work is premised on sociocultural theory which suggests that all new knowledge is encountered firstin social interaction before being “appropriated” by an individual (John-Steiner & Mahn, 1996). The notion ofappropriation encapsulates the idea that learners’ understanding of new concepts is shaped by their perception ofhow the new concept is used within a rich social context in addition to their prior experiences with similarconcepts. While all social contexts can lead to learning, play is a particularly powerful space for earlyelementary students (Vygotsky, 1978). From a sociocultural perspective, the defining characteristic of play isthat it always includes an imaginary situation and a set of rules (Vygotsky, 1978). The imaginary situationcreates a context in which children can explore the rules in ways that were not previously accessible to them,allowing play to function as informal inquiry (Youngquist & Pataray-Ching, 2004). In fact, children often spendmore time articulating and negotiating the rules of a play situation than actually “playing” their parts (Cooper,2009). In this way, play is a social and collaborative activity that supports and encourages reflection.Dewey (1933) defined reflection as “active, persistent, and careful consideration of any belief orsupposed form of knowledge in the light of the grounds that support it and the further conclusions to which itextends” (p. 91). More recently, Davis (2003) suggested that reflection can focus on several general subjects: onstudents’ specific actions, on the activities or tasks in which they are engaged, on the content being studied, orCSCL 2015 Proceedings332© ISLSon students’ knowledge in general. In other words, reflection is an opportunity for multiple kinds of sensemaking within activity. Our design work within the STEP environment is premised on the assumption that thesemultiple forms of reflection, which are promoted through play and can be seen both in students’ interactions andteacher-led discussions, are central to the process through which students can explore new concepts. In ourprevious work with the Learning Physics through Play (LPP) environment (Enyedy, Danish, Delacruz, &Kumar, 2012; Enyedy, Danish, & DeLiema, in press), we demonstrated that play-based mixed realityenvironments are able to support early elementary students in reflecting on the rules of Newtonian physics,affording them an opportunity to explore concepts that are typically considered too challenging.The STEP environment also uses mixed reality tools to combine students’ embodied play activitieswith the power of computer simulations and thus support them in reflecting on scientific content. Mixed realityenvironments use software to combine elements of the real world with virtual objects and capabilities. In theSTEP environment, students move around in the classroom space, play-acting how they believe water wouldbehave in a range of circumstances such as a freezing cold day. They can see their activity projected into acomputer simulation where an avatar of a water particle is displayed over the video display (see Figure 1). Thisavatar not only supports playful activity as a costume might, but also includes a representation of importantinformation necessary for the students’ inquiry such as the temperature in the imagined space or the energy levelof the individual particles. The information represented is intended to direct students’ attention towards keyaspects of the content being studied. As the students role-play in the STEP environment, they make choicesabout how real particles might behave, and those choices are reflected within the projected simulation.Figure 1. The STEP classroom environmentThus, STEP helps to create a participatory simulation (Colella, 2000; Wilensky & Stroup, 1999) orparticipatory model (Danish & Saleh, 2011; Enyedy et al., 2012), where students work with peers to explorehow their individual behaviors as particles of water influence the current state of the simulated matter. As thestudents collectively reflect through talk upon the nature of their shared model, they refine their understandingof the content. The STEP environment moves beyond our prior work by capitalizing on advances in computervision to track multiple students without the need for physical markers, exploring a new content area (states ofmatter rather than Newtonian physics), and by more explicitly examining the role of play and embodiment insupporting students’ reflection. In order to research the relationship between students’ collective embodied playwithin the STEP environment and the kinds of reflection that it afforded, we designed a short 3-activitysequence intended to support students in learning about states of matter while engaging with the environment inseveral distinct ways. In particular, our goal was to help students to understand that matter is made of particles,and to begin exploring the relationship between energy, the motion of particles, and state change. We alsowanted to target misconceptions such as the belief that the properties of particles are the same as the propertiesof the matter at a macroscopic level (Talanquer, 2009), and to overcome assumptions about particles changingor ceasing to exist at key points in state transitions such as when water boils.(Treagust et al., 2010 ).Activity designsWe designed three sequential activities to begin exploring the potential of the STEP environment: 1) macrolevel costume play, 2) particle-embodiment play and 3) energy-embodiment play (see Table 1). While allCSCL 2015 Proceedings333© ISLSactivity is in some sense “embodied”, our design focuses on promoting opportunities for groups of students tomove throughout the classroom, using their positions and motions to shape the activity. We also aimed topromote dramatic play by encouraging students to take on a role within an imaginary situation and to exploretheir role somewhat freely. In costume play, students were first introduced to state change at the macroscopiclevel via the costumes that they selected. This activity was intended to introduce the technology, help studentssee dramatic play as a science activity, and to help them reflect on the relationship between temperature andchanges in states of matter (e.g., heat causes ice to melt). In the particle-embodiment play, students play-acted asparticles and explored how the space between each particle and its movement impacted the state of matter thatwas displayed on the screen (figure 2). In the energy-embodiment activity, students took on the role of energysources (represented as small glowing balls), observing how energy impacted the behavior of simulated particleon the screen. In addition to allowing students to explore the role of energy in state change, we wanted to seehow shifting from the perspective of being the object under study (the particle) to influencing that object wouldimpact students’ play and reflection. All of the activities required the students to discuss and coordinate theiractions, and in the final two activities the teacher explicitly worked with the students to reflect on the “rules”that characterized their movement by recording these rules and revising them through their activity.Figure 2. STEP software environmentTable 1: The three play activitiesPlay Activity Name and DescriptionMacro-level costume play: Studentsselected characters and play-acted howthey would move past an ice wall.Learning goals• Introduction to macroscopic state changes.• Introduction to causal relationship between temperature and statechange.Particle-embodiment play: Students actedout how they felt particles of water mightbehave.• Matter is made up of tiny particles, which are too small to see.• Particles are always in motion.• Motion and arrangement of particles affect state of matter.Energy-embodiment play: The studentsacted out being sources of energy andattempted to change the state of matter.• Temperature is related to heat energy which affects the motion ofparticles (e.g., higher temperature = higher energy)• A change in energy is required for state changes to occur.MethodsParticipants and data sourcesThis study was implemented with 18 second-grade students (ages 7-8, 12 male, 6 female) at a public school in asmall mid-western town. Students were divided into four groups. Each of the two participating teachers workedwith a group of three students and a group of six students in a separate classroom where STEP was installed toexplore the impact of group size upon our design. All groups participated in 3 activity sessions averaging 30minutes per session.CSCL 2015 Proceedings334© ISLSExamining student learningTo examine student learning, we developed a pre-post structured interview, which included a range of questionsabout the nature of matter and how it changes state. We coded student responses using a scheme based on Paik,Kim, Cho, and Park (2004) to reveal the depth of student content understanding. Two sets of ordered codes(i.e., superficial to deep understanding) of matter (MT) and change of matter (CT) were established (see table 2).Table 2: Summary of the matter-type and change-type codesCodesIllustrative examplesMT1: Observable characteristics of matterIt’s just stacked up, ice is hard, water can just sinks down to the bottom butice has to stack.Really it’s the same amount as this picture from that picture, cause it melts.The particles are frozen... on a hot day it melts the particles can't handlethat much coldness.They [water] move a lot, medium fast, not like (makes whizzing-likenoise), that would be gas.Water changes into ice.It [The glass shaking] sorta rocks me around.Energy made me [particle] move faster.Gas [particles] coming together a little bit more [to make liquid].Well, there has to be snow or something like that to get it cooler, and getthe energy not flowing as much, so they [particles] move a little.MT2: Understand that matter is conservedMT3: Initial discussion of particles(includes incorrect articulations)MT4: Accurate discussion of particles (noincorrect articulations)CT1: Superficial description of state changeCT2: Some mechanism involvedCT3: Energy or temperature as mechanismCT4: Particle behavior as mechanismCT5: Relates energy to particle behaviorand state changeWe conducted a chi-squared analysis to determine if there were a higher proportion of content codesfrom the pre interviews to the post interviews. To facilitate this analysis, each question was coded for eitherstate changes (CT) or matter (MT), with the exception of one question, where both codes can occur. We thencollapsed several codes into macro (MT1, MT2, CT1, CT2, CT3) and micro descriptions (MT3, MT4, CT4,CT5). The former represents students’ observable properties and simple causal mechanisms of change of states,whereas the latter includes students’ characterizations of particle behavior of matter and the relationshipbetween energy, particles and state changes. We expected that students would articulate more micro-leveldescriptions than macro after the implementation.Analyzing the design in actionIn our analysis of the video data, we first sought to sub-divide students’ activity into interactive sequenceswhich manifest distinct normative structures and rules (Carspecken, 1996). We identified two general sequencesin our data: classroom sequences and embodiment sequences. A classroom sequence is defined by teacherdirected activity, where instructions or discussions occur. An embodiment sequence differs from the classroomsequence in that it is predominantly characterized by play, 1) an imaginary situation and 2) rules that governactions. These rules are instantiated when students take on different roles such as being a fire fairy, particles orenergy and play-acting within that role. The software was also embedded with some rules regarding particlebehavior, which shaped how students approached their roles. Embodiment sequences sometimes begin with aplanning phase, where students discuss what they intend to do as part of their play, and may also narrate theiractions as their play unfolds. Unlike a classroom sequence, both students and teacher are equally likely to beginor direct the sequence, observations made can be spontaneous, and students interact with each other and thescreen, rather than with the teacher. All the videos were watched and categorized according to the twointeractive sequences. These sequences were re-watched to identify specific sub-episodes within the sequencesand to determine if there were patterns that emerged, particularly with reference to the type of reflection evidentin students’ talk and the accuracy of content talk that accompanied each sub-episode within a sequence.Episodes were coded in terms of the kinds of reflection that they included. To identify reflection, we modifiedthe sub-categories suggested by Davis (2003) to better reflect our data and identified three types: 1) on actions(discussions of what students just did or what they will do next); 2) activities (broader activities that are definedby the design, such as being particles, being energy), and 3) reflection on content knowledge.ResultsLearning gainsAfter engaging with the STEP activity, students were able to articulate accurate descriptions of particle behaviorin different states of matter, as well as the relationship between energy, particle behavior and state changes (seeCSCL 2015 Proceedings335© ISLSTable 4). This included a significantly higher proportion of micro-level descriptions than macro-leveldescriptions after the implementation, X2 (3, N =524) = 142.18, p <.001 indicating that students generallyprovided more robust and normative accounts for how matter changes after engaging in the STEP activities.Table 4: Proportion of codes from pre and post interviewsPrePostMacro191 (73%)90 (34%)Micro20 (8%)148 (56%)Other21 (8%)10 (4%)Don’t Know29 (11%)15 (6%)The role of the STEP activities in supporting reflectionGeneral patterns in reflectionAcross all of the 4 groups and all 3 days of activities, students’ patterns of reflection were relativelyconsistent. Each group began with a classroom sequence before alternating between embodied sequences wherestudents played with the STEP software and paused to debrief their experience in a new classroom sequence.The initial classroom sequence consisted primarily of reflecting on students’ prior knowledge of the conceptbeing studied that day in response to teacher prompts. In all of the embodiment sequences, students’ reflectionswere focused primarily on their physical actions. Content-oriented reflections in this sequence typicallyoccurred only when prompted by the teacher and included a shift in orientation in their play from rather fluidand chaotic to more structured and deliberate. Once prompted, students’ replies did mirror the kinds of depthdisplayed during the classroom sequences. It is also during this phase that some of the students’ non-normativebeliefs about how particles behave were indicated as they called out predictions regarding how they expectedtheir behavior to impact the simulation. In general, it appears that the students did notice interesting patterns ofrelations during the embodied play sequence, but required teacher support to articulate many of them.During the debriefing classroom sequences, which occurred immediately after their embodied play, thestudents’ shifted to focus on reflection of the actions they just completed in their play, and how those related totheir prior knowledge. In these cases, the students’ reflections on their prior knowledge also became morespecific, such as moving from discussing energy rather abstractly to discussing specific sources of energy andhow they impacted the particles in motion and thus transformed the state of matter being displayedReflection during costume playStudents’ reflection during the costume play activity largely focused on the stories that they were constructingwith the costumes. They appeared confident in the fact that temperature leads to state change, and assumed thatheat led ice to melt to water, and eventually led water to evaporate. The students were quite comfortable withthe idea that an avatar would follow them around the screen and quickly focused on creating narratives together.Therefore, we will not describe this sequence in detail, as it seemed to primarily serve the role of introducing thestudents to the STEP software. However, one accidental event is worthy of note. In 3 of the 4 sessions, theteacher asked the students to create a play about how they would get through an ice wall. The studentsimmediately focused on the avatars that represented the ice, or a heat source such as a fire sprite. However, oneteacher inadvertently suggested they find a way “over” the ice wall. Those students shifted their attention to theanimal sprites that would live in the frozen wasteland that was displayed (e.g., bears and deer) and explored howthey might build a bridge over the ice wall rather than trying to go through it. Those students did not discussheat and melting until it was re-introduced by the teacher. This unintentional contrast and its resulting shift infocus helps to underscore the relationship between rules and students’ engagement with the content.Reflection during particle playDuring the particle play activity, each student was represented on-screen by a particle. The students could alsosee a “state meter” which depicted the overall state of matter based on their movement and relative positioning.For example, if the students all stood close to each other and relatively still, the state meter displayed a block ofice. In contrast, if the students were running rapidly around the space, the state meter displayed a gas. Once thestudents began to notice how their behavior influenced the state meter, the teacher asked them to embody aspecific state. At these times the students would begin moving around, adjusting their movement as they noticedchanges in the state meter (or the absence of expected changes). Students were quite playful and would oftenfocus on their movement without looking at the screen. For example, when becoming a “gas” the students beganrunning around as quickly as they could, some even beginning to play tag and try to catch each other.However, students would sporadically notice their state either because one student would look up, orthe teacher would draw their attention to it. At that point, they would attempt to adapt their movement,CSCL 2015 Proceedings336© ISLSsometimes with one student taking on a “director” role and shouting instructions. These comments often focuson their actions and rarely included conceptual explanations unless the teacher prompted for them. For example,one group noticed that even though they were moving quickly the state meter still depicted a liquid. A studentthen suggested that they were too close together and needed to spread out. At this direction, the students stoppedto spread out as far as the space would allow and then began running all in the same direction to attempt tocreate a gas. Thus, while students’ talk during the activity appeared primarily focused on their specific actions, itappears likely that at least some of the students were reflecting upon the reason behind those actions. Thesedetails then became more explicit when the teacher asked the students to articulate their rules while debriefing.While the rules were also articulated during debriefing sessions that occurred after the embodied play,one of our design goals was to help the students see their embodied play as a form of modeling where they couldexplore the content in greater detail, and notice concepts that were not previously apparent. This can best beillustrated with an example of students’ exploring the question of whether molecules move when in a solid form.Students typically begin with the idea that particles only move in either liquid or gaseous states, but otherwiseremain still in solid form. This is an example of an inheritance view (Talanquer, 2009), where students assumethat properties of particles are equal to the observable properties of matter. This conceptualization of particles insolid state is a particularly challenging idea for students; only half of the students in the post interviews wereable to articulate this accurately when asked demonstrate how the particles in solid ice behave.The excerpt below demonstrates how the software and embodiment offers an effective way for studentsto better address their current conceptions. Prior to this, the facilitator had shown students a brief video aboutparticles which depicted the particles in a solid as vibrating. Nonetheless, the students still suggested thatparticles within solid ice do not move. Excerpt 1 shows how the students worked with the teacher and the STEPenvironment to continue exploring this issue. First, we see that the students moved from their prior idea ofmodeling ice by hugging each other as closely as possible to recognize that a pattern (lattice) is necessary. Online 8, Adam shows the importance of the embodiment for articulating his idea by asking if he can physicallydemonstrate along with his peers. Initially, the students do not take note of the fact that they are still moving andin-fact they appear to be trying to hold as still as possible. However, the facilitator is then able to point (lines 1216) how a little movement doesn’t change the state meter from ice to water. The students then note, with theteacher’s help, that a little movement is possible, an idea that they later re-articulate when drafting their rulesabout how particles behave when in solid form. One aspect of this example which is particularly compelling forus is that the students have previously watched a video of particles in solid form as a way of summarizing theirearlier activity. Despite its clarity, the students persisted in their belief about ice particles remaining stationary.Fortunately, with the help of their teacher and the STEP environment, this group of students noticed that theycould be stationary and yet exhibit movement.Excerpt 1: Students embodying ice1Facilitator 1:2345678Adam:Facilitator 1:Students:Facilitator 1:Fred:Facilitator 1:Adam:9 Teacher:10 Adam:111213141516Teacher:Facilitator 2:Students:Teacher:Mary:Teacher:Do you remember the video when they showed us how the solids were arranged? Cananybody remember that in the video?They were like in a pattern.In a pattern. So when you guys were huddled together, was there a pattern when you ...No...No? So how do you think we should arrange ourselves?Oh I think we should arrange ourselves into a rectangle, or square.Do we want to try it out?Uh, how many people. There could be a line of three and like, another… Can Idemonstrate?Sure.Can we stand up? Ian you can stay here. Stand in line with Ian, Mary. That's good ...[Students arrange themselves according to Adam's instructions].What do we see on the screen? [Students form ice on the interface]So wiggle your fingers a little bit, and your toes. Are you still solid ice?Yeah.Well, that's movement.It's ba::rely movement.Oh! Oh! Ba::rely movementCSCL 2015 Proceedings337© ISLSReflection during energy playDuring the energy play activity the students were represented on-screen as small suns that moved amongst alarger number of particles. If they stayed away from the particles, the particles eventually drew close togetherand slowed their movement, and then the state meter indicated that they had formed into ice. However, if theymoved closer to the particles, the particles would slowly begin moving further and faster away, transitioningfirst into water and then into gas. This activity helped to highlight both the power of embodiment in our design,and the potential pitfalls to be avoided. Some students initially found the shift from particles to energy to beconfusing, moving much as they had before; running around to be a gas and slowing to be a solid. However,they soon realized with the help of their teacher than they were in fact influencing the particles and thus played adifferent role in the environment. For example, see excerpt 2 below, which depicts the students in one groupcoming to understand this relationship after initially running around the space.Excerpt 2: Students as energy123Facilitator 1:Students:Facilitator 1:456789101112Carl:Facilitator 1:Regan:Carl:Neal:Regan:Facilitator 1:Students:Facilitator:13 Neal:Can you all line up on the back? I think that might help...Yeah. [Students move towards the back of space.]Alright, so now you can see the energy is moving out of the way. Now let's watch whathappens to the particles.The sun is moving awaySo they're moving real fast right now, what do you think they are?LiquidGas. [Students are far from the particles which slow and transition from gas to solid.]Oh look, solid!Solid!There we go. Can someone describe, how do you know that's solid?Cause it's all together!Ok, so now if we move the energy in so that you're starting to touch them, what do youthink will happen? Step forward a little bit? [Students step forward.] Oh, so what'shappening now?They're coming apart.Some of the students in this group continued to find it difficult to reflect on the energy as separate fromthe movement of the particles. For example, when asked to “write down a note about energy” Neal suggestedthat “when energy moves freely, it usually means it's gas” whereas Regan noted that “whenever energy movesaround, and it does not get in the way, of the gas or particles, then it ... then it can come in and turn into solid”.While the facilitator re-voiced Regan’s idea, stating that “I think, what you're saying is that, if you stay out ofthe way so that there's no energy, the particles started to slow down and stay together and become a solid,” it isclear from this that the students were attending quite intensely to their own embodied role within the activity,and that some found this confusing when their embodiment played an indirect role in modeling the system (e.g.,as opposed to directly acting out the movement of the particles).One of the more successful groups appears to have resolved this tension by electing an “observer” whodirected the students-as-energy in their movement while attending to the state meter. This observer helped thestudents to recognize their role in influencing the simulated particles more clearly, and as a result they were ableto articulate the role of energy in causing particles to move, and then tying that movement to the state of matter.Thus we can see that their embodied role within the simulation was important for both the students who wereable to make this connection, and for those who struggled. Given how challenging students find this concept, weview this as a promising start and will incorporate the observer role into future design iterations in order to helpstudents to transition between perspectives as they explore the simulated system through embodied play.Summary and significanceThe initial STEP implementation was quite successful, resulting in learning gains over the course of the threetechnologically enhanced play scenarios. By exploring students’ reflections, we are able to focus on how theSTEP activities and environment support their learning effectively, as well as moments where we can continueto refine our design. From our analysis, it is clear that embodied play was central to students’ sense-makingactivity, and yet embodiment alone was not enough. Rather, the STEP environment supported this embodimentby providing key feedback to the students as they modeled the target system, helping them to see how theirCSCL 2015 Proceedings338© ISLSmovement, and the movement of their peers influenced the simulation. Furthermore, while the students appearedto notice many key principles through their embodied play, they didn’t initially articulate all of these, and maynot have even recognized them. Fortunately, with the help of the teacher and facilitator, the students were ableto more clearly connect their observations and articulate the rules of the system. In sum, we believe the STEPenvironment helps to articulate how designs for embodied activity can benefit from moving beyondconsiderations of analogous movement (though that is still important) to include a focus on how play engagedstudents in reflecting on their movement, how software tools can help make the patterns in this movement morevisible and relevant, and how teachers can help students to reflect more deeply upon the patterns they notice,and articulate the reasons for those patterns.ReferencesCarspecken, P. F. (1996). Critical ethnography in educational research: A theoretical and practical guide:Psychology Press.Colella, V. (2000). Participatory simulations: Building collaborative understanding through immersive dynamicmodeling. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 471-500.Cooper, P. M. (2009). The classrooms all young children need: Lessons in teaching from Vivian Paley:University of Chicago Press.Danish, J. A., & Saleh, A. (2011). The Primary Interactive Pathway: An Analytic Tool For Examining andComparing Students’ Representational Activities. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the JeanPiaget Society, Berkeley, CA.Davis, E. A. (2003). Prompting middle school science students for productive reflection: Generic and directedprompts. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(1), 91-142.Enyedy, N., Danish, J. A., Delacruz, G., & Kumar, M. (2012). Learning physics through play in an augmentedreality environment. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1-32.Enyedy, N., Danish, J. A., & DeLiema, D. (in press). Liminal Blends: How students blend symbols,experiences, and their own bodies together in order to co-construct meaning in a collaborativeaugmented-reality learning environment. International Journal of Computer Supported CollaborativeLearning.John-Steiner, V., & Mahn, H. (1996). Sociocultural approaches to learning and development: A Vygotskianframework. Educational Psychologist, 31(3-4), 191-206.Lee, V. R., & DuMont, M. (2010). An Exploration into How Physical Activity Data-Recording Devices Couldbe Used in Computer-Supported Data Investigations. International Journal of Computers forMathematical Learning, 1-23.Lindgren, R., & Johnson-Glenberg, M. (2013). Emboldened by Embodiment: Six Precepts for Research onEmbodied Learning and Mixed Reality. Educational Researcher, 42(8), 445-452. doi:10.3102/0013189x13511661Paik, S. H., Kim, H. N., Cho, B. K., & Park, J. W. (2004). K-­‐8th grade Korean students' conceptions of ‘changesof state’and ‘conditions for changes of state’. International Journal of Science Education, 26(2), 207224.Talanquer, V. (2009). On cognitive constraints and learning progressions: The case of “structure of matter”.International Journal of Science Education, 31(15), 2123-2136.Treagust, D. F., Chandrasegaran, A. L., Crowley, J., Yung, B. H. W., Cheong, I. P. A., & Othman, J. (2010 ).Evaulating Students' Understanding of Kinetic Particle Theory Concepts Relating to the States ofMatter, Changes of State and Diffusion: A Cross-National Study. International Journal of Science andMathematics Education, 8(1), 141-164.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society : the development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge:Harvard University Press.Wilensky, U., & Stroup, W. (1999). Learning through Participatory Simulations: Network-based Design forSystems Learning in Classrooms. Paper presented at the Computer Support for Collaborative Learning(CSCL) 1999 Conference, Stanford Univ, Palo Alto, CA.Youngquist, J., & Pataray-Ching, J. (2004). Revisiting “Play”: Analyzing and Articulating Acts of Inquiry.Early Childhood Education Journal, 31, 171-178.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation (IIS-1323767). We would also like tothank the teachers and students who made this possible. In addition, we thank Jeffrey Burke, Fabian Wagmister,UCLA REMAP, and Inquirium for all of their support in the design and development of the STEP platform.CSCL 2015 Proceedings339© ISLS