Making Engagement Visible:The Use of Mondrian Transcripts in a MuseumBen Rydal Shapiro, Vanderbilt University, benrydal@gmail.comRogers Hall, Vanderbilt University, r.hall@vanderbilt.eduAbstract: This paper describes how we have used a new transcription system we callMondrian Transcripts to study visitor engagement and expand professional vision (Goodwin,1994) in a museum. Methods, concepts and findings from this paper contribute to researchconcerning interest driven learning (Azevedo, 2013; Ito et al., 2009, Crowley & Jacobs,2002), how people “make places” for learning while moving through different types ofphysical or information environments (Taylor & Hall, 2013; Ma & Munter, 2014; Marin,2013; Lave et al., 1984) and the design of learning environments that can advanceprofessional design practice. Empirical data include 1) 22 case studies of complete museumvisits that captured continuous, multi-perspective video and audio records of visitor mobilityand interaction and 2) audio, video and survey based data from a professional developmentand design session with museum educators, exhibit designers, curators and archivists.Introduction and organization of paperThe setting and empirical basis of this research is a two year ethnographic study to understand how visitorscultivate interests in and learn about the diverse historical and cultural heritage of American Roots and Countrymusic while visiting a nationally renowned museum located in the mid-South region of the United States. Aspart of this work, we collected a purposive sample of complete museum visits across 22 visitor group casesincluding 11 family groups (2-5 visitors per group) over a period of six weeks (twenty-four days of datacollection). These 22 case studies captured continuous, multi-perspective video and audio records of visitorgroup mobility and interaction through small GoPro cameras worn by visitors with no researchers present. Inaddition, following their visit we conducted 1-2 hour post visit interviews with all visitor groups and weconnected with visitors on various social media platforms in order to follow online the content that visitorscollected and shared from their visit. Table 1 summarizes this work.Table 1: OverviewCSCL 2017 Proceedings33© ISLSThe first part of this paper introduces Mondrian Transcripts as a transcription system to: 1) visuallytranscribe museum visitor’s physical movement and conversation over space and through time and 2) study howvisitors engage in museum gallery spaces. This work draws from and extends Interaction Analysis (Jordan &Henderson, 1995) and Time Geography (Hagerstrand, 1970) and reflects our recent efforts to describe and usewhat we call “Interaction Geography” in studies of learning (Shapiro & Hall, 2017; Shapiro, 2017). The secondpart of this paper describes how we have used a dynamic visualization environment that allows for multi-modalanalysis of Mondrian Transcripts, which we call the Interaction Geography Slicer (IGS) (Shapiro & Hall, 2017;Shapiro, 2017), to support a professional development and design session with museum professionals at thismuseum. This session aimed to demonstrate new ways to conceptualize and design for visitor engagement andlearning. This work is part of a larger design study (Cobb, Confrey, diSessa, Lehrer & Schauble, 2003) that aimsto advance museum professional’s learning about how design practice can create opportunities for interestdriven learning in and beyond their gallery spaces (Azevedo, 2013; Ito et al., 2009, Crowley & Jacobs, 2002).Mondrian Transcripts and visitor engagementFigure 1 below displays a museum gallery space and maps the physical movement within that space of two (offive) members of a family we call the “Bluegrass Family” (not pictured in the image). On the left in “floor plandisplay”, movement is shown over a floor plan of the gallery space (e.g. as if you were looking “down” onto thespace). On the right in “timeline display”, movement unfolds continuously over a timeline. On the timelinedisplay, vertical position corresponds to vertical position on the floor plan. In addition, line pattern correspondsto horizontal position on the floor plan. Adhir (orange) is 25 years old and Blake (blue) is a 6-year old boy.Figure 1. A museum gallery space & Adhir and Blake’s mobility over space and space-time.Source: Copyright © by Ben Rydal Shapiro. Reprinted by permission.CSCL 2017 Proceedings34© ISLSThe plan display shows where Blake and Adhir go within the gallery space, while the timeline displayshows how they interact with exhibits and one another in space and over time. For example, using the timelinedisplay, one can see that during the first five minutes Blake is moving quickly (apparently running) back andforth across the gallery space in what appears to be multiple, frantic attempts to draw Adhir away from anexhibit dedicated to Hank Williams where he remains standing (straight orange path in space-time from roughly0-5 minutes). After four failed attempts, Blake finally appears to succeed in leading Adhir on what we describeas a “tour” of other exhibits in the gallery, indicated by their intertwined paths from approximately minutes 5-6.Figure 2 below maps the physical movement of two other members of the Bluegrass Family, Blake’sbrother Jeans (green) and their sister Lily (yellow). The timeline display illustrates how Jeans and Lily movethrough the gallery space nearly always together (apart only during minutes 4-5).Figure 2. Jean’s & Lily’s mobility over space and space-time.Source: Copyright © by Ben Rydal Shapiro. Reprinted by permission.Together, Figures 1 and 2 show how pairs within the Bluegrass Family move and engage with exhibitsand one another in starkly different ways. While Blake produces a “recruitment” mobility pattern in response toAdhir’s persistent pattern of “reverence” (e.g., he later explains his attachment to the troubles in Hank’s life),Jeans and Lily produce an intertwined path that is similar to the “tour” mobility pattern later achieved betweenBlake and Adhir. On closer examination, all four young people and their paths are entangled in ways that allow:1) Lily to soothe the emotions of Adhir (her fiancé), 2) Jeans to lead Blake away from the Hank Williamsexhibit to give them privacy, and 3) Lily and Jeans (with help from Mom) to help Blake to succeed in“recruiting” Adhir to follow a tour. Blake’s dramatic (blue) path is produced in relation to other members of thefamily, who eventually help him take Adhir on a tour of other musicians.Figures 1 and 2 also demonstrate how the visible qualities (e.g., pace, duration, shape, distance) andrelationships (e.g., intersections, weaving, splitting, proximity) among movement paths in Mondrian Transcriptssupport and deepen different analytical framings of engagement. For example, they provide a means to studyhow people engage by managing personal and social distance between family members (Hall, 1966). However,Mondrian Transcripts also demonstrate that these distances are not only interactional phenomena as traditionallyconceived but are also related to the spatial layout of the gallery space. For example, Blake and Adhir’srespective mobility patterns of recruitment and reverence are partly a response to the spatial location of theHank Williams exhibit in relation to other artists in the gallery and how this sequence can be experienced as apath over time.Figure 3 below extends the design of Mondrian Transcripts in a variety of ways. First, it maps thesimultaneous physical movement of all five members of the Bluegrass Family (now including the mother inpurple). Second, it similarly maps the Bluegrass Family’s conversation. To do this, talk is transcribed usingstandard conventions of conversation analysis, colored by speaker, and organized in relation to physicalmovement through space and over time. Conversation “boxes” group topically related talk. Thicker boxes on thefloor plan show repeated conversations in the same area of space.CSCL 2017 Proceedings35© ISLSFigure 3. Mondrian Transcript of the Bluegrass Family’s Interaction Geography.Source: Copyright © by Ben Rydal Shapiro. Reprinted by permission.Figure 3 shows how the design of Mondrian Transcripts supports and deepens an understanding ofengagement as both a response to the built environment and produced in interaction and mobility (Cleveland &Fisher, 2014). The Bluegrass Family’s mobility shows how the family manages personal and social distance andlikewise produces patterns of mobility that can be studied as a “meshwork” or as a form of “learning on themove” (Ingold, 2007; Taylor, 2013; Taylor & Hall, 2013). For example, the mother’s mobility (named Mae)appears to “lag” behind other members of the family in a manner that could indicate she is overseeing andmanaging her family. Lagging patterns in space-time are common and in this case, indicate the need for closeranalysis of Mae’s mobility. In this example, closer analysis reveals how Mae often joins her family to makeconnections across exhibits for her children, thus helping to manage their engagement and learning.Additionally, the family’s mobility and conversation illustrates how this family is intimately connected to oneanother as well as a particular semi-circular set of exhibits within the gallery space. Put another way, thefamily’s mobility and conversation patterns show how the family selectively creates a “personally edited” (Laveet al., 1984; Ma & Munter, 2014) version of the gallery space that extends or elaborates the meaning of exhibitsin ways relevant to the personal and social history of the Bluegrass Family.Figure 3 also illustrates the embodied work of museum visitor groups that we call “engagementcontours” (ECs). Engagement contours are comprised of topically bounded sequences of movement and talkthat often repeat and accumulate over space and through time in relation to the physical environment and otherCSCL 2017 Proceedings36© ISLSpeople. Engagement contours have a spatial and temporal footprint and are connected in ways that further theconcept of “personal editing” as previously described. In Mondrian Transcripts, each visual box in the timelinedisplay that bounds a set of intersecting movement paths and conversation indicates an engagement contour.Within engagement contours members of the Bluegrass Family arrange themselves in different types ofinteractional formations, similar to what (Kendon, 1990) calls “facing formations” and what (Marin, 2013) calls“ambulatory sequences”. One result of this, as shown in Figure 3, is that repeated engagement contours in thesame area of space accumulate to produce dense conversation “boxes” or “textures” on the floor plan. Anotherresult is that things like “Blake’s tour” become visible as forms of “place making” or “inhabitation” that arespatially and sequentially experienced in relation to the physical environment and other people. Thus, theconcept of engagement contours furthers Marin’s innovative efforts to begin to put Kendon’s concept of a“facing formation” (e.g. how people spatially organize their bodies in interaction) into motion in studies oflearning on the move (Taylor, 2013; Taylor & Hall, 2013). Moreover, it specifically theorizes engagement asboth 1) a response to the built environment at different grain sizes (e.g. ECs can be studied at one exhibit or atthe scale of a gallery space) and 2) produced through people’s interaction and mobility. Research rarelyconsiders both of these aspects of engagement simultaneously primarily due to methodological limitations.Figure 4 below is a set of “small multiples” from the Interaction Geography Slicer (IGS) and furtherillustrates the kinds of comparative analysis that can be explored using Mondrian Transcripts. The figurecompares the movement of four different families/groups in three different types of gallery spaces within themuseum. Columns distinguish different families while rows distinguish different museum gallery spaces. Alldisplayed information is set to the same spatial and temporal scales. The Taylor Swift Family did not visit theHall of Fame Rotunda Gallery thus we substituted an image of the entire museum and superimposed themovement of all families in each gallery space.Figure 4. Small multiples of family mobility from Interaction Geography Slicer (IGS).Source: Copyright © by Ben Rydal Shapiro. Reprinted by permission.Figure 4 illustrates broader use of Mondrian Transcripts in a variety of ways. First, it highlightssimilarities and differences in how engagement can be a response to the built environment. For example, for allgroups the “Folk Roots Gallery” (a narrow, linear space) conditions particular linear ways of moving indicatedby similarly sloped lines in space-time that rarely lead to repeated engagements. In contrast, the “BluegrassGallery” and “Hall of Fame Rotunda Gallery” (both open plan spaces with different supports for sequentialengagement) promote a wide variety of movement patterns (in both space and space-time) and a great numberof repeated engagements in some visitor groups.CSCL 2017 Proceedings37© ISLSSecond, Figure 4 helps to further show how people and groups “personally edit” gallery spaces (Laveet al., 1984; Ma & Munter, 2014). For example, for those who know these gallery spaces (e.g., museumcurators), it is immediately apparent that the Bluegrass Family primarily visits and spends time at exhibits thatreflect content from Bluegrass and early Country Music, whereas the Women in Music Family engages withexhibits featuring female artists. Mondrian Transcripts provide a new means to conceptualize and visualizepersonal editing as processes of selecting and “making places” within the museum for group exchange and inways that are driven by the personal and social history of individuals and groups.Third, Figure 4 further illustrates how Mondrian Transcripts aim to meet provocations to develop a“graphic anthropology” to study meshworks of mobility (Ingold, 2007). In particular, Figure 4 shows howMondrian Transcripts make processes by which visitor groups come together and split apart (e.g. meshworking)visible as a form of space-time mobility and how these can vary across visitor groups and gallery spaces.Mondrian Transcripts cannot tell us what goes on inside these meshworks, but they do draw our attention tomoments and places of potential importance where, in this work, multi-party engagement with museum exhibitsand their content rises and falls over space and through time.Lastly, Figure 4 begins to demonstrate a developing space-time vocabulary of what we call “interactiongeography” (Shapiro & Hall, 2017) that draws from both established “constraints” paradigms and emerging“new mobilities” paradigms in human geography (Hagerstrand, 1970; Sheller & Urry, 2006; Cresswell, 2010).For example, the Bluegrass and Women in Country Music Families illustrate significant variation in family“path braiding” (e.g., the pace and spatial density of engagement contours). In comparison, the BusinessPartner’s movement within the Hall of Fame Rotunda Gallery shows a lagged pattern of “path following”, inwhich Cindy follows Andy’s movement closely, but almost always trails about one minute behind. Likewise,across visitor groups, sharp “cuts” in space-time typically indicate young children who are running betweenfamily formations or trying to draw adults to other parts of the museum.Using Mondrian Transcripts to extend professional visionWe now shift our focus to describing how we used a dynamic visualization environment that allows for multimodal analysis of Mondrian Transcripts, which we call the Interaction Geography Slicer (IGS) (Shapiro & Hall,2017), during a professional development and design session with museum professionals at this museum.Two starting points informed our design. First, visitor learning is not the primary focus of thismuseum’s design departments (e.g., they primarily design exhibits, marketing campaigns, and social mediapresence). For example, museum educators see their mission as “fitting” learning programs to museum contentand exhibits after these have been designed/built. Second, as in any museum organization (Schauble et al.,1997), departments within the museum possess what we describe as an idealized view or model of their visitors.For example, there is a prevalent view across all departments that museum exhibits are a fixed curriculum thatvisitors succeed or fail to understand as opposed to a view of visitor engagement and interaction as an “enactedcurriculum”, where learning is in the hands of visitors (Crowley & Jacobs, 2002; Louw & Crowley, 2013).Our design goals were thus: 1) to provide methods and concepts to bring a more expansive view oflearning to museum professionals and 2) to challenge with empirical cases the “idealized” view of galleryspaces and museum visitors described above. Our long-term goal, shared with our partners at the museum, is toidentify opportunities for designing more equitable, expansive and productive learning in museum galleryspaces. Bringing learning sciences and museum design together is a promising but challenging design space.In a half day workshop with 15 museum professionals, we used Mondrian Transcripts within theInteraction Geography Slicer (IGS) to help create an environment for joint exploration and discussion of what 4different visitor families/groups were doing in 3 different gallery spaces (e.g., the visitor groups shown in Figure4). The IGS allowed museum professionals to use Mondrian Transcripts as a means to study in highlyinteractive ways visitor’s movement, conversation and what we call “personal curation” (e.g. people’s use ofpersonal information devices to capture, edit and share exhibit content during their visit). Moreover, the IGSalso synced transcript and audio and video data from multiple-perspectives (e.g. from cameras worn by eachvisitor within a group) to each visitor’s movement, conversation and personal curation as visualized inMondrian Transcripts. Thus, museum professionals could study a visitor group’s mobility, switch seamlessly tostudy their conversation and personal curation, isolate particular members of that visitor group, isolate particularregions of space and sequences of time during their visit, read transcript (e.g. what people were saying) andlisten/watch audio and video from the perspective of each family member. Figure 5 below provides a snapshotfrom the session of museum professionals using the IGS to study the Bluegrass Family as previously described.The bottom right image in the figure displays video (from a camera worn by Lily) selected by a museum curatorat a point in space and time when the family is gathered together at an exhibit dedicated to Maybelle Carter.CSCL 2017 Proceedings38© ISLSFigure 5. Museum Professionals using the Interaction Geography Slicer (IGS) to study the Bluegrass Family.Source: Copyright © by Ben Rydal Shapiro. Reprinted by permission.One of the more powerful sequences during the workshop was one that triggered a dramatic shift inprofessional vision (Goodwin, 1994) among lead designers and educators regarding the movement andexperiences of Blake from the Bluegrass Family. When museum professionals first saw Blake’s highly mobilepaths, as previously described, few believed that he could possibly be learning. Some expressed concern that hisseemingly erratic mobility might even be undermining the intended design of exhibits by distracting othermembers of his family during their museum visit. However, the workshop provided numerous opportunities formuseum professionals to unpack Blake’s (and other young children’s) mobility patterns as a form of learning onthe move. For example, in addition to confronting Blake’s “tour”, museum professionals studied how in onegallery space Blake, after failing to get an adequate answer to a question he asked from Adhir, ran to anothergallery space across the museum to find and get an adequate answer from his brother Jeans only to run backacross the museum once again to deliver his “found” answer to Adhir in the original gallery space. By the end ofthe workshop, museum professionals were studying and asking questions about Blake’s (and other youngchildren’s) mobility that demonstrated an understanding that young children’s seemingly erratic patterns ofmobility could be quite intentional efforts to engage and learn and were also opportunities for learning design.There were even jokes about hiring Blake as a museum ambassador for bluegrass music.While there is not space to present further empirical material in this paper, we believe that exploringMondrian Transcripts with the Interaction Geography Slicer (IGS) allowed museum professionals to see theirvisitors in new ways and to challenge idealized models of museum visitors as relatively passive consumers ofintended design in ways that were previously impossible. Likewise, this work supported conversations betweenmuseum professionals that rarely occur. As one museum educator described in the post-survey, “I recall theproductive cross-department conversation about visitor behavior, engagement, learning. We seldom (never?)have the opportunity to discuss visitor experience in the gallery—with our content—across departments. I alsoenjoyed and benefited from the visitor conversations in relation to specific space and artifacts—good to "see"the exhibit through their eyes and mind rather than assume their view, takeaways, paths, etc.”.CSCL 2017 Proceedings39© ISLSConclusion and next stepsCurrent and future work continues to develop and address inherent limitations in this early work in order to a)advance Mondrian Transcripts (theoretically and computationally) for use by others working in a variety ofsettings and at different scales (e.g., schools, neighborhoods, cities) and b) use Mondrian Transcripts to supportprofessional development and new design practices. While illustrated with data from a museum, these methodsand concepts are quite general purpose and may provide new possibilities for research and learning designs thatconsider space, learning and mobility.ReferencesAzevedo, Flávio S. (2013). The Tailored Practice of Hobbies and Its Implication for the Design of InterestDriven Learning Environments. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 22(3), 462-510.Cleveland, B., & Fisher, K. (2014). The evaluation of physical learning environments: A critical review of theliterature. Learning Environments Research, 17(1), 1-28.Cobb, P., Confrey, J., diSessa, A., Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educationalresearch. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9-13.Cresswell, T. (2010). Towards a politics of mobility. Environment and planning D: society and space, 28(1),17-31.Crowley, K. & Jacobs, M. (2002). Building islands of expertise in everyday family activity. In G. Leinhardt,K. Crowley, & K. Knutson (Eds.) Learning conversations in museums (pp. 333-356). Mahwah, NJ:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3): 606-633.Hagerstrand, T. (1970). What about people in regional science? Papers in Regional Science, 24(1), 6–21.Hall, E. T. (1966) The Hidden Dimension. Garden City, N.Y., Doubleday.Ingold, Tim (2007). Lines: A Brief History. London, Routledge.Ito, M., et al. (2009). Hanging Out, Messing Around, and Geeking Out: Kids Living and Learning with NewMedia. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39-103.Kendon, A. (1990). Spatial organization in social encounters: The F-formation system. Conducting interaction:Patterns of behavior in focused encounters, pp. 209-238.Lave, J., Murtaugh, M., & de la Rocha, O. (1984). The dialectics of arithmetic in grocery shopping. In B.Rogoff and J. Lave (Eds.), Everyday cognition: Its development in social context (pp. 67–94).Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Louw, M., & Crowley, K. (2013). New ways of looking and learning in natural history museums: The use ofgigapixel imaging to bring science and publics together. Curator: The Museum Journal, 56(1), 87-104.Ma, J. Y., & Munter, C. (2014). The Spatial Production of Learning Opportunities in Skateboard Parks. Mind,Culture, and Activity, 21(3), 238-258.Marin, Ananda M. (2013) Learning to Attend and Observe: Parent-child Meaning Making in the NaturalWorld. Ph.D. Dissertation. Northwestern University.Schauble, L., Leinhardt, G., & Martin, L. (1997). A framework for organizing a cumulative research agenda ininformal learning contexts. Journal of Museum Education 22: 3-7.Shapiro, B.R. (2017). Using Space Time Visualization in Learning Environment Design. In Proceedings of the2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '17).ACM, Denver, CO, USA.Shapiro, B.R., & Hall, R. (2017). Interaction Geography in a Museum. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHIConference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '17). ACM,Denver, CO, USA.Sheller, M., & Urry, J. (2006). The new mobilities paradigm. Environment and planning A, 38(2), 207-226.Taylor, K. H. (2013). Counter-mapping the neighborhood: A social design experiment for spatial justice.Dissertation, Vanderbilt University.Taylor, K. H., & Hall, R. (2013). Counter-mapping the neighborhood on bicycles: Mobilizing youth toreimagine the city. Technology, Knowledge and Learning, 18, 1-2: 65-93.AcknowledgmentsThis work is made possible by the National Science Foundation, wonderful and ongoing collaborations with ourmuseum partners, and Vanderbilt University’s Space, Learning & Mobility Lab.CSCL 2017 Proceedings40© ISLS