Uncertainty Management in Science ArgumentationCatherine E. Cullicott, Arizona State University, ccullicott@asu.eduYing-Chih Chen, Arizona State University, ying-chih.chen@asu.eduAbstract: The purpose of this study is to investigate how an experienced 5th grade teacher helpsstudents approach and manage uncertainty during scientific argumentation. Transcripts ofnineteen lessons over the course of the school year were analyzed using the constant comparativemethod and the enumerative approach and were coded for social negotiation and epistemicengagement of an argument. Results include that over time the dialogic move gradually shiftedfrom teacher-directed to a more student-directed pathway.Keywords: Argumentation, uncertainty, social negotiation, epistemic engagement, inquiryIntroductionArgumentation has recently been advocated a critical need for science education (e.g., National Research Council[NRC], 2012) because it helps students learn to discern what counts as good evidence, manage uncertainties, andreach consensus through dialogic negotiation (Berland & Lee, 2012; Buck, Lee, & Flores, 2014). A Frameworkfor K-12 Science Education states: “Scientific knowledge is a particular kind of knowledge with its own sources,justifications, ways of dealing with uncertainties, and agreed-on levels of certainty (NRC, 2012).” However,engaging students in dealing with uncertainty through argumentative practice is ambitious and challenging.Transferring this unique form of practice from expert settings to classrooms is not unproblematic (Watkins,Hammer, Radoff, Jaber, & Phillips, in press); understandably, the intentions and ways that scientists work are notfamiliar to students.Uncertainty is defined as “an individual’s subjective experience of doubting, being unsure, orwondering,” and experiencing uncertainty “likely plays an important role in content learning and in interactionduring collaborative learning tasks.” (Jordan & McDaniel, 2014). This study aims to unpack and track how anexperienced teacher engages fifth-grade students in dealing with uncertainties over the course of a school year.Previous research on uncertainty during the development of scientific understanding has focused on theexperiences of individual students (e.g., Chen, Park, & Hand, 2016; Metz, 2004) or small groups (e.g., Jordan &McDaniel, 2014) rather than of the class as a whole. This study aims to add to the body of knowledge regardinguncertainty during argumentation by considering the social negotiation and epistemic engagement of an argumentthat take place during whole-class argumentation.MethodsThe Science Talk Writing Heuristic (STWH) approach (Chen, Benus, & Yarker, 2016) was utilized to createcurriculum and instructional strategies that promote building disciplinary core ideas while using talk and writingto engage students in scientific practices. The STWH approach consists of five phases: (1) exploring beginningideas/generating an inquiry question, (2) designing tests/observations to gather data, (3) engaging in socialnegotiation to debate claim/evidence, (4) reading to compare ideas with experts, and (5) reflecting through writing.Given the purpose of this study, i.e., how a teacher helps students engage in managing uncertainties through socialnegotiation, the analysis focused on the third phase.Nineteen classroom observations of whole-class discussions were purposefully selected over fourunits—ecosystem (six classes), human body system (six classes), day and night (three classes), forces and motion(four classes). Each unit had the same overall structure, starting with a “big idea” to guide students’ questions,investigations, and whole-class discussions that occurred after students designed and conducted experiments toanswer their guiding question about the “big idea” (Chen, Hand, & Park, 2016).The analysis of the nineteen classes involved two complementary analytical approaches: (1) the constantcomparative method (Strauss & Corbin, 1990) and (2) the enumerative approach (LeCompte & Preissle, 1993).All nineteen classroom observations were transcribed and each transcript was broken into individual utterances,defined as an idea that contributed to the discussion. Because this study is particularly interested in how teacherand students use social negotiation (e.g., collaboratively construct and critique arguments to build consensus) andepistemic engagement of an argument (e.g., understand what counts as a good argument and apply thatunderstanding to argumentation) as resources to manage uncertainties (Duschl, 2008), each utterance was codedfor both social negotiation and epistemic engagement. Figure 1 shows the coding scheme as applied to one eventin the sixth transcript of the first unit (ecosystem), in which one group of students stated their claim about theICLS 2018 Proceedings1479© ISLSeffect of temperature on the germination of seeds to the rest of the class, and the teacher raised uncertainty byasking the group to clarify their claim. The resulting discussion involved social negotiation and epistemicengagement of an argument by both teacher and students, at the end of which the group restated their claim.Transcript 01, Event #6 – Temperature Group presents their claimFigure 1. Event map from the ecosystem unit showing the social negotiation and epistemic engagement of anargument components of a teacher-directed dialogic pathway (see Results, below).ResultsThree dialogic pathways have been identified through analyzing each event: (1) teacher-directed pathway: teacherraises an uncertainty, guides and intervenes to maintain the uncertainty through engaging students to evaluate andimprove their arguments, and resolve the uncertainty resulting in the group reaching a consensus, (2) serpentinepathway: teacher or students raise an uncertainty, teacher and students cooperate together to maintain and resolveuncertainty, and (3) students-directed pathway: students raise an uncertainty, maintain an uncertainty throughcomprehending, constructing and critiquing the argument, and eventually resolve the uncertainty. As the semesterproceeded with increasing opportunities for students to engage in uncertainty management, the dialogic movesshift from teacher-directed to serpentine and student-directed pathway. Students started to learn how to raise,maintain, and resolve uncertainty.ReferencesBerland, L. K., & Lee, V. R. (2012). In pursuit of consensus: Disagreement and legitimization during small-groupargumentation. International Journal of Science Education, 34(12), 1857-1882.Chen, Y. C., Benus, M. J., & Yarker, M. B. (2016). Using models to support argumentation in the scienceclassroom. The American Biology Teacher, 78(7), 549-559.Chen, Y. C., Park, S., & Hand, B. (2016). Examining the use of talk and writing for students' development ofscientific conceptual knowledge through constructing and critiquing arguments. Cognition andInstruction, 34(2), 100-147.Duschl, R. (2008). Science education in three-part harmony: Balancing conceptual, epistemic, and social learninggoals. Review of Research in Education, 32(1), 268–291.Jordan, M. E., & McDaniel, R. R. (2014). Managing uncertainty during collaborative problem solving inelementary school teams: The role of peer influence in robotics engineering activity. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 23(4), 490–536.LeCompte, M. D., Preissle, J., & Tesch, R. (1993). Evaluating qualitative design. Ethnography and qualitativedesign in educational research, 315-356.Metz, K. E. (2004). Children’s understanding of scientific inquiry: Their conceptualization of uncertainty ininvestigations of their own design. Cognition and Instruction, 22(2), 219–290.National Research Council (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Strauss, A. L., Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research (Vol. 15). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.Watkins, J., Hammer, D., Radoff, J., Jaber, L. Z., & Phillips, A. M. (2018). Positioning as not-understanding: Thevalue of showing uncertainty for engaging in science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 55(4),573-599.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1480© ISLS