“How Do We Pack the World Into Words?” Examining the Collectiveof Humans and Non-Humans in the Science ClassroomDonald J. Wink, Learning Sciences Research Institute and Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois atChicago, dwink@uic.eduAbstract: This paper uses Bruno Latour's framework of a “collective of humans and nonhumans” to consider how to construe the non-human objects of learning and their role inclassroom knowledge construction. This is done by considering materials and reports from aform of a “construction site” for science: the implementation of laboratory science in a highschool chemistry classroom. The paper considers how the collective operates in three domainscentral to the learning sciences: learning environments, discourse, and identity. Implicationsfor the relation of this to other ways of considering artifacts and inscriptions, includingmaterial feminisms, and for the for the role of phenomena in learning are also discussed.Keywords: science, learning environments, discourse, identity.Introduction: Preparing metals for classroom useIn the continuing saga of my [in-school] work, yesterday I completed making up all the metalpieces for two of the labs in ChemCom--the “metal / nonmetal” and the “reactivities of metal”labs. I just calculated the number of pieces this involved and it adds to about 2500. Each was 1cm or less in size, comprised of Zn, Ag, Cu, Mg, Fe, and also carbon and silicon. Mostly easywork, though the supplier did send us some Zn “wire” that was about gauge 10. Never tedious,though, in part because it was mostly done while class was going on. I have no idea what a“Zen experience” is supposed to mean, but this has to be one.Figure 1. Email from a science educator supporting a high school science curriculum.Figure 1 presents a report of an event in science instruction, with many areas of exciting activity: Samples ofelements are cut into pieces; a classroom is prepared for students; a curriculum is brought into schools; achemist has an experience that contrasts with other modes of professionalism. Within this, novel attributesaccrue—for the elements: a new place to be active; for the classroom and the students: new interactions withnew materials; for the curriculum: a new place for use; for the chemist: new ways of seeing himself and of beingseen. How can we, in such a setting, say who are the participants in this activity? What is the subject? What isthe object? Are these new attributes constructed? Are they discovered? How does this incorporate the metalpieces in the discourse of the humans? And, finally, how does this activity shape and characterize the identity ofthose who are here? These questions go to the heart of questions about reality and knowledge construction,including especially in science. The questions are also among those central to science studies, including thework of Bruno Latour, working across the fields of anthropology, sociology, philosophy, and science, as hedocuments the how collectives of non-humans and humans are needed to understand how to answer the questionof “How do we pack the world into words?” (Latour 1999).The collective within learning environments, discourse, and identityThree domains are considered in this paper, to document the activity of a collective in learning: learningenvironments, using Latour’s concept of a circulating chain of reference, discourse, using his concept of speechprostheses, and identity, using a concept of the mutual enhancement and articulation of properties. FollowingLatour’s method, a specific “construction site” for science (Latour 2005) is considered: a secondary sciencelearning environment (Wink et al 2008; Daubenmire et al 2011).Learning environments are complex locations where multiple actors engage on another. In his work,Latour (1999) considers a research environment, accompanying a team of researchers studying the forest /savanna boundary. The environment is a place where the things of the world become a scientific report, notthrough correspondence, but across “circulating chain of reference.” In much the same way, we examine howthe metal is cut up to become the form of the experiment (Figure 1), the pieces are used in a chemical reaction,the reaction in a lab report, and the lab report in learning: in this construction site also, through a series of small,ICLS 2018 Proceedings1721© ISLStraceable steps, we see how the learning environment contains another circulating chain of reference among thenon-humans and the humans.Within a construction site the non-humans become part of the discourse, also. This is done through aprocess of permitting the non-humans to speak using “speech prostheses that allow non-humans to participate inthe discussions of humans, where humans become perplexed about the participation of the new entities incollective life” (Latour 2004). Within the curriculum a similar set of speech prostheses are found, permittingnon-humans to enter discourse in science learning, specifically through staging of experiments, entry of resultsin notebooks, and claims on behalf of the non-humans in the interpretation of results.Finally, Latour’s anthropological work is also about how humans and non-humans co-construct identitywhen they “mutually exchange and enhance their properties” (Latour, 1999) with an example focused on LouisPasteur and the “discovery” of microbes. In this paper, a similar examination of the implementation of a sciencecurriculum over time gives evidence about how humans (students, teachers, educators) and non-humans (metals,solutions, apparatus) also gain and stabilize identity through articulation of properties with one another. Thisuses methods of narrative analysis in describing identity through the emergence of metapragmatic models ofidentity within narrative data (Sfard & Prusak 2005; Wortham, 2001; 2004).Implications: Inscriptions, materiality, and phenomenaThere are several implications considering Latour’s collective for the learning sciences, including interestingpoints of comparison with work on artifacts and inscriptions (e.g, Roth et al 1999). In addition, the work will berelated to concepts found in material feminisms (Alaimo & Hekman 2008), agential realism and literacy (Barad2000) and their educational applications (Taylor & Ivinson 2013; Scantlebury & Milne 2017). Finally, the roleof non-humans will be considered in thinking about the basis of phenomena (National Research Council 2012)and in association with the epistemological basis of disciplinary learning (Goldman et al 2016).ReferencesAlaimo, S. & Hekman, S., Eds., Material Feminisms, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.Barad, K. (2000). Reconceiving scientific literacy as agential literacy. In Doing Science + Culture, Reid, R., andTraweek, S., Eds., New York: Routledge.Daubenmire, P. L., Wink, D. J. & Tarnoff A. (2011), These kids can't do inquiry, Another urban legend. InInvestigating Classroom Myths through Research on Teaching and Learning. Bunce, D., Ed..Washington, DC: American Chemical Society.Goldman, S. R., Britt, M. A., George, M. A., Lee, C. D., Brown, W., Cribb, G., Greenleaf, C., Shanahan, C.,Project READI (2016). Disciplinary literacies and learning to read for understanding: A conceptualframework for disciplinary literacy. Educ. Psych., 51(2), 219-246.Latour, B. (1999) Pandora's Hope, Cambridge, M. A.: Harvard University Press.Latour, B. (2004) The Politics of Nature, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.National Research Council (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.Roth, W-M., McGinn, M. K., Wiszczyna, C., & Boutonné, S. (1999). Differential participation during scienceconversations: The interaction of focal artifacts, social configurations, and physical arrangements. J.Learn. Sci., 8, 293-347.Scantlebury, K. & Milne, C. (2017). Material practice and materiality: Too long ignored in science education.New York: Springer.Sfard, A. & Prusak, A. (2005), Telling identities: In search of an analytic tool for investigating learning as aculturally shaped activity. Educational Researcher, 34(4), 14–22.Taylor, C. A., & & Ivinson, G. (2013). Material feminisms: new directions for education. Gender andEducation, 25, 665-670.Wink, D. J., Daubenmire, P. L., Brennan, S. K., & Cunningham, S. A. (2008). Bringing standards-basedchemistry instruction to an urban school district. Chemistry and the National Science EducationStandards, 2nd ed., Stacey Lowery Bretz, Ed. Washington, DC: American Chemical Society.Wortham, S. (2001). Narratives in action. New York: Teachers College Press.Wortham, S. (2004). Learning identities. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.AcknowledgmentsI thank the University of Illinois for a sabbatical leave. Several of these ideas were developed with the studentsand coteachers in the course Foundations of Scientific Inquiry at the Learning Sciences Research Institute.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1722© ISLS