Math: It’s Not What You “Think”José F. Gutiérrez, University of Utah, jose.gutierrez@utah.eduAbstract: This paper presents an emerging pedagogical approach for implementing criticalmathematics. I describe a specific tactic for teaching mathematics: to avoid using the word“thinking.” This approach is informed by scholarship on race, critical mathematics, andembodied cognition. I argue that using the term “thinking” is not necessary for facilitatingauthentic learning experiences. Moreover, this tactic disrupts a number of pernicious historicalnarratives (i.e., stereotypes) about mathematics education and about who can and who cannotdo mathematics. The crux of the paper is that avoiding the word “thinking”—and other termsassociated with “smartness”—loosens the grip Cartesian epistemology has on mathematicseducation by shifting classroom discourse away from math-as-thinking to math-as-action,which may, in turn, create stronger opportunities for learning. From a learning-sciencesperspective, I present other hypotheses stemming out of this pedagogical approach thatwarrant further research.Keywords: Cartesian dualism, embodied cognition, equity, mathematics learning, race“Who thinks that they could explain their thinking for question one?”– Deborah Ball to her fifth-Grade math class“You should have those five Gauss-Markov assumptions sort of… in your head.”– Statistics professor to his graduate students“There is no right or wrong answer. We’re only interested in your thinking. … You’ve done a fantastic job ofexplaining your thinking!”– Mathematics education researcher to a middle school student“What do you think?”– EveryoneIntroduction and objectivesThinking and related phrases, such as What do you think?, are ubiquitous in secondary math classrooms (HerbelEisenmann, Wagner, & Cortes, 2010). They are assumed to be pedagogically neutral or positive. This paper ispart of my ongoing research that challenges and problematizes this assumption.Focusing on “thinking” and related notions like abstraction and manipulating symbols has the potentialto overlook other authentic forms of knowing in mathematics. In a previous study (Gutiérrez, 2015), I conducteda year-long participatory ethnography of a secondary math class. I focused my analysis on Mr. Matthew Lam, ateacher who believed that “math=thinking=liberation.” He repeatedly presented this metaphorical “equation” tohis class, and its underlying logic appeared to guide his instructional decisions. One of Mr. Lam’s primarypedagogical objectives was to support student thinking—critical thinking in particular. He associated certaintypes of mathematical thinking (e.g., generalization) with the ability to “see,” “critique,” and “understandingsystems,” which is something that he sought to foster in his students as part of his social justice pedagogy(Gutiérrez, 2015). That said, what Mr. Lam called mathematical “thinking” emphasized “abstractions” thatinvolve “letters.” In his instruction, Mr. Lam occasionally conflated mathematical reasoning with usingsymbols. This negatively influenced his students’ agency, because it overlooked other authentic forms ofknowledge and knowing that did not rely on “abstraction” or manipulating symbols as evidence of mathematical“thinking.” For instance, some students constructed generalizations using an array of semiotic resources such asverbal speech, rhythm, gesture, repetition, and non-conventional notations that were never sanctioned by theteacher (Author, 2016). If students’ emergent ways of knowing and different forms of knowledge gounrecognized, this can lead to distorted notions of what counts as mathematics.Mr. Lam’s expressed belief that “math= thinking” is not unusual. In a linguistic analysis of 148classroom transcripts involving eight different math teachers in a variety of school contexts, Herbel-Eisenmann,Wagner, & Cortes (2010) reported that the second most frequent group of words found in their data was Whatdo you think. This particular phrase, which they refer to as a “lexical bundle,” had 198 instances spread across 8ICLS 2018 Proceedings1021© ISLSclassrooms. (The most frequent bundle was a directive, I want you to, which had 333 instances spread acrossthose same 8 classrooms). These findings indicate that notions of math-as-thinking are quite common inclassroom discourse. The objectives of this paper are: (1) to argue that this hidden aspect of mathematicseducation is not just a semantic issue but a substantial point that could have a tremendous impact on studentlearning; (2) to describe a specific tactic for teaching mathematics: avoid using the word “thinking” whenworking directly with youth in mathematical contexts; and (3) to present a series of hypotheses stemming out ofthis pedagogical approach that warrant further research.The Cartesian Grip on mathematics educationThe use of the term “thinking” is not necessary for facilitating authentic learning experiences and fosteringconceptual understanding. On the contrary, the constant use of this term in classroom discourse reinforces aCartesian mind-body dualism (1) that interferes with learning mathematics (cf. Cook & Brown, 1999), as in thecase of Mr. Lam and his students (Gutiérrez, 2016). Functioning just under the radar, the Cartesian view ofmathematics privileges knowledge “possessed” or “acquired” by the individual over group participation andsocial practice (cf. Sfard, 1998), which severely underestimates the importance of social interaction inconceptual learning (Radford, 2003; Sfard, 2007; Vygotsky, 1978). Cartesian dualism also promotesstereotypical notions of mathematics based primarily on analytic, decontextualized reasoning which, in turn,promote false notions of mathematics education as an acultural and ahistorical enterprise. Critical educationalscholars have repeatedly argued against the idea of mathematics education as politically neutral because itignores the structural dimensions in the organization of learning (Nasir, Hand, & Taylor, 2008; Valero &Zevenbergen, 2004).To clarify, this paper does not argue that thinking is absent during mathematical activity or problemsolving. What I am arguing, is that there are social-historical narratives that equate mathematics to thinking (i.e.,“math=thinking”). Moreover, these narratives posit that pure thinking (i.e., mental activity that is disconnectedfrom perceptual or bodily activity) is what drives mathematical discovery and therefore learning. The Cartesianview of mathematics reproduces a stereotype of mathematics as tantamount to pure thinking. Math learning isbelieved to be mostly an “amodal” phenomenon, a way of reflecting on the world that begins and ends “in thehead.” The process of mathematical problem solving is to “think about stuff,” and the final products that resultfrom that “pure mental activity” are other clearer/logical/cogent ways of thinking. An exclusive focus on mathas-thinking ignores the fundamental roles that the human body, action, discourse, and signs play in mathematicslearning (Abrahamson & Trninic, 2015; Alibali & Nathan, 2012; Nemirovsky, 2003; Wertsch, 1998).Furthermore, this problematic stereotype of math-as-thinking is fundamentally linked to anothersocially constructed narrative: math-as-intelligence. Through the prism of Cartesian epistemology, mathematicalability is often seen as an index of general intelligence, rather than simply the development of skill orcompetence within certain genres of semiotic activity. In their analysis of race and mathematical practices, Shahand Leonardo (2017) further unpack the notion of math-as-intelligence and point to one of its limitations:The practice of doing school mathematics in the U.S. context is associated with a particularset of meanings. Mathematics is typically viewed as the most difficult of all subjects; only theelite few are thought to possess the innate capacity to understand mathematics (Schoenfeld,2002). Perhaps as a result, mathematical ability and intellectual capacity are believed to gohand in hand (Ernest, 1991). And because mathematical ability is viewed as innate, it tendsnot to be seen as something that can develop through concerted effort over time. (p. 60)In sum, the deployment of the word “thinking,” explicitly in mathematical contexts, functions as an insidiousvessel that laces everyday classroom discourse with Cartesian epistemology. In turn, classroom discourse thatsubscribes to Cartesian precepts overlaps with racial-mathematical discourse (Shah, 2017; Shah & Leonardo,2017) that serves to create a “racial hierarchy of mathematical ability” (Martin, qtd. in Shah, 2017, p. 11). (2)Mathematics education research as complicit with the math-as-thinking regimeThrough the use of everyday terms such as “thinking,” Cartesian dualism is “baked into” the everyday languageof mathematics education. This results in the reproduction of hierarchical category systems and phraseologiesrelated to both mathematical ability and intelligence (e.g., “fast” versus “slow kids”; “advanced” versus “belowbasic” courses; and “failure” versus “success” with problem-solving) that have pernicious effects on learningand student identity (Horn, 2007; Larnell, Boston, & Bragelman, 2014; Ruthven, 1987). Furthermore, theimplications of these hierarchies extend beyond the classroom. I maintain that constructs stemming from theresearch world—such as “grit,” “smartness,” and “resilience”—are actually derivative of Cartesian dualism.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1022© ISLSWhereas certain research constructs are intended to be useful tools for investigating and improving mathematicseducation, they in fact “tighten” the grip and delimit opportunities for learning, because these, too, are relationalconstructs (Shah, 2017) based on “differences” that have been demarcated, historically, along racial lines.Therefore, these constructs, although believed to describe “objective” properties of individual students so as toidentify leverage points to bolster “smartness,” for example (Leonardo & Broderick, 2011), instead serve toreproduce and strengthen the racial–mathematical hierarchy due to the tight, three-way link betweenmathematical ability, intelligence, and race.Future researchTo loosen the Cartesian grip on mathematics education, I suggest eliminating certain types of statements duringclassroom discourse (see Table 1). I hypothesize that students would respond differently to prompting strategiesthat emphasize action and perception (cf. Abrahamson, 2012). A set of specific hypotheses stem from thisapproach (Table 2), which future research can explore in laboratory settings or classroom contexts, or both.Table 1: Two different prompting strategiesAvoid these prompts:What do you think?How are you thinking about that?Can you explain your thinking?How do you think THIS is related to THAT?Use these instead, focus on perception and action:What do you see? (Alt: What do you notice?)How are you seeing that?Can you show/explain what you did?How is THIS related to THAT?Statements such as those in the left column of Table 1, above, reify Cartesian epistemology and stereotypednotions of mathematics that ignore the bodily activity. Statements from the right column (along with otherdiscursive action such as gesturing, body movement, and voice prosody) shift the attention to perceptual andsensory-motor action that can provide the substrate for conceptual learning. Avoiding explicit mention ofthinking in classroom discourse, and instead drawing on other semiotic and embodied measures, can shift thediscourse away from math-as-thinking to math-as-action, which creates more robust opportunities to learn(Abrahamson & Trninic, 2015; Alibali & Nathan, 2012; Nemirovsky, 2003).Table 2: Hypotheses to be exploredHypothesis:Suggested study and research questions (“RQ”):1. Avoiding “thinking,” as a primaryControlled laboratory study. Conduct basic experiments thatprompting or questioning strategy, willexplore and compare the types of mathematical statements andelicit different responses from learners.strategies elicited by math-as-thinking versus math-as-actionprompts in a structured setting. Example RQ: Do “thinking”and/or non-“thinking” prompts support the construction ofmathematical generalizations?2. For teachers or instructors ofClassroom-based study: conduct case studies of teachers’ initialmathematics, avoiding “thinking” willattempts to use this tactic. Example RQ’s: Do teachers gesturelower the threshold to gesture (cf.more? Do they gesture differently? What is the nature of theKelly, Byrne, & Holler, 2011),referents indicated by their gesturing actions? Is the conceptualpossibly improving communicationspace (in terms of these referents) expanded as a result of thiswith learners.tactic?3. “Loosening the Cartesian grip” is aTeaching and teacher education study. Example RQ: How can weuseful theme for pre-service teachersupport teacher learning of different instructional models,training programs as well as continuingorientations, and tactics? A few examples include:professional development programs.• “Professional perception” of mathematical objects andTeachers can engage in discussion of,processes (Goodwin, 1994; Stevens & Hall, 1998)as well as explore in their own• “Revoicing to position” (see Enyedy et al., 2008)practice, a variety of discourse• Designing instructional gestures (see, e.g., Alibali et al.,strategies whose affordances for2013)teaching/learning are well-documented.• “Action before concept” (Trninic & Abrahamson, 2013)Concluding remarksICLS 2018 Proceedings1023© ISLSIn general, teachers and instructors of mathematics interested in implementing this approach might find itchallenging to make this shift in discourse. That said, avoiding “thinking” can bring about not only a superficiallinguistic shift, but can actually spur a shift at the level of deep semiotic-cognitive structure, and thus expand ateacher’s communicative means of instruction, including bodily activity. This constraint on what a teacher does(or does not say) can induce critical reflection on what exactly is being communicated and how it’s beingcommunicated, in situ, regarding constituent elements in a given problem space. This approach has the potentialto introduce precision not only in terms of general language-use, but also in the moment-to-moment multimodalmicro-practices that engender shared meaning-making and conceptual learning. Over time, a classroom culturebased on this approach could enhance both the teacher’s and students’ semiotic means of objectification ofmathematical objects, structures, and generalizations (Gutiérrez, 2013, 2016; Radford, 2003).Endnotes(1) Cartesian epistemology is a branch of philosophy attributed to René Descartes and his study of knowledge. Cartesiandualism refers to his concept of the mind and the body as two completely different types of substances (immaterial vs.material) that interact.(2) Danny Martin proposes that this hierarchy is one in which “students who are identified as Asian and White are placed atthe top, and students identified as African American, Native American, and Latino are assigned to the bottom” (qtd. inShah, 2017, pg. 11).ReferencesAbrahamson, D. (2012). Discovery reconceived. For the Learning of Mathematics, 32(1), 8–15.Abrahamson, D., & Trninic, D. (2015). Bringing forth mathematical concepts. ZDM, 47(2), 295–306.Alibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. J. (2012). Embodiment in mathematics teaching and learning. JLS, 21, 247–286.Alibali, M., Young, A., Crooks, N., Wolfgram, M., Ledesma, I., Church, R., & Knuth, E. (2013). Students learnmore when their teacher has learned to gesture effectively. Gesture, 13(2), 210–233.Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 617–645.Cook, S. D., & Brown, J. S. (1999). Bridging epistemologies. Organization Science, 10(4), 381–400.Enyedy, N., Rubel, L., Castellón, V., Mukhopadhyay, S., Esmonde, I., & Secada, W. (2008). Revoicing in amultilingual classroom. Mathematical Thinking & Learning, 10, 134–162.Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 603–633.Gutiérrez, J. F. (2013). Agency as inference. REDIMAT, 2, 45–76.Gutiérrez, J. F. (2015). Signs of power: a critical approach to the study of mathematics cognition andinstruction (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of California, Berkeley.Gutiérrez, J. F. (2016). The “obj–subj” dialectic. and the co-construction of hierarchical positional identitiesduring a collaborative generalization task. In C.-K. Looi, J. Polman, U. Cress, & P. Reimann (Eds.),“Transforming learning, empowering learners.” ICLS 2016. Singapore: N.I.E.Herbel-Eisenmann, B., Wagner, D., & Cortes, V. (2010). Lexical bundle analysis. ESM, 75(1), 23–42.Horn, I. S. (2007). Fast kids, slow kids, lazy kids: framing the mismatch problem. JLS, 16(1), 37–79.Kelly, S., Byrne, K., & Holler, J. (2011). Raising the ante of communication. Information, 2(4), 579–593.Larnell, G., Boston, D., & Bragelman, J. (2014). The stuff of stereotypes. Journal of Education, 194(1), 49–57.Leonardo, Z., & Broderick, A. (2011). Smartness as property. Teachers College Record, 113(10), 2206–2232.Nasir, N., Hand, V., & Taylor, E. (2008). Culture and mathematics in school. RER, 32, 187–240.Nemirovsky, R. (2003). Three conjectures concerning the relationship between body activity and understandingmathematics. In P. Dougherty & J. Zilliox (Eds.), PME-NA (Vol. 1, pp. 105- 109). Uni. of Hawaii.Nemirovsky, R. (2011). Episodic feelings and transfer of learning. JLS, 20(2), 308–337.Radford, L. (2003). Gestures, speech, and the sprouting of signs. Mathematical Thinking & Learning, 5, 37–70.Ruthven, K. (1987). Ability stereotyping in mathematics. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 18, 243–253.Sfard, A. (2007). When the rules of discourse change, but nobody tells you. JLS, 16, 565–613.Shah, N. (2017). Race, ideology, and academic ability. Teachers College Record, 119(7), 1–43.Shah, N., & Leonardo, Z. (2017). Learning discourses of race and mathematics. In I. Esmonde & A. Booker(Eds.), Power and privilege in the learning sciences (pp. 50–69). New York, NY: Routledge.Stevens, R., & Hall, R. (1998). Disciplined perception. In M. Lampert & M. Blunk (Eds.), Talking mathematicsin school (pp. 107–149). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Valero, P., & Zevenbergen, R. (Eds.). (2004). Researching the socio-political dimensions of mathematicseducation: issues of power in theory and methodology. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academics.Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge: MA: Harvard University Press.Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. New York: Oxford University Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1024© ISLS