How Learners Employ Semiotic Resources forCollaborative Meaning-Making in Outdoor Mobile LearningEsther Tan, Ludwig-Maximilian University, Germany, Esther.Tan@psy.lmu.deHyo-Jeong So, Pohang University of Science and Technology, South Korea, hyojeongso@postech.ac.krAbstract: This paper attempts to investigate how learners employ semiotic resources presentin the material and physical world to construct and to negotiate shared meanings in an outdoormobile learning context. We investigate the collaborative meaning-making and interactionprocess of two groups of 13-year-old students (Grade 7) during an outdoor mobile learningtrail exploring the history and geographical features of World War II battle site.Methodologically, we employ video-based interaction analysis, which facilitates a micro-levelanalysis of human interaction, to understand how learners deploy and assemble the materialand social resources available in the outdoor learning context. We surface two noteworthypatterns about a) how learners in small groups leverage semiotic resources to negotiate, repairand converge at shared meaning in changing contextual configurations and b) how priorlearning experiences affect the way learners employ semiotic resources. The findings providehelpful insights into the design and implementation of mobile learning activities in outdoorsettings.IntroductionIn recent years, researchers, key stakeholders, school leaders and practitioners alike, recognize the growingsignificance of the borderless classroom and the emergence of mobile learning as legitimate learning platforms.Hitherto, the rich repertoire of research and literature on mobile learning revolves chiefly around exploringemerging mobile devices and Web/cloud technologies to enhance learning experience across physical locations.On the other end of the spectrum of research on mobile learning, research studies caution against an obsessivefocus on the technological system and the naive assumption of learning anytime and anywhere (e.g., Eliasson,Nouri, Cerratto Pargman & Ramberg, 2010; Frohberg, Göth, & Schwabe, 2009). They accentuate theimportance of positioning mobile learning as socio-cultural activities and the criticality of designing learningactivities that indeed foster both physical interaction with multiple resources available in physicalenvironments, and social interaction supported through the mediation of mobile technologies (Kerawalla et al.,2012; Pachler, Bachmair, & Cook, 2010). Also, there appears to be a dearth of previous research work, whichexplores the intricate and the interwoven nature of the collaborative meaning-making process, not only betweenand amongst learners, but also with the physical and the material world in an outdoor mobile learning context.However, there remains a dire need for researchers and educators to investigate the dynamics at play in anoutdoor mobile learning context, which have significant bearings on mobile learning design andimplementation.To unpack the complex meaning-making processes in an outdoor mobile learning context, this studyaddresses the question of how learners employ different kinds of semiotic resources present in the materialworld to construct and negotiate meanings within the context of collaborative mobile learning. While scholarsaccept the importance of unpacking the interplay of multiple resources during mobile learning, performing indepth analysis of meaning-making process is methodologically challenging. Thus, we employ video-basedinteraction analysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995) to explore this rich-textured experience and interaction at bothverbal and nonverbal levels in an outdoor mobile learning environment. Essentially, through the use of videobased analysis, we want to answer the research questions regarding (a) how learners employ the multiplesemiotic resources (e.g. artefacts, social resources) in the physical, social and material realm to negotiate, repairand converge at shared meanings, and (b) how prior learning experiences affect the way learners employsemiotic resources in an outdoor mobile learning context.Theoretical frameworkMobile learning as situated activity in a physical and social contextThe notion of mobile learning has been fraught with diverse views and definitions of what ‘Mobile Learning’connotes and how it ought to take shape. Some conceptual frameworks of mobile learning underscore the worksof Lave and Wenger (1991) on the situated nature of learning, where they conceive of “knowing as activity byspecific people in specific circumstances” (p. 52). Vavoula and Sharples (2008) accentuate that mobile learningCSCL 2015268© ISLSis essentially about learning in context and pervasive learning across different contexts. Similarly, Pachler et al.(2010) emphasize the situated interpretative nature of mobile learning that mobile learning experiences enablelearners to “reinterpret their everyday life contexts as potential resources for learning. Learning is viewed assemiotic work and meaning making in which users develop, with the aid of devices, new cultural practices withand through which they learn and strengthen their resources for meaning-making whilst interacting with theworld” (p. 5, emphasis added). In this light, the focal point of mobile learning would be to maximize thepresence of a real world platform, engaging learners in semiotic work with relevant resources for meaningfulknowledge creation and production where “the process of learning is informed by sense of place” (Lim &Barton, 2006).In this research, we contend that there is a critical need to shift from technology-driven mobile learningdesign to one that supports semiotic work and situated learning experiences leveraging on physical affordancesof environment, and importantly, giving focus to the dynamics and synergy of collective cognition in mobilelearning. In Frohberg, Göth and Schwabe’s (2009) critical review of mobile learning projects, they cautionagainst embracing the general perception of mobile learning as learning anytime, anywhere with compactmobile devices. Mobile devices should be seen as mediating tools that allow people to capitalise on the situationin terms of the immediate physical space, while promoting social interaction that enhances the learning context.Collaborative meaning-making and semiotic resourcesThe process of collaborative meaning-making is poignantly illustrated by Stahl’s (2005) notion of a “sharedmeaning and common ground” constructed through group discourse in the context of a joint activity, where hecontends that the “status of this shared meaning must be continually achieved in the group interaction”;frequently the shared status of ‘breaks down’ and repair is necessary” (p. 345). In mobile learning scenarios, the‘context’ of a shared activity cannot be fully pre-specified, since the repair and re-conceptualisation of meaningmaking is created through the situated activity of learning (Sharples, Taylor, & Vavoula, 2005). On the samenote, Kerawalla et al.’s (2012) research on learners’ interpretation of and interaction with the environment on ageography field trip showed that apart from the use of mobile technologies, learners had to leverage multimodalsemiotic resources such as gesture, gaze, and bodily location in the meaning-making process. By semioticresources, we are inclined to adopt van Leeuwen’s (2005) definition of semiotic resources as actions, materialsand artifacts for communicative purposes, which encompass both the physiological, as well as the technologicalrealm. A semiotic resource is thus, a material, social, and cultural resource.As aforementioned, the collaborative meaning-making process, therefore, inevitably involves troubleand repair among participants, making it necessary to realign with semiotic resources such as artefacts andsocial resources in the physical and material world to arrive at shared meanings. From the perspective ofinteraction analysis, when premeditated trajectory of activity is interrupted, it calls for more than repairs at theverbal level: it necessitates an analysis of how learners exploit bodily, artifactual, spatial, and social resourcesin the physical, social and material environment, to restore normalcy and resolve issues (Jordan & Henderson,1995). For instance, in the video-analysis on how two students resolve technical difficulties in operating amachine, Roschelle and Clancey (1991) surface the notion of a “shared visual and manipulative space” whereidentifying the trouble and the solutions requires mutual alignment in this ‘shared space’. Here, the two studentsengage a combination of ‘talk’, ‘gesture’ and ‘screen objects’ in this ‘shared space’ to arrive at a solution.However, in a mobile learning context, the concept of a shared visual and manipulative space and thelikelihood of stable situations may vary significantly. Here, it is helpful to visit Goodwin’s (2009) postulation ofchanging contextual configurations. Goodwin (2009) contends that contextual configuration does not andcannot remain constant for “as action unfolds, new semiotic fields can be added, while others are treated as nolonger relevant” (p. 21). This implies that the actions and thought processes experience a course of continualchange as new semiotic resources enter and exit the context. Thus to this end, participation framework,interaction patterns and the building of action are subjected to the fluidity of contextual configuration specific tothe moment and to that particular context. As such, participants alter their course of actions accordingly, toaccommodate, to adapt to new configurations, and to realign with the emerging artifactual, spatial and socialresources. Thus, our research questions aims to investigate the following:1) How do learners employ the multiple semiotic resources (e.g., artefacts, social resources or spatialresources) in the physical, social and material realm to negotiate, repair and converge at sharedmeanings?2) How do prior learning experiences affect the way learners employ semiotic resources in an outdoormobile learning context?CSCL 2015269© ISLSMethodologyResearch background and contextThis research was carried out in one of the future schools in Singapore, which leverages on its 1:1 computinginitiative to create a technology-rich learning environment. The research team worked closely with thecollaborating teachers in the Integrated Humanity subject (i.e., history and geography) to design mobile learningactivities that integrate knowledge, skills, and attitude to solve complex problems in authentic places. Oneparticular platform of such mobile learning activities is what we called a mobile learning trail, conceptualizedas a series of learning activities in and out of school mediated by mobile devices and applications.In this paper, we discuss the implementation of a mobile learning trail titled the British DefenceStrategy Trail that was designed for students to understand the fall of Singapore in World War II. The BritishDefence Strategy Trail took place at Fort Siloso, situated at the Western tip of Sentosa Island, Singapore, whichis the site used by the British to defend Singapore during WWII. Fort Siloso was selected as a suitable locationfor this mobile learning trail for its historic significance during WWII, and for the availability of physicalartefacts such as numerous tunnels, artillery guns and other resources left behind from the war.Participants of the British Defence Strategy Trail were Secondary One (Grade 7, aged 13) students,who were acquainted with the use of interactive digital tools and mobile technologies both in and out of theclassroom. We adopted a small-group collaboration structure where groups of 3-4 members were formed andremained in the same group throughout the trail. Regarding more specific design of learning activities, we firstidentified a BIG (Beyond Information Given) question that serves as an overarching inquiry goal that studentspursue through various learning activities. Under a BIG question, we adopted a three-stage learning model thatincludes the integrated design of pre-trail lessons in the classroom, outdoor mobile learning trail and post-traildiscussions in the classroom. Prior to the mobile learning trail, the students participated in History andGeography lessons to learn about the history of WWII and mapping/ navigation skills.As shown in Figure 1, we identified four areas at Fort Siloso; what we called “learning stations” for themobile learning trail. A series of trail tasks at the four learning stations (A to D) was designed to enable learnersto answer the overarching BIG question on “What is the role of Fort Siloso at Sentosa Island in the British’s bigplan of defence to protect Singapore during WWII?” Various learning tasks at each of the four stations weredesigned for students to co-construct and to advance knowledge toward answering this BIG question. Table 1presents an overview of the type of tasks designed for the British Defence Strategy Trail at learning stations Aand C (for the focus of this paper). Trail tasks range from performative to knowledge generative. A performativetask refers to a simple direct application task that is procedural, close-ended and linear leading to fixed answers.In a performative task, students are expected to apply knowledge and skills learned in pre-trail lessons in schoolto real-world contexts. On the other hand, a knowledge generative task is ill-structured, open-ended and nonlinear leading to multiple potential answers. For instance, at learning station A, learners were first tasked todetermine the direction of the gun using the iPad compass (Task 1: Performative), and thereafter, to locate thetunnel B and explain the purpose of the tunnel (Task 2: Knowledge Generative).Table 1: Overview of mobile learning trail tasks at Sentosa IslandBIG Question: What is the role of Sentosa in the British’s big plan of defence to project Singaporeduring WWII?StationTask TypeTask DescriptionAPerformativeT1. Determine the direction of the guns using the iPad compass.KnowledgeT2. Describe the dimension of the tunnel and state its purposeGenerativeT4. Explain why the previous artillery gun (Area A) and this one areKnowledgepointed in the same direction.GenerativeT5. Give reasons for the British’s plan to locate the tower at Area B.Describe the role and purpose of the tower and the guns.CPerformativeT6. Calculate the distance between the cliff to Pulau Palawan (house food& ammunition supplies).KnowledgeT7. Identify whether the vessel is “friendly” or “hostile” using the chart atGenerativethe watchtower.T8. Give reasons for the erecting of another tower in this area. Describe theKnowledgerole and purpose of the tower and the guns.GenerativeCSCL 2015270© ISLSOn the use of mobile devices, students in small group (3-4 members) shared an iPad as a main mobiledevice to access the web-based platform called SquareCrumb that hosted all learning activities and associatedmobile applications (see Fig 2). In this platform, the students could retrieve the learning tasks at each learningstation, save their findings, data, and notes. They were able to interact with other group members and teachersthrough the synchronous broadcasting and feedback features.Figure 1. Activity sequence and structure in the BritishDefence Strategy TrailFigure 2. Learners leverage use of technologicalresources to find their bearing.Data collection and analysisWe closely observed and monitored two small groups of four members each (Group 1 and Group 2 hereinafter)throughout the mobile learning trail. These two groups of students were audio- and video-recorded during thetrail. Each student wore a small-sized audio-recorder, which recorded the dialogue of each group. One researchassistant was assigned to each group to video record group interaction throughout the trail. Two researchersfollowed each group and took field notes. All video and audio recordings of participants’ interaction discourseat the two learning stations (A & C) were formatted and transcribed respectively for analysis using theTransAna software. Stations A and C were selected for analysis owing to the range of task types and thephysical and material context of the learning stations which aligns with the objective of this research study. Intotal, there was approximately an hour and 35 minutes of video footage for the two groups. The two researcherswho followed and observed the two groups, taking field notes were also the same researchers who conducted thevideo-based interaction analysis. Apart from individual analysis work, the two researchers engaged in“collaborative viewing” (Jordan & Henderson, 1995) to overcome the inclination towards partiality arising frompredetermined conceptions and analyst bias. Further, in the collaborative viewing and discussion phase, fieldnotes taken on day of event were also resurfaced to lend support and affirmation of analysis and findings.The corpus of video data at the two learning stations was first segmentised according to larger, clearlydefined events. These larger events were first, marked by the learning stations and next, by the different tasktypes. Each of these larger events was then further segmentised into smaller units for analysis based ondiscursive moves, participation movements, interaction with the resources in the physical and the materialspace. Our data analysis was guided by a set of analytic foci in interaction analysis (e.g., turn-taking interaction,participation structure, artefacts and documents, trouble and repair) from Jordan and Henderson (1995).Findings and discussionIn this section, we attempt to surface two noteworthy patterns from interaction analysis about how students insmall groups leverage the use of semiotic resources in the material and physical world to construct and negotiateshared understanding:1) How do learners employ the multiple semiotic resources (e.g., artefacts, social resources or spatialresources) in the physical, social and material realm to negotiate, repair and converge at sharedmeanings?2) How do prior learning experiences affect the way learners employ semiotic resources in an outdoormobile learning context?CSCL 2015271© ISLSTrouble and repair in changing contextual configurationWe investigated how learners leverage the use of semiotic resources to manage “trouble and repair” in anoutdoor mobile learning setting, where the contextual configuration of semiotic resources in the physical andmaterial world is unlikely to remain constant. The following interaction discourse (see Episode 1) illustrateshow changing contextual configurations shape and structure the collaborative meaning-making process and howlearners reassemble resources inherent in each contextual change, to negotiate conflicting perceptions andachieve collective goals.Table 2: Episode 1 – Group 2 in the process of locating tunnel CLineStudentVerbalNonverbal1EEh the map is correct or not?2YNo, Gavin checking!3EHuh? That one is tunnel A, we4GTunnel A5Y6ETunnel B is there, then tunnel C is all theway there! See all the people there. Whyyou want to go there?Tunnel C is that way, cos erm, north is thisway right, then north south, north east, north7G8E9GThe team is walking towards what they believe istunnel C. However, E appears uncertain about thedigital map and G decides to move off to check ifthe tunnel ahead is indeed tunnel C.E is still trying to locate tunnel C with the digitalmap. G calls out to them that it is tunnel A, not C.Check that map (referring to the Googlemap). Tunnel A, where's tunnel A?Isn’t it showing south? Go!No not that direction. 24… So that meanswe suppose to go there. Opposite. Thatmeans go there la. Do we need to climb thestairs?Y spots other teams heading in that direction andconfirms that tunnel C should be on the other side.E hands over the iPad to Y. She makes use ofspatial orientation to affirm the team’s currentposition and the probable location of tunnel C.G suggests to the team to check the map again.The three of them review the map.G studies the map and re-directs the team. On theway to the tunnel, E also makes use of the physicalmap & signage to affirm the location.The team was confronted with conflicting viewpoints owing to the different resources the memberstapped on, coupled with some technical problems with the digital map. Here, the technological resource (i.e.,digital map), the physical location map and the rich physical affordances of an outdoor setting (their spatialorientation with reference to their present physical location) offer differing information on the exact location oftunnel C (see Lines 1 to 7). On top of that, there was the availability of social resources (e.g., other groups) aspoint of reference (see Line 5). Learners were engaged in a process of what Roschelle (1992) construed of as an“iterative cycle of displaying, confirming and repairing meanings” where former conjectures give way to newmeanings/ ideas based on new contextual configurations that enter the collaborative learning space. In thissituation, learners move from one contextual configuration to another in ‘trouble and repair’ (Goodwin, 2009, p.34), by reassembling resources to restore interaction and resolve difficulties. It also reiterates that establishingcommon grounds in shared meaning-making (Stahl, 2005) could only be achieved through mutual alignment ina ‘shared space’ (Roschelle & Clancey, 1991).Another interesting phenomenon observed in this episode is how semiotic resources, in particular, therich physical affordances of the outdoor learning context could impact seemingly straightforward task types.While application and procedural tasks are presumably easier as compared to tasks that require critical thinkingand inferential skills, our analysis showed otherwise. Apparently, both groups at the learning station C spentconsiderable amount of time in completing the performative task (T6: Calculate the distance between the cliff toPulau Palawan). Further, we observed more occurrences of “trouble and repair” as compared to knowledgegenerative task type. We attribute this to the presence of the real world platform - the rich physical affordancesthat somewhat “complicates” seemingly easy procedural and applicational tasks. The interaction with the realenvironment presented some unforeseen variables. Application skills such as mapping, measuring of gradient,determining directions and bearings become complex to the participants in an outdoor context endowed withrich physical affordances. Concepts and skills they have learnt and “practised” within the four walls of theclassroom, were no longer as clear-cut for transfer into the current context. The problem-solving processnecessitated collective review of ideas, negotiation and finding consensus. The rich semiotic resources presentin an outdoor learning context created new challenges and opportunities of looking at familiar tasks andformulas. The situated interpretative nature of the mobile learning context (Pachler et al., 2010) cannot beCSCL 2015272© ISLSunderestimated for learners leverage on emerging resources specific to the learning context, to interpret and tointeract with the environment in the meaning-making process.Contingency action versus conditioning in interacting with artifactual resourcesIn the following episode, we address how prior learning experiences affect the way learners employ the semioticresources in an outdoor mobile learning context. Here, we foreground Knoblauch’s (2009) notion of“habitualised, routinized and institutionalized” (p.13) meanings on action where he sees conditioning aspossessing considerable impact on current action and meaning-making.Episode 2 is about Group 1’s interaction and discourse at learning station A where they were tasked todescribe the dimension of the tunnel. Learners were unanimously certain that the dimension of the tunnelresided in the artifactual resources such as exhibits and displays delivering information about the history andstructure of the tunnels. Group 1 participants approached exhibits and displays (see Lines 7 - 12) chiefly to lookfor answers. In a bid to save time and human resources, group eventually spilt up to look for answers on thedisplays and exhibits (Lines 5, 9 & 13).Table 3: Episode 2 – Group 1 enters tunnel B and their immediate preoccupation is to look for answers to thefirst task question, which is to describe the dimension of the tunnelLine1StudentAVerbalDescribe the dimension of the tunnel.NonverbalTeam gathers for a very short while at the end of thestairways and takes a quick glance around thetunnel. A reminds team of the task question.2DWhat dimension? 3D dimension or the…3B4 dimension4C5BDimension ... dimension. Why do you wantus to find dimension? What dimension?Eh... It might be written on the wall.6DLook at the question first.7BCalvin, you search here. I go and searchthere8CSearch what? Search what? [louder]C is confused by the division of labour.9BSearch, search for the dimension10AYea what...what...what dimension11D12AOk. You find what is the dimension and thepurposeNo. No. Bob find dimension, Calvin findsthe necessary and we go and find purpose.B replies C as he is walking off (B & C aresupposed to look for dimension).A gets a little agitated and seeks affirmation on taskand role assignments.13BBut, purpose is over there!14AOk ...sorry. Ok. So what is the purpose?15DNo, we are finding dimension16AWe all go this side…Team appears certain that the dimension can befound on the exhibits as they hurry from display todisplay and move briskly from one exhibit toanother in the tunnel (perhaps too accustomed toconventional field trips tasks where answers arederived from displays or artifacts).A, B & C forge ahead and scan through the exhibitsvery quickly for clues on dimension. D lags behindand calls out to the rest to review the question. Shefinally gestures A to the bench. They re-read thequestion. C & D join them.B proposes a spilt to look for answers. He suggeststhat the team be spilt into two as they have two taskquestions to complete at the tunnel – one was thedimension and the other; the purpose of the tunnel.A looks impatient and corrects D.B notices A & D are heading the “wrong” directionand reminds them that they are supposed to look forpurpose.Team spilt up.Group 1 was unable to allow the environment to speak to them amid the rich affordances of thephysical environment in mobile learning. Neither were they able to comprehend the requirements of the taskquestion correctly. The engagement and interaction with the artifactual resources (exhibits and displays) becameCSCL 2015273© ISLSbrief, superficial and conservative. Here, artifactual resources in the tunnel became a restraint rather than aresource because learners had approached task questions with past experiences of outdoor learning trips wherethey were accustomed to looking for answers in the artifacts. Prior experiences conditioned and reproducedrecurring learning behaviour. Their strongly entrenched pre-conceived notion of conventional field trips notonly impacts the way they interact with the real world environment to construct knowledge and meaning, butalso inadvertently shapes their participation framework. We attribute such a phenomenon to what Knobluach (asmentioned in Kissman 2009, p. 13) conceives of as “fixed patterns that also shape action” when meaningsbecome “habitualised, routinized and institutionalized socially”.Likewise, Group 2 showed initial confusion and uncertainty about describing the dimension of thetunnel. This was especially so when they saw many students reading the exhibits for answers. However, theyrestored their discussion track after briefly browsing the exhibits (see Episode 3, Lines 1 to 3, verbal utterancesand nonverbal observations). They moved away from the exhibits, and came together to discuss, makingreference to spatial resource in their description of the tunnel. Here, the participants were not entirelyconstrained by known protocols on field trips; rather, they were able to interact with the current environmentand ride on the affordances of the semiotic resources resided in the specific situation to re-negotiate sharedmeanings. Akin to what Lim and Barton (2005) advocate that, ‘the process of learning is informed by the senseof place’, Group 2 developed a sense of situational intent and was able to engage with the artifactual resourcesto make valid interpretation and inferences.Table 4: Episode 3 – Group 2 enters tunnel B to review the task question and to visit the tunnelLineStudentVerbalNonverbal1EWhat is, what do you mean bydimension?Student E & Y descend the stairways leading to thetunnel. Student G is just right behind them, readingthe task question aloud. Student E voices her query on“dimension”, she is not sure what is required of them.2GThat means the tunnel, how big is this, isit cramp or what?The three students are now at the entrance to thetunnel. They look around. Student E & Y, upon seeingmany students reading the exhibits, approaches one ofthe displays briefly. Student Y moves to look aroundthe tunnel, trying to do some the spatial reasoning.3EIs it cramped?4YWhat's the dimension of the tunnel…5G6EDimensions? Erm...dimensions. Eh...whywhy whereThere's quite narrow.Student E moves away from the exhibits to lookaround the tunnel.Student G moves to the bench; looks into the iPad.Student Y & E stand beside him but continues to lookaround the tunnel.7G6.8E10.9Y6. Gavin can only fit like that.The three students come together to discuss theirviewpoints, making references to the spatial resourcesto make some conclusions about the dimensions of thetunnel. They conclude that it is about 6 feet wide,using student G’s size as a gauge.Conclusions and implicationsThis research study reports our initial efforts to investigate how learners leverage the use of semiotic resourcesin the physical, social and material world to construct and converge at shared meanings. It enables us to makesense of how and why learners leverage the available resources, and how they repair and restore a projectedsequence to accomplish collective goals.Our two key findings reported here afford us some insights into the challenges and implications indesigning and implementing mobile learning activities. First, in an outdoor learning context where contextualconfigurations cannot remain constant, learners assemble and reassemble the physical, social and materialresources in ‘trouble and repair’ to negotiate and to re-converge at new meanings and shared understanding.Designing mobile learning could consider how we can help learners response to changing contextual resourcesin an outdoor learning environment to advance their learning collectively. Instructional scaffolds andtechnological supports could empower learners in their interaction with and the interpretation of the learningenvironment in the meaning-making process. Technological support could facilitate rather than dictate thelearning process. Embedded tools could serve as a means of support, while provisions could be made forCSCL 2015274© ISLSlearners to deploy other technological tools where they deem more relevant at the point of contextual reference.Second, the richness of the semiotic resources present in an outdoor environment has a bearing on task-types(aim and structuredness of the task), and consequentially, shapes how learners leverage use of availableresources in the physical and material world in the meaning-making process. Task design in mobile learningcould see a combination of structure and unstructured learning space, where the latter might make provisions forthe environment to speak to the learners; i.e. learners be given that platform to see relationships. Further, priorexperiences and past conditioning could affect learners’ use of semiotic resources. This is evident in our secondfinding that conditioning has a profound impact on current action and meaning making. Learning activitiescould possibly create space for learners to develop a sense of situational intent and the capacity to ride onemerging semiotic resources.We acknowledge that there could be limitations to our findings and conclusions as mobile learningdesign and practices vary from context to context and across different subject disciplines. Further, thecommunities of practice and the socio-cultural conditions of learning can neither be predetermined norprescribed, as it is nurtured and refined overtime. Nevertheless, our initial efforts to understand how learnersleverage use of multiple semiotic resources for collaborative meaning making, will provide some insights intothe richness of an outdoor learning context, in particular, the opportunities and challenges in exploring thematerial conditions for learning.ReferencesEliasson, J., Nouri, J., Ramberg, R., & Cerratto Pargman, T. (2010). Design heuristics for balancing visual focuson devices in formal mobile learning activities. In Proceedings of the 4th World Conference on MobileLearning (pp.216-223), Valletta, Malta.Frohberg, D., Göth, C., & Schwabe, G. (2009). Mobile Learning projects – a critical analysis of the state of theart. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 25, 307–331.Goodwin, C. (2009). Video and the analysis of embodied human interaction. In U. T. Kissmann (Ed.), Videointeraction analysis (pp. 21 – 40). Peter Lang GmbH. Frankfurt am Main.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39-103.Kerawalla, L., Littleton, K., Scanlon, E., Collins, T., Gaved, M., et al. (2012). Doing Geography: A multimodalanalysis of students' situated improvisational interpretation during fieldtrips. Learning, Culture andSocial Interaction, 1(2), 78-89.Kissman, U. T. (2009). Video interaction analysis. Peter Lang GmbH. Frankfurt am Main.Knoblauch, H. (2009). Social constructivism and the three levels of video analysis. In U. T. Kissmann (Ed.),Video interaction analysis (pp. 181 – 198). Peter Lang GmbH. Frankfurt am Main.Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Lim, M. & Barton, A. (2006). Science learning and a sense of place in an urban middle school. Cultural Studiesin Science Education 1(1), 107-142.Pachler, N., Bachmair, B., & Cook, J. (2010). Mobile learning: Structures, agency, practices. New York:Springer.Sharples, M., Taylor, J. & Vavoula, G. (2005, October). Towards a theory of mobile learning. Paper presentedat the 4th World conference on mLearning, Cape Town, Africa.Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge (pp. 249 – 396).MIT PressRoschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. Journal of the LearningSciences, 2(3), 235 -276.Roschelle, J. & Clancey, W. J. (1992). Learning as social and neural. Educational Psychologist,27(4), 435-453.van Leeuwen, T. (2005). Introducing Social Semiotics: An Introductory Textbook. (pp. 3 – 25). London:Routledge.Vavoula, G. N. & Sharples, M. (2008). Challenges in evaluating mobile learning. In Traxler, J., Riordan, B., &Dennett, C. (eds). In Proceedings of the mLearn 2008 Conference (pp. 296-303), University ofWolverhampton,AcknowledgmentsThis research is supported by the FutureSchools@Singapore project under the Singapore National ResearchFoundation’s (NRF) Interactive and Digital Media (IDM) in Education Research and Development (R&D)Programme. We thank Corrine Ho for her contribution in transcription and video-based interaction analysis.CSCL 2015275© ISLS