Scripted and Unscripted Aspects of Creative Work With KnowledgeCarl Bereiter, Institute for Knowledge Innovation and Technology, University of Toronto,carl.bereiter@utoronto.caUlrike Cress, Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien (Knowledge Media Research Center), Tuebingen, Germany,u.cress@iwm-tuebingen.deFrank Fischer, Munich Center of the Learning Sciences & Department of Psychology, Ludwig MaximiliansUniversity, Munich, frank.fischer@psy.lmu.deKai Hakkarainen, Institute of Behavioural Sciences, University of Helsinki,kai.hakkarainen@helsinki.fiMarlene Scardamalia, Institute for Knowledge Innovation and Technology, University of Toronto,marlene.scardamalia@utoronto.caFreydis Vogel, TUM School of Education, Technical University of Munich,freydis.vogel@tum.deAbstract: Advances in scripting theory and advances in support for student-driven knowledgeconstruction call for a reconsideration of long-standing issues of guidance, control, andagency. This symposium undertakes a fresh analysis based on the relations between twowidely adopted approaches that may be poles apart but arguably viewed as variations within acommon applied epistemological framework. The two approaches are scripted collaborationand Knowledge Building. Rather than focusing on similarities and differences, the symposiumwill address deeper problems such as reconciling external supports of all kinds with the selforganizing character of knowledge construction and integrating such supports into classroomsviewed as knowledge-creating communities. The centerpiece of the symposium is a paneldiscussion that includes experts who provide different theoretical viewpoints. In its synthesisthe symposium will capture and make sense of what is strongest in the two approaches andprovide a broad conceptual basis for next-generation initiatives.IntroductionIn their original formulation of the idea of scripts, Schank and Abelson (1977) defined them as recurrent,conventional, predictable, and relatively fixed patterns of behavior. Early educational applications of scriptsstayed close to this conception, emphasizing roles and prescribed behavior associated with those roles(O'Donnell, Dansereau, & Rocklin, 1987). The prescriptive nature of such scripting seemed to put it at oddswith constructivist educational approaches that place a premium on student epistemic agency, exploration, andexplanation or theory building. In more recent developments, however, concepts of scripts and scripting havebroadened to encompass much of what more open educational approaches espouse. In one formulation,“internal collaboration scripts” are taken to include small, reusable pieces of procedural knowledge that can beassembled into novel wholes (Fischer, Kollar, Stegmann, & Wecker, 2013). However, “external collaborationscripts,” as used in a variety of applications, continue to have a prescriptive character (King, 2007), althoughrecent work advocates flexible (Dillenbourg & Tchounikine, 2007) and adaptive external scripts (Adamson etal., 2014; Diziol et al., 2010) that seem to resemble much more the notion of scaffolding. Clearly, the relationbetween scripting, scaffolding, and knowledge construction needs to be examined anew. The self-organizingcharacter of thought and action scarcely entered the discourse of 30 years ago, but it is now a fundamentalconception. At the same time, refinements in ways of supporting collaborative knowledge construction andproblem solving have cast doubt on the old antinomies regarding structure and agency.The purpose of this symposium is to have a constructive discussion focused on two educationalapproaches that from some standpoints are poles apart but that from another viewpoint represent potentiallycompatible variations within a common applied epistemological framework. The two approaches are scripting,as represented in the “Script Theory of Guidance” (Fischer et al., 2013), and Knowledge Building, asrepresented in “Knowledge Building: Theory, Pedagogy, and Technology” (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014). At aminimum the symposium should develop a new map of the conceptual field taking into account recentconceptual developments in both areas, providing a firmer conceptual foundation for future research. Hopefullythe symposium will go beyond this in the direction of an integrative framework to resolve long-standingdifferences.CSCL 2017 Proceedings751© ISLSPlan of the symposiumThe plan of the symposium is to devote the first 25 minutes to introductory comment and two presentationssetting forth views on the support of collaborative knowledge construction from the respective standpoints ofscript theory and knowledge building theory. Following this will be a moderated panel discussion in which thetwo presenters will be joined by three other participants for a back-and-forth aimed at building upon orresolving issues raised in the initial presentations. The moderator will determine the point at which to open thediscussion to the audience, but an expected minimum of 20 minutes will be available for audience participation.Initial presentationsFrank Fischer and Freydis VogelIn our presentation from the standpoint of script theory we introduce the development of the understanding of(internal) scripts as rather rigid cognitive structures to the dynamic reconfiguration of its smaller componentsand how scaffolding or external scripts can be created to support learners regarding the use and development oftheir internal scripts. The introduction is arranged in four parts that represent the different notions of scripttheory and its current developments.In the first part of the presentation, we sketch our view on the development of the script concept from arelatively rigid cognitive structure resulting from repeated encounters with identical and highly similarsituations to the current view of scripts as flexibly adaptive support for groups targeted at activating existinginternal (cognitive) script components (Schank, 1999; Schank & Abelson, 1977).In the second part we present a summary of one theoretical model that uses this more recent notion ofscripts and scripting, namely the Script Theory of Guidance for computer-supported collaborative learning(SToG, Fischer et al., 2013). With four types of components of internal and external scripts (play, scene, role,and scriptlet) and seven principles, this theory aims at explaining how CSCL practices are shaped bydynamically re-configured internal collaboration script components. It gives answers to the question howinternal collaboration scripts develop through participation in CSCL practices. It tries to conceptually link therole of subject matter knowledge and knowledge on collaboration. The theory also suggests that transactiveforms of knowledge application will better facilitate learning than non-transactive forms. Further, the theoryexplains how external collaboration scripts modify CSCL practices and how they influence the development ofinternal collaboration scripts. The principles specify an optimal scaffolding level for external collaborationscripts and allow for the formulation of hypotheses about the fading of external collaboration scripts. We willreport empirical results partly in support of the model, partly challenging some of the principles (Vogel et al.,2016).In the third part we will apply SToG to explain some phenomena of collaborative knowledgeconstruction. For example, there is a series of experimental studies on facilitating competences of mathematicalargumentation. These studies indicate that external collaboration scripts that facilitate transactive argumentationin the process of collaboration have positive effects on social-discursive aspects of the mathematicalargumentation skills of the individuals involved (Vogel, Wecker, Kollar, & Fischer, in press). Transactivearguments are arguments that contain ideas that (a) go beyond what is given in the learning environment and (b)build on arguments of the learning partners. This finding can be seen as evidence for the claims that externallyscripted environments can indeed facilitate creative and substantive processes and that the stimulated processesare causally related to improved mathematical argumentation skills.SToG enables predictions with respect to the necessary level of scaffolding for learners with differentinternal collaboration scripts. The SToG would predict positive effects of even micro-managing the compositionof a contribution if it turned out that students cannot access reasonably suitable internal scriptlet components.Furthermore, SToG would predict that removing the few existing scaffolds that are given in KnowledgeBuilding are beneficial for advanced learners. Advanced learners dispose of the respective self-regulationcapabilities or in other words, the necessary internal collaboration script components.In a final part we will address the aspect of flexibility through adaptivity and adaptability of externalcollaboration scripts and put forward the argument that this flexibility is a defining feature of scaffolding(Dillenbourg & Tchounikine, 2007). Adaptivity refers to the technology diagnosing and adjusting thescaffolding level automatically (e.g. Diziol, Walker, Rummel, & Koedinger, 2010). Adaptability, in contrast,means that the external script can be changed by the learners using it. Both adaptivity and adaptability ofexternal scripts seem to be promising ways to improve learning. While adaptivity needs automatic analysis oflearning data in real-time (e.g. Mu, Stegmann, Mayfield, Rosé, & Fischer, 2012; Rosé et al. 2008), theadaptability needs less resources and lets students learn in a more self-regulated way. All means ofimplementing flexibility to external scripts have the goal to adapt the amount of scripting to the learners’ needsCSCL 2017 Proceedings752© ISLSthat are related to the development of their internal scripts. Regarding the SToG perspective notion of creatingexternal guidance that is perfectly adapted to the learners’ internal scripts, Knowledge Building is in part“under-scripted”, meaning that too little external guidance is provided for beginning learners who do not yethave access to productive internal script components because the CSCL activity of Knowledge Building isradically new for many of them. In other parts, Knowledge Building is possibly sometimes “over-scripted”when scaffolding like semantic pointers remain although they are no longer needed. Thus, we will raise thequestion to what extent flexibly adaptive and adaptable scaffolding could strengthen Knowledge Building. Inthe first part of the presentation, we sketch our view on the development of the script concept from a relativelyrigid cognitive structure resulting from repeated encounters with highly similar situations to the current view ofexternal collaboration scripts as flexibly adaptive group supports facilitating the configuration and reconfiguration of networks of existing internal script components.Carl Bereiter and Marlene ScardamaliaKnowledge Building is a principles-based rather than a procedures-based approach to knowledge construction(Hong & Sullivan, 2007). The need for pedagogical and technological supports for novice knowledge builders isrecognized, but care is taken not to undermine such principles as epistemic agency, pervasive knowledgebuilding, collective responsibility for idea improvement, and identification with the worldwide knowledgecreating community (Scardamalia, 2002; Bereiter & Scardamalia, 2014). This means maximizing theintelligence operative among the students in proportion to the intelligence contributed by the teacher and theteacher’s tools (of which external scripting would be one kind of tool). The most script-like elements ofKnowledge Building technology are what we call “epistemic markers,” but which are commonly called“scaffolds,” a term also common in the scripting literature. A typical set of markers for theory building includes“My theory,” “I need to understand,” “A better theory,” and “This theory does not explain.” Unlike otherapproaches that use such supports, in Knowledge Building their use is not obligatory and there is no fixed order.Thereby hangs an anecdote that casts an interesting light on the question of whether epistemic markers are aform of scripts. The children in one primary grade class decided they didn’t need so many markers, so theyreduced them to two—“My theory” and “Did you know”—and these appeared to be working very well.However, the teacher had introduced the students to the distinction between “knowledge telling” and“knowledge transforming” (Scardamalia, Bereiter, & Steinbach, 1984), “knowledge telling” being a composingstrategy that outputs topically relevant information without the processing that would have any transformingeffect on the writer’s personal knowledge. One student remarked that what he and classmates were doing inresponse to the “Did you know” scaffold was knowledge telling. The others agreed and they proceeded torestore the epistemic markers that signaled a more serious effort at theory building. If this is to be calledscripting, then we need to consider the possibility of students scripting their own collaborative behavior and thatthis sort of action could be an important step toward full competence in collaborative knowledge building.Despite their being optional, students use them, partly because the technology provides an easy way to insertthem in text, just by clicking on the item. In this sense they are more like having a personal scribe than a script,and they remain useful, becoming part of the vocabulary students use in their collaborative work, whetheronline or in oral conversation. They can be revised or turned off by the teacher or students as a collectivedecision. The epistemic markers, however, are only one element in an epistemically rich environment thatKnowledge Building teachers have been able to foster—even in kindergarten, where there is no KnowledgeForum and no epistemic markers. Other important elements of an epistemically rich environment areknowledge-building concepts such as building on, rising above, explaining, and idea improvement. Youngstudents initially understand these in very limited ways, but gradually, through their own knowledge buildingefforts and with help from their teachers and peers, the concepts take on fuller meaning and become not justsupports for action but part of how they see the world, part of their culture. Consistent with this expectation, acomparative experiment showed that students engaged in Knowledge Building gain better understanding of thenature of science than students pursuing more guided inquiry (Chuy, et al., 2010).Knowledge Building, like knowledge creation in general, achieves its objectives mainly through whatis coming to be called “design thinking,” a generalization of the kind of thinking that goes on in creative designgroups such as Ideo (Brown, 2009). This is in contrast to what may be called analytical/evaluative thinking(Martin, 2009), which has been the prevailing form of thought in formal education since ancient times.Analytical/evaluative thinking has a role to play in knowledge advancement, but it does not generally producenew knowledge—theories, inventions, problem solutions, and the like. Its main function is assessing the validityof knowledge claims.Analytical/evaluative thinking is eminently scriptable, as witness the abundant work on scriptingargumentation (Andriessen, Baker, & Suthers, 2003). One can find on the Web efforts to script design thinking,CSCL 2017 Proceedings753© ISLSbut they are not very impressive. Design thinking is a self-organizing process par excellence (with explanationbuilding or theory building as one type of it especially relevant in education). Its products are emergents, notpredictable from their constituent elements. If we are serious about students being genuine creators ofknowledge and not just play-acting the roles of scientists and other knowledge creators, then the educationsystem must find ways to support design thinking—not only in the arts and engineering, where design thinkingmore or less comes with the territory, but also in core work with the “big ideas” of the disciplines. This is a newchallenge for educators—a distinctly 21st century challenge. There are no doubt teachable elements, which maybe treated as reusable components of internal scripts. But when it comes to external scripting, there is a dangerthat the kinds of scripts that work for argumentative evaluation of knowledge claims will be heedlessly appliedto design thinking, with potentially stultifying effects. One type of support for Knowledge Building that iscurrently under active development and showing great promise is feedback tools students themselves can use toassess progress at the group level and to identify shortcomings—for instance a domain vocabulary tool thatallows students to compare the vocabulary used in their discussion with the vocabulary used by expertsdiscussing the same topic and another tool that graphs frequency of use of the various epistemic markers(Resendes, Scardamalia, Bereiter, Chen, & Halewood, 2015). These supports are obviously not scripts, althoughthe use students make of them is potentially scriptable. But is that necessary or desirable?The crucial role of the teacher in Knowledge Building is community development. All teachers devoteeffort to community development and are often very effective at it. The particular challenge, however, isbuilding a community organized around the collective development of community knowledge. This issomething beyond organizing for collaborative pursuit of individual learning goals. It is comparable to the effortof progressive disciplines of all sorts to advance the state of knowledge in their domains. ExperiencedKnowledge Building teachers tell us that it can take upwards of half a year to build such a community fromscratch, but that it is worth the effort because once it is achieved the community has its own dynamic ofadvancing knowledge frontiers and the teacher does not have to work constantly to make it happen; benefits areexponential if the teacher does not need to start from scratch each year. But are we talking about studentsinternalizing a knowledge-creating script? This is an interesting question to explore, but we sense that scripts arenot the most informative way to look at what goes on. Concepts such as ethos, values, self-identity, andcommunity-level goals seem to get closer to the heart of the educational challenge.We suggest that the relation between Knowledge Building and scripting be thought of as consisting oftwo diverging paths of support for students’ thinking. At the lowest level of support, common to both paths, arewhat may be described most simply as reminders—epitomized by IBM’s famous motto, “THINK,” and Apple’smore recent “think different.” It is assumed that users already understand and appreciate these injunctions butcan benefit from being reminded of them. One path of increasing support leads in the direction of algorithms,that is to say rule-based systems, as epitomized in John Anderson’s (1993) Rules of the Mind. Various levels ofscripting may be found along this path, though generally stopping short of full embodiment of a productionsystem. The other path leads in the direction of self-organizing group knowledge-creating processes fosteredthrough support for increasingly complex forms of interaction and feedback, including for examplevisualizations of epistemic markers used in the discourse and multiple visualizations to help participants crisscrossing the landscape of their ideas (Scardamalia & Bereiter. 2016).Panel discussion participantsThe moderator will steer the participants toward highly interactive discussion related to ideas and issues raisedin the presentations and away from separate presentation of prepared remarks. Participants are:Ulrike Cress (moderator). Since 2008 Ulrike Cress is Professor of the University Tuebingen and since2017 she is also Director of the Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien (Knowledge Media Research Center) inTuebingen. She works on mass collaboration and knowledge creation with social media. In her work (Cress &Kimmerle, 2008, 2017) she aims to combine different methodological approaches (experiments; big datastudies; discourse analysis) and she links different theoretical perspectives (information-processing perspective,socio-cultural perspective). This makes her a boundary spanner between the different poles the symposion dealswith.Carl Bereiter is one of the originators of Knowledge Building as an educational approach and has beenactive in research related to it and to supportive technology design. His particular interest has been in theepistemological aspects of knowledge production (Bereiter, 2002, 2014, 2016).Frank Fischer co-developed the Script Theory of Guidance for CSCL (Fischer et al., 2013; Stegmann etal., 2016) and has been involved in experimental field and laboratory studies on collaborative learning with afocus on facilitating scientific reasoning and argumentation. In collaboration with Carolyn Rosé he has alsoCSCL 2017 Proceedings754© ISLSexplored ways to automatically analyse argumentation (Rosé et al., 2008; Mu et al., 2012) to enable flexiblescripting.Kai Hakkarainen has studied technology-mediated learning more than two decades. He has developed aknowledge-creating learning framework that integrates knowledge building and activity theory (Paavola &Hakkarainen, 2014; Paavola, Lipponen, & Hakkarainen, 2004). His work on “knowledge practice” deals withrelations between knowledge building and social practices (Hakkarainen, 2009).Marlene Scardamalia invented CSILE, the first networked collaborative learning environment and isactive in all aspects of research on Knowledge Building and Knowledge Building technology. As holder of thePresidents’ Chair in Learning and Knowledge Technology at the University of Toronto, she has led aninternational network of researchers and innovators in education devoted to extending the limits of the possiblein students’ functioning as knowledge-creating communities.Freydis Vogel, in her research, is concerned with scripts for computer-supported learning since 2009and conducted a series of studies about argumentation scripts in the context of mathematics (Kollar et al. 2014,Vogel et al. 2016). She also co-authored the first meta-analysis about computer-supported collaboration scripts(Vogel, Wecker, Kollar, & Fischer, 2016). Her future research plans are to follow the question how learningwith scripts can be designed in a way that it supports and demands more self-regulated learning.The moderator will determine when to open the discussion to audience participation, based on progressbeing made in the panel discussion and on signs of audience interest. It is assumed that the topic of thesymposium and the contrasting positions will generate enough audience interest that it will not be necessary topose issues for discussion.Key issuesThe following are issues raised in the prepared presentations that are expected to be further developed throughthe panel discussion and audience input:•••••••Does script theory encompass all forms of external support for knowledge construction? If not, whatare unscripted supports?If knowledge construction is a self-organizing process at both individual cognitive and at collaborativegroup levels, what implications does this have for the design of external supports and supportiveenvironments? What kinds of flexible/open structuring can provide needed support for engagingstudents in authentic scientific inquiries and design practices while maintaining openness toemergence?Is it realistic to empower students to collectively design their own scripts or other forms of support?Is the production of public or community knowledge (the kind of thing mature research teams do) aviable objective for the school curriculum? If so, how does it fit with objectives framed in terms ofindividual knowledge and skills?In the development of community ethos, norms, and identity, what are potentially scriptable andunscriptable aspects?What is the place in collaborative knowledge construction of group level assessment (of discussionquality, for instance, or the state of intellectual and disciplinary norms) as distinct from assessment atthe individual level? Does this have implications for the use of more prescriptive forms of support?To the extent that there is a fundamental difference between the approaches discussed in thissymposium, what does this mean for educational policy? In particular, what does it mean for thepopular belief that a more highly structured or guided approach is needed for certain types of studentswhile others may profit from a less regulated approach?Significance of the symposium for the CSCL community and the CSCL 2017themeIn recent years both scripting and Knowledge Building have had a substantial presence in CSCL and ISLSmeetings and publications. Both, moreover, have enjoyed an expanding influence in educational practice. Theyhave, however, tended to occupy separate universes, with their own vocabularies and knowledge claims. Theirdifferences could be matter for a lively debate. However, on the basis of informal discussion, the applicantshave felt that there is enough common ground to justify a symposium focusing our diverse views on issues thatunderlie all efforts to promote collaborative knowledge construction. The issues briefly itemized in this proposalare ones that go to the heart of what CSCL and collaborative knowledge construction are about. The issues areCSCL 2017 Proceedings755© ISLSalso relevant at a deep level to the conference theme of “prioritizing equity and access.” It would be easy toconclude, and many educators may already have concluded, that scripting is best for the academically lessprepared students and Knowledge Building is appropriate for the more advanced. This would be an unfortunateresolution from the standpoints of both approaches. To go beyond such over-simplification, to provide aneducation that is accessible to all yet does not exclude some students from the opportunity to become fullmembers of a knowledge society, a convincing and realistic resolution is need of the issues that are the focus ofthis symposium.ReferencesAdamson, D., Dyke, G., Jang, H., & Rosé, C. P. (2014). Towards an agile approach to adapting dynamiccollaboration support to student needs. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education,24(1), 92-124. doi:10.1007/s40593-013-0012-6Anderson, J. R. (1993). Rules of the mind. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Andriessen, J., Baker, M., & Suthers, D. (Eds.) (2003). Arguing to learn: Confronting cognitions in computersupported collaborative learning environments. Dordrecht: Kluwer.Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Bereiter, C. (2014). Principled practical knowledge: Not a bridge but a ladder. Journal of the Learning Sciences,23(1), 4-17, doi:10.1080/10508406.2013.812533.Bereiter, C. (2016). Theory building and education for understanding. In M. A. Peters (Ed.), Encyclopedia ofeducational philosophy and theory (Living Reference Work Entry). Singapore: SpringerScience+Business Media. doi:10.1007/978-981-287-532-7_370-1Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: One concept, two hills toclimb. In S. C. Tan, H. J. So, & J. Yeo (Eds.), Knowledge creation in education (pp. 35-52). Singapore:Springer Science + Business Media.Brown, T. (2009). Change by design: How design thinking transforms organisations and inspires innovation.New York, NY: HarperBusiness.Chuy, M., Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., Prinsen, F., Resendes, M., Messina, R., Hunsburger, W., Teplovs, C.,& Chow, A. (2010). Understanding the nature of science and scientific progress: A theory-buildingapproach. Canadian Journal of Learning and Technology, 36(1). Published onlineat http://www.cjlt.ca/index.php/cjlt/article/view/580Cress, U. & Kimmerle, J. (2017). A Cognitive-Systemic Framework for Analyzing Individual andCollaborative Learning. In U. Cress & S. Schwan, The Psychology of Digital Learning: Constructing,Exchanging, and Acquiring Knowledge with Digital Media. New York, NY: Springer.Cress, U., & Kimmerle, J. (2008). A Systemic and Cognitive view on Collaborative Knowledge Building withWikis. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3(2), 105-122.doi:10.1007/s11412-007-9035-zDillenbourg, P., & Tchounikine, P. (2007). Flexibility in macro‐scripts for computer‐supported collaborativelearning. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 23(1), 1-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2729.2007.00191.xDiziol, D., Walker, E., Rummel, N., & Koedinger, K. R. (2010). Using intelligent tutor technology to implementadaptive support for student collaboration. Educational Psychology Review, 22(1), 89-102. doi:10.1007/s10648-009-9116-9Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Stegmann, K., & Wecker, C. (2013). Toward a script theory of guidance in computersupportedcollaborativelearning.EducationalPsychologist,48(1),56-66.doi:10.1080/00461520.2012.748005Hakkarainen, K. (2009). A knowledge-practice perspective on technology-mediated learning. InternationalJournal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 213-231. doi: 10.1007/s11412-009-9064-xHong, H. Y., & Sullivan, F. R. (2009). Towards an idea-centered, principle-based design approach to supportlearning as knowledge creation. Educational Technology Research and Development, 57(5), 613-627.doi:10.1007/s11423-009-9122-0King, A. (2007). Scripting collaborative learning processes: A cognitive perspective. In Fischer, F., Kollar, I.,Mandl, H., Haake, J.M. (Eds.), Scripting computer-supported collaborative learning: Cognitive,computational and educational perspectives (pp. 13-37). New York, NY: Springer.Kollar, I., Ufer, S., Reichersdorfer, E., Vogel, F., Fischer, F., & Reiss, K. (2014). Effects of collaboration scriptsand heuristic worked examples on the acquisition of mathematical argumentation skills of teacherstudents with different levels of prior achievement. Learning and Instruction, 32(1), 22–36. doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2014.01.003CSCL 2017 Proceedings756© ISLSMartin, R. (2009). The design of business: Why design thinking is the next competitive advantage. Cambridge,MA: Harvard Business Press.Mu, J., Stegmann, K., Mayfield, E., Rosé, C., & Fischer, F. (2012). The ACODEA framework: Developingsegmentation and classification schemes for fully automatic analysis of online discussions.International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 7(2), 285-305.doi:10.1007/s11412-012-9147-yO'Donnell, A. M., Dansereau, D. F., Hall, R. H., & Rocklin, T. R. (1987). Cognitive, social/affective, andmetacognitive outcomes of scripted cooperative learning. Journal of Educational Psychology, 79(4),431-437.Paavola S. & Hakkarainen, K. (2014). Trialogical approach for knowledge creation. In Tan S-C., Jo, H.-J., &Yoe, J. (Eds.), Knowledge creation in education (pp. 53-72). Singapore: Springer Science + BusinessMedia.Paavola, S., Lipponen, L., & Hakkarainen, K. (2004). Modeling innovative knowledge communities: Aknowledge-creation approach to learning. Review of Educational Research, 74, 557-576. doi:10.3102/00346543074004557Resendes, M., Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., Chen, B., & Halewood, C. (2015). Group-level formative feedbackand metadiscourse. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 10(3), 309336. doi: 10.1007/s11412-015-9219-xRosé, C., Wang, Y. C., Cui, Y., Arguello, J., Stegmann, K., Weinberger, A., & Fischer, F. (2008). Analyzingcollaborative learning processes automatically: Exploiting the advances of computational linguistics incomputer-supported collaborative learning. International Journal of Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning, 3(3), 237-271. doi:10.1007/s11412-007-9034-0Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith(Ed.) Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, andtechnology. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (2nd ed.) (pp. 397417). New York: Cambridge University Press.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2016). Creating, criss-crossing, and rising above idea landscapes. In R.H.Huang, Kinshuk, & J. K. Price (Eds.), ICT in education in global context: comparative reports of K-12schools innovation (pp. 3-17). Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., & Steinbach, R. (1984). Teachability of reflective processes in writtencomposition. Cognitive Science, 8, 173-190. doi:1 0.1016/S0364-0213(84)80016-6Schank, R. C. (1999). Dynamic memory revisited. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Schank, R. C., & Abelson, R. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals, and understanding. Hillsdale, NJ: Earlbaum Assoc.Vogel, F., Kollar, I., Ufer, S., Reichersdorfer, E., Reiss, K., & Fischer, F. (2016). Developing argumentationskills in mathematics through computer-supported collaborative learning: the role of transactivity.Instructional Science, 44(5), 477–500. doi: 10.1007/s11251-016-9380-2Vogel, F., Wecker, C., Kollar, I., & Fischer, F. (in press). Socio-cognitive scaffolding with computer-supportedcollaboration scripts: a meta-analysis. Educational Psychology Review. doi:10.1007/s10648-016-93617CSCL 2017 Proceedings757© ISLS