Computational Discourse in a Role-Playing Game PodcastJoshua Gabai, University of Wisconsin–Madison, jgabai@wisc.eduMatthew Berland, University of Wisconsin–Madison, mberland@wisc.eduAbstract: Tabletop role-playing games are a discourse-rich environment in which participantsare frequently confronted with narrative and computational problems. By observingdocumented gameplay of a tabletop role-playing game (Edge of the Empire) and coding thediscourse, we observe computational discourse being used to address narrative andmechanical problems. The contribution of this work is in presenting evidence of andexamining the role of computational discourse in an under-explored environment.IntroductionComputational literacy has been posited as one of the primary new literacies of the 21st century - it has thepotential to afford students new perspectives, new agencies, and new opportunities for professions (diSessa,2001). A core element of diSessa's computational literacy work is the concept of social computational literacy,or computational discourse. Recent work in games (Berland and Lee, 2011) has found evidence of complexcomputational discourse in the naturalistic talk around board games.Role-playing games (RPGs), combining elements of board games and improvisational storytelling,provide high-discourse problem-solving scenarios. Within a framework of game mechanics, participantscollaboratively construct a narrative. The mechanics of these systems create environments in which participantsmust assess situations and solve problems within the constraints of rules. Many situations in RPGs are resolvedwith role-play, where participants collaboratively act out or narrate events in the game to progress the story.These narrative situations – that is, situations grounded in the narrative of the game rather than in the game'smechanical rules – often require assessment and problem solving even though they are not dependent on therules of the game system. In this work, we examine a recorded session of a RPG and examine naturalisticcomputational discourse. We hypothesize that computational discourse may be used to assess and solve bothnarrative and mechanical problems. The contribution of this work is in presenting evidence of and examiningthe role of computational discourse in podcasts and the use of podcasts as a source of interesting data for thelearning sciences.MethodsWe collected the data from a recorded session of the CAMPAIGN Podcast (Kuhl, 2014), where four playersused the Edge of the Empire game system (Fantasy Flight Games, 2013) published by Fantasy Flight Games tocreate a narrative in a Star Wars setting. We chose the earliest possible "normal gameplay" episode (Episode 3,66min, Kuhl, 2014), as the expectation was that the participants might take a couple sessions to get settled intothe new campaign. This group was chosen because: it is one of the most popular RPG podcasts; they explicitlyfocus on improvisation and storytelling; and the group consists entirely of expert roleplayers who areprofessional improvisers. Comedian Kat Kuhl is the gamemaster (GM). The GM has the most narrative control;she facilitates and arbitrates the game. Each other player controls one protagonist and (as a result) has lessoverall narrative control.We used a coding scheme developed by Berland and Lee (2011) to observe computational discourse incollaborative strategic board games. As per their coding scheme, the first author coded for conditional logic,algorithm building, debugging, simulation, and distributed computation. Conditional logic is the use of “if-thanelse” and involves thinking globally about consequences of a specific statement. Algorithm building is creatingreusable instructions for current situations and future unknown situations. Debugging is identifying andresolving problems when something is not functioning. Simulation involves modeling future events based onlogic. Distributed computation occurs when multiple participants contribute information that leads to a resultwhich would not have occurred without the shared contributions. Coding categories were not mutuallyexclusive, so some events were coded for multiple categories. No events of algorithm building occurred; we arenot sure why.Observed speech events are categorized as either mechanical or narrative. Mechanical events arecoded speech events in which the discourse concerns the discrete rules and mechanics of the game system.Narrative events are those events in which the discourse concerns the story or narrative aspects of the game.Finding computational discourse being used to assess and solve narrative situations (in addition to themechanical) will support the hypothesis that computational discourse can emerge in narrative situations.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1745© ISLSFindingsUsing the coding scheme described above, we observed instances of the four computational discourse codes inboth mechanical and narrative events (see Table 1 below, full data available upon request). Some events arecoded as both mechanical and narrative. In these situations, the dialogue was typically narrative, but there was aclear mechanical element of the game influencing the discourse. Table 2 contains examples of coded events.Table 1: Coded eventsConditional Logic511218MechanicalNarrativeBoth M+NTotalDebugging411116Simulation123327Distributed Computation318425Table 2: Examples of mechanical and narrative eventsMechanicalNarrativeBoth M+NDiscourse“If you got a good roll, it would belike two solid hours work.”“We can wait for her to come back.See if we can start a dialogue. Or wecan get the hell off of this planet.”“Look, their ship’s a scout. Ours hasfirepower.” “Worst comes to worst,we can take them out.”Code(s)ConditionallogicSimulationExplanationResolution is determined by gamerules, in this case by rolling dice.There are no rules in the game systemwhich determine how this will play out.Simulation,distributedcomputationPlayers assess narrative elements butknow that the ships likely havedifferent rules and likely consider that.One noteworthy event occurred when a player rolled dice to attempt an action; the player failedaccording to the rules, but the GM decided that this failure was ‘wrong’ for the story (“you should get it; you'rejust spending time”) and so 'debugged' the situation by overruling the game mechanics in favor of the narrative.Conclusions and limitationsThe observed instances of computational discourse occurred in both mechanical and narrative situations. Thissupports the expectation that narrative problem solving can use the same discourse tools as computationalproblems. Although the collected data contains a substantially higher number of narrative codes than mechanicalcodes, this does not necessarily indicate that such discourse is more useful for narrative situations. It may berepresentative of this specific session. We predict another session with either more combat or more skillchallenges would show a higher number of mechanical events.This case study looks at a single session of a single gaming group with a specific game system. It is notintended to generalize - it is a proof by example of the existence of a meaningful mechanical/narrative spectrumin computational talk and the utility of understanding computational talk through podcasts. Future studies willlook more closely at the evolution of computational discourse in a group over time.ReferencesBerland, M., & Lee, V. R. (2011). Collaborative strategic board games as a site for distributed computationalthinking. International Journal of Game-Based Learning, 1(2), 65-81. doi: 10.4018/ijgbl.2011040105DiSessa, A. A. (2001). Changing minds: computers, learning and literacy. Cambridge, MA: The Mit Press.Fantasy Flight Games (2013). Star Wars Edge of the Empire roleplaying game. (2013). Roseville, MN: FantasyFlight Games.Kuhl, K. (2014, October 22). Episode Three. CAMPAIGN Podcast. Podcast retrieved fromhttp://oneshotpodcast.com/podcasts/campaign/episode-3/ICLS 2018 Proceedings1746© ISLS