Attunements to the Ethical in Design and LearningShirin Vossoughi, Northwestern University, shirin.vossoughi@northwestern.eduAva Jackson, Northwestern University, AvaJackson2015@u.northwestern.eduMegan Bang, University of Washington, mbang3@uw.eduBeth Warren, Boston University, bwarren@bu.eduAnn S. Rosebery, TERC, ann_rosebery@terc.eduThomas Philip (discussant), University of California, Los Angeles, tmp@ucla.eduAbstract: Within the learning sciences, conversations around the political dimensions oflearning and design are growing, with implications for research epistemologies, approaches tosocial change-making, and possibilities for impact in the lives of children and communities.This symposium seeks to explicate, amplify, and further theorize ethical dimensions of humanlearning that orient our thinking towards what could or ought to be and sensitize us to theways ethics, like politics, are always mediating learning. We explore these questions: In whatways do attunements to the ethical dimensions of learning, teaching, and design evolve inactivity to expand opportunities for children and youth to grapple with the world as it is andimagine how it might be? In what ways does relationality shape and become shaped byemergent ethical attunements in learning environments? How might research and design thatcenter the ethics of learning shift how “impact” is defined and assessed?Keywords: ethics and politics of learning, geographies of responsibility, relationality, epistemicheterogeneityThe 21st-century marks a critical time in human history, one that demands the re-mediation of social structuresof human communities towards more sustainable and just assemblages of forms of life. While the complexity ofthe task before us is stunning, we argue that a pivotal dimension of change rests on the remaking of relationsbetween humans and more than humans, that is, the natural and material worlds of which humans are a part(Tallbear, 2011; Latour, 2013). Implicitly or explicitly, human activity draws together epistemic, ontological,and axiological commitments that vary across cultural communities and places, even as they traverse global andlocal trajectories. Importantly, this activity is constructed relationally, and, as such, as Massey (2005, p. 10)argues, poses challenging questions about the politics of the geography of those relations as well as the ethics ofour relationships to and responsibility for those relations. Designing learning for expansive relationality attunedto these questions requires, we suggest, axiological innovations (Bang et al., 2016) beyond the normative formsoften manifest in learning environments characterized by human domination and entitlement (Cajete, 2000;Wildcat, 2009). A focus on axiological innovations entails attention to the values, ethics, and aesthetics – that is,what is good, right, true and beautiful – that shape possible meanings, meaning-making, positioning andrelations in the design and implementation of expansive learning ecologies.Within the learning sciences, conversations around the political dimensions of learning and design aregrowing, with important implications for research epistemologies, approaches to social change-making, andpossibilities for impact in the lives of children, families and communities. In a special issue of Cognition andInstruction, Bang & Vossoughi (2016) featured research aimed at making power, history, relationality andepistemic heterogeneity explicitly engaged aspects of designing for social change-making. Similarly, thePolitics of Learning Writing Collective argues:to embrace learning as situated means to conceptualize it as inherently political: It is alwaysembedded in and articulated through hierarchies of power and tied to particular visions ofpossible futures...we know that at minimum our efforts ought to resist the tendency todepoliticize the situated nature of learning and withstand the inclination to ignore the alwayspresent historical and ideological dynamics and contexts (2017, p. 5).In a resonant vein, Esmonde and Booker’s (2016) edited volume Power and Privilege in the LearningSciences brings together sociocultural theories of learning with different strands of critical social theory in theeffort to engender concepts and lenses adequately sensitive to the “always-present” political and ethicaldynamics of learning and teaching. Building on the powerful ways sociocultural and cultural historical theoriesICLS 2018 Proceedings1283© ISLShave intervened to widen and deepen the study of learning beyond individualism and ethnocentrism, theserecent interventions assert that learning is always cultural and political. Further, they embody a critique ofnormativity and the ways learning is entangled with oppressive political and economic systems, as well as a callfor critically imagining, designing and closely studying learning as relationally responsive ways of being,knowing and acting (Shotter, 2006). Though not always explicitly stated, both of these moves involvefundamental questions of ethics and values.Importantly, attention to the political is not new to studies of learning; rather, the terms of engagementwith the politics of learning are taking new forms. Situating ourselves within both the sociocultural and politicalturns in the learning sciences, this symposium seeks to explicate, amplify and further theorize the ethicaldimensions of human learning, those that orient our thinking towards what could or ought to be, and sensitize usto the ways ethics, like politics, are always mediating learning.The papers in this symposium explore how new “geographies of responsibility” (Massey, 2004)emerge when ethical attunements in learning and design become an explicit focus of attention. We explore thesequestions: In what ways do attunements to the ethical dimensions of learning, teaching, and design evolve inactivity to expand opportunities for children and youth to grapple with the world as it is and imagine how itmight be? In what ways does relationality shape and become shaped by emergent ethical attunements inlearning environments? How might research and design that center the ethics of learning shift how “impact” isdefined and assessed?We will engage the audience in considering ways in which attention to politics implicates ethics (e.g.,in future-makings), how politics and ethics mutually constitute one another, and how these dynamics shape whatwe might call theoretical-, design- and construction-oriented dimensions of impact.“(I)f we can prepare ourselves to ‘think-with’ living things to guide us in our thinking...thennot only will that change everything that in the past we have thought of as being well-knownto us -- the nature of reality; knowledge and knowing (epistemology); the nature ofcommunication and language; meaning and understanding; ways of being (ontology); and oureveryday ways of relation to others and ‘othernesses’ around us (attitudes, orientation, andethics) -- but it will also lead us into recognising the influence of factors to which, in the past,we have given no attention at all. (Shotter, 2015, p. 8)Embodied pathways and ethical trails: Attuning to the relational andaxiological dimensions of learningShirin Vossoughi and Ava Jackson, Northwestern UniversityIn Talk and Social Theory, Erickson argues that “social changes of a deep-rooted kind, by their very nature,involve alterations in the character of day-to-day social practices” (Erickson, 2004, p. 160). This paper is part ofa larger project that both draws from and widens this argument by paying close attention to the role ofembodiment and relationality in the moment-to-moment and day-to-day development of learning environmentsthat aim to enact educational dignity (Espinoza & Vossoughi, 2014). We define embodiment as the physical,gestural and artifact-mediated dimensions of human learning, as well as the kinds of ethical and pedagogicalvalues embodied in talk and interaction (Vossoughi, Escudé, Kitundu & Espinoza, Under Review). Thus far,this work has looked closely at the kinds of embodied assistance that mediated rich forms of joint activity withinan after-school setting focused on making/tinkering (the “Tinkering Afterschool Program” or TAP), as well asthe ways adult and young adult educators’ analysis of photographs and audio-video recordings led to deeperforms of co-presence and relationality with young children.Taking up questions of ethical attunement and relationality, this paper asks: how do relational historiesand salient moments of embodied assistance mediate future action and meaning? Through a systematic analysisof ethnographic and interactional information spanning three years of programming in TAP, we found thatparticular forms of assistance and relationality across participants created embodied pathways that others thentook up, plied and re-created in future moments. We define embodied pathways as courses of possible actioninvolving participants’ voices and bodies that both represent and open up particular kinds of relations (ethical,intellectual, political). We argue that the felt experience of salient instances of assistance imprints (leaves animpression of) such pathways within memory, creating resources for possible action in the future. Wesubstantiate this finding through three distinct and complementary cases: 1) a five-minute interaction whereincareful forms of embodied assistance used to support one child to learn how to use a hot-glue gun wereimmediately used by that child to guide her friend’s learning in both resonant and novel ways; 2) a case inwhich two children were deliberately supported to learn how to collaborate or form a “we” within a marbleICLS 2018 Proceedings1284© ISLSmachines activity in ways that were appropriated and further improvised by the pair across the week; and 3) acase spanning 3 years that looks at the ways one young participant grew into the role of a facilitator, and cameto organize learning for younger children using key forms of embodied assistance valued within the setting.Across distinct time-scales, these cases evidence the ways movements that are improvised within theflow of pedagogical activity can create resources for future activity in ways that illuminate local processes ofcultural production—in this case, the shift from normative, individualized forms of education towards a modelof joint activity built on the notion of people becoming keepers of one another’s learning. The term “culturalproduction” amplifies the improvisational dimensions of this shift, as well as the aesthetic dimensions ofpedagogical activity. In this case, the shift towards joint activity was also aimed at surfacing and addressing there-emergence of racialized and gendered inequities with regards to who received different forms of assistancewithin the setting (who was more likely to have an artifact taken out of their hands, or who was trusted to use atool, etc.).The notion of “pathways” is germane to the study of gesture and embodied interaction because thereare literally paths through the air that may be seen as “marked” or accentuated by participants in ways thatcreate potential openings for others to utilize, explore, and reshape. Though research on embodied cognitiontends not to foreground the relational histories among participants within a focal interaction, analyzing thesepathways has helped us to see learning as both deeply historical and radically future-making. In a genetic sense,we might say that participants “re-trace” prior moments with their bodies/hands, or that future moments carrythe trace of prior relations and systems (Bakhtin, 1984; Gordon, 2008; Wolfe, 2016). Looking forward frompresent moments, we argue for the salience of interactional “firsts”—the initial turns within an exchange, or theinitial moments and days of a program or setting (Hansen, 1989)—as creating value-laden movements or“substrates” (Goodwin, 2017) that can linger in the air.We conclude with a discussion of key pedagogical and theoretical implications. First, our analysis ofgestural pathways offers one way to see learning (shifts in participation, new relations with others, withmaterials and tools) through the movements of the body, and to conceptualize collective learning as tied to thelive choreography of activity within a setting over time. Understanding design as a kind of compositionalactivity, this lens can support educators in being reflective and intentional about the pathways we are enacting inthe moment. In other words, making the ethical explicit engenders new responsibilities and domains ofconsideration for design. Our findings also attune us to the ways pedagogical movements are always ethicallyand politically laden (Bang, et. al., 2016), enmeshed with processes of social reproduction, contestation andtransformation (Erickson, 2004). Orienting towards present action as always holding the potential to createexpansive meanings that can shape future moments in unanticipated ways offers a way of perceiving real-timeactivity that is sensitive to the “ethical trails” we are etching in the air. On a small but significant level, we see insuch everyday moments how settings come to be, and children, youth and adults make decisions about who theywant to be in the world, what kind of thinker, teacher, or friend.The Hummingbird story: Navigating ethical multiplicities of heterogeneousnature-culture relations in learning environmentsMegan Bang, University of WashingtonIn this paper I explore the axiological engagements and possibilities that are designed for and enacted in aSTEAM learning environment focused on forest ecology and climate change with 1st-12th graders. Axiologicalpositionings of self and others with respect to knowledge, knowing, and human activity are routine parts ofinteraction (Lemke, 2002). This study is part of an iterative community-based design project which involvedcommunity members, researchers, and graduate students to design and implement land-based learning programsthat facilitate and support Indigenous ways of knowing and western science. The program was designed to focuson nature-culture relations and learning about complex ecological systems through relational ontoepistemologies and mobile pedagogies of walking, talking, and storying the land (Bang & Marin, 2015; Bang &Medin, 2010). The framing question for the STEAM camp was: How can we live in respectful, reciprocal, andresponsible relations with our lands and waters? In this paper, I analyze the ways in which these forms ofrelations were explored and enacted and the kinds of affordances or constraints they placed on learning andteaching about nature-culture relations and, more specifically, complex ecological systems.The data for this paper come from four sources. The research team collected video and audiorecordings of the program that included 30 youth and 4 educators as well as additional community members,artists, and scientists who also co-taught in these environments. The video data included both panoramic videoof the activity as a whole as well as 5 students who wore point of view cameras during activity. Audio was alsocollected of all of the teachers in learning environments so that we could ensure the capturing of all of theirICLS 2018 Proceedings1285© ISLSinteractions. In addition to the video and audio, we collected the artifacts produced by learners in the learningenvironment. Finally, we also took field notes. Analytically for this paper I utilized a microethnographicapproach. Microethnographies allow the researcher to examine the interplay among moment-by-momentparticipant interactions with each other, with artifacts, and with the academic tasks, which are reciprocallymediated by, and mediating, the social construction and dynamics of the activity (Gee & Green, 1998). Morespecifically, I take a microlongitudinal and microlatudinal approach to characterize how ethical sense-makingevolved over time and reiteration (longitudinal) in learning, as well as in moments of interaction across settingsor in movement during learning (latitudinal) (DeLiema, Lee, Danish, Enyedy, & Brown, 2016). To do this, Iutilized interaction analysis to examine the ways in which ethical dimensions of nature-culture learning wereenacted.I focus this paper on a collective experience with the finding of an injured Hummingbird in the forestand the multiple responses that unfolded from the initial discovery. I examine the teacher and communitymember driven responses to the Hummingbird as well as student responses and the different ethical stances andrelationships that are articulated and enacted over the course of the program. I find that there are 5 key eventsthat shift the semiotic landscape (Goodwin, 2013) with respect to ethical dimensions in nature-culture relationsthat created different possibilities for learning. These include: 1) the initial encounter with the Hummingbird andthe accidental killing of and response to the Hummingbird by a facilitator; 2) student and community membersresponses to the accidental killing of the Hummingbird; 3) teachers’ facilitated reflection of the encounter; 4)students’ spontaneous activity and sharing with their families; and 5) students’ incorporation of theHummingbird story into the culminating projects in the learning environment. I explore the ways in which theethical responses by the facilitator, community members, and teachers marked significantly different forms ofnature-culture relations that afforded different understandings of ecosystems and the roles and functionings ofspecies in these ecosystems as well as human behavior and engagements. These differences were marked bydifferences in western and Indigenous knowledge systems as well as differences in expertise about ecosystems.Further, I explore how shifts in pedagogy across these key events reflected different pedagogical perspectivesand adults’ ethical attunements and perceived responsibilities (Shotter, 2015; Massey, 2004; Lawson, 2007) tochildren.Based on the five incidents, I propose a set of design principles as well as pedagogical practices tosupport ethical engagements with nature-culture relations in science learning relevant to 21st-century demands.Socio-political discourse about 21st-century demands, such as climate change, are only increasing. Yet, largelyas a field we have continued to focus narrowly on the science of climate change, leaving teachers underpreparedto navigate the kinds of questions that learners bring to learning environments. This work helps to developframeworks and practices for teachers and students to robustly take up 21st-century science learning with itsaccompanying ethical demands and entanglements.Microbe-human relations: Imagining new geographies of responsibilitythrough artscienceBeth Warren, Boston University, and Ann S. Rosebery, TERCIn U.S. schools, intellectual traditions rooted in Cartesian influences selectively shape the aims, practices andphenomena highlighted as central to disciplinary learning. This “form-shaping ideology” (Bakhtin, 1984)structures a particular conceptualization of the relations between natural and cultural (or human) worlds indisciplinary learning. At its core, this conceptualization positions humans as distinct from and apart from thenatural world in relations of mastery and entitlement (Latour, 2013). This form-shaping ideology continues todominate disciplinary learning, functioning as a tacit and pervasive form of settled expectation (Harris, 1995)that restricts the scope of possible meanings and meaning-making in classrooms, i.e., how students and teachersimagine, come to know, and attend to relations between natural and human worlds (Bang & Marin, 2015; Bang,Warren, Rosebery & Medin, 2012; Warren & Rosebery, 2011).In its orientation to human entitlement, the dominant conceptualization of nature-culture relationsstands in stark contrast to cutting-edge research in a variety of disciplines (e.g., ecology, geography,oceanography, anthropology), which is re-conceptualizing relations among human and more than human formsof life in new “geographies of responsibility” (Massey, 2004). In these disciplines, complex socio-ecologicalfutures are being re-imagined through relations of reciprocity, humility, responsibility, and sustainability(Cajete, 2000; Hulme, 2009; Massey, 2005). In this work, we connect these disciplinary developments toeducational designs that engage epistemic heterogeneity not as a problem to repair or overcome but asfoundational and generative in learning and teaching (Bang & Vossoughi, 2016; Rosebery et al., 2010).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1286© ISLSIn this paper, we share findings from a collaborative research endeavor to design an “artsciencepedagogy” that aims to cultivate youths’ attunement and involvement with complex ecological phenomena,specifically the emerging interdisciplinary field of the human microbiome. Over three years, a design collectiveof learning scientists, high school arts and science faculty, microbiologists, and local independent artists workedtogether with two main design goals in mind and in hand. One goal was to build from the microbial turn inrecent biology to desettle dualistic structures of nature-culture relations rooted in Cartesian and colonial logics.As understood by anthropologists Heather Paxson and Stefan Helmreich,(t)he microbial turn marks the advent of a newly ascendant model of ‘nature’, one swarmingwith organismic operations unfolding at scales below everyday human perception,simultaneously independent of, entangled with, enabling of, and sometimes unwinding ofhuman, animal, plant, and fungal biological identity and community…Microbes are nottokens…of the ‘age of biological control’…, but are rather pointers to a biologyunderdetermined and full of yet-to-be explored possibility. (Paxson & Helmreich, 2014, pp.166-167)A second design goal, resonant with these shifting dynamics in biology, was to open up morerelationally responsive, epistemically heterogeneous, participative modes of thinking, feeling, being, andmaking (Shotter, 2006) than are conventionally made available in high school science to youth from historicallynon-dominant communities. Taking seriously the heterogeneity of human sense-making, the artsciencepedagogy was designed to engage youth in exploring and creating “narratives of life” (Heath, 1986) imaginedthrough relations of reciprocity, humility, responsibility, and sustainability (Cajete, 2000; Hulme, 2009; Massey,2005; Shotter, 2006) rather than human domination and entitlement.Students at a public high school with an arts focus were invited to explore microbe-human relationsthrough engagement with multiple, narrative-centered practices of art and science. The idea behind thisartscience repertoire is that multiple, narrative-centered engagements would bring to life the ordinarily invisiblepresence of microbes on the human body, making them newly legible as forms of life of varying color, shape,contour, texture, and growth, and making them newly speakable as a part of “a world around us ‘here’” (Shotter,2006, p. 112). Working with practicing artists and scientists over four weeks in the official space of a biologyclass, students cultivated microbial communities living in and on various parts of their bodies (e.g., the palmsand fingers of their hands, forehead, armpits, belly buttons) and then explored possible meanings of microbehuman relationships through varied artistic and scientific forms of engagement. They choreographed movementphrases to experience microbial ubiquity and scale. They sculpted imagined microbial worlds with wood reeds.They musically scored microbial growth as it unfolded in Petri dish cultures of their skin microbiomes. Theypainted expressive portraits of microbe-human relationships. They scripted and dramatized microbe-humanencounters. They engaged with emerging findings and open questions in human microbiome science. Towardsthe end of their inquiry, the students created and shared an "artscience story," defined as an artistic and scientificexpression that a) explored an aspect of the human microbiome or their own process of inquiry that had becomeimportant to them, and b) creatively communicated this to people they care about.In this paper, we draw on data that includes the artscience responses of three students and theirnarrative accounts of their responses in individual interviews. Two students co-created a hip-hop song(“Bacteria At Its Finest”). In the lyrics, they riff on the genre of a love song by counterposing third-personnegative societal narratives about bacteria with a first-person bacterial point of view. Another student createdfacial body art, which she entitled “False Expectations vs Reality,” to express “the drastic difference there isbetween what people think (about bacteria) and what it actually is.” Using narrative and discourse analyticmethods, we are exploring the ways in which the students conceptualized, expressed, and evaluated microbehuman relations in their artscience stories. Preliminary analyses show the students narrating their growingattunement to microbes and humans as being in a “we” rather than an “other” relationship, answerable to eachother. In their lyrics and narration, the students creatively used the meaning-making resources of their art formsto move between points of view and layer multiple voices to chart new geographies of responsibility linkinghumans and microbes in withness-relations, e.g., of mutual care. They spoke of human cultural practices ascreating vulnerabilities for both humans and microbes (e.g., hand sanitizers, wide-spectrum antibiotics,consumer capitalism), and emphasized their growing sense of responsibility to educate others into newunderstandings of microbe-human relations. They expressed an ecological sensibility toward microbial ways ofbeing and living, which they marked aesthetically (“the true beauty behind our microbiome”) as well aspolitically (“this doesn’t stop at just me”) in a new ethical formation of relational involvement.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1287© ISLSBuilding on Shotter’s work, we suggest that, in an artscience pedagogy of the kind we have beenexploring, transdisciplinary practices of attending, thinking, feeling and making support expansive ethicalengagements with complex socio-ecological phenomena. Learning becomes the cultivation of new possible“responsive living relations” with phenomena, relations that emerge in and through participative modes ofinquiry (Shotter, 2006). We see high school youth, virtually none of whom identified with school science,responding to this vision, imagining themselves into new geographies of responsibility as they engage creativelywith the complexities of socio-ecological future-making.ReferencesBakhtin, M. (1984). Speech genres and other late essays. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.Bang, M., Faber, L., Gurneau, J., Marin, A., & Soto, C. (2016). Community-based design research: Learningacross generations and strategic transformations of institutional relations toward axiologicalinnovations. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 23(1), 28-41.Bang, M., & Marin, A. (2015). Nature–culture constructs in science learning: Human/non‐human agency andintentionality. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 52(4), 530-544.Bang, M., & Medin, D. (2010). Cultural processes in science education: Supporting the navigation of multipleepistemologies. Science Education, 94(6), 1008-1026.Bang, M., & Vossoughi, S. (2016). Participatory design research and educational justice: Studying learning andrelations within social change making. Cognition and Instruction, 34(3), 173-193. DOI:10.1080/07370008.2016.1181879Bang, M., Warren, B., Rosebery, A.S., & Medin, D. (2012). De-settling expectations in science education.Human Development, 55(5), 243-358.Cajete, G. (2000). Native science: Natural laws of interdependence. Santa Fe, NM: Clear Light Publisher.DeLiema, D., Lee, V. R., Danish, J. A., Enyedy, N., & Brown, N.J.S. (2016). Amicrolatitudinal/microlongitudinal analysis of speech, gesture, and representation use in a student'srepeated scientific explanations of phase change. In A. diSessa, M. Levin, & N. Brown (Eds.),Knowledge and interaction: A synthetic agenda for the learning sciences (pp. 133-159). New York:Routledge.Erickson, F. (2004). Talk and social theory: Ecologies of speaking and listening in everyday life. New York:Polity Press.Esmonde, I., & Booker, A. N. (2016). Power and privilege in the learning sciences: Critical and socioculturaltheories of learning. New York: Routledge.Espinoza, M. L., & Vossoughi, S. (2014). Perceiving learning anew: Social interaction, dignity, and educationalrights. Harvard Educational Review, 84(3), 285-313.Gee, J. P., & Green, J. L. (1998). Discourse analysis, learning, and social practice: A methodological study.Review of Research in Education, 23, 119-169.Goodwin, C. (2013). The co-operative, transformative organization of human action and knowledge. Journal ofPragmatics, 46(1), 8-23.Goodwin, C. (2017). Co-operative action. New York: Cambridge University Press.Gordon, A. F. (2008). Ghostly matters: Haunting and the sociological imagination. Minneapolis, MN:University of Minnesota Press.Hansen, D. T. (1989). Getting down to business: The moral significance of classroom beginnings. Anthropology& Education Quarterly, 20(4), 259-274.Harris, C. I. (1993/1995). Whiteness as property. In K. Crenshaw, N. Gotanda, G. Peller, & K. Thomas (Eds.),Critical race theory (pp. 276-291). New York: New Press.Heath, S.B. (1986). Good science or bad art? Or both? In D. Baker, J. Clay, & C. Fox (Eds.), Challenging waysof knowing: In English, mathematics and science (pp. 13-18). London: The Falmer Press.Hulme, M. (2009). Why we disagree about climate change. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.Latour, B. (2013). An inquiry into modes of existence. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Lawson, V. (2007). Geographies of care and responsibility. Annals of the Association of AmericanGeographers, 97(1), 1-11.Lemke, J. (2002). Ideology, intertextuality, and the communication of science. In P. Fries, M. Cummings, D.Lockwood, & W. Spruiell (Eds.), Relations and functions within and around language (pp. 32-55).London: Cassell.Massey, D. (2004). Geographies of responsibility. Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography, 86(1), 518.Massey, D. (2005). For space. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1288© ISLSPaxson, H., & Helmreich, S. (2014). The perils and promises of microbial abundance: Novel natures and modelecosystems, from artisanal cheese to alien seas. Social Studies of Science, 44(2), 165-193.The Politics of Learning Writing Collective (2017). The learning sciences in a new era of U.S. nationalism,Cognition and Instruction, DOI: 10.1080/07370008.2017.1282486Rosebery, A.S., Ogonowski, M., DiSchino, M., & Warren, B. (2010). “The coat traps all your body heat”:Heterogeneity as fundamental to learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(3), 322–357.Shotter, J. (2006). Participative thinking. In Y. Haila & C. Dyke (Eds.), How nature speaks (pp. 106-126).Durham, NC: Duke University Press.Shotter, J. (2015). On being dialogical: An ethics of ‘attunement’. Context, 137, 8-11.Tallbear, K. (2011). “Why Interspecies Thinking Needs Indigenous Standpoints. Theorizing the Contemporary.Cultural Anthropology website, April 24, 2011. https://culanth.org/fieldsights/260-why-interspeciesthinking-needs-indigenous-standpointsVossoughi, S., Escudé, M., Kitundu, W., & Espinoza, M. (Under Review). “Hands & eyes:” Embodied learning,social relations and the genesis of pedagogical perception.Warren, B., & Rosebery, A.S, (2011). Navigating interculturality: African American male students and thescience classroom. Journal of African American Males in Education, 2(1), 98-115.Wildcat, D. R. (2009). Red alert: Saving the planet with indigenous knowledge. Golden, CO: FulcrumPublishing.Wolfe, P. (2016). Traces of history: Elementary structures of race. Brooklyn, NY: Verso Books.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1289© ISLS