The Influence of Question Wording on Children’s Tendencies toProvide Teleological Explanations for Natural PhenomenaJonathan Halls, Shaaron Ainsworth, and Mary OliverEmail: ttxjh76@nottingham.ac.uk, shaaron.ainsworth@nottingham.ac.uk, mary.oliver@nottingham.ac.ukLearning Sciences Research Institute, University of NottinghamAbstract: Young children often provide teleological explanations for Entities and Phenomenain the natural world; stating, for example, that snow is for making snowmen or nighttime is forgoing to sleep. However, research supporting this stance has employed questions that could beconsidered to be teleologically-leading, suggesting a partially inaccurate view of children'stendency to provide teleological explanations. This paper compares a teleologically-leadingtreatment (what is X for?) with an open-treatment (why is there X?), finding that the leadingtreatment resulted in significantly more teleological explanations that the open-treatment. Thissuggests children's proposed bias to provide teleological rationales about the natural world maybe being overestimated.Keywords: natural phenomena, science education, teleological reasoning, young childrenIntroductionTeleological explanations are those that imply a natural object or phenomenon exists for a specific purpose(Kampourakis, 2014; Kelemen, 1999a, 1999b). In relation to science education about the Natural World the useof teleological explanations can be inappropriate and problematic as the focus is placed upon perceived outcomesor goals rather than causal accounts. Teleological reasoning is considered by some to be a major barrier tounderstanding evolution (Kampourakis, 2014) and a debilitating factor which restricts scientific reasoning (Hanke,2004). However, there is an argument that the appropriateness of a teleological explanation depends upon thecontext in which it is used and the subject to which it relates. In these situations certain teleological accounts couldbe considered valuable learning heuristics (Ruse, 1989; Zohar & Ginossar, 1998).Considering the appropriateness of a specific teleological explanation rests upon the type of teleologyemployed. The commonly discussed construct is design-teleology: that a topic has been designed or created for aspecific purpose (Kelemen, 1999a, 1999b), if the creator was supernatural this could be considered to be religiousteleology. Teleology can also be conceptualised as functional-teleology, for example, appropriate functionalexplanations for Natural Organism appendages (Ayla, 1970), or as relational-teleology, a topic is not designed forsomething but rather subjectively used to do something (Ojalehto, Waxman, & Medin, 2013). While the type ofteleology used is key to the appropriateness of the explanation, the focus of this paper is simply children'spropensity to provide teleological rationales, regardless of their perceived relevance. In this paper these fourconstructs of teleology are collectively referred to as teleological explanations.The levels of children's teleological thinking vary between ontological categories, due to the debatearound if children are selective (provide teleological explanations for parts of Organisms and Artefacts)(Kampourakis, Palaiokrassa, Papadopoulou, Pavlidi, & Argyropoulou, 2012; Keil, 1994) or promiscuous(maintain a teleological stance for all ontological categories) (Kelemen, 1999a, 1999b) in their application ofteleology. However, in some form teleological explanations dominate the scientific discourse of children age 4to 9-years old, although their use decreases with age (Kampourakis, 2014; Kelemen, 1999b).A key figure in this field is Kelemen. In an often-cited paper Kelemen (1999a) asked 4- and 5-year-oldwhat is X for? in relation to several topics of Organisms, Natural Objects and Artefacts. The results indicated thatthe majority of children displayed a strong promiscuous tendency to provide teleological explanations for allontological categories, with 57% teleological answers for Organisms, 88% for Organism parts 67% for NaturalObjects, 58% for Natural Object parts, 65% for Artefacts and 80% for Artefact parts (means taken from graphs).However, there is a possibility that the question wording, what is X for? could be a teleologically-leading question,which may have inadvertently placed certain demand characteristics (Orne, 1962) upon the child leading them toprovide a higher level of purposeful responses. This notion requires further investigation as the question wordingused may have resulted in an overestimation of children's predisposition to provide teleological explanations.Other studies have used different techniques to understand children’s propensity for teleologicalreasoning. Kelemen (1999b) gave children in US Grades 1, 2 and 4 multiple choice questions (MCQ), for fourOrganisms and four Natural Objects, each containing a social or self-serving teleological and a scientific option.ICLS 2016 Proceedings775© ISLSAcross the age range 70.5% of 1st Graders gave teleological responses for Natural Objects and 53.0% forOrganisms parts; 2nd Graders responses were 75.0% for Natural Objects and 65.5% for Organisms; 4th Gradersresponses were 56.5% for Natural Objects and 59.5% for Organisms. However, dichotomous MCQ could beproblematic as they may not measure what the respondent believes, merely which answer they think is morecorrect, or which option they dislike the least. This concern is shared by Kampourakis et al. (2012, p. 283) whomaintain that the use of MCQ may not have provided a comprehensive view of children’s actual beliefs. Toexplore this they used similar methods to Kelemen (1999b) but instead of MCQ, used open-ended questions on awritten survey. Their findings support a selective application of teleology, not a promiscuous application; Naturalobjects traits received 17.2% teleological responses for Pre-schoolers, 9.0% for 1st Graders and 4.7% for 2ndGraders. Organism traits received 27.4% teleological responses for Pre-schoolers, 26.68% for first graders and21.48% for Second graders. The difference in levels of teleological answers in the studies by Kelemen andKampourakis et al. suggests that assessment method, MCQ or open-ended questions, could influence children’stendency to choose or provide teleological explanations. Although this finding is only relevant to Natural Objects,Organisms received similar levels of teleological answers in both papers, perhaps because functional rationalescould be used to explain the appendages of Organisms. Therefore, questions investigating organism parts couldbe leading, as a functional-teleological explanation is a plausible and scientifically acceptable response.It should be noted that Kelemen (1999a) is not the only researcher to use what could be consideredquestions that lead to, or require, a teleological answer. Keil (1994) used MCQ options in the form of X helps Yand it is better for X to have Y. Other abstracted examples of open-ended and MCQ include, why do these X’s doY? (Polling & Evans, 2002), why does Y have X? (Kampourakis et al., 2012), why do you think X had Y? (Kelemen,1999b). The latter two question stems being particularly difficult to answer for Organism appendages withoutusing functional-teleology (e.g. an eagle's wing can be considered to be for flight). These possible leadingquestions share a similar stem, either the question is asking for the purpose of a certain topic (X), or for the purposeof an appendage (X) of a certain topic (Y). These two questions stems, What is the purpose of X and What is thepurpose of X for Y can be further combined into what is the purpose of X, or simply what is X for? This generalisedquestion stem, of what may possibly be a teleologically-leading question, is the same as the one used by Kelemen(1999a). Therefore, it provides a suitable example of a leading-treatment.The purpose of this study was to investigate the hypothesis that question wording influences children’sresponses to questions about scientific phenomena, with a leading treatment (what is X for?) predicted to result inmore teleological responses than an open treatment (why is there X?). Furthermore, it was hypothesised that aschildren's age increased the levels of scientific responses would increase, however it was not clear how age wouldinteract with question format.MethodParticipantsThe participants were 66 primary school children, aged 68- to 104-months-old (5- to 8-years-old) (M = 85.59, SD= 10.84, Female = 34). Participants were equally split between Year 1, 2 and 3, no child was considered to haveEnglish as an Additional Language or Special Educational Needs.ProcedureThe study used a repeated-measures design, the two levels of the question wording variable were the leadingtreatment (what is X for?) and the open-treatment (why is there X?). Children received five of each question formatacross ten topics of Natural Phenomena. Piloting was conducted to find appropriate topics which childrenrecognised and could articulate a response. The topics used, following piloting, were: Day, Darkness, Light, Night,Rain, Rainbows, Storms, Snow, Waterfalls and Waves. The topics were fully counterbalanced across treatmenttype to avoid influencing the main variable. Children were randomly assigned to treatment groups (leadingtreatment 1st or open-treatment 1st).Children took part in structured individual interviews, in a shared space outside of the main classrooms.All interviews began with a short drawing to settle the child and act as an icebreaker. Following this, participantsreceived either their five leading-questions or open-questions, depending upon treatment group. If a response wasunclear the probe can you tell me a bit for about Q? (Q being the unclear statement) was used to elicit moreinformation. If a child declined to answer, or suggested they did not know, the interviewer moved to the nextquestion. After the first set of questions the participant played another round of the drawing game, beforecompleting the interview with the remaining five leading- or open-questions.ICLS 2016 Proceedings776© ISLSMeasuresTo investigate the influence of question wording children's explanations were transcribed and coded as either ateleological or a scientific response; answers consisting of non-sequiturs, descriptions and 'don't know' responseswere removed for analysis. The coding rubric is outlined in Table 1. A tenth of the data, 66 responses, were codedby a second coder, calculation of Cohen’s K (K = .885, p < .001) revealed a high level of agreement.Table 1: Coding rubric for categorising explanation typeType of response(score)Teleologicalexplanation (0)ExplanationExampleThe existence of the topic is referred toby invoking a purpose, implying that thetopic aids another entityScientific explanation(1)The existence of the topic is explained viaa, simplified, causal explanation.However, does not have to bescientifically correct. The topic is notimbued with purposeNon-sequiturs, descriptive answers,‘don’t know’ and non-responsesNight is "for making the sky dark sowe can have a little sleep"Rain "is for keeping all the plants,grass and flowers healthy""when it rains and suns at the sametime it makes, it makes a rainbow"When "it's very cold the rain comesdown and it freezes and becomessnow""my favourite rainbow colour is red""when it's stormy the floor gets wet"Other (uncoded)ResultsAcross the two treatments, 72 out of 660 responses were coded as 'other', 456 (69.0%) were coded as teleologicalanswers and 132 (20.0%) as scientific. Removing the 'other' data resulted in a split of 77.6% teleological answersand 22.4% scientific responses. Separating the data by question wording suggests a strong influence of questionwording, with 92.12% of the leading-treatment's responses being teleological answers compared to 68.18%teleological explanations for the open-treatment.A two-way ANCOVA was conducted, with the independent variable of question wording (leading- andopen-treatment), and the dependent variable of summed scores for the five leading-questions and five openquestions. Teleological responses scored 0 and scientific answers scored 1; therefore, each treatment has a possiblesummed score of 0-5. The covariate was mean-centred age in months. Means are displayed in Table 2.Table 2: Table mean scientific responses by treatment typeTreatmentLeading-treatmentOpen-treatmentTotal(n = 66)Mean score as % ofscientific responses (SD)7.88 (13.979)31.82 (30.377)Leading-treatment 1st(n = 33)Mean score as % ofscientific responses (SD)7.88 (15.763)26.06 (26.685)Open-treatment 1st(n = 33)Mean score as % ofscientific responses (SD)7.88 (12.185)37.56 (33.074)The ANCOVA showed a significant effect of question wording upon response type, F (1, 63) = 44.579,p. < .001, η2 = .414, with the leading-treatment resulting in a significantly larger number of teleological responsesthan the open-treatment. The covariate of age in months was a significant predictor of response type F (1, 63) =4.402, p. < .040, η2 = .065 but did not interact with question wording, F (1,63) = 0.013, p. > .05, η2 < .001,confirming that, regardless of treatment type, children provided less teleological explanations with age. Checkson the counterbalancing confirmed there was no significant influence of treatment order F (1, 63) = 4.402, p. >.05, η2 = .065 upon participant score, so randomisation was successful. Furthermore, there was no interactionbetween treatment order and question wording, F (1, 63) = 2.592, p. > .05, η2 = .040. When receiving the leadingtreatment first, children were not primed to provide teleological explanations for their second set of questionsusing the open-treatment, nor when receiving the open-treatment first were children primed to provide scientificanswers.Conclusion and implicationsThe results confirm that children (aged 5- to 7-years-old) have a strong teleological bias to provide purposefulexplanations for Natural Phenomena. With regards to this debate around if children employ promiscuous- orICLS 2016 Proceedings777© ISLSselective-teleology these results supports the former. When receiving the open-treatment 68.18% of children’sexplanations were teleological answers, a score similar to the findings of Kelemen (1999b), 56.5-75.0% forNatural Objects, than to those of (Kampourakis et al., 2012), 4.7-17.2 %. However, it should be noted that thisstudy is limited by only investigating topics of Natural Phenomena.In relation to the influence of question wording, the results confirm the hypothesis: the leading-treatment(what is X for?) resulted in children giving predominantly teleological answers and the open-treatment (why isthere X?) provided less teleological and more scientific responses. Consequently, research employing leadingquestion may have inadvertently placed demand characteristics upon their participants, leading to a higher levelof teleological explanations. This result does not undermine the findings of Kelemen (1999a), and others citedabove. However, it does suggest an overestimation of children’s teleological tendencies; indicating that childrenmay be more scientifically competent in their explanations than the literature suggests. Further research would beneeded to ascertain the influence of question wording for different ontological categories, although this may beproblematic with Organisms or Appendages where functional-teleological explanations could be consideredappropriate. While children’s tendency to provide teleological explanations decreased with age, supportingKelemen’s (1999b) and (Kampourakis et al., 2012) findings, the influence of question wording did not diminish:all ages were equally influence by treatment type. Therefore, the finding that question wording can result in anoverestimation of teleological tendencies may be applicable to a wider age-range.The main implication arising from this study is the need for research assessing children's teleological orscientific explanations to avoid the use of teleologically-leading questions. However, an educational implicationwould be that if young children advocate less teleological explanations for Natural Phenomena that previouslyindicated, they may be more susceptible to the teaching of causal accounts. This conclusion forms part of a largerresearch project which investigates how question topics within the same ontological category affect children'sresponses. It also analyses the type of teleological explanations to examine why children may be providingpurposeful rationales. For example, are children using teleology to appropriately explain a function (functionalteleology), to suggest a topic has been designed for a purpose (design-teleology) or to propose a purpose for whicha topic could be used (relational-teleology). While analysis is ongoing, initial results suggest that selection of topicand disregard for the type of teleology children are advocating may also lead to an overestimation of children'steleological tendencies.ReferencesAyla, F.J. (1970). Teleological explanations in evolutionary biology. Philosophy of Science, 37(1), 1-15.Hanke, D. (2004). Teleology: The explanation that bedevils biology. In J. Cornwell (Ed.), Explanations: Styles ofexplanation in science. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Kampourakis, K. (2014). Understanding evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Kampourakis, K., Palaiokrassa, E., Papadopoulou, M., Pavlidi, V., & Argyropoulou, M. (2012). Children'sintuitive teleology: Shifting the focus of evolution education research. Evolution: Education & Outreach,5, 279-291.Keil, F.C. (1994). The birth and nurturance of concepts by domains: The origins of concepts of living things. InL. A. Hirschfeld & S. A. Gelman (Eds.), Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and culture(pp. 234-254). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Kelemen, D. (1999a). The scope of teleological thinking in preschool children. Cognition, 70(3), 241-272.Kelemen, D. (1999b). Why are rocks pointy? Children's preference for teleological explanations of the naturalworld. Developmental Psychology, 35(6), 1440-1452.Ojalehto, B., Waxman, S.R., & Medin, D.L. (2013). Teleological reasoning about nature: Intentional design orrelational perspectives? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17(4), 166-171.Orne, M.T. (1962). On the social psychology of the psychological experiment: With particular reference todemand characteristics and their implications. American Psychologist, 17, 776-783.Polling, D.A., & Evans, E.M. (2002). Why do birds of a feather flock together? Developmental change in the useof multiple explanations: Intention, teleology and essentialism. British Journal of DevelopmentalPsychology, 20(1), 89-112.Ruse, M. (1989). Teleology in biology: Is it a cause for concern? TREE, 4(2), 51-54.Zohar, A., & Ginossar, S. (1998). Lifting the taboo regarding teleological and anthropomorphism in biologyeducation - heretical suggestions. Science Education, 82, 679-697.AcknowledgmentsThis project is funded by the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) [grant number 13366484].ICLS 2016 Proceedings778© ISLS