Acceptance and Refusal:Examining Conflicting Goals Within Co-DesignKristina Stamatis, University of Colorado Boulder, kristina.stamatis@colorado.eduAbstract: This case study examines a small co-design team within a larger multi-year designbased implementation research (DBIR) project. During the 2015-2016 school year, a group ofteachers and researchers collaboratively designed and piloted four English language arts (ELA)project-based learning (PBL) curricular units. Teachers and researchers split into four teams,one of which was tasked with designing a project that examined relationships between humansand technology. Throughout this team’s design process, co-designers encountered moments oftension that led to increased productivity; however, these tensions also pointed to the ways thatparticipants struggled to navigate multiple roles and goals in agentic ways. This study usesWertsch’s (1991) notion of mediated action to examine the ways that designed curricular objectsmediate co-designers’ multiple roles (Penuel et al., 2015) and connected goals.Keywords: Co-design, Curriculum Design, English Language Arts, Project-Based LearningIntroductionCollaborative design (co-design) has roots in participatory design, a process through which researchers anddesigners team with users to develop products that solve specific problems, giving attention to details with anintention of promoting change (Latour, 2008; Voogt et al., 2015). Education researchers have adoptedparticipatory design tenets to promote the inclusion of practitioners in the development of research and curriculum(Penuel et al., 2007). While educational research often points to the ways that co-design can empower teachersby shifting practice and offering space for acknowledged agency (Leary et al., 2016; Severance et al., 2016), moreresearch is needed to establish understandings of the roles co-designers perform, the multiple goals attached toeach of those roles, and the ways that acceptance and refusal of designed objects can demonstrate agency.During the 2015-2016 school year, nearly 25 teachers and researchers began a project to collaborativelydesign a 9th grade English language arts (ELA) project-based learning (PBL) curriculum. In this paper, I examinethe ways that curricular objects mediated co-designers’ multiple roles (Penuel et al., 2015) and goals, sometimesleading to tensions around the acceptance or refusal of prototypes during the iterative design process. Analyzingdata from a small team of co-designers, I explore the ways that these tensions may hold implications for thedevelopment of co-designed projects. I ask the following research questions:•How do individual designers illustrate and articulate their roles within a small co-design team?•In what ways do designers’ acceptance or refusal of designed objects reflect agency in navigatingtheir roles and connected goals within co-design?Related worksThis paper draws upon sociocultural approaches to learning and goal setting as mediated action (Wertsch, 1991),as well as conceptions of co-design that center collaborators as agentic actors within communities of practice(Lave & Wenger, 1991). In co-design teams, members play multiple roles in order to navigate the complexitiesof iterative design (Design-Based Research Collective, 2003).In this study, co-designers described playing a number of simultaneous roles (e.g., teacher, parent,designer, researcher, coach), each of which intersected with multiple goals that were determined by differentstakeholders (e.g., individual co-designers, districts and administrators, researcher agendas, and project funders).Designed curricular objects served as artifacts that mediated action (Wertsch, 1991) around participants' roles andgoals. Co-designers’ creation, adoption, adaptation, and refusal of artifacts, both within design meetings andduring classroom-based implementation, uncovered some of the ways that individual designers navigated betweentheir many roles to pursue oft-contradictory project, district, and individual goals. Tensions appeared to arise whenthese multiple goals intersected with co-design practices that thrust participants into boundary practices (Penuelet al., 2015) and led them to accept or refuse the co-designed objects and activities.Research context and methodsICLS 2018 Proceedings1025© ISLSIn the summer of 2015, primary investigators met with funders to develop goals for creating a 9th grade ELAcurriculum that would incorporate social-emotional learning (SEL) and universal design for learning (UDL)principles into a project-based learning (PBL) context. In August of that year, a team of 14 teachers and 11researchers held a design institute to create shared understandings of PBL, SEL, and UDL and to develop initialideas around four curricular themes. These themes were situated under the umbrella concept “Composing OurWorld,” and included heroism, change, place-based literacy, and technology. From this initial meeting, smalldesign teams formed around each of the four project themes, though the larger project team continued to meetevery other month to offer professional development and refine shared goals.Teachers chose the theme they were most interested in pursuing. Four 9th grade teachers from threeschools in two districts collaborated with three university-based researchers (two graduate research assistants andone primary investigator) to co-design the Singularity project. We began with Kurzweil’s (2005) technologicalSingularity—when technology outpaces human intelligence—and designed toward goals of humanizing studentswithin classroom spaces, while incorporating design criteria and ELA objectives developed by other stakeholders.The researchers on this team each had experience teaching 9th grade ELA and had worked in teachereducation. The teachers had varying degrees of experience in the classroom. Lisa (all participant names arepseudonyms), beginning her second year of teaching at a new Core Knowledge charter school, identified as anovice teacher, “entering the project to learn from others.” Maria, who taught at West High School, had beenteaching for six years and frequently referred to her own expertise in the classroom, as did James, who was athird-year teacher at Ridgeview High School. Though Elizabeth had ten years of ELA classroom experience atWest High School and was the most experienced teacher on our team, she never claimed expertise, insteadreferring to herself as practicing.The Singularity team met monthly during the fall 2015 semester to plan the project that teachers wouldpilot in the spring of 2016. As designers collaborated and began to define roles, individual, district, and projectgoals emerged, causing tensions common within the co-design process (Potvin et al., in press; Penuel et al., 2015).Data sourcesThis study draws from design-based research (Cobb et al., 2003) to examine the ways that participants understoodtheir role within co-design during the first year of a long-term co-design project. The data used for this analysiswas primarily from the Singularity team meetings, classroom observations, and interviews; however, interviewswith PIs and field notes from whole-project meetings were also included as data sources. For nine months,researchers conducted eight individual interviews with teachers, and collected field notes and audio recordingsduring more than 20 classroom visits and 16 design meetings. Additionally, the author conducted interviews withteachers and four researcher co-designers from the larger team to better understand participants’ views of theirindividual roles and connected goals within the co-design process.As a member of the co-design team, my role was that of participant observer (Spradley, 1980). I analyzeddata sources using first-cycle and deductive coding to identify data that revealed the ways that participantsapproached co-design, and inductive coding to remain open to emerging analysis of participants ideas of roles andgoals (Miles, Huberman, & Saldana, 2014). During second and third-cycle coding, I sought out patterns, writinganalytic memos to make sense of critical moments and grouping representative examples into themes.FindingsIn this study, co-designers entered the design process with multiple goals that were determined by their roleswithin districts, outside of school in personal contexts, and as designers for the Compose Our World project. Forexample, teacher co-designers were at once expected to play the role of designer with the goal of piloting tenetsof PBL in their classrooms, while also adhering to district expectations for teaching ELA skills in traditional ways.Drawing upon research that acknowledges the inherent tensions in co-design when designers attempt to navigatemultiple roles (Potvin et al., in press; Penuel et al., 2015), this study sought to understand how individuals navigatevarious roles and goals through the refusal or acceptance of curriculum.Understanding intersecting roles and goals in a small co-design teamCo-designers worked to acknowledge that establishing community can be tenuous because participants enter withvarying backgrounds (Penuel et al., 2015). Researchers made efforts to position teachers as agentic experts byproviding opportunities for choice in small design teams and by collaboratively developing design norms. Withinthe Singularity team, participants initially discussed co-design as a democratic process.Despite the expectations of researchers that teachers would take the lead as designers in developingflexible projects that could be supported in a variety of contexts and with a variety of content and standards, thefour teachers on the Singularity team each established different goals for themselves as co-designers. Lisa andICLS 2018 Proceedings1026© ISLSMaria consistently returned to district mandates during the design process, often expressing frustration that theproject was “not focused on standards.” At different points, they each refused the co-designed curriculum ratherthan adapting it to meet their classroom needs. In contrast, Elizabeth stated that she was comfortable piloting newideas in her classroom. She self-identified as a “social justice educator” and wrote that she joined the co-designproject because she was interested in providing students with “opportunities to build relationships.” Elizabethconsistently adapted and changed the co-designed curriculum to use ELA content that she felt would best “reflectstudents.” James explained that his goal was to “dive into something new” with his students. In an interview, hedescribed seeing himself as a “leader within the [co-design] group,” as well as the person “most comfortable withchaos” in implementing something “not quite finished.” While James taught very little traditional content in ourobservations, he implemented the Singularity project with the most fidelity.Team meetings illustrated the ways that both project and individual goals were expected to be met whenteachers shared the role of designer. While the researchers attempted to recruit teachers to lead portions of thesemeetings, teachers frequently expressed hesitation. Analysis of audio recordings showed that though teacherswere willing to guide meetings toward classroom problems of practice, most expressed reticence to take on rolesthat would require time spent designing or collaborating outside of monthly meetings. In an interview, Lisaexplained that though her initial goal in joining the project had been to participate in “develop[ing] strongercurriculum,” she hesitated to lead design because she was concerned about “burnout.” Lisa also reflected thatwhile she appreciated the activities presented in meetings, she needed “to reinstate more self-care” rather thantaking on additional responsibilities. The goals Lisa had as a teacher, a co-designer, and a person outside of schoolconflicted and caused her to feel tension in choosing between herself and her work.Although researchers were initially perplexed by the perceived hesitancy of teachers to prototypecurricular activities—one email correspondence between researchers questioned how to “transfer ownership” ofthe project—researchers ultimately adopted the role of lead designers, bringing prototypes to the group forfeedback. While we expected teachers to embrace leadership roles if explicit attention was given to democratizingthe co-design process (Voogt et al., 2015), teachers on this team struggled to navigate between various goals whentheir multiple roles were at odds with one another. As Lisa’s correspondence illustrates, her goals for protectingpersonal time and space, creating new curricula, and upholding school requirements conflicted.Acceptance and refusal in co-designOf the four teachers on the Singularity team, Elizabeth and James actively piloted the project in their classrooms.Maria took up some of the activities, but refused others, and Lisa left the co-design team, explaining that she wasfeeling “overwhelmed” and could not see how to “make the project work.” If curriculum objects are seen asmediating action (Wertsch, 1991), then the acceptance and/or refusal of these objects can help us understand theways that the co-designers on this team navigated between (and asserted agency within) their multiple roles.Elizabeth was the only teacher to adapt the curriculum, supplementing activities and content with otherresources that better mirrored her students’ experiences. In an interview, Elizabeth explained that she activelypiloted the curriculum because it allowed her to address “a crisis point in [her] career.” She stated, “I don’t feellike I’m very effective anymore and I find myself going to these places of ‘what’s wrong with kids these days?’And then I’m like, did I just say that? Like, what’s wrong with you these days?” Elizabeth wanted to change herclassroom in ways that honored “students’ social and emotional well-being” and “better reflected social justice.”The curriculum design goals matched her goals as a teacher, and so Elizabeth was able to navigate her roles acrossthese spaces in ways that she and the research team deemed successful.While James and Elizabeth had very different reasons for co-designing, each was able to create goals forco-designing that fit with the other roles they played. For James, the co-design process felt chaotic, but herepeatedly described the ways that he was “comfortable with chaos in the classroom” and wanted to “embracechaos because it’s how we learn.” James said he saw himself as a leader with a lot of district flexibility. He neverexpressed a tension between project and district goals, and he made few adjustments to the co-designed projectduring his implementation because he was more concerned with “big concepts than specific standards.”For Maria, implementation of the project was more complicated. While Maria’s administrationencouraged implementation, she articulated her goals for students as more closely aligned to standards. Mariaoften argued vehemently in co-design meetings when her proposed activities were changed, and duringimplementation, researchers observed her refusal of most of the co-designed project materials in favor of theoriginal activities that she had proposed to the rest of the team. While Maria’s implementation of the project wasinitially analyzed by researchers as furthest from the research team’s intentions for PBL, Maria’s refusal of theco-designed curriculum points to the achievement of a secondary project goal, that of positioning teachers asagentic and capable professionals. While neither Maria nor Lisa were able to reconcile their multiple roles andgoals within this project, each of them used refusal as a means of asserting their agency as co-designers.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1027© ISLSSignificanceFor each of the teachers, data analysis showed that the more participants see goals from their multiple rolesreflected in the co-design process, the more likely they are to adopt the goals of co-design projects. Wertsch (1991)explained, “human action typically employs ‘mediational means’ such as tools and language, and that thesemediational means shape the action in essential ways” (p. 12). Actions reflect the roles and connected goals withwhich individuals identify. In this study, co-designers were expected to navigate their multiple roles in ways thatwould allow them to meet the goals attached to each of those roles by different stakeholders. As tensions arose,the co-designers on this team exhibited agency through the acceptance or refusal of mediating curricular objects,pointing to the ways that these roles and goals intersect. While researchers initially analyzed teacher’s refusal ofthe Singularity project as evidence of some teachers’ failure to engage in the co-design process, Wertsch’s theoryoffers a lens through which to see all of these co-designers as agentic actors reaching for disparate goals. Byencouraging participants to voice their multiple roles and connected goals, the researchers may have found moresuccess in encouraging teachers to lead the design process and/or pilot curriculum. As researchers continue topursue co-design as a means of educational transformation and empowerment for teachers, we must also take intoaccount not only the multiple roles that co-designers play (Penuel et al., 2015), but also the ways that goalsattached to those roles intersect.ReferencesCobb, P., Confrey, J., diSessa, A., Lehrer, R., and Schauble, L., (2003). Design experiments in educationalresearch. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9–13.Corbin, J. & Strauss, A. (2015). Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and procedures for developinggrounded theory. 4th Ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.Design-Based Research Collective. (2003). Design-Based Research: An Emerging Paradigm for EducationalInquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5-8.Kali, Y., McKenney, S., & Sagy, O. (2015). Teachers as designers of technology enhanced learning. InstructionalScience, 43(2), 173-179.Kurzweil, R. (2005). The Singularity is Near. New York, NY: Viking Press.Latour, B. (2008). A Cautious Prometheus? A few steps toward a philosophy of design. In J. Glynne, F. Hackney,& V. Minton (Eds.), Networks of design. (pp. 2-10). Boca Raton, FL: Brown Walker Press.Leary, H., Severance, S., Penuel, W.R., Quigley, D., Sumner, T., & Devaul, H. (2016). Designing a deeply digitalscience curriculum: Supporting teacher learning and implementation with organizing technologies.Journal of Science Teacher Education, 27(1), 61-77.Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldana, J. (2014). Qualitative data analysis: A methods sourcebook. ThousandOaks, CA: Sage.Penuel, W.R., Allen, A.R., Coburn, C.E., & Farrell, C. (2015). Conceptualizing Research-Practice Partnershipsas Joint Work at Boundaries. Journal of Education for Students Placed at Risk, 20(1-2), 182-197.Penuel, W.R., Roschelle, J. & Shechtman, N. (2007). Designing Formative Assessment Software with Teachers.Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning. 2(1). 51-74.Potvin, A. S., Kaplan, R. G., Boardman, A. G., & Polman, J. L. (in press). Configurations in co-design: Participantstructures in partnership work. In Bevan, B., & Penuel, W. R. (Eds.), Connecting research and practicefor educational improvement: Ethical and equitable approaches. New York: Routledge.Severance, S., Penuel, W.R., Sumner, T., & Leary, H. (2016). Organizing for Teacher Agency in Curricular CoDesign. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25(4), 531-564.Spradley, James P. (1980). Participant Observation. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.Voogt, J., Laferrière, T., Breuleux, A., Itow, R.C., Hickey, D.T., & McKenney, S. (2015). “Collaborative Designas a Form of Professional Development.” Instructional Science. 43. pp. 259-282.Wertsch, J.V. (1991). Voices of the Mind: A Sociocultural Approach to Mediate Action. Cambridge, MA: HarvardUniversity Press.AcknowledgementsWe are grateful to participating teachers. This work was funded by the George Lucas Educational Foundation.All opinions are the author’s.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1028© ISLS