Expanding the Maker Movement by Recentering “Building forOthers” in Construction ActivitiesNathan Holbert, Teachers College, Columbia University, holbert@tc.columbia.eduSawaros Thanapornsangsuth, Teachers College, Columbia University, st2839@tc.columbia.eduAbstract: The goal of the Bots for Tots project is to develop theory around the role of activityframing on diverse participation in making and construction practices. In Bots for Tots, adesign-based research project in three locations over two years, builders create a “dream toy”for a younger member of their local community. We hypothesized that building for otherswould appeal to young girls that may not typically see building robots and racecars as aligningwith their goals and values. Data indicates participating girls consistently considered their“client” throughout the design process and were interested in continuing to build for othersafter the project ended. We show how the degree to which the “other” impacts theconstruction process depends on the quality of the relationship between builder and client. Wepropose recentering “women’s ways of knowing” in maker practices to broaden participationamong women in STEM domains.IntroductionThe “maker movement” has become an international phenomenon. No longer just the purview of a handful oftechnology enthusiasts, the opportunity to design and produce unique artifacts using high tech prototypingequipment such as 3D printers, laser cutters, and microcontrollers has extended beyond the garage anduniversity laboratory. Schools and educational programs have embraced so-called makerspaces in hope ofleveraging these tools and activities to engage young people in STEM domains and practices (Halverson &Sheridan, 2014). Despite this exciting development, longstanding traditions of “making”—such as sewing andtextile work that has traditionally been performed by women—have mostly been ignored in the mainstream faceof the movement (Buechley, 2016), leaving many to question whether the embrace of the maker movement byeducators will help to address or exacerbate the overwhelming gender gap in STEM domains. Enthusiastic aboutthe cognitive and sociocultural possibilities enabled by construction activities (Papert, 1980), we propose thatwhen making is framed as leveraging multiple epistemologies, ways of knowing, and diverse materials andpractices it can be a powerful method of connecting diverse learners to STEM domains.The goal of the Bots for Tots (BfT) project is to develop theory around the role of activity framing ondiverse participation in making and construction practices (Holbert, 2016). Specifically, we seek to identify theways in which making for others impacts when and how young girls engage with construction activities. BfTwas conceived of as design-based research and implemented over two years in three locations. At the core of theBfT project is a shift from the typical maker activity which has learners make something for themselves toinstead have builders create a “dream toy” for a younger member of their local community. We hypothesize thatbuilding for others will appeal to young girls that may not see STEM domains as aligning with their goals andvalues. In this paper, we present data from implementations conducted over two years and show how the “other”was a constant focus of young builders as they first became motivated to participate in the project, as theyovercame obstacles as part of the design process, and as they considered additional construction opportunitiesbeyond the BfT program.Theoretical frameworkDespite an explicit focus by education researchers, practitioners, and policy makers, women make up a smallsegment of the STEM workforce. Recent surveys suggest women hold just 25% of computing occupations andmake up only 15% of the engineering workforce (NSF, 2015; NCWIT, 2015). Many factors contribute to thisgender gap including a misogynistic culture that pervades STEM workplaces (Posner, 2017; Ratcliffe, 2015),the low number of female role models and support (Margolis & Fisher, 2003), as well as a misalignmentbetween the values and goals held by many women and their perceptions of the work of STEM domains(Diekman et al., 2010; Intel, 2014).As maker activities have become a popular method of engaging young learners in STEM practices, it isimportant to make clear that the popular “maker movement” has major diversity issues. For example, 70% ofthose attending the 2014 Maker Faire in San Francisco were men, an overwhelming 97% had college degrees,and attendees had a median household income of $130,000 (Maker Media, 2014). Examining the 53 covers ofall Make: magazines published over 10 years, Buechley (2016) found that only 16% showcased women or girls.ICLS 2018 Proceedings488© ISLSOne promising avenue for addressing the recent and narrow definition of making popularized by Make:has been to recenter making practices such as sewing and paper crafts that have existed for centuries and havetraditionally been performed by women. This effort has included the design of new tools and technologies suchas the Lilypad Arduino that brings computational power to textiles (Buechley, 2006), as well as a diverse arrayof workshops and activities that engage young women in designing electronically embedded clothing (Kafai,Fields, & Searle, 2014; Peppler & Glosson, 2012). Materials and tools are cultural artifacts that communicategendered expectations. By expanding the possibilities of what these tools and materials can do, we expand whatcounts as legitimate STEM activity.This work has pushed the research community to look beyond the overtly masculine definition ofSTEM to include the unique practices and values of the visual and manual Arts. And yet, too often the importantintellectual contribution of these programs of research are oversimplified in practice and reduced to robots forboys and fashion and e-textiles for girls (Kafai et al., 2014; Kafai & Peppler, 2014). Consequently, our work hassought to further broaden this design space by considering not just the materials and tools of construction, butalso the underlying values and motivation at the heart of making. Not just “who makes and with what,” but also“why and for whom?”We find Belenky et al.’s (1986) work on women’s ways of knowing a compelling framework forreframing the value and goals of making to be about building connections. They argue that women are oftendriven by the desire to connect with knowledge and with “the other” at a personal level—that “connectedknowers learn through empathy” (p. 115). Though these values are not restricted to women (and some womenmay value traditionally “masculine” activities and practices), these ways of knowing are ignored by STEMpractitioners or worse, actively disparaged and belittled (Posner, 2017; Ratcliffe, 2015). Evidence of the value ofreframing these activities to focus on contributing to one’s community can be found in the project-based servicelearning literature. Schools of engineering that have adopted project-based service learning have found greatersuccess in both recruiting and retaining women and other underrepresented groups (Barrington & Duffy, 2007;Swan, Paterson, & Bielefeldt, 2009).MethodsThe BfT project was designed to engage young makers (builders) in building toys for other children in theircommunity (clients). This project was conceived of as design-based research (The DBR Collective, 2003) andimplemented iteratively over two years in three different locations, with each iteration evolving to addressunique challenges and contexts and in response to ongoing data analysis. The design-based researchmethodology allows us to compare iterations of the BfT design across each version and between contextsthereby informing theory at the intersection of the design and student learning.In the first year of the project, all 4th grade students (ages 9-10) from a public elementary school in alarge urban city in the US were invited to attend a series of five free Saturday workshops where the goal wouldbe to “build new toys for younger kids in your school.” These workshops were run by the first author and wereheld in a maker lab in the first author’s academic institution. While all 4th grade students received the flyeradvertising the workshop, due to space constraints only the first ten to respond and schedule a pre-workshopinterview were invited to participate. One participant that was interviewed was unable to attend the workshopsresulting in nine participants (seven girls and two boys). In this paper, we will refer to this implementation as“Y1 Public.”The following year, BfT was re-designed, in collaboration with a teacher partner, responding tofindings from our first implementation (extensive details about the design changes can be found in Holbert et al.,2017). In one of these implementations, BfT was once again presented to 4th grade students from the samepublic elementary school as in Y1 Public. However, in this implementation, BfT was structured as anafterschool club that met weekly for 1.5 hours during a semester resulting in 12 total sessions. Becauseafterschool clubs are often used as childcare, and the school controlled the sign up process, it is likely thatparents signed their children up to participate, rather than the students choosing to participate based on interest.This sign up process resulted in eight total participants (six boys and two girls). The BfT afterschool maker clubwas located in the school’s library and was facilitated by the second and first authors. We will refer to thisimplementation as “Y2 Public.”In the second year, we also implemented BfT in an all-girls private school in a nearby suburbancommunity. This implementation was run by our teacher co-designer who is employed by the school as thevisual arts instructor and was held in the school’s expansive “Design and Engineering Lab.” All 4th gradestudents were required to participate in the BfT project resulting in 41 girls (ages 9-11) spread across twoclasses. Each design session lasted 45 minutes and occurred approximately twice a month throughout the yearfor a total of 18 sessions. In this paper, we will refer to this implementation as “Y2 Private.”ICLS 2018 Proceedings489© ISLSAll Y1 and Y2 making sessions followed approximately the same overall structure shown in Table 1.Introduction sessions introduced participants to the tools and techniques they would use throughout theworkshop. Following these introductory activities, builders interviewed their clients about their dream toysasking: “What kind of toys do you like? If you could imagine any toy, what would it look like and how wouldyou play with it?” The next sessions included opportunities to brainstorm possible toy designs that would meetthe requests of the clients, prototyping, and eventually building the final toy. Finally, builders delivered theirnewly constructed toys to their clients during a “play date.” Two important changes to the BfT implementationin Y2 included allowing builders to revise their target client in Y2 Public and the addition of a client feedbackand reflection session in Y2 Private.Table 1: While the overall structure of each BfT implementation did not change, additional opportunities tointeract with the clients and reflect on design ideas was added in year twoY1 Public (3 hr sessions)IntroductionOmnianimal (wood)Client Interview (20 min)Y2 Public (1.5 hr sessions)Introduction3D cardOmnianimal (cardboard) x 2Client Interview (20 min)Y2 Private (45 min sessions)IntroductionOmnianimal (cardboard) x 3Client Interview (20 min)Collage of Client InterestsBrainstormRevise ClientBrainstormBrainstorm x 2PrototypePrototype x 2Build Final ToyBuild Final Toy x 3Play date (30 min)Play date (30 min)Prototype x 2Client FeedbackDesign RevisionBuild Final Toy x 7Play date (30 min)Each session was video recorded and detailed field notes were taken by researchers present in theroom. The research team conducted semi-structured interviews with participants to determine makers’ priorexperiences with technology, construction, and crafts as well as knowledge of relevant concepts or skills. In Y1Public, most all participants were interviewed both before and after the workshop. In Y2 Public, all participantswere only interviewed before the workshop due to scheduling difficulties. Twelve participants were randomlyselected to be interviewed before and after the BfT implementation in Y2 Private. Interviews were videorecorded and transcribed. Transcripts were coded “bottom-up” where coding categories emerged from patternsin the data. A subset of the codes relevant to this analysis were applied by outside coders. Interrater reliabilitywas computed for each data set with all sets achieving greater than 0.7 Cohen’s Kappa initially and improving togreater than 0.9 after discussion.A large number of artifacts were produced throughout this project. These include worksheets (MyClient Profile, client feedback, etc.) and notebooks completed by the builders, photographs and roaming videorecordings of participants working on their projects, and photographs of toy designs throughout the constructionprocess. These artifacts provided a broad picture of each participant’s work, such as whether they workedindependently or alone, as well as their level of expertise both in technique and constructed toy.ResultsThe central hypothesis of the BfT program was that building for others would be a compelling way of framingthe value of making for young girls. We expected that young girls might be excited to work with youngerchildren in their community, but also assumed that the quality of the builder-client relationship would impact thedegree to which this activity felt meaningful to the builders. Each implementation provided a different builderclient relationship which allowed us to interrogate the role this relationship played throughout the constructionprocess.Bots for Tots year oneICLS 2018 Proceedings490© ISLSIn the first implementation of the BfT project, we invited 4th grade builders to create toys for pre-Kindergarten(pre-K) children (age 4) in their school. Because the number of students in the pre-K class was greater than thatof the builders in the BfT project, Y1 Public builders were broken into groups of two and paired with five to sixpre-K clients. Consequently, when the builders first interviewed their clients and asked them to describe theirdream toys, each pre-K child described a different toy resulting in a large number of highly diverse requests. Forexample, one set of requests included a Pinky Pie pony, a phone, and a monster truck race car.Rather than abandon some ideas in favor of a more coherent design, teams took seriously each requestby the children. Some groups addressed this difficulty by combining many ideas into one toy, such as Tayla andInez’s “shopkins” plane car. Others chose to create multiple objects that could work together to satisfy thedesign requests. For example, Kelly, Raquel, and Kyle created a toy that included a Pinkie Pie pony doll phonethat rides a monster-truck-skateboard (Figure 1).Figure 1. Groups took the many diverse requests by the clients seriously, going as far as to merge a variety ofideas into multiple toys that worked together, such as the Pinkie Pie pony doll phone that rides a monster truckskateboard.The desires and requests of the clients also played a role in early phases of the construction process.When making design decisions about toys, teams often took on difficult tasks to meet the requests of the pre-Kclient. For example, when trying to decide which materials to use when making the wings and wheels of a toyplane, a builder from another team suggested something “squishy” so that the toy would be pleasant to cuddle.Another designer quickly spoke up stating, “I disagree that the wings should be squishy! Cause isn’t it anairplane and is supposed to fly? So how’s it going to fly if the wings are squishy!”When eight Y1 Public builders were interviewed after the project (one of the girls was unable toschedule a post-interview), three builders expressed some disappointment in what they created and six indicatedthey would like to continue to add to or modify their designs. However, all eight interviewed children told usthey felt their design was a success. For example, Juan stated, “I felt happy because the kids were happy andthey were like each one were playing with the toys!” Similarly, when asked if they’d rather make for themselvesnext time or for someone else, five of the six girls interviewed told us they’d prefer to make for someone else(due to an error made by the interviewer, one of the girls was not asked the question during the interview,though responding to what made her proudest, she stated she liked seeing the kids’ faces, ‘‘it was so nice!’’).Bots for Tots year twoIn the second year of implementations we sought to increase the personal nature of the client-builderrelationship. Y2 Private offered a unique opportunity to leverage an existing mentorship program that had the 4thgrade girls of the school mentoring 1st graders (age 6) throughout the year. Using this existing program, our BfTimplementation in this school paired each 4th grade “Big Sister” 1:1 with her 1st grade “Little Sister” client(because of uneven numbers, one client had two builders). The builder-client pairs interacted multiple timesthroughout the school year (in addition to those facilitated by the BfT project) which allowed each builder to getto know the interests and personality of her client. This relationship was central to how and what the Y2 Privatebuilders created.Early in the semester builders interviewed their clients asking them to describe a dream toy. Using a“client profile sheet” builders were encouraged to identify the interest and likes of the client—including toys,materials, colors, etc.—as well as any objects or things they do not like. In a few cases, this interview providedbuilders with a precise specification for a dream toy to be built—for example Ava’s client indicated she wanteda “pop out monster car.” In most cases, however, this interview provided a list of potential toy features orpossible toy properties that could become part of a toy design. For example, Chloe’s client profile sheetsuggested her client likes stuffed animals, bounce balls, Magna-Tiles, and drawing, and does not like sharks.ICLS 2018 Proceedings491© ISLSUsing these lists, builders brainstormed toy ideas that might satisfy the requests of their clients anddrafted lists of materials and tools they might need to create this new toy. For example, Chloe starred “stuffedanimal” and “draw” on her list of toys and activities provided by her client. She then brainstormed ideas thatincluded extensive details about the materials and colors she would use in her construction. While Ava knew shewas to build a “pop out monster car,” a variety of concerns would need to be considered. For example, Avachose to make the car out of wood, planned to include a “squishy guy” with a “funny wig,” and intended to havethe car play music and light up when used. Ava’s description also included a constraint expressed by her client,“No pink or purple on or in the car.”Brainstormed ideas were eventually translated into a simple prototype which was then shown to theclient to gauge her interest in the design and to received feedback and suggestions for the final dream toy.Occasionally, the client simply provided additional ideas such as “more eyes” for Ava’s pop up monster car and“fluffier” for Chloe’s whiteboard bunny. However, others requested large changes. For example, when Ruthpresented her client with a prototype of a pillow with a voice recorder that spoke “I love you!” when squeezed,her client told her she would prefer a doll house. Ruth was initially disappointed, but after some encouragementfrom her classmates, she was soon back on track sawing sheets of plywood to build the new toy requested by herclient.Incorporating this feedback into their designs, the 4th grade builders then constructed the final toy overa few weeks and eventually delivered these toys to their clients in a final “play date” at the end of the year. Ofthe 40 projects being built by Y2 Private builders, 26 of them stayed consistent from the brainstorming phase allthe way to the final toy construction. 14 of the builders made changes after the initial brainstorm phase or afterreceiving feedback on their prototype from the client. The reasons for these changes varied. Three of the 14altered their design because they became enamored with a different material or because the materials availabledid not meet the requirements of their designs. Two of these girls changed their design due to requests by theclient. For example, Sari had originally planned to make a stuffed talking monkey as requested by her client.However, when playing with the prototype her client informed her she would rather have a white talking sheep.Sari used this feedback to alter her final toy design and produced a beautiful white fluffy sheep (Figure 2).Figure 2. Many girls altered their designs between the brainstorm, prototype, and final construction phases—such as Sari’s shift from a monkey to a sheep design seen here—due to requests made by the client.Eight of the 14 that altered their designs between the brainstorming and final toy stage did so becausethey had difficulty achieving the goals they set out in their design. These challenges varied from sawing woodthe correct length to cutting fabric for different shapes for stuffed animals. All eight of these girls instead choseto make a pillow for their clients (an activity they had done in class the previous year). While the pillow designwas not the design originally requested by the clients, all eight designs were personalized for each client andincorporated features that were requested, such as using the client’s favorite color, sewing the client’s name intothe pillow, or drawing pictures that were of interest to the client.After the year-long project, 12 randomly selected Y2 Private participants were interviewed. Similar toY1 Public, we asked participants if in a future BfT project they would prefer to build for themselves or forsomeone else. Ten of the 12 girls said they would like to make for others. LillyJane told us, “I like making stufffor others because I love seeing their reactions.” Panni explained, “Well, they really appreciate what I make forthem and I love hugs and they give me hugs!” Five of these 10 girls expressed interest in making something forthemselves as well as others. Two told us they’d prefer to just make something for themselves next time. Thesegirls felt proud of the toy they had made and were sad to part with their construction.Y2 Public offered a different set of results regarding the role of the client in the builders’ designs andconstruction processes. As with the other conditions, we had planned for builders to create dream toys forICLS 2018 Proceedings492© ISLSyounger children in their school. Similar to Y1 Public, we created teams of two builders and provided anopportunity for them to interview 5-6 pre-K clients. As builders worked to document their clients’ likes/dislikesin the construction of a collage, it became clear that they had little interest in building the toys requested by thepre-K children. One boy felt the “squeaky gem toy” requested by his clients was boring, others seemed moreinterested in making a collage using pictures relevant to the then upcoming 2016 presidential election.As the goal of the project was to leverage builder’s goals and values in the making process, we allowedbuilders to choose new clients. Because anxiety was high for children in this school—which includes manyimmigrant families—after the 2016 presidential election, we suggested builders might create toys for peoplethey were close to as a way to show they cared. Builders then generated a new list of potential clients. Allbuilders included their friends (five of which included other people in the class) on their potential client list.Two also listed their mothers and two listed the pre-K clients they had interviewed previously.After choosing new clients, Y2 Public builders became reenergized about the construction process. Oneof the groups continued to build for their pre-K clients, creating and sewing a stuffed T-Rex monster that metthe original requests of the pre-K clients they had interviewed. Another builder chose to work alone to create atoy train for one specific pre-K student that was the younger brother of a fellow BfT builder. Two other groupsand a third solo builder chose to make toys for their friends.DiscussionThe BfT project sought to examine the impact of leveraging “ways of knowing” to increase young women’sparticipation in construction activities. The results above highlight how the changes in implementation design aswell as the school and wider communal context impacted the young makers’ interests in building for others.While the idea of making for others was compelling for most girls (and some boys) in all three implementations,the degree to which this framing impacted practice and future interest varied by context and design.Y1 Public provided an existence proof for the notion that building for others might be a compellingway to engage young girls in construction workshops, and the Y2 implementations allowed us to make severalmodifications to the design of the project to further interrogate key features of the project system. In particular,Y2 Private allowed us to examine a one:one builder-client ratio and in Y2 Public we replicated the few:manybuilder-client ratio from Y1. We find that the quality of the relationship between builders and clients matters agreat deal. Specifically, while nearly all young girls found making for others compelling, when able to make forone specific person, rather than many at once, builders more frequently considered the client’s interests in allphases of the design process.In Y1 Public, teams of two to three builders took on the task of creating a dream toy for five to six preK children. While teams rarely mentioned individual pre-K children, during the brainstorm phase they took eachrequest by their pre-K clients seriously. As indicated in the results section, this meant that teams often createdmany toys that worked together, or one toy that blended each idea into one artifact. However, this attention tothe client took place almost exclusively in the brainstorm phase. Once teams identified a project idea, the clientwas only occasionally mentioned. When the client was mentioned, it was often to motivate team members thatwere not contributing equally.While the results from Y1 Public were compelling, in Y2 we intentionally set out to better support therelationship between builders and clients to reflect Belenky et al. (1986) connected knowing—women’stendency to value social interactions and a sense of community. Leveraging the Big/Little Sisters programensured builders would not only encounter their client more frequently (they shared the same building and oftenmet outside of class time), but also be encouraged to develop a mentor-like relationship providing care andguidance to their client as it was their first year of elementary school. This intimacy seemed to motivated thebuilders throughout the making process. For example, Hailey said in the post interview that she “really wantedto make something that [her client] would remember and really love.” Kate told us she sometimes asked herclients during recess if she still wants a doll to make sure that she was making it right for her.In all three iterations builders had a high degree of flexibility in what they made. While they wereencouraged to make the client’s dream toy, there was no metric or standard to measure their adherences to thisprogram goal. However, all builders, made some effort to do so. In Y1 Public, builders took on challenging andeven occasionally impossible design tasks. The one group that struggled to complete their design on time,reconceptualized their project as a DIY for their clients creating an opportunity for the builders and clients tobuild together during the play date (Figure 3). In Y2 Private, client feedback and reaction had both positive andnegative impact on the builders and drove their design decisions. As shown in the results section, Chloe’s clientliked her whiteboard bunny so Chloe only made minor changes to her design; while Ruth changed her projectentirely when her client expressed dislike for her pillow prototype. Out of 40 Y2 Private projects, 39 werepersonalized to their clients. In Y2 Public the lack of interest in the initially assigned pre-K clients caused someICLS 2018 Proceedings493© ISLSbuilders to lose interest in the project all together. After allowing participants to choose new clients, each teambecame motivated to persist through the design process. While we did not see the same degree of commitmentto the client as that of Y2 Private, nor did we see the complex designs of Y1 Public, designers did producecomplete and compelling artifacts aligned with what they believed to be the interests of their clients (Figure 3).Figure 3. A Y1 Public team (left) made a “DIY” toy so they could build with their clients and a Y2 Public teamstuck with their pre-K clients even when they weren’t initially interested in building the toy requested.Finally, while most of the girls found building for younger children in their school communitycompelling, some did not. The two girls in Y2 Private that suggested they would prefer to make for themselvesnext time indicated that they were sad to part with a project for which they had worked so hard. One girlsexplained by stating, “I mean once you make something, I kind of like to keep it so I can like admire it.”Likewise, many of the boys did not find the pre-K clients compelling. One of the Y1 Public boys told us hewould like to make a toy for himself. The other boy in this implementation indicated he would like to make atoy for his younger brother rather than the pre-K children he did not know very well. Two of the Y2 Public boyshappily made toys for the pre-K children, while the other four preferred to make for a friend or family member.In each of the three implementations, making was explicitly framed as a way of giving to others.However, the reason for giving depended on more than the gender of the builder. In Y1 Public, builders createdtoys as a gift to younger members of their community. The relationship between builder and client was modest,but effective at driving initial construction activity. This relationship was enhanced by leveraging the mentormentee relationship in Y2 Private. For these girls, building a dream toy became a way of representing andstrengthening this mentor-mentee relationship. While we assumed our activity framing from Y1 Public wouldwork similarly in Y2 Public, we instead found external social and political pressures meant a narrowing of whatcounts as one’s community. For Y2 Public builders, existing personal relationships were paramount, andmaking was a way of reinforcing that relationship.These results suggest that while framing making as a way of building connections to one’s communitywill likely be compelling for young makers—and girls in particular—the degree to which this framing drives themaking process will depend on who builders see as being part of their community and the quality of thatconnection. We suggest designers of maker activities should leverage “making for others” as a way ofincreasing participation and persistence among girls in maker activities, while also acknowledging the challengeof determining a compelling “other.” In addition to using the existing research literature, as we did for Y1Public, we recommend designers seek to both connect with existing community programs as well as build intothe activity design opportunities for participants to express with whom they desire to connect.ConclusionsWomen have been makers for centuries. And yet, the recent conceptualization of “making” elevated by themaker movement and pushed by tech companies, startup culture, and schools alike often legitimizes masculineconstruction activities and materials over those traditionally performed by women. As these maker activitieshave become a primary way of engaging young learners in STEM domains, this new definition of making mustbe challenged.One method to address this overtly masculine definition of STEM has been to design maker and STEMworkshops that focus use traditionally feminine materials and interests. We propose to further broaden thiseffort by recentering women’s ways of knowing in maker practices. In our work, we have found that whenmaking is framed as being a way of building connections to one’s community, young girls are likely to see theseactivities as aligning with their values and goals.ICLS 2018 Proceedings494© ISLSOf course, ways of knowing and connecting will vary along a variety of dimensions. For some thisconnection may be strongest when positioned in a mentorship roll—as we saw in our own Y2 Privateimplementation—while for others, building for family or a friend may be most compelling. But making andconstruction isn’t only an interaction between builder and tools or materials. Both bring with them culturalexpectations, goals, and values. Future efforts to broaden participation in STEM domains through making andconstruction must acknowledge and center the values and goals of diverse learners in both design andimplementation.ReferencesBarrington, L., & Duffy, J. (2007). Attracting underrepresented groups to engineering with service-learning. InProceedings of the 2007 American Society of Engineering Education International Exposition andConference.Belenky, M. F., Clinchy, B. M., Goldberger, N. R., & Tarule, J. M. (1986). Women’s Ways of Knowing: TheDevelopment of Self, Voice, and Mind. Basic Books.Buechley, L. (2006). A Construction Kit for Electronic Textiles. In 2006 10th IEEE International Symposium onWearable Computers (pp. 83–90). https://doi.org/10.1109/ISWC.2006.286348Buechley, L. (2016). Inclusive Maker Education: STEM is Everywhere. Presented at the Fablearn 2016.Retrieved from https://edstream.stanford.edu/Video/Play/a33992cc9fb2496488c1afa9b6204a571dDiekman, A. B., Brown, E. R., Johnston, A. M., & Clark, E. K. (2010). Seeking Congruity Between Goals andRoles A New Look at Why Women Opt Out of Science, Technology, Engineering, and MathematicsCareers. Psychological Science, 21(8), 1051–1057. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797610377342Halverson, E. R., & Sheridan, K. (2014). The Maker Movement in Education. Harvard Educational Review,84(4), 495–504. https://doi.org/10.17763/haer.84.4.34j1g68140382063Holbert, N. (2016). Leveraging cultural values and “ways of knowing” to increase diversity in maker activities.International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction, 9–10, 33–39.Holbert, N., Thanapornsangsuth, S., & Villeroy, M. (2017). Challenges and Tradeoffs When Engaging YoungMakers with Constructing for Others. International Journal of Designs for Learning, 8(1).Intel Corporation. (2014). MakeHers Report: Engaging Girls and Women in Technology through Making,Creating, and Inventing. Retrieved from http://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/technology-ineducation/making-her-future-report.htmlKafai, Y. B., Fields, D., & Searle, K. (2014). Electronic Textiles as Disruptive Designs: Supporting andChallenging Maker Activities in Schools. Harvard Educational Review, 84(4), 532–556.Kafai, Y. B., & Peppler, K. A. (2014). Transparency Reconsidered: Creative, Critical, and Connected Makingwith E-textiles. In M. Ratto, M. Boler, & R. Deibert, DIY Citizenship: Critical Making and SocialMedia (pp. 179–188). MIT Press.Maker Media. (2014). Attendee Study Maker Faire Bay Area 2014. Retrieved from http://makermedia.com/wpcontent/uploads/2013/01/MFBA-2014-research-deck_FINAL.pdfMargolis, J., & Fisher, A. (2003). Unlocking the Clubhouse: Women in Computing. MIT Press.National Science Foundation. (2015). Women, Minorities, and Persons with Disabilities in Science andEngineering. Retrieved from http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/wmpd/NCWIT. (2015). Women in IT: The Facts Infographic. Retrieved January 26, 2016, fromhttps://www.ncwit.org/resources/women-it-facts-infographic-2015-updatePapert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books.Peppler, K., & Glosson, D. (2012). Stitching Circuits: Learning About Circuitry Through E-textile Materials.Journal of Science Education and Technology, 22(5), 751–763.Posner, M. (2017, March 14). We can teach women to code, but that just creates another problem. TheGuardian. Retrieved from http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/mar/14/tech-women-codeworkshops-developer-jobsRatcliffe, R. (2015, June 10). Nobel scientist Tim Hunt: female scientists cause trouble for men in labs. TheGuardian. Retrieved from http://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/10/nobel-scientist-tim-huntfemale-scientists-cause-trouble-for-men-in-labsSwan, C. W., Paterson, K. G., & Bielefeldt, A. R. (2009). Panel - measuring the impacts of project-based servicelearning in engineering education. In 39th IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference, 2009. FIE ’09 (pp.1–2). https://doi.org/10.1109/FIE.2009.5350508The Design-Based Research Collective. (2003). Design-Based Research: An Emerging Paradigm forEducational Inquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5–8.ICLS 2018 Proceedings495© ISLS