Showing and Telling:Response Dynamics in an Online Community of MakersOmaima Almatrafi, George Mason University, oalmatra@gmu.eduAditya Johri, George Mason University, johri@gmu.eduAbstract: Online communities are an important learning resource, especially for learners inMakers, Making, and 3D printing. In this study, we examine one online Maker communitycalled SoliForum to better understand how an emphasis on producing physical objects shapesonline interaction; specifically, what kinds of messages elicit useful responses for thoseseeking help. We found that compared to text-only posts those with media elements had ahigher response rate and more resolved problems. Based on our analysis we attribute this tothe more descriptive and explanatory power of multimedia and its ability to better representphysical objects. The findings suggest that guidance for crafting messages using multimediacan lead to more equitable participation and learning in online Maker communities.IntroductionPrior work on the educational implications of Maker Movement (Halverson & Sheridan, 2014) has focusedprimarily on informal learning in physical spaces or Makerspaces (Forest et al. 2015). A crucial element that ismissing is the role of online communities in in supporting informal learning related to Making. The MakerMovement resides largely in the digital ecosystem and this self-emerging, cyber-physical, and sociotechnicalsystem is one of the primary innovations of the Maker Movement (Litts et al. 2016; Martin, 2015; Rafalow,2016). Writing about the potential impact of the Maker Movement on education, Martin (2015) outlined threecritical elements to consider: 1) availability and advances in digital tools, including rapid prototyping tools andlow-cost microcontroller platforms, that characterize many making projects, 2) community infrastructure,including online resources and in-person spaces and events, and 3) the maker mindset, values, beliefs, anddispositions that are commonplace within the community. He argues that integration of new tools into thepractices of Makers is relatively easy because in the online community “people can read manuals and tutorials,watch videos, converse through forums, and share code (Martin, 2015, p. 34).” The value of the community alsoextends the role of mentors who provide the expertise required for problem solving and also serve as rolemodels to youth. Martin (2015) recommends that given the role of community-driven processes in learning andidentity development there should be more research on “online learning communities (p. 36).”Online communities as a learning resourceWith increase in online activity, online discussion forums have become increasingly popular for problemsolving and help-seeking (Teo & Johri, 2014). Research shows that online forums are also robust platforms forlearning as they evolve over time and become a rich source of information for participants due to theinterpersonal exchange. For instance, van De Sande (2011) examined an online help forum for mathematics andfound that learners receive general forms of help that orient the learners towards resolving homeworkchallenges. Similar findings are echoed by Puustinen, Bernicot, Volckaert-Legrier & Baker (2015) in their studyof help-seeking exchanges in homework help forums. These forums are not only helpful, they are also highlyefficient. For instance, Teo & Johri (2014) found that more than 88% of posed questions in a Java forum receiveat least one answer and answers were typically of high quality. Although prior work shows that onlinediscussion forums have emerged as a popular source for problem-solving help and potentially for learning,online forums related to Maker/Making have to rely significantly on non-text based interaction, such as imagesand videos. What effect does this have on interaction among users if any? Prior work has examined use of textacross a range of online communities and has looked at different forms of text-based information (e.g.Velasquez, Fields, Olsen, et al., 2014), but has not looked at response dynamics in a mixed-media onlinecommunity environment, which is the goal of this study.Case study of SoliForumSoliForum is a popular 3D-prining online community that supported Solidoodle, a 3D printer launched inSeptember 2011. Solidoodle 3D printers use digital files supplied by the user to create physical plastic parts.Although the company went out of operation in 2016, SoliForum was and remains an active community with indepth discussions related to 3D printing. For this study, we analyzed one forum related to Solidoodle withinSoliForum “Help/Repair/Maintenance”, which we are calling SoliForum-Help. This forum focuses specificallyCSCL 2017 Proceedings605© ISLSon help-seeking and sharing of 3D objects making problems. The forum contains 19,850 posts by 1179community users across 2265 threads spread over 4 years (08/10/2012-09/10/2016). Similar to other onlinecommunities, the majority of users had 10 or fewer posts on SoliForum-Help but the response rate for questionswas 93.8%. Of the total users, 4 members had more than 500 posts each whereas 29 community members hadbetween 100-500 posts. Discussion forums differ in their design features and in SoliForum posts arechronologically ordered within a thread. There is no affordance for responding to a specific message within thethread and any new response just goes at the bottom of the thread. There is also no rating or vote for the posts.However, it allows users to incorporate different informational representations to convey a message, such asimages, links, videos and attachments.Response comparisonThe data selected for this analysis are threads that received at least one response and fall into one of the groups:group1-plain, which include threads using plain text-only in the original post of the thread, and group2multimedia, which include threads containing images, videos, or attachments in the original post of the thread.Table 1 summarizes the number of threads for each group and the response time to get the first response,response rate, which is the percentage of the threads in this group that got at least one response and the averagenumber of replies in each group.Table 1: Response time, rate, and average number of replies (multimedia vs. plain) groupsPlain Group (N=714)Multimedia Group (N=622)p-value (alpha = 0.1)Response time44 min 12 sec48 min 5 secp= 0.4981Response Rate93.3%95.8%p= 0.02144Average (#replies)8 (SD = 10)9 (SD= 11)p= 0.04203The result of t-test statistics shows that the average number of replies and the response rate issignificantly higher (90% confidence level) in the multimedia group. Although response time is faster in plaingroup, the difference in the response time between the two groups is not statistically significant at (alpha=0.1).Breaking the multimedia down into images, videos, and attachments (att), we can see a finer grain of theresponses in the different data representation use; videos and images garnering more than the average response(Figure 1).Figure 1. Response time, rate, and average replies in regard to multimedia element used (images, videos, andattachments) and plain text.Identification of frequent communication patterns within a threadTo further understand the communication patterns within the forum, a network graph for each thread wasconstructed to analyze the communication among the participants (Teo, Johri & Mitra, 2013). Since SoliForumHelp does not have a “reply-to” feature to respond to a specific message within a thread, to determine therelationship between poster and responders the following assumptions have been made: (1) if it is a new posterand there are no quotes, it is a reply to the original poster; (2) if it is not the first post by the poster and post doesnot have quotes, it is a reply to the previous poster in the thread; and (3) if the post has a quote, the response isto the quoted member.CSCL 2017 Proceedings606© ISLSTo identify the frequent sub-graphs in a thread a data mining algorithm gSpan was applied (Yan &Han, 2002). In this analysis, a sub-graph is considered frequent if it occurs in at least 25% of the discussionthreads. To identify a frequent pattern across two groups, they should have the same length of conversation(number of replies) otherwise the algorithm will not detect patterns with higher degree (number of participants)because such a pattern will not exist in the shorter thread. After applying the algorithm and looking at the resultsfor different conversation lengths, we decided to proceed with lengths 8 and 10 as a sample for our analysisbecause threads with fewer than eight messages did not show any meaningful frequent patterns and we did nothave enough threads with more than 10 messages to have a representative sample of analysis. Table 2 presentsthe super frequent communication patterns among the participants in a discussion thread. All subsets of thesuper communication pattern are also frequent but not shown here for clarity. If a frequent communicationpattern between participants occurs in one group but not the other, the latter is assigned (NF: Not Frequent),while the former is assigned the percentage of occurrence in the respective group. In Table 2 the blue circlesrepresent the help-seeker who posted the original post in a thread while the orange, second level, circlesrepresent help-givers. It can be observed in Table 2 that threads in the plain group have more unidirectionalinteraction. In contrast, multimedia group especially with length 8 tends to have more connected bidirectionalrelations within a thread. There were some interaction among help-givers but they were not frequent to happenmore than 25% of the time.Table 2: Frequent communication patterns (occurrence percentage) among participants within a threadSub-graphMessages/Thread (10)PlainGroupN=180.67MultimediaGroupN=260.380.33Sub-graphPlainGroupN=320.28MultimediaGroupN=320.560.31NF0.340.56NF0.25NF0.44NFMessage/Thread (8)To supplement the findings of the sub-group analysis we further conducted a quantitative analysis of(1) help-seeking frequency and the number of help-givers participating in a thread for a sample that has 8replies, and (2) text length for the two groups. Table 3 shows that the help-seeker (original poster) averageparticipation within a thread in multimedia group is significantly higher than their counterpart group(p=0.047<alpha =0.1) possibly indicating that they are more engaged in the problem-solving.Table 3: Comparison of help-seekers and help-givers across multimedia vs. plain groups (within a thread)Plain GroupMultimedia Groupp-valueHelp-seeker participationMeanStandard Deviation3.6881.1204.2191.362p= 0.04652Unique help-giver participationMeanStandard Deviation3.751.5243.4061.876p= 0.21101Text length for both groups was analyzed in (Table 4) to see if using multimedia substitutes the text.An average word count shows a significant difference, hence median was also computed to account for anyoutliers and the difference is still significant. This suggests that forum users not only visually displayed thesolution but also explained the steps textually.CSCL 2017 Proceedings607© ISLSTable 4: Length of text comparison for multimedia and plain groupsWord CountAverage97.84173.756Number of ThreadsPlain GroupMultimedia Group765649Median85130SD62.06234.96The presence of a back-and-forth exchange begs the question – is there ambiguity when the multimediais used in the original post of a thread? To answer this question we did a qualitative analysis and read through asample of 64 threads, 32 from each the plain and multimedia group, each with length 8 to examine the nature ofinteraction within the thread posts. There was no confusion observed when more complex informationalrepresentation (multimedia group) was used. In fact, about 21% of the plain group threads were asked or hadprovided a richer informational representation in the course of the discussion. The reason for this could be thatmultimedia group posters had specific questions and were eager to get the answer with more help-seekerengagement, while in the plain group, members asked primarily for suggestions (they had a breadth with highernumber of respondents but less of help-seeker engagement). Furthermore, problems posed in multimedia groupwere more likely to be resolved (56.25%) as compared to the plain text group (where only 37.5% of problemswere resolved). There was no definite marker of an issue being resolved and a thread was considered solved ifthe original poster acknowledged the issue is resolved. It is quite possible that the rate was higher.ConclusionThe findings from our study illustrate that in this Maker-related community the use of photos, videos, and othermedia artifacts improved the response rate for those seeking help and the responses they received were morethorough and richer in information. Help-givers preferred the information they received from help-seekers to bein a form that was easy to understand. Help-seekers were also more engaged in the problem-solving processwhen they used more media. The primary limitations of this research are that the study is based on a singlesetting and the sample size used for comparison is relatively small.ReferencesForest, C. R., Moore, R. A., Fasse, B. B., Linsey, J., Newstetter, W., Ngo, P., and Quintero, C. (2015). TheInvention Studio: A University Maker Space and Culture. Advances in Engineering Education, 4(4).Halverson, E. R., & Sheridan, K. (2014). The maker movement in education. Harvard Educational Review,84(4), 495-504.Litts, B., Halverson, E. & Bakker, M. (2016). The Role of Online Communication in a Maker Community. InPeppler, K., Halverson, E. & Kafai, Y. (Eds.) Makerspaces, Culture, and Learning, New York:Routledge Press.Martin, L. (2015). The Promise of the Maker Movement for Education. Journal of Pre-College EngineeringEducation Research (J-PEER), Vol. 5: Issue, 1, Article 4.Puustinen, M., Bernicot, J., Volckaert-Legrier, O. & Baker, M. (2015). Naturally occurring help-seekingexchanges on a homework help forum, Computers & Education, Vol. 81, pg. 89-101.Rafalow, M. (2016). Tinkering Online: Digital Supports for Making and Sharing. In Peppler, K., Halverson, E.& Kafai, Y. (Eds.) Makerspaces, Culture, and Learning, New York: Routledge Press.Teo, H. J. & Johri, A. (2014). Fast, functional, and fitting: expert response dynamics and response quality in anonline newcomer help forum. Proceedings of CSCW’14: 332-341.Teo, H. J., Johri, A. & Mitra, R. (2013). Visualizing and Analyzing Productive Structures and Patterns in OnlineCommunities Using Multilevel Social Network Analysis. Proceedings of CSCL, Wisconsin, MI, USA.Velasquez, N., Fields, D., Olsen, D., et al.. (2014). Novice programmers talking about projects: What automatedtext analysis reveals about online Scratch users' comments. In Proceedings of HICSS (pp. 1635-1644).van de Sande, C. (2011). A description and characterization of student activity in an open, online, mathematicshelp forum. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 77(1), 53 –78.Yan, X., & Han, J. (2002). gSpan: Graph-based substructure pattern mining. Proceedings of ICDM (p. 721724).AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported, in part, by the U.S. NSF under awards EEC#1424444 &DUE#1444277.CSCL 2017 Proceedings608© ISLS