Fostering Argumentation Skills in Mathematics with AdaptableCollaboration Scripts: Only Viable for Good Self-Regulators?Freydis Vogel, Technical University Munich, freydis.vogel@tum.deIngo Kollar, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich, ingo.kollar@psy.lmu.deStefan Ufer, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich, ufer@math.lmu.deElisabeth Reichersdorfer, Technical University Munich, elisabeth.reichersdorfer@tum.deKristina Reiss, Technical University Munich, kristina.reiss@tum.deFrank Fischer, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich, frank.fischer@psy.lmu.deAbstract: Argumentation scripts have been proposed as an effective means to structurestudents’ argumentation and to support their acquisition of argumentation skills. Yet,argumentation scripts run the danger of overscripting students’ argumentation. A possiblesolution might be to offer adaptable argumentation scripts that allow students to adjust thescript to their own needs. This study compares the effects of three argumentation scripts (highstructured vs. low structured vs. adaptable) on students’ argumentation skills. Furthermore, weinvestigate to what extent students’ self-regulation skills influence the acquisition ofargumentation skills in the three conditions. N = 109 math students were randomized to thethree treatment conditions and worked in dyads on mathematical proof tasks in a CSCLenvironment. Students’ argumentation skills increased between pre- and post-tests withcomparable gains in all three conditions. Only for students learning with the adaptableargumentation script, self-regulation skills were a significant positive predictor forargumentation skills.Keywords: collaboration scripts, argumentation, mathematics.IntroductionTo be able to engage in high-level argumentation has often been described as an important precondition to gainknowledge in a given domain (“arguing to learn”; Andriessen, Baker & Suthers, 2003). When situated in asocial context, argumentation includes the production and exchange of well-warranted arguments andcounterarguments and possibly the construction of a synthesis of different arguments that were previouslyexpressed by different learners (see Leitão, 2000). Even in rather well-structured domains such as mathematics,in which often more systematic instructional methods are suggested (such as worked examples; Atkinson,Derry, Renkl & Wortham, 2000), the potential of putting learners in social contexts in which they engage incollaborative argumentation for knowledge construction has been recognized (e.g., Kollar, et al., 2014; Zemel &Koschmann, 2013).Nevertheless, by far not all learners are able to engage in high-level argumentation spontaneously(Stegmann, Weinberger, & Fischer, 2007). Particular kinds of scaffolding that can be designed to help studentsengage in high-level argumentation are argumentation-related collaboration scripts (“argumentation scripts”hereafter). Mostly studied in domains other than mathematics, argumentation scripts structure collaboration byspecifiying, sequencing and distributing high-level argumentation activities among the learners of a small group(Kollar, Fischer & Hesse, 2006). For instance, while one learner may be prompted to make a claim and provideevidence for it, his/her learning partner may be asked to provide counterevidence. Empirically, suchargumentation scripts have been shown to be effective for the development of students’ argumentation skills(e.g. Noroozi, Weinberger, Biemans, Mulder, & Chizari, 2013).Yet, collaboration scripts have in the past been criticized with respect to the high rigidity by which theystructure the collaborative learning process. More specifically, scripting argumentation often comes with arestriction of learners’ autonomy to apply their own – possibly functional – learning strategies and thus may notalways lead to optimal learning outcomes (“over-scripting”, Dillenbourg, 2002). As a reaction to this criticism,attempts have been undertaken to design more flexible collaboration scripts by making them adaptive. Oftenbased on intelligent tutoring technology, adaptive scripts continuously assess the quality of the collaborativelearning process and fade parts of the collaboration script in or out as needed (Diziol, Walker, Rummel &Koedinger, 2010). An alternative to the often costly development of intelligent tutoring technologies that enablesuch a continuous assessment of learning processes might however be to make collaboration scripts adaptable,i.e. to grant learners themselves the opportunity to switch parts of the script on and off, based on their selfperceived needs. On the one hand, adaptable scripts offer a valuable opportunity for self-regulated learning, asCSCL 2015 Proceedings576© ISLSdecisions on how to adapt the script must be made on a thorough analysis of the previous learning episode andan estimation of one’s own competence level (Järvelä & Hadwin, 2013). On the other hand, unfortunately,learners who are not able to self-regulate their learning effectively may make wrong decisions when granted theopportunity to adapt their script and thus not benefit from the opportunities offered by adaptable scripts.Research questions and hypothesesOverall, this paper addresses two research questions:RQ 1:To what extent do the structure and the adaptability of an argumentation script (low structured scriptvs. high structured script vs. adaptable script) affect the learners’ acquisition of argumentation skills?We hypothesized that learners presented with a high structured argumentation script would outperformstudents from the low structured script condition. Learners from the adaptable script condition should onaverage reach higher levels than students from the low structured script condition because students from theadaptable script condition have at least the chance to choose a high-structured collaboration script to bedisplayed to them. With regard to the comparison between students from the high structured and the adaptablescript condition, we did not set up a directed hypothesis, as one may either expect the adaptable script to lead tobetter learning outcomes (because of the opportunity to engage in a more self-regulated form of learning) or toworse learning outcomes (because learners’ self-regulation skills may be over-taxed by being granted theopportunity to adapt the script).RQ 2:To what extent do students’ self-regulation skills influence their acquisition of argumentation skillswhen learning with adaptable and differently structured non-adaptable argumentation scripts?With respect to RQ2, we hypothesized learners’ self-regulation skills to be a significant predictor oftheir acquisition of argumentation skills in the adaptable script condition, but not in the other two conditions, asin both the low and the high structured script condition, students had no chance (and thus no need to engage in afurther reflection of their collaboration) to modify the script.MethodsParticipants were N = 109 mathematics students and mathematics teacher students participating in a two weekspreparatory course at university. They were randomly assigned to one of the three treatment conditions: Lowstructured argumentation script, high structured argumentation script, and adaptable argumentation script. Thestudents learned in three treatment sessions within three consecutive days. For each treatment session, thelearners were grouped into new learning dyads to work on a different mathematical proof task. Each learner wasequipped with a laptop and a graphical tablet. The two laptops of each dyad were connected via a computersupported learning environment that displayed the mathematical proof task and a graphical chat environmentwhere the dyads were able to exchange text, formulas and drawings on their ideas to solve the proof task.Beyond that, the dyads could also communicate face-to-face. The computer-supported learning environmentalso displayed the script prompts which sequenced the discussion and structure of argumentation.The students were asked to collaboratively discuss their ideas about the proof tasks in all treatmentconditions. In the condition with the low structured argumentation script, prompts that were integrated in thechat sequenced the discussion into the steps (1) argument, (2) counterargument and (3) synthesis three times pertreatment session. In the condition with the high structured argumentation script students were additionallyprompted to formulate sound arguments (e.g. formulating evidence for a claim) in the first and second step. Inthe condition with the adaptable argumentation script, learners were allowed to choose between the highstructured and the low structured argumentation script right before each argument and counterargument step ineach treatment session. Overall, an adaptation of the script was thus possible at six points in time per treatmentsession.To assess students’ argumentation skills, a pre- and a post-test was conducted in which students wereasked to describe typical phases and quality features of an argumentative discourse in science. Students’answers were evaluated by two trained coders for the appearance of relevant elements in an argumentativediscourse. These were derived from Leitão (2000) for the social discursive phases in an argumentative discourse(relating to the other’s arguments when continuing the argumentation, formulating critic against the other’sarguments, integrating different arguments). After training, the coders reached sufficient interrater reliability(Cohen’s κ = .82). Self-regulation skills were measured with an eight-items questionnaire (adapted from Fisher,King, & Tague, 2001) in which students rated the extent to which they typically apply certain self-regulationCSCL 2015 Proceedings577© ISLSstrategies (e.g.; “I prefer to plan my own learning.”; “I am systematic in my learning.”). The resulting scaleproved reliable (Cronbach’s α = .72).ResultsResults from a repeated measures ANOVA showed that across all conditions, students’ argumentation skillsincreased significantly between pre- and post-test (see table 1; F(1,106) = 12.83, p < .01, η² = .11). With respectto RQ1, there were no significant differences in students’ learning gains between the three conditions(F(2,106) = 1.49, p = .23, η² = .03).Table 1: Mean values and standard deviations for students’ performance in the pre- and post-test onargumentation skillsPre-test argumentation skillsPost-test argumentation skillslow structure (n = 32)m (SD)0.84 (0.88)0.94 (0.84)CSCL scripthigh structure (n = 41)m (SD)0.71 (0.81)1.10 (0.80)adaptable (n = 36)m (SD)0.61 (0.77)1.06 (0.86)With regard to RQ2, subsequent regression analyses for each condition showed that the students’ selfregulation skills were neither a significant predictor for the acquisition of argumentation skills in the conditionswith the low structured script (b = 0.14, p = .45, R² = .02) nor in the condition with the high structured script(b = 0.05, p = .75, R² < .01). However, in the condition with the adaptable script, the students’ self-regulationskills had a significant positive influence on the acquisition of argumentation skills (b = 0.40, p < .05, R² = .16).Conclusions and implicationsWe argued that argumentation scripts may be helpful in fostering students’ argumentation skills in the domainof mathematics. Yet, such scripts have been criticized for their rigidity that leaves little freedom for learners toapply their own – potentially functional – strategies (“over-scripting”; Dillenbourg, 2002). Our study thereforeinvestigated the potential of making scripts adaptable as a way to grant learners the opportunity to adjust theargumentation script to their self-perceived needs.Regarding RQ1, our results indicate that there was no general superiority of the adaptableargumentation script on learners’ acquisition of argumentation skills, compared to a continuous (low or highstructured) argumentation script. Thus, students on average do not seem to be able to take full advantage ofopportunities to adapt scripts to their self-perceived needs. This adds to previous literature that has argued forstrong instructional guidance when it comes to help learners acquire new skills (e.g., Kirschner, Sweller &Clark, 2006). What however is surprising is that learners from the high structured script condition did notoutperform students from the low structured script condition, given that previous research has typically reportedpositive effects of stronger forms of scripting especially on more domain-general skills and competences (e.g.,argumentation skills or online search skills; e.g., Kollar, Wecker, Langer & Fischer, 2011). Though, the presentstudy differs from many previous studies with respect to the fact that related studies often compare their scriptsto completely unstructured control conditions in which groups are simply asked to discuss with each other,without being further supported in this process. In our study, in contrast, also the low structured conditionreceived considerable guidance with regard to the different phases of their argumentation. The fact that, inaddition, our coding of the post-test mainly focused on exactly this sequential argumentation strategy (and not,for example, the quality of single arguments or counterarguments) may thus have obscured possible differencesbetween the two conditions.Regarding RQ2, we found that learners’ self-assessed self-regulation skills were a significant predictorof argumentation skills as measured in the post test only in the adaptable, but not in the two continuous scriptconditions. This confirms our hypothesis that only learners with high levels of self-regulation skills are able tobenefit from the opportunity of adapting the script. Thus, the opportunity to consciously decide about thestructuredness of the argumentation script, which may be regarded as a genuine act of self-regulation (Järvelä &Hadwin, 2013), can obviously only be taken by learners who already possess a certain level of self-regulationskills. This leads of course to the question how argumentation scripts should be designed that also help studentswith less functional self-regulation skills. Perhaps, for these learners a longer phase of learning with acontinuous (high-structured) argumentation script could be effective, before they are granted opportunities foradaptation. Another possibility might be to offer those students additional instructional guidance on how toCSCL 2015 Proceedings578© ISLSreflect their past scripted learning experience and their actual learning needs in order to make adequate decisionsduring adaptation.In further analyses of our data, we aim at investigating the students’ adaptation behavior in more detail.The underlying hypothesis is that a more appropriate adaptation behavior in the adaptable script conditionshould lead to an improved acquisition of argumentation skills. Such an analysis seems important since ourmeasure of self-regulation skills was based on students’ self-assessments. Since students do not alwaysadequately assess their own knowledge and skills (Dochy, Segers & Buehl, 1999), an analysis on the basis ofreal performance data may yield important insights into the validity of our measure. If such an analysis could bedone by aid of intelligent tutoring technology (see Diziol et al., 2010), even a successful combination ofadaptability and adaptivity might be achieved.All in all, our study demonstrates that adding flexibility to argumentation scripts (e.g., through makingthem adaptable) does not seem to reduce their effectiveness with regard to the acquisition of argumentationskills. Yet, only some learners seem to be able to really benefit from this flexibility, i.e. those who alreadypossess a decent set of effective self-regulation skills. Future research should investigate (a) whether thesefindings also hold true in other domains and (b) ways to help poor self-regulators in their adaptation process.ReferencesAndriessen, J., Baker, M., & Suthers, D. (2003). Argumentation, computer support, and the educational contextof confronting cognitions. In J. Andriessen, M. Baker & D. Suthers (Eds.), Arguing to Learn:Confronting Cognitions in Computer-supported Collaborative Learning Environments (pp. 1-26).Dordrecht: Kluwer.Atkinson, R.K., Derry, S.J., Renkl, A., & Wortham, D.W. (2000). Learning from examples: Instructionalprinciples from the worked examples research. Review of Educational Research, 70, 181–214.Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructionaldesign. In P. A. Kirschner (Ed). Three worlds of CSCL. Can we support CSCL (pp. 61-91). Heerlen,Open Universiteit Nederland.Diziol, D., Walker, E., Rummel, N., & Koedinger, K. (2010). Using intelligent tutor technology to implementadaptive support for student collaboration. Educational Psychology Review, 22(1), 89-102.Dochy, F., Segers, M. & Buehl, M. M. (1999). The relation between assessment practices and outcomes ofstudies: the case of research on prior knowledge. Review of Educational Research, 69(2), 145-186. doi:10.3102/00346543069002145Fisher, M., King, J., & Tague, G. (2001). Development of a self-directed learning readiness scale for nursingeducation. Nurse Education Today, 21(7), 516–525. doi:10.1054/nedt.2001.0589Järvelä, S. & Hadwin, A. (2013). New Frontiers: Regulating learning in CSCL. Educational Psychologist, 48(1),25-39. doi:10.1080/00461520.2012.74800Kirschner, P.A., Sweller, J., & Clark, R.E. (2006). Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work: Ananalysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-basedteaching. Educational Psychologist, 41(2), 75-86.Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Hesse, F. W. (2006). Collaboration scripts - a conceptual analysis. EducationalPsychology Review, 18(2), 159-185.Kollar, I., Ufer, S., Reichersdorfer, E., Vogel, F., Fischer, F., & Reiss, K. (2014). Combined effects of heuristicworked examples and collaboration scripts on the acquisition of mathematical argumentation skills.Learning & Instruction 32, 22-36. doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2014.01.003Kollar, I., Wecker, C., Langer, S., & Fischer, F. (2011). Orchestrating Web-Based Collaborative InquiryLearning with Small Group and Classroom Scripts. In H. Spada, G. Stahl, N. Miyake & N. Law (Eds.),Connecting Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning to Policy and Practice: CSCL2011Conference Proceedings, Volume 1 - Long Papers (pp. 422-429). International Society of the LearningSciences.Noroozi, O., Weinberger, A., Biemans, H. J. A., Mulder, M., & Chizari, M. (2013). Facilitating argumentativeknowledge construction through a transactive discussion script in CSCL. Computers & Education, 61,59–76. doi:10.1007/s11412-012-9162-zStegmann, K., Weinberger, A., & Fischer, F. (2007). Facilitating argumentative knowledge construction withcomputer-supported collaboration scripts. International Journal of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning, 2(4), 421-447. doi:10.1007/s11412-007-9028-yZemel, A., & Koschmann, T. (2013). Recalibrating reference within a dual-space interaction environment.International Journal for Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 8(1), 65-87, doi:10.1007/s11412-013-9164-5CSCL 2015 Proceedings579© ISLSZimmermann, B. J., & Martinez-Pons, M. (1990). Student Differences in Self-Regulated Learning: RelatingGrade, Sex, and Giftedness to Self-Efficacy and Strategy Use. Journal of Educational Psychology,82(1), 51–59. doi:10.1037/0022-0663.82.1.51CSCL 2015 Proceedings580© ISLS