Exploring the Adoption, Spread, and Sustainability of an InformalSTEAM Learning Innovation in SchoolsReed Stevens (Chair), Kay Ramey, and Peter Meyerhoffreed-stevens@northwestern.edu, kay.ramey@northwestern.edu, peter.meyerhoff@u.northwestern.eduNorthwestern UniversityJaakko Hilppö, Kristiina Kumpulainen, Anu Kajamaa, and Antti Rajalajaakko.hilppo@helsinki.fi, kristiina.kumpulainen@helsinki.fi, anu.kajamaa@helsinki.fi,antti.Rajala@helsinki.fiUniversity of HelsinkiRichard Halverson (Discussant), University of Wisconsin-Madison, halverson@education.wisc.eduAbstract: This symposium brings together different studies on the adoption andsustainability of FUSE Studios, an alternative STEAM learning infrastructure. Since itslaunch, FUSE has been adapted successfully in 136 different school-based implementationsoperating across 18 different states and two countries (USA and Finland). Yet, despite beingtailored to each context by local actors, FUSE has largely managed to preserve the integrityof implementation as educational innovation. Each contribution explores a point in thelifecycle of a FUSE adoption and describes local adaptations of the approach in the US andin Finland. In addition to addressing the critical question of how new educationalinnovations are adopted and sustained, this symposium provides perspectives on how tobalance adaptability to local contexts and the integrity (rather than fidelity) ofimplementation.Keywords: STEAM; scale-up; organizational learning; Actor-Network TheorySession summaryA common goal in the learning sciences is the conceptualization and design of learning environments thatimprove learners’ opportunities and contexts for learning. It is also a goal to implement more broadly thosecarefully tended pilot innovations that achieve these objectives. While the diffusion of innovations has beenstudied and conceptualized in other fields (e.g., Greenhalgh, et al., 2004; Rogers, 2003), far less is known abouthow educational innovations travel between contexts and what factors aid or hamper wider implementation. Theexisting literature makes two key points. First, while initial adoptions of an innovation can be made withsignificant support by an implementation team or partnership, moving and ‘scaling’, beyond a local, carefullytended context can be difficult and is often unsuccessful (Clarke, 2008; Hubbard, Mehan, & Stein, 2006;McNeil, 2002). Second, the adaptability of innovations to new contexts is an important contributing factor intheir wider implementation and spread (e.g., Coburn, 2003; Cole, 2005; Penuel et al., 2011). Designing foradaptability is, however, tricky and poses a two-horned dilemma. On the one hand, while insisting on strictadherence to ‘fidelity of implementation’ (O’Donnell, 2008) may preserve the organization and elements of anintervention's original design, it also stifles educators’ abilities to tailor an innovation to local contexts. Thatmay weaken the innovation’s fit to the local context and reduce the ownership local educators experience withregard to the innovation. On the other hand, allowing for local adaptation risks educators inadvertentlyundermining what made the original innovation successful, producing ‘lethal mutations’ (Brown, 1992) ordepriving the implementation of ‘integrity’ to its original core principles and practices (LeMahieu, 2011). Whilethe idea of designing for adaptability is common, research on adapting in practice is still rare.This symposium brings together four different case studies of how a particular educational innovationcalled FUSE Studios has been and is continuing to be adopted and adapted in 137 different school-basedimplementations operating across 18 different U.S. states and two countries: the United States and Finland. (Foran overview video about FUSE, visit www.fusestudio.net). When implemented with integrity ofimplementation—as prior research shows it can be at the scale of a large Midwestern public school district(Stevens et al., 2016)—FUSE represents a significant departure from typical classroom practice. Participating inFUSE involves students exploring a collection of about 30 STEAM (science, technology, engineering,arts/design, and math) challenge sequences that level up like video games. In-school implementation modelsICLS 2018 Proceedings1203© ISLSvary, but a common approach is for a FUSE Studio to meet for two or three periods during a school week.Examples of challenge activities include programming a robot to perform actions (“How to Train Your Robot”)building your dream home in a digital 3D environment (“Dream Home”), and a range of challenges that involvemaking 2D digital designs that students then 3D print (e.g. “Print my Ride” and “Eye Candy”). FUSEclassrooms differ from traditional academic subject matter classrooms most fundamentally in the fact thatstudents choose among the challenges, and the principle of choice extends to who they work with, how longthey work on challenges, and whether they continue with challenges (or further levels within challengesequences). The core commitment to choice is rooted in the goal of seeking to help students find, cultivate, anddeepen their own STEAM-based interests. An outcome of the interest-based pathways that students navigatethrough FUSE because of choice is that peer-to-peer teaching and learning is the norm in FUSE classrooms,with teachers playing more facilitative roles. As well, in FUSE classrooms there is no testing, and grades aredeemphasized or eliminated. Our prior field research on FUSE has shown common features of FUSEclassrooms to include: (1) students devising and inhabiting diverse “learning arrangements” to do their work; (2)students developing and sharing “relative expertise” that emerges as they work on challenges of their owninterest and choice; and (3) students pushing through frustration and learning from ‘failure’, since ‘failure’ is notpenalized as it is in typical classrooms but treated as “just another try” (e.g., Ramey, 2017; Stevens et al., 2016).While our prior research has shown that these features are shared across implementations in schools within onelarge U.S. school district, the question we pursue here is whether and how these common, distinctive features ofFUSE Studios are more broadly sustainable as it is introduced into new, more distant contexts.The focus on a single educational innovation (FUSE Studios) for this symposium is strategic, becauseit allows for an analysis of how the same ‘package’ (Becker, 1972) is interpreted and implemented underdifferent conditions, thereby making those conditions visible and showing the range of possibilities for aninnovation, in relation to particular features of local contexts. Here, we follow the broad logic of studies of theFifth Dimension, which employed a garden metaphor to ask about the relationship between ‘seeds’ (in this case,the FUSE suite of tools, materials, and recommended practices) and the local ecological conditions in which theseeds grow, thrive, mutate, wither, or die (Cole, 2009).Extending the ecological metaphor, this symposium considers implementation in terms of a life-cycle,studying how the implementation of FUSE at different phases of its life-cycle. For the purposes of thissymposium, we conceptualize implementation in terms of three potential phases: getting in, getting rooted, andspread. Getting in refers to how a school (or collection of schools) decides to implement and adapt their basicinfrastructure to accommodate the innovation. Getting rooted refers to the phase in which local educators,working in partnership with the university-based FUSE team, work out the details of an implementation,adapting it and, at the same time, adapting local practices, to stabilize it within the local school context. Finally,spread refers to both the intentional and emergent ways in which FUSE has moved from two afterschoolimplementations in 2013 to 136 implementations spanning the US and two countries.Each of the four contributions to this symposium represents a case study of implementation, at differentphases in the life-cycle, and each contribution provides an analysis of how FUSE is interpreted, adopted, oradapted. The contextual conditions in which FUSE has been introduced vary considerably. The first contributiontraces how FUSE evolved from an afterschool implementation to a stable, in-school implementation incollaboration with a large Midwestern school district. The second contribution focuses on a later stage in thespread of FUSE, in which FUSE is being adopted across a wide variety of geographically-distant schools. Thiscase study is based on nine new schools implementing FUSE in distinct ways that are representative of patternsin the larger dataset. The third contribution focuses on the first year of FUSE implementation into the verydifferent institutional and cultural contexts of public elementary schools in Helsinki, Finland, where FUSE iscurrently implemented in six schools. This analysis is based on the first two schools to implement FUSE in2016. The final contribution is a case study of how FUSE is being implemented in one public school classroomthat represents a different but growing species of FUSE adoption; while early adoptions of FUSE in publicschools have largely been as stand-alone classes within a traditional school infrastructure, the growing interestin STEAM and makerspaces has led to FUSE being integrated into classes and spaces oriented toward thesegoals. This case study explores this species of implementation. Taken together, these cases allow us to exploreadaptations of FUSE as processes of mutual appropriation (Downing-Wilson, Lecusay, & Cole, 2011). Byfocusing on a single educational innovation in different contexts, we will offer both concepts and specificempirical findings to contribute to questions of how learning scientists can bring their design offerings to wideraudiences with integrity of implementation (LeMahieu, 2011). This 90-minute symposium will include an eightminute introduction, fourteen-minute presentations, a ten-minute synthesis from the discussant, and fifteenminutes for audience questions.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1204© ISLSAdaptation begets adoption: How an unusual educational innovation becamepart of the regular school day in a large Midwestern school districtJaakko Hilppö and Reed StevensIn this paper, we present a study of the adoption and adaption of an innovative educational program calledFUSE Studios, in a large Midwestern school district. Our paper focuses on a time period during which theimplementation of the program expanded significantly and became a stable part of all of the 27 schools in thedistrict. In specific, we highlight two key moments in this process. Given that FUSE Studios can becharacterized as a highly unusual program, in the context of conventional school practices (Stevens et al, 2016),our study of its implementation represents an information-rich case study on the spread of educationalinnovations. Moreover, our paper provides one of the first studies that looks in detail at how an innovativeeducational program gets in, gets rooted, and spreads within a school district.In our study, we conceptualize the adoption and adaption process of FUSE Studios from an ActorNetwork Theory (ANT) perspective (Latour, 2005; Fenwick & Edwards, 2010). In other words, weconceptualize FUSE Studios as an actor, a particular assemblage of human and non-human actors, that throughvarious moments of ‘translation’, gets incorporated into the standing and relatively stable actor-network of thetraditional public school day. In ANT, an actor’s agency is based not in its inherent qualities but from thenetwork of associations in which the actor comes to be embedded; actor-networks have effects, like stability orchange. Yet, which actors come to be part of any network cannot be determined in advance, but rather, need beuncovered by researchers by tracing the associations within the network. Prior work in ANT has been able toshow that, most often, the scope of the actor-network that constitutes, for example, a successful pedagogicalprogram, is far more extensive and heterogeneous than it might at first appear (e.g., Nespor, 2002).The data for our study come from open-ended interviews (Patton, 2002) with key personnel working onboth sides of the FUSE Studios research-practice partnership; this includes the FUSE program coordinator, itstwo creators/founders and district coordinators and administrators. In addition, we have used documentsproduced by both parties, such as public school board records, local newspaper articles, blog posts, emailexchanges and promotional material to understand the adoption and adaptation process. In our analysis we usedboth the interviews, as well as the existing documentation, to create a retrospective reconstruction of theimplementation process and its different phases (e.g. Miettinen, 1999).During the time period analyzed for this paper (Spring 2013 - Summer 2016) the implementation ofFUSE in the district grew from reaching approximately 380 students in five schools to reaching 4000 students in27 schools, through four different implementation models. Our analysis highlights two significant moments oftranslation in this process to illustrate the complexity of adoption, thus illustrating the value of ANT’ssensitivity to heterogeneity: (1) when FUSE Studios was adopted and adapted as an in-school exploration class;and (2) when FUSE Studios was further adapted into a district-wide engineering and design class. Furthermore,our analysis shows how a heterogeneous set of different actors, like late busses, equity goals, state standards,3D-printed objects, parents, and a large industrial company took part in how FUSE Studios was incorporated aspart of the students’ educational experiences in the district. For example, after the initial implementation, torespond to the positive feedback on the program and to achieve the district's equity goals, the districtadministrators looked into afterschool clubs, as a way to provide the FUSE experience to all interested 5th and6th graders. However, due to the lack of late busses, the district could not transport students to and from the fiveschools that had FUSE Studios. This, along with the new state science standards that the administration neededto comply with, led the administration to contact the FUSE design team and eventually to design a new FUSEStudios implementation with them. This new version was then introduced to all of the schools in the district.Moreover, our analysis shows that the process also produced new actors that were able to connect,translate, and stabilize the various constraints and pressures directed toward the extending network of FUSEStudios in the district. For example, as part of moving FUSE Studios into the school day, the district created anew administrative position, a STEM Coach, and delegated the daily management of the implementation to thatposition. At the same time a new version of FUSE Studios, as an in-school exploration class, was created,through collaboration with the FUSE Studios design team and the district administration. Both the new STEMcoach and the new implementation of FUSE Studios played consequential roles later in the implementationprocess.In sum, our study contributes to the still-thin scholarship that investigates educational change processesfrom an actor-network perspective (Fenwick & Edwards, 2010). As such, our paper adds to the current literatureon educational change by illuminating the complex, heterogeneous arrangements involved in enacting changeand countering overly simplistic, often top-down, narratives of how educational innovations are implemented.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1205© ISLSRemoving the blindfolds and finding the elephant: From diverse anticipationsto convergent experiences of an educational innovationKay Ramey, Jaakko Hilppö, and Reed StevensBecause FUSE requires a technological and pedagogical infrastructure that is quite different from traditionalschool infrastructure, it faces particularly intense challenges related to scale-up and sustainability (Hargreaves,2010; Rogers, 2003). There is a risk that as FUSE Studios gets adopted into new schools, it may adapt too muchto local contexts, losing its core design components. Conversely, it may not adapt enough, making itunsustainable. Therefore, in coordinating with schools implementing FUSE, we have attempted to balanceadaptability to local constraints (Clarke, 2008; Hubbard et al., 2006; McNeil, 2002; Penuel et al., 2011) withintegrity (rather than fidelity) of implementation (LeMahieu, 2011). In other words, rather than mandating strictreplication, we provide training and support to foster implementations that align with both core designprinciples of FUSE Studios and local needs and circumstances.This approach to implementation provides an opportunity to understand the work that stakeholders putinto adapting and sustaining educational innovations. It also provides us with an opportunity to understand thesociomaterial conditions that lead to successful scale-up. Accordingly, this study examines FUSE as a boundaryobject (Star & Greisemer, 1989) and examines, via an Actor Network Theory (ANT) perspective (Latour, 2005),how the associations between the ideas, practices, and artifacts that constitute this object change over time, inlocal contexts, and how they shape implementation.We draw on data from 57 schools implementing FUSE as a new program during one academic year.Many of these schools are high-need schools, with large underrepresented minority and low socioeconomicstatus populations, that received FUSE as a grant. Data collected from these schools includes: (1) writtenapplications submitted by schools to fund and implement FUSE; (2) recordings of phone conversations betweenschools and our team; (3) observations and video recordings of facilitator training sessions; (4) interviews withstudents, facilitators, and administrators; (5) observations and video recordings of students doing FUSE; and (6)social media and community discussion board postings related to FUSE implementation. Here we focus onanalysis of data from 14 focal schools implementing FUSE in distinct ways that are representative of patterns inthe larger dataset.Analyses of schools’ applications for FUSE showed 24 perceived qualities of FUSE that stakeholdersassociated with, as reasons for pursuing FUSE for their school. Among these, the most common were “STEM”,“STEAM”, “career preparation”, “equity”, “21st century skills”, “problem-based learning”, “collaborativelearning”, and “personalized learning”. During facilitator trainings, additional associations were made, includingassociations with specific components of the technical infrastructure of FUSE, such as the 3D printers providedto each school as part of the program. Later analysis of interviews and community discussion board postsshowed variation in the ways in which FUSE was integrated into the school day and the sociotechnical networksthat ended up comprising FUSE in different local contexts. For example, while some schools experienceddifficulty setting up the necessary technological infrastructure or finding physical space to run the program,others had well-equipped makerspaces before beginning the program and merely lacked curriculum for thosespaces. Similarly, while some schools ran “pure FUSE” a totally choice-based, ungraded STEAM explorationexperience, others felt pressure to align FUSE activities with standards (e.g., NGSS, ISTE, Common Core) andto find ways to assess and attach grades to student progress during their FUSE experience.However, despite differences in initial conceptualizations of FUSE and implementation models, ouranalyses suggest that the program maintains high integrity of implementation across diverse contexts. Forexample, despite the wide variety of associations with FUSE listed in schools’ applications for the program, ininterviews with facilitators, administrators, and students after they’d begun FUSE, discourse converged around adescription of a common set of student and facilitator experiences. We consistently heard stories of studentshelping each other and collaborating on challenges, pushing through frustration and learning from failure,discovering new capacities and interests, and demonstrating greater engagement and fewer behavioral problemsin FUSE than in other classes, qualities of FUSE we’ve identified in our previous research (Ramey, 2017;Stevens et al., 2016).Based on these analyses, we argue that the adaptable nature of FUSE is what allows it to both get inand thrive in a variety of different contexts. In other words, the program serves as a boundary object,simultaneously allowing different stakeholders to form a variety of different associations with the program butalso carrying with it a set of core associations that are resilient to changes in local ecology. This findingchallenges conventional wisdom that tested educational innovations can or should be imported into newcontexts as is, without adaptation and with what has been called “fidelity of implementation”. In our analysis,ICLS 2018 Proceedings1206© ISLSadapting is not a threat but a means for sustainable implementation, not only in FUSE but in scaling up othertechnology-rich STEM learning environments in diverse school contexts.FUSE as a “nested” phenomenon: How an innovative intervention fares withinan existing context of innovationPeter MeyerhoffThe interaction of a design-based research project with its context(s) of implementation represents an ongoingtheoretical and empirical challenge in the learning sciences (Penuel, Cole, & O’Neill, 2016). Each context has aparticular social, material, and institutional history that constrains and guides any educational intervention. Onone hand, researchers seek to design for a consistent experience at scale: once a program has been iterativelydeveloped and improved, the goal is to make it resilient to changes in context as new sites are added (O’Neill,2016). At the same time, the differences among contexts may constitute precisely the phenomenon of interest ina design research program (Cole & Packer, 2016). FUSE, an interest-driven, STEAM learning environment(Stevens et al., 2016), has grown rapidly, and early research has suggested that it maintains its essential coreacross implementation contexts (DiGiacomo, Van Horne, & Penuel, 2017). An important possible differencehas emerged, however. During early implementations, no activities other than FUSE were allowed in the room.But as the program has grown, some schools have brought FUSE in as an available option within establishedclasses that already provide some form of interest-driven, choice-based activity structure. This raises a possiblescenario that may be new to the literature on implementation, which normally conceptualizes innovativeprograms as phenomena foreign to their environment.How does an innovation like FUSE fare when it enters a context of implementation in which its newpractices are already explicitly well-aligned? The answer is not self-evident. Perhaps local actors, seeing nothingnew in the innovation, will reject it altogether. Alternatively, it could be that since people in the environment arewell-prepared for the new ideas, they might enthusiastically embrace them and let go of what came before. Toinvestigate this question, I examine one case of a nested implementation: the installation of FUSE within theTech21 elective at Eagle Lake Junior High. I conducted 6 months of observations in Tech21, spoke daily withthe teacher, interviewed 7 school and district leaders, and examined internal district memoranda. I watchedstudents work and talked with them about their experiences. I made regular counts as to how many studentswere engaged in each activity at any given time, and frequently asked students why they had chosen one activityover another. In what follows, I show that FUSE ended up in a stable, parallel co-existence with the existingTech21 program.In 2015, before district leaders learned about FUSE, Eagle Lake remodeled the school’s old scienceroom into a “STEAM Lab,” which they called a “collaborative makerspace”, and created a new class, Tech21.A memo from the district’s technology director to the superintendent and the school board declared that Tech21reflected a vision for “choice driven activities” that “engage students in STEAM topics, while fostering thedevelopment of important 21st century skills.” Eagle Lake had filled the STEAM Lab with an assortment of thelatest devices and tools--Spheros, Makey Makeys, Cubelets, FlyBrix. and many others. Students had laptopswith access to online tools and activities such as TinkerCAD, Unity, Minecraft, Kerbal Space Program, andCodeCombat. By the end of the year, however, administrators grew concerned about what they believed was alack of what they called “progression” in Tech21. Searching for more structure, the technology director foundFUSE and purchased the program for the 2016-17 school year, handing it to the Tech21 teacher, Mr. J, toimplement.The existing technical infrastructure—mobile devices with students well-accustomed to their use—made it easy for students to get started in FUSE. Moreover, the open-plan layout of the STEAM Lab encouragedthe movement and collaboration that is characteristic of student work in FUSE. Mr J provided moderateencouragement to students to choose FUSE challenges. However, other Tech21 activities—Minecraft, KerbalSpace Program, and FlyBrix in particular—attracted significant participation. In each Tech21 class, activity inFUSE eventually stabilized to account for about one-third to one-half of activity. Students mainly either stayedin or out of the FUSE environment.At the same time, students’ engagement, as evidenced by their focus on and attention to their projectsand their active collaboration with other students, remained broadly consistent across FUSE or non-FUSEprojects. Most students entered Tech21 and went immediately to their work and remained involved through theend of the period; a few students even came in during their lunch period to continue working on their projects.Whether it was constructing a working airplane out of FlyBrix and cardboard, writing a program to solve aRubik’s Cube, or designing a “dream home” in FUSE, students in Tech21 worked over extended periods onICLS 2018 Proceedings1207© ISLScomplex, elaborate creative and technical projects. The one snag that occurred affected participants in FUSEand non-FUSE activities equally: Eagle Lake struggled to find a way to assess and grade participation inTech21.In sum, FUSE came into Eagle Lake as an innovation located inside another innovation. It occupied aparallel position within the STEAM Lab alongside the existing activities in Tech21 and found a core base ofparticipants. This research suggests that a nested intervention may achieve successful integrity ofimplementation and complement, rather than dislodge, the new practices already in place.“Please, no hanging around, return back to your own works” - Teachers andstudents negotiating social and cultural rules for their engagement andlearning in FUSEKristiina Kumpulainen, Anu Kajamaa and Antti Rajala, University of HelsinkiDespite a proliferation of implementation efforts of novel learning environments to schools, resources areseldom directed into longer-term follow-ups of these efforts. In response to this research gap, we investigate thefirst year of adaptation of FUSE Studios in two Finnish schools. Building on cultural historical theorizing andethnographic logic of inquiry, in this study we focus on how students and teachers negotiate social and culturalnorms and rules for their engagement and learning in FUSE, a novel technological infrastructure designed tosupport choice-based STEAM learning based on students’ interests (Stevens, et al., 2016). In specific, we areinterested in potential tensions that can emerge when existing social and cultural norms of schools meet withthose rules and norms that participants attach and negotiate for their engagement and learning in FUSE.As no educational innovation functions in a vacuum, in this study we investigate the axiology FUSEembodies, the experiences it generates, and the actions it makes possible and forecloses, both for students andtheir teachers, within the cultural context of Finnish schooling. Our study holds that it is important to examinepossible disjunctures, resistances, and tensions between different sets of norms and rules, when educationalchanges are implemented, because these can provide important information on how educational innovations arelocally adapted and what features aid or hamper their effectiveness (see also Rajala & Sannino, 2015; Kennedy,2005). To this end, in this study we ask: How do students and teachers negotiate social and cultural rules fortheir engagement and learning in FUSE Studios?; and What tensions emerge, and what are their consequences,when existing social and cultural norms of the school interact with those established for FUSE?The ethnographically (Marcus, 1998) collected, empirical data for our study are derived from twoFinnish public schools with children aged 7 to 12 years old (School 1: 251 students and 16 teachers, School 2:535 students and 28 teachers). FUSE was introduced to these schools by the city, to support the implementationof the new Finnish core curriculum in practice. The teachers of the schools were provided with a 2-day trainingworkshop on FUSE, combined with online tutoring from the developers.The empirical data are comprised of video-records and field notes, of students’ and teachers’ socialactivity in FUSE, and student and teacher interviews, collected intermittently over one academic year.Sociolinguistic and ethnographic discourse analysis (Gee & Green, 1998) and interaction analysis (Jordan &Henderson, 1995) have guided the analyses. We analyzed moment-by-moment interactions and critical events inwhich tensions emerged with regards to the rules and norms for engagement and students’ learning practices inFUSE.Our findings indicate that the forms of engagement and learning available to the students and theirteachers in FUSE resonated in many ways with the Finnish core curriculum, which emphasizes connectinginformal and formal learning and recognizing student expertise and local knowledge in solving multidisciplinaryand authentic challenges. For instance, in their interactions in FUSE, the students actively applied and validatedtheir previous experiences and knowledge, embedded in their social ecologies, in and out of school, in order tosolve STEAM challenges of their preference. The students’ developing expertise and interests were also activelyrecognized by their teachers and peers in joint activities, as students were officially nominated as expert tutorsof specific STEAM challenges. Here, the traditional teacher-student roles were transformed, as expertisebecame more relative. At an institutional level, the recognition of students’ expertise resulted in transformedsocial and cultural structures, as students were called upon from their regular class to the FUSE Studio to act asexperts for a challenge that no teacher or other student could solve.The findings also illustrate tensions. Not all students found interest in the STEAM challenges and theteachers struggled in motivating them. Also, some teachers resisted the freedom of student choice - an importantFUSE design principle - to the result that they decided to close down some FUSE challenges, as they wanted tohave more control over the content of the students’ work. Some forms of student engagement that characterizeICLS 2018 Proceedings1208© ISLSFUSE were also found to result in tensions and restrictions. For instance, not all teachers appreciated thestudents’ “hanging around” in the FUSE Studios while the students followed and observed their peers’ work onchallenges. These attitudes reflected the traditional norm of individual accountability for school work. Likewise,the forms of assessment built into FUSE (or lack thereof) created tensions as the teachers wanted to evaluate thestudents’ learning progressions in FUSE. For this reason, some teachers created additional portfolio and/orreflection tasks for their students. The interview data suggests that many of the teachers considered onlyformalized learning with a separate evaluation component as legitimately addressing the students’ learning.Altogether, our study contributes to understanding local adaptation processes of FUSE into theeveryday life of schools, with the actors’ point of view at the center. In this adaptation process, the adopters alsoactively changed the meaning of the practice. Hence, implementation goes along with transformation (Rogers,2003, Kajamaa & Schulz, 2017). Our study shows how the teachers and students did not respond passively toFUSE but that their specific needs, objectives, sense-making and experiences importantly shaped theirengagement and learning practices, leading to unexpected and creative solutions, which at times deviated fromand contradicted with the original intentions and plans set forth for FUSE. The participants became not onlyadopters of the existing resources (i.e. the prefixed FUSE tasks), but actively drew from their previous learningexperiences, resisted, initiated change, and challenged and shaped the implementation process. On this basis, wesuggest that implementation of educational innovations needs to be viewed as a continuous process in whichdesign, implementation and learning are intertwined.ReferencesBecker, H. S. (1972). “A school is a lousy place to learn anything in.” American Behavioral Scientist: 85-105.Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating compleinterventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.Clark, R.E. (2008). Resistance to change: Unconscious knowledge and the challenge of unlearning. In D.C.Berliner, & H. Kupermintz (Eds.), Fostering Change in Institutions, Environments, and People (pp.75-94). Routledge.Coburn, C. E. (2003). Rethinking scale: Moving beyond numbers to deep and lasting change. Educationalresearcher, 32(6), 3-12.Cole M. (2005). Cross-cultural and historical perspectives on the developmental consequences of education.Human Development, 48(4), 195–216Cole, M. (2009). Designing, implementing, sustaining, and evaluating idiocultures for learning anddevelopment: The case study of the Fifth Dimension. In S. Bekman & A. Aksu-Koç (Eds.),Perspectives on human development, family and culture (pp. 331-349). New York, NY: CambridgeUniversity Press.Cole, M., & Packer, M. (2016). Design-based intervention research as the science of the doubly artificial.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25(4), 503-530.DiGiacomo, D., Van Horne, K., Penuel, W. R. (2017). Designing and Supporting Productive Adaptation:Cross-Context Teacher Perspectives on Using FUSE. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of theAmerican Educational Research Association.Downing-Wilson, D., Lecusay, R., & Cole, M. (2011). Design experimentation and mutual appropriation: Twostrategies for university/collaborative after-school interventions. Theory & Psychology, 21(5), 656-680.Fenwick, T. & Edwards, R. (2010). Actor-Network Theory in education. New York, NY: Routledge.Gee, J.P. & Green, J. (1998). Discourse analysis, learning and social practice: A methodological study. Reviewof Research in Education, 23, 119-169.Greenhalgh, T., Robert, G., MacFarlane, F., Bate, P., & Kyriakidou, O. (2004). Diffusion of innovations inservice organizations: systematic review and recommendations. Milbank Quarterly, 82(4), 581-629.Hargreaves, D. H. (2010). Creating a self-improving school system. Nottingham: National College forLeadershipofSchoolsandChildren’sServices.Availableatwww.nationalcollege.org.uk/index/docinfo.htm?id=133672Hubbard, L., Mehan, H., & Stein, M.K. (2006). Reform as learning: When school reform collided with schoolculture and community politics in San Diego. New York: Routledge.Jordan, B. & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction Analysis: Foundations and Practice. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39-103.Kajamaa, A. & Schultz, K-P. (2017). From the abstract to the concrete: Implementation of an innovative tool inhome care. Health Services Management Research Journal. DOI: 10.1177/0951484817724581Kennedy, M. (2005). Inside teaching: How classroom life undermines reform. Cambridge, MA: HarvardUniversity Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1209© ISLSLatour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to Actor-Network-Theory. London: OxfordUniversity Press.LeMahieu, P. (2011). What We Need in Education is More Integrity (and Less Fidelity) of Implementation.[Web log comment]. Retrieved from http://www.carnegiefoundation.org/blog/what-we-need-ineducation-is-more-integrity-and-less-fidelity-of-implementation/Marcus, G. E. (1998). Ethnography through thick and thin. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.McNeil, L. (2002). Contradictions of school reform: Educational costs of standardized testing. Routledge.Miettinen, R. (1999). The riddle of things: Activity Theory and Actor-Network Theory as approaches tostudying innovations. Mind, Culture and Activity, 6(3), 170–95.Nespor, J. (2002). Networks and contexts of reform. Journal of Educational Change, 3(3), 365-382.O’Donnell, C. L. (2008). Defining, conceptualizing, and measuring fidelity of implementation and itsrelationship to outcomes in K–12 curriculum intervention research. Review of Educational Research,78(1), 33–84.O’Neill, K. (2016). Understanding design research–practice partnerships in context and time: Why learningsciences scholars should learn from cultural-historical activity theory approaches to design-basedresearch. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25(4), 497-502.Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Penuel, W.R., Cole, M., & O’Neill, K. (2016). Introduction to the special issue. Journal of the LearningSciences, 25(4), 487-496.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development at theintersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331-337.Rajala, A. & Sannino A. (2015). Students’ deviations from a learning task: An activity theoretical analysis.International Journal of Educational Research, 70, 31-46.Ramey, K. E. (2017). FUSE Studios: Bringing interest-driven, integrated-STEAM learning into schools viamakerspaces. (Doctoral dissertation, Northwestern University).Rogers, E. M. (2003). Diffusion of innovations. (5th ed.). New York: Simon and Schuster.Star, S. L., & Greisemer, J. R. (1989). Institutional ecology, ‘translations’ and boundary objects: Amateurs andprofessionals in Berkeley’s museum of vertebrate zoology, 1907-39. Social Studies of Science, 19(3),387-420.Stevens, R., Jona, K., Penney, L., Champion, D., Ramey, K. E., Hilppö, J., Echevarria, R., & Penuel, W.(2016). FUSE: An alternative infrastructure for empowering learners in schools. Proceedings of the12th International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Singapore, SG, Volume 2, 1025-1032.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under grants DRL-1348800,DRL-1433724, and 1657438. However, any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressedin this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National ScienceFoundation. We would also like to thank the FUSE development team: Henry Mann, Colin Sheaff, AnneStevens, Gabi Nelson, and Shahab Tabatabainejad, whose dedication and hard work has made it possible for thisresearch to happen. We owe many thanks to our participating students, teachers, and administrators for allowingus into their classrooms and schools to collect research data.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1210© ISLS