Skyscraper Games: Designing Professional Development forMiddle School Teachers to Promote Computational Thinking UsingCustom ToolsMatthew Duvall, Frank J. Lee, and Brian K. Smith,Md697@drexel.edu, fjl24@drexel.edu, bks59@drexel.eduDrexel UniversityAbstract: We are piloting professional development (PD) for six middle-school teachers froma Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. Our goal is to involve students from underrepresentedSTEM populations in programming through an annual game design competition that allowsstudents to display their game on a large skyscraper in the city through the Skyscraper Gamesproject. The initial PD group includes educators from public schools, charter schools, andafterschool programs. We are using a design-based approach to (1) create a sustainable, ongoingprofessional development program for educators of middle-school students; (2) develop alibrary of curricular materials for Skyscraper Games; and (3) enhance and upgrade our websiteand online programming tool. The goals of these activities are (1) to better understand how theinteraction of professional development, curricular materials, and our online tool affectcomputational thinking for young people and (2) to use these results to iteratively improve ourprofessional development, curriculum, and web-based tools for use by both middle-schoolstudents and their teachers in formal and informal settings.Major issuesBackgroundOn a chilly night in April 2014, Philadelphia residents looked up to see the 29-story Cira Centre briefly transforminto the World’s Largest Video Game. The players were miles apart, maneuvering the familiar rainbow blocks ofTetris as they cascaded down the 120,000-sq. ft. surface. The spectacle was the culmination of years of carefulwork and planning by Dr. Frank Lee, director of the Entrepreneurial Game Studio (EGS) at Drexel University'sExCITe Center. For Lee, this was more than just a public art installation. It was the first step in creating a new,exciting platform to engage young people in computer programming. Since that day, EGS has hosted onsiteworkshops for 82 middle schoolers from diverse backgrounds, with more than half of them identifying as femaleor gender-nonconforming. Now, the team is working with a small group of STEM educators to encourage middleschool students from all backgrounds to participate in an annual game design and development competition, withthe opportunity to display their final game on the skyscraper itself.Current researchWe are designing a professional development (PD) training sequence for middle school teachers to help themintegrate the Python computer programming language and computational thinking skills into their existingcurricula. To do this, they are using our custom web-based Skyscraper Games editor to create games and displaythem on a virtual skyscraper. This paper focuses on the following research question: In what ways can a designbased approach to professional development assist middle school STEM teachers with integrating computationalthinking skills in their classrooms?This pilot study, which is still under way for the 2017 – 2018 school year, includes the design of threedifferent but connected components: (1) the professional development program itself, (2) the accompanyingcurricular materials, and (3) the online programming tool and associated website. We have adopted a designbased research (DBR) approach. Some key features of DBR are mixed-methods, an intervention, iterativerepetitions and refinements, and a recognition of its situated nature (Cobb, Confrey, diSessa, Lehrer, & Schauble,2003; Gresalfi & Barab, 2011).For this PD intervention, we are collecting quantitative data that include teacher pre- and post-surveysconcerning technology beliefs and classroom integration (Brinkerhoff, Ku, Glazewski, & Brush, 2001), aresearch-team created Game Design and Creative Code Computational Thinking Assessment for the students, andstudent computer attitude pre- and post-surveys (Loyd & Gressard, 1984). Qualitative data include audio/videoof PD sessions, researcher observation notes and memos, and interviews. Each month, beginning in November2017 and ending in June 2018, we are meeting with the teachers for a professional development session. The firstICLS 2018 Proceedings1579© ISLSsession was five hours, and each monthly session after that will be two hours. There are six participants for thispilot study: three males and three females. Four were middle school teachers in formal educational settings; ofthose four, two taught at urban public schools (mathematics, technology) and two taught at urban charter or privateschools (technology, media literacy). The private school is a girls-only school. The other two educators workedwith non-school community-based computer programming organizations.Theoretical approachesBrinkerhoff (2006) studied a long-term professional development academy for integrating technology into schoolsin New Mexico. The study identified barriers to effective PD, with the three most relevant to this project being(1) resources, (2) institutional and administrative support, (3) training and experience. The findings also suggestedseveral key components for creating a successful PD program. Those most relevant for our study are (1) extendedcontact hours for instruction and practice, (2) provision of materials to teachers, and (3) holding participantsaccountable for integrating their ideas into practice.Conclusions and implicationsWe will add more results as we collect and analyze additional data, but the early implications are that theBrinkerhoff guidelines for PD are relevant.The following barriers have been evident in our preliminary data analysis. (1) Resources: time andequipment are the primary concerns for the teachers. (2) Institutional support has proven to be an issue for someteachers; in one case, the teacher tried unsuccessfully for nearly four months to get the Skyscraper Games websiteunblocked before the research team was able to help. (3) Of the six teachers, two do not have formal training incomputer science. This has been an issue for one of these teachers, who requires additional support in learningprogramming generally, beyond the specific requirements of the Skyscraper Games tool.Briefly, this is how we have addressed the elements for successful PD. (1) Extended contact hours:meeting for several hours each month has provided an opportunity to discuss pedagogical approaches, review andrequest curricular materials, and use the website and coding tool in order to generate a list of action items forimproving those. (2) Provision of materials to teachers has been important, both to help them understand the tooland how they might use it, and also to demonstrate that they are being supported by the research team. (3) Whilewe cannot require teachers to actually use the tool in their classrooms, we worked with them to create a timelinefor the year that culminates in a student showcase at the end of May 2018. This has helped to motivate them,particularly since the student teams that complete a game will have the opportunity to play their games on theCira Centre itself later in the summer/early fall of 2018.This study will provide important information for researchers who are interested in designing effectivePD opportunities for computational thinking using custom technological tools, particularly at the middle schoollevel where CS is generally not a required course.ReferencesBrinkerhoff, J. (2006). Effects of a long-duration, professional development academy on technology skills,computer self-efficacy, and technology integration beliefs and practices. Journal of Research onTechnology in Education, 39(1), 22-43.Brinkerhoff, J., Ku, H., Glazewski, K., & Brush, T. (2001). Development, results and validation of technologyintegration surveys for preservice and practicing teachers. Paper presented at the Association forEducational Communications and Technology, Atlanta, GA.Cobb, P., Confrey, J., diSessa, A., Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educational research.Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9-13.Gresalfi, M., & Barab, S. (2011). Learning for a reason: Supporting forms of engagement by designing tasks andorchestrating environments. Theory Into Practice, 50(4), 300-310. doi:10.1080/00405841.2011.607391Loyd, B. H., & Gressard, C. (1984). The reliability and validity of an instrument for the assessment of computerattitudes. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 45(4), 903-908.AcknowledgmentsThis research was supported by a grant from The Intel Corporation.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1580© ISLS