Constructing Knowledge: A Community of Practice Frameworkfor Evaluation in the VMT ProjectMichael Khoo, Drexel University, khoo@drexel.eduGerry Stahl, Drexel University, Gerry@GerryStahl.netAbstract: This paper describes a formative evaluation of the Virtual Math Teams (VMT)Project as it adopts the GeoGebra dynamic-mathematics application. The project team isconsidered as a Community of Practice, which communicates with student users throughboundary objects. An ethnographic action research approach is used to analyze three sourcesof data: VMT user manuals; screenshots of tool interfaces and assignments; and logs ofstudent chat sessions addressing those assignments. The analysis focuses on how the topic of‘construction’ is articulated in each data set. The results show that the team understands‘construction’ in terms of a complex web of knowledge of dynamic geometry, while thestudents develop their own emergent notions of ‘constructing’ from the boundary objectsproduced by the team. Recommendations for boundary object design are considered.Keywords: action research, boundary objects, communities of practice, design research, dynamicgeometry, ethnography, GeoGebraIntroductionA basic distinction in project evaluation is that between summative and formative evaluation (Frechtling, 2002).Summative evaluation assesses the final outcomes of a project, while formative evaluation assesses ongoingprocesses, focusing on how that project is achieving its goals. Evaluations reported in the literature are oftensummative in nature, and explicit cases of formative evaluation are infrequent. One issue here is that theongoing nature of formative evaluation, and the iterative generation of interim data, present a less tidy unit ofanalysis than summative evaluation. However, formative evaluations are useful, for instance in design research,where projects follow iterative design cycles of development, implementation, and assessment. Where asummative evaluation may conclude that one intervention has better outcomes than another, a formativeevaluation may suggest how to adjust the intervention to be more effective. This paper introduces a formativeevaluation of work with the Virtual Math Teams (VMT) Project as it adopts the GeoGebra dynamicmathematics application. One aim of the evaluation is to evaluate the ongoing ways in which the VMT projectteam is codifying its knowledge of dynamic geometry into the project’s online tools and documentation, andhow well these tools and documents support students to engage in dynamic geometry. This contributes to theongoing incremental improvement of the project’s artifacts, and is a typical use of formative evaluation (itwould be of little use to wait until the project has been completed in order to evaluate these materials). Theevaluation approach described in this paper draws on theories of Communities of Practice (Lave & Wenger,1991; Wenger, 1998) to consider VMT not just as a series of tools, assignments and users, but as an ensemble ofpeople, practices, processes, and other phenomena, which all aim at education in dynamic geometry. Theanalysis focuses on recent pedagogical artifacts produced by the project, the ways in which these artifactsrepresent the educational intentions of the project team, and how these artifacts are used by the project’s studentusers. The analysis focuses on the team’s understanding of dynamic geometry, the reifications of theseunderstandings in informational artifacts, and the understanding gained by students after interacting with thesereifications. An important issue here is the extent to which the design of VMT tools and curricula help studentsto understand dynamic-geometric construction in the same ways as the project team.The VMT Project with GeoGebraVMT is a CSCL project spanning over a decade (Stahl, 2013). The project’s technological, pedagogical andanalytic components provide an integrated online platform for middle- and high-school students to engage inonline mathematical discourse as they explore dynamic geometry. Geometrical construction and explanation areemphasized. In classical geometry, these practices involve the use of a straight edge and a compass. In VMT,these concrete affordances are ‘translated’ (Stahl, 2013a) into a virtual environment and dynamic screen tools.VMT incorporated GeoGebra for the past several years. The system now includes an online environment with achat window, a virtual whiteboard, and a range of interactive dynamic-geometry tools, which students use tolearn about dynamic geometric construction (Stahl, 2011). The project follows a design-based researchCSCL 2015 Proceedings126© ISLSapproach, with iterative cycles of user-centered design, implementation and evaluation. The dynamic-geometrytools in VMT have been developed over a number of years by a team of pedagogists, learning scientists, coders,discourse analysts, social scientists, HCI experts, evaluators, and others. Key components of the design processare the team’s weekly meetings, in which members discuss topics such as the student chat logs, curriculumdesign, technological issues, and paper writing. Outputs from the meetings include revised assignments,analyses of project data, drafts of papers, and technical bug reports and fixes. These and other outputs feed intothe iterative development of the educational artifacts that mediate the project to its users: the online tools, thetool documentation, the curricula, specific assignments, and so on. It is a form of mutual bootstrapping, withimplementations of the tools and curricula generating data for the research team, the analysis of which supportsimprovements in the tools and curricula, which in turn leads to the generation of new data for analysis. Theproject team’s hope is that by following a design-research process, the educational artifacts they produce will bemore useful than a ‘one-shot’ design approach.Communities of PracticeFigure 1. Participation and reification in Communities of Practice. (c.f. Wenger, 1998, Figs 1.1 and 4.1.)Communities of practice are often glossed somewhat simply as ‘groups of people working together on acommon task.’ The concept has however considerable theoretical depth, including attempting to account forhow knowledge is constituted and shared within and between groups. Lave and Wenger (1991) draw on theoriesof practice by Giddens (1979), Bourdieu (1977), and others, to theorize how newcomers become members of aCoP and gain knowledge of its practices not just by learning what a community knows, but what communitymembers do. This includes knowing what to talk about in that community, and also how to talk and to supportcommunity discourse and memory. Experienced community members guide less experienced members throughthe community’s practices, a process known as legitimate peripheral participation, “an engagement in socialpractice that entails learning as an integral constituent.” Wenger (1998) further elaborates membership in a CoPin terms of a duality of participation and reification (Figure 1). Participation involves “the social experience ofliving in the world in terms of membership in social communities and active involvement in social enterprises,”while reification includes a range of activities (making, designing, representing, naming, encoding, anddescribing, as well as perceiving, interpreting, using, reusing, decoding and recasting”) which generate traces ofthat membership. The processes are distinct yet mutually constitutive: “[Reification] always rests onparticipation: what is said, represented, or otherwise brought into focus always assumes a history ofparticipation as a context for its interpretation. In turn, participation always organizes itself around reificationbecause it always involves artifacts, words and concepts that allow it to proceed” [pages].Given that meaning is constituted internally in CoPs in terms of the participation-reification duality,what might individuals external to a CoP make of the reifications of that CoP? Here, says Wenger, boundaryobjects play an important role. According to Star and Griesemer (1989), boundary objects are:objects which are both plastic enough to adapt to local needs and constraints of the severalparties employing them, yet robust enough to maintain a common identity across sites …They may be abstract or concrete. They have different meanings in different social worlds butCSCL 2015 Proceedings127© ISLStheir structure is common enough to more than one world to make them recognizable, a meansof translation. The creation and management of boundary objects is key in developing andmaintaining coherence across intersecting social worlds.While CoPs regularly appear in the CSCL literature, boundary objects appear less frequently. The rest of thispaper therefore focuses on VMT as a CoP and its use of boundary objects.Boundary objects in VMTFigure 2. Boundary objects in the VMT projectFrom the point of view of CoP theory, participation in the VMT project team is built partly on communitypractices that support project members’ knowledge of math, dynamic geometry, the project tools, and the team’seducational and pedagogical philosophy. Reification in VMT takes this knowledge and produces artifacts suchas the tool interfaces and documentation that represent this knowledge to users. Ongoing cycles of participationand reification have led to the creation of formalized webs of meaning that in turn support the team’s practicesand identity. This process has been going on for a number of years, with the team’s knowledge of dynamicgeometry reified in the form of a range of informational artifacts. Many of these artifacts are internal to theproject, such as document drafts, meeting agendas and minutes, email, and so on. Other artifacts – boundaryobjects – have been designed to communicate the project team’s understandings of dynamic geometry to wideraudiences. Distillations of the team’s thinking, these boundary objects are tailored for particular audiences, andinclude documents such as conference papers, journal articles, funding proposals, and reports. The boundaryobjects that we are interested in here are designed for students, and consist of sociotechnical ensembles of tools,interfaces, instructions, curricula, and other artifacts. As explicit reifications of the team’s knowledge, they aredesigned to lead students, through a series of activities and exercises, to an understanding of dynamic geometry.Figure 2 shows, on the left, the CoP of the project team; on the right, a series of small and emergingCoPs that represent various student teams; and in the middle, the boundary objects created by the project teamand intended to serve as sense-making artifacts for the students. An important evaluation question here is: Dothese boundary objects – which make sense to the team – also make sense to the students and support them tolearn about dynamic geometry? To address this question, the students’ discourse and actions in VMT areanalyzed, using as a starting point Laborde’s (2004) distinction between spatio-graphical and theoreticalreasoning. According to Laborde, when students construct and use geometrical figures, they can understandthese figures at ‘face value,’ in terms of what they see, and also in terms of wider theoretical reasoning. Inlearning, students oscillate between these two modes of reasoning, with theoretical hypotheses explored partlythrough the construction of diagrams, leading to new hypotheses being formed, and an increase in their overallunderstanding. From this perspective, when examining the VMT student logs, do we see students working theirway through the assignments based on ‘surface’ comprehension of the visual forms that they see on theirscreens, or do they build theoretical arguments and reasoning to account for the underlying dynamic geometricalforms? The analysis that follows evaluates this question by examining the ways in which the project team andthe students use the word ‘construction’ and its synonyms. Analyzing the use of ‘construction’ is useful, as suchusage can be a marker of both spatio-graphical and theoretical reasoning, depending on the context in which it isused (c.f. Wittgenstein, 2001).Methodological approachAs noted in the introduction, formative evaluation focuses on descriptions of ongoing dynamic processes, ratherthan static one-off measurements of project outcomes. It calls for different methods than may traditionally beused in summative evaluation. The research in this paper follows an ethnographic action-research approach(Tacchi, Slater, & Hearn, 2003), combining ethnographic methods with ongoing analyses of and contributions toCSCL 2015 Proceedings128© ISLSthe field site. The aim is to develop iterative improvements in theoretical and practical understanding, useful forboth the ethnographer and the research subjects. It is a method suitable for complex field sites exhibitingorganizational and technological development, such as VMT (Baskerville & Pries-Heje, 1999).In this analysis, it is assumed that the VMT team produces reifications both for internal use and also forcommunicating with external stakeholders. The focus here is on boundary objects produced for students, and thestudents’ responses to these boundary objects. The data examined were as follows. First, curricula and manualsrelated to the VMT tools were analyzed, including introductory assignments, and overall reviews of the projectwork (Stahl 2012, 2013b, 2014a, and 2014b). Second, the VMT interface, and instructions and assignmentswere analyzed (screenshots of many of these are included in the documents just cited). Third, the chat of astudent group in the VMT Fall Fest 2013 was analyzed (see http://gerrystahl.net/vmt/icls2014/Topic3.xlsx;http://gerrystahl.net/vmt/icls2014/). The analysis followed a general grounded-discourse-analysis approach, inwhich ‘construction’ had previously been identified as a main category, and axial codes related to ‘construction’were identified. The analysis was carried out using NVIVO coding software.ResultsAs might be expected, the curricula, manuals, and the VMT interface, evidenced richer uses of ‘construction’than the discourse of the student teams. At the same time, the students used what knowledge they had acquiredfrom the reifications to engage, at times, in creative hypothesis generation. For reasons of space, the analysis inthis section is abbreviated.Curricula and manualsAcross the four documents, ‘construction,’ as well as ‘constructing,’ ‘constructed,’ and a range of synonyms,were used in a wide variety of practical and technical senses. Approximately 180 examples were identified. Acommon sense usage that emerged from the coding was that of an activity that can be carried out by users:GeoGebra lets you construct dynamic-mathematics figuresA related usage was that of a thing that was being made or had been made in GeoGebra by students or tutors:Take turns being in control of the construction. Say what you are doing in the chat.Use the chat to let people know when you want to ‘take control’ of the GeoGebraconstruction. Use the chat to tell people what you notice and what you are wondering aboutthe construction.Sliding the history slider shows you previous versions of constructions in the GeoGebra tab,so you can review how your group did its work.Construction was seen as an activity carried out with tools. For instance, the VMT tool has a ‘construction area’(i.e. the whiteboard area and associated tool buttons):Here is how to use these tool buttons. Try each one out in the construction area of your ownGeoGebra tab. First click on the button for the tool in the tool bar, then click in theconstruction area to use the tool.Different uses of ‘construction’ were often combined in the same chunk of discourse, for example:You can even let someone else take control in your tab to help you construct something or toexplore your construction. After your group constructs something in the group GeoGebra tab,you should make sure that you can do it yourself by doing the construction in your own tab.A wide range of synonyms was also used to describe actions involved in construction, for example:Use the Compass to draw a circle whose radius is equal to the distance between two pointsand whose center is at a third point. First click on two points to define the length of the radius.Then without releasing the cursor, drag the circle to the point where you want its center to be.A ‘construction’ was often seen as the goal or outcome of an assignment. This usage included subsidiaryactions, such as creating, dragging, moving, and placing, and subsidiary components such as points, lines,segments, rays, and so on. While this whole/subsidiary distinction was often observed, there were also placeswhere these usages overlapped, for instance where students were expected to construct a figure with underlyingdependencies. In these cases, a dependency, although part of the overall figure, could be referred to in itself as aconstruction:Note: You must construct the dependencies among the objects, (lines and circle), not justdraw something that looks like this.CSCL 2015 Proceedings129© ISLSCan you think of any ways you could use the dependency created with the compass tool orcircle tool to construct other geometric figures or relationships?Finally, where one task of the assignment was to come up with a component, this could also be referred to as aconstruction. For instance, a segment – if it was the outcome of an assignment – could be constructed:Challenge: Construct a segment DG along ray DE, whose length is equal to the sum of thelength of a radius AB of a circle plus the length of a segment BC connecting two points on thecircumference of the circle.Interface and assignmentsFigure 3. An example of an assignmentThe project manuals (previous section) are useful documents, but students may not always read them, and theirfirst encounter with VMT is often through the tool interface. The interface includes several interrelatedfunctional elements, including a whiteboard area in which students can construct dynamic geometry figures witha range of tools, a chat window where they can communicate with other students in their group, and a list ofusers currently online. Often included in the whiteboard area are informational graphics related to theassignments. The content and format of the graphics varies, but they can be seen as summaries of the descriptionof the assignment in the manual, consisting of a few sentences, step-by-step instructions, and figures (see Figure3). Graphics are sometimes posted alongside pre-built Geogebra constructions that students can interact with.The assignments summarized in the graphics run from simple tasks that introduce the students to the functionsand affordances of VMT, to more complex tasks that test students’ understanding of dynamic geometry. As aboundary object, the assignment figure provides a good reflection and synopsis of the associated coursematerials, although it should be noted that as the description and accompanying figures are succinct summaries,they might require further background understanding in order to be usefully understood (such understanding asis, for instance, provided in the extended explanations in the accompanying manuals). The graphic illustrated inFigure 3 was presented to students in session 3 the Fall Fest of 2013, in which the students had to construct theperpendicular of a line they have previously constructed, and after that to construct a perpendicular bisectorthrough a given point. The word ‘construction’ is used in several places in this assignment description, andrefers both to the construction of various parts of assignment, and the overall goal of the assignment itself (theconstruction of perpendiculars and bisectors). The assignment also includes elements of dynamic geometry,where the students are instructed to ‘drag to make sure your new Line stays perpendicular.’Student chat logs and constructionsStudents use VMT tools to discuss how to approach each assignment, to coordinate their use of the whiteboardand tools, and to discuss what they have learned and discovered in each session. The system is instrumented tocapture the traces of student discussion and tool use in GeoGebra is. These logs are regularly analyzed byproject members, both individually, and in collective data sessions. The discussion in this section refers to astudent session associated with the GeoGebra assignment outlined in the previous section. An excerpt from thislog is shown in Figure 4, which shows (left to right) the event number; the time a student started to write acomment; the time the student actually posted the comment; and the comment itself. Because of their loginnames, this student team, who are middle school students, are referred to by the VMT project as the ‘CerealTeam’ (sessions by the Cereal team are also reported in Çakir & Stahl, 2015, and Öner & Stahl, 2015).CSCL 2015 Proceedings130© ISLSFigure 4. An example of a VMT chat logHere we can see the three team members, Cornflakes, Cheerios, and Fruitloops. An interesting featureof this session is that while the students often referred to using the tools, they used the term ‘construction’relatively infrequently: they used ‘make’ fourteen times; ‘put,’ ‘move’ and other related terms seven times; and‘construct’ only twice. For example:(17)fruitloops: how do i make the line segment?(29)fruitloops: no you dont make a line you make a line segment(30)cheerios: i just made the intersecting line and point in the middle(50)cheerios: turn line fhg so its easier make it horizontal(57)cornflakes: so after construting the line we put the circle on top(63)cornflakes: put point m on tp of h(85)fruitloops: you make the points go through qr and then you move h ontop of the lineWhere construction is part of the students’ chat, it seems to be in terms of quoting from the assignment.For instance:(28)fruitloops: so now you need to construck points at the intersection (Assignment:Construct Points at the intersections)(53)cornflakes: now construct the line (Assignment: Can you construct a Lineperpendicular to FG that goes through Point H?)Figure 5. “You can’t really prove that by looking at it.”One question that could be asked of the students’ actions here, following Laborde’s model of spatiographical and theoretical thinking, is: Are they generally making, moving, putting, etc., or are they‘constructing’ in the dynamic-geometrical sense intended by the term? The discourse of the students describesvarious acts of manipulation, but there is little explicitly technical reference to any higher order dynamicgeometry principles that could be informing the construction. At the same time, however, the students alsoengage in some incipient attempts at proof, even if they lack the technical language to describe this in formalterms. This occurs towards the end of their session, where Fruitloops makes some suggestions for summing upthe knowledge gained from the assignment (Figure 5). Here, Fruitloops seems to be working towards adistinction between what the students see, what they know, and what they should be able to prove, noting that“you can’t really prove that [the line is perpendicular] by looking at it,” but rather that the students should aimtowards an understanding guided by deeper underlying geometrical thinking.CSCL 2015 Proceedings131© ISLSDiscussionOne finding from the analysis is that the VMT project team used ‘construction’ and related terms in complexways, while the students used the same terms imprecisely. On one level this should not be surprising. At thisstage in their learning of dynamic geometry, the students do not necessarily have at their disposal the range oflanguage and concepts that would enable them to make the rich connections between dynamic-geometryconcepts and practices that the project team does. Further, the students seemed to respond literally to theassignment prompts, with the inference that they are demonstrating spatio-graphical responses; that is, they aretalking about constructing without having full knowledge of what this might mean in dynamic geometry.From the point of view of the evaluation framework proposed in this paper, one counter-argument isthat the students did in fact develop an understanding of dynamic geometry, but that they did not (yet) possess asophisticated enough vocabulary to express this in the same terms as the project team. Towards the end of thesession described in this paper, and in response to the assignment instruction “Point H is an arbitrary Point onLine FG. Can you construct a Line perpendicular to FG that goes through H?”, they test hunches by moving theconstruction around to see if it aligned. They appear to be working towards a preliminary hypothesis regardingdynamic geometrical proof, even if they do not formally test this, or use the same terminology that a member ofthe VMT might have used. While from one perspective, this may be seen as spatio-graphical behavior, andlining up different figures with no regard for why they align, at the same time, these actions can also be seen asnascent forms of hypothesis testing based on early understandings of the possibilities for proof in dynamicgeometry environments. This has been suggested in other analyses of the Cereal Team. Çakir and Stahl (2015)studied another VMT session in which the team was instructed to drag previously constructed quadrilaterals, inorder to make inferences regarding the underlying dependencies and constructions of these quadrilaterals. Theynote: “through an interactive process of calibrating and recalibrating their indexical references (Zemel &Koschmann, 2013) to the evolving visual configurations witnessed during different dragging performances, theteam members were able to collectively notice several dependencies among constituent elements, describe themin colloquial and semi-formal terms, and produce conjectures for the underlying causes of those dependencies.”Similarly, Öner and Stahl (2015), who have analyzed the same session described in this paper, but using Sfard’scommognitive framework, suggest that by the end of the session the students are engaged in working towards apreliminary discussion of proof, even if this is not framed in rigorous terms.From the perspective of Laborde, the Cereal Team iterated rapidly between spatio-graphical responsesand theoretical reasoning. This rapid iteration and reasoning was supported by the dynamic nature of the VMTtools and the ability to drag, as well as by the collaborative affordances of the interface, such as the ability towatch other students manipulating constructions in real time, and the chat window for discussion of thesemanipulations. This iteration was productive; while (as the students observed) the perpendicular bisector figuremay look the same from either a spatio-graphical or theoretical perspective, as they interacted with it over thecourse of the session, the students started to specify differences between these perspectives. They began to positproto-rules for evaluating whatever it is that they have been instructed to notice in the assignment (constructinga perpendicular bisector), and move from spatio-graphical reasoning and towards theoretical reasoning. Thus,while their discourse consciously reflects at least partly the steps presented in the assignment images and texts –and they recognize that following these steps correctly should result in achieving the assignment goal – they arealso aware that the assignment calls on them to provide theoretical accounts beyond those same steps. Theyrecognize that their dynamic constructions can be seen both as spatio-graphical assemblages of components(points, lines, circles), and also as objects that can be explained in terms of more abstract underlying dynamicgeometrical principles. At this stage, however, this reasoning is emergent, not least because of the lack ofpractice with and reflection upon dynamic geometry, at least beyond the immediate goals of the assignment.Overall, the VMT tools and documentation functioned well as boundary objects that reified andexternalized the project team’s knowledge for students. This is not surprising, given the design researchapproach that the project team uses, which produces regular ongoing revisions to these artifacts. At the sametime, the observations, framed within CoP theory, regarding the differences in meaning of ‘construction’ in boththe vocabularies and practices of the project team and the students, suggest further topics for investigation inthis process. What are the ontological grounds that the team and the students bring to their understanding ofgeometry and dynamic geometry? Do the students understand their actions in terms of classical geometry, inwhich they have yet to be formally trained, or in terms of a translation of dynamic geometry, or in terms ofsomething else again? Further, how do they interpret the affordances of the VMT tools? Do they assume thatobjects move, unless otherwise specified, and if so, what sort of understanding of dynamic geometry thenemerges? These questions lead to a consideration of how VMT can be developed further to support students intheory building and proof. One strategy suggested by the evaluation is to continue to refine the boundary objectsproduced by the team (in the form, for instance, of assignment images and texts), and to gain further tractionCSCL 2015 Proceedings132© ISLSwith the students’ understanding of what is meant by ‘construction.’ A second strategy is to understand furtherthe contribution the connections between the collaborative nature of the tools, and the rapid iterations betweenspatio-graphical and theoretical thinking displayed by the students. (Note: this section benefited from discussionat the 2014 ICLS workshop Interaction Analysis of Student Teams Enacting the Practices of CollaborativeDynamic Geometry; http://gerrystahl.net/vmt/icls2014/.)ConclusionA formative evaluation of the VMT project, based on Communities of Practice and boundary objects, identifiedvarious uses of ‘constructing’ by project members and students. For the VMT team, the idea of constructing wasconstituted within a web of dynamic geometry knowledge, and reified in boundary objects such as instructionalmanuals, assignments, and interfaces. The students drew on these boundary objects, developing notions of‘constructing’ which were more emergent. The evaluation recommendations are that the project’s boundaryobjects should continue to be refined, and also that further understanding be gained of what team members andstudents understand by ‘constructing’ and related terms. Overall, the CoP approach usefully pulled back theevaluation lens from the tools, and brought into view the project as a whole, covering not just technology use,but organizational levels of design and implementation. The evaluation design allowed insights to be fed back tothe project team on an iterative basis, complementing the design research approach of the team.ReferencesBaskerville, R., & Pries-Heje, J. (1999). Grounded action research: Amethod for understanding IT in practice.Accounting,Management, and Information Technology, 9(1999), 1–23.Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Çakir, M., & Stahl, G. (2015), Dragging as a Referential Resource for Mathematical Meaning Making in aCollaborative Dynamic-Geometry Environment. CSCL 2015, Gothenburg, Sweden, June 7-11, 2015.Frechtling, J. (2002). The 2002 user-friendly handbook for project evaluation. Arlington, VA: The NationalScience Foundation. Retrieved May 11, 2014, from: http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2002/nsf02057/start.htmGiddens, A. (1979). Central Problems in Social Theory. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.Laborde, C. (2004). The hidden role of diagrams in students’ construction of meaning in geometry. In J.Kilpatrick, C. Hoyles, & O. Skovsmose (Eds.), Meaning in mathematics education. Dordrecht: KluwerAcademic Publishers, pp. 1–21.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Öner, D., & Stahl, G. (2015). Tracing the Change in Discourse in a Collaborative Dynamic-GeometryEnvironment: From Visual to More Mathematical. CSCL 2015, Gothenburg, Sweden, June 7-11, 2015.Rogers, Y., Sharp, H., & Preece, J. (2011). Interaction Design. Beyond Human-Computer Interaction. 3rdEdition. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.Sfard, A. (2008). Thinking as communicating: Human development, the growth of discourses, andmathematizing. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.Stahl, G. (2011). Computer-Supported Math Discourse Among Teachers and Students. NSF proposal. RetrievedNovember 1, 2014, from: http://gerrystahl.net/publications/proposals/dr2011.pdfStahl, G. (2012). Dynamic-geometry activities with GeoGebra for virtual math teams. Retrieved November 1,2014, from: http://GerryStahl.net/elibrary/topics/activities.pdfStahl, G. (2013a). Translating Euclid. San Rafael, CA: Morgan & Claypool Publishers.Stahl, G. (2013b). Topics in dynamic geometry for virtual math teams. Retrieved November 1, 2014, from:http://GerryStahl.net/elibrary/topics/topics.pdfStahl, G. (2014a). Explore dynamic geometry together. Retrieved November 1, 2014, from:http://GerryStahl.net/elibrary/topics/explore.pdfStahl, G. (2014b). Construct dynamic geometry together. Retrieved November 1, 2014, from:http://GerryStahl.net/elibrary/topics/construct.pdfStar, S., & Griesemer, J. (1989). Institutional ecology, 'translations' and boundary objects: Amateurs andprofessionals in Berkeley's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907-39. Social Studies of Science,19(1989), 387-420.Tacchi, J. A., Slater, D., & Hearn, G. N. (2003). Ethnographic Action Research: A User’s Handbook. NewDelhi, India: UNESCO.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Wittgenstein, L. (2001). Philosophical Investigations. Third edition. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.Zemel, A., & Koschmann, T. (2013). Recalibrating reference within a dual-space interaction environment.International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 8(1), 65-87.CSCL 2015 Proceedings133© ISLS