Authentic Problem-Based Learning With Augmented RealityTodd Ogle, Virginia Tech, todd.ogle@vt.eduDavid Hicks, Virginia Tech, hicks@vt.eduAaron Johnson, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, ajohnson147@unl.eduThomas Tucker, Virginia Tech, thomasjt@vt.eduAbstract: This work resulted in an authentic problem based – and place based – historicalinquiry unit utilizing augmented reality and an engagement-first approach to scaffolddisciplined inquiry, facilitate student understanding of change over time, and motivate andsustain students through the inquiry arc. The design was guided by cognitive research thatrecognizes both the psychological and social aspects of learning. The outcomes represent bothresearch findings across 14 participating classes as well as a more specific look at the activitiesof one student group, documenting their experience and perspectives in-situ. Data gatheredinclude interviews, usage logs, student notes and student final projects. All interviews and videorecordings were transcribed, indexed and underwent inductive content analysis to identify keythemes around motivation to learn and explicit learnings and negotiations with the app. Ourfindings suggest that AR can facilitate and sustain an inquiry through making the invisiblevisible in authentic and challenging settings.Keywords: augmented reality, place-based learning, historical inquiry, authentic problembased learningThis paper reports on the outcomes of an augmented reality (AR) application designed to scaffold schoolchildren’sinvestigation of the hidden local history of a former African American school – Christiansburg Institute. Atransdisciplinary team of Virginia Tech faculty in History, Education, Computer Science, and Visual Arts, publicschool teachers, the school division’s social studies supervisor, and Christiansburg Institute alumni workedtogether to build the place based/problem based historical inquiry unit of instruction that used AR to allow students- with little or no knowledge of what the historical site was – to engage in cultural fieldwork. The app, CI Spy,was part of a unit designed to introduce 5th grade students to the site’s history, purpose, and significance whileengaging with a range of historical sources in a place-based inquiry (See Johnson et. al 2017). At the initiation ofthis project we hypothesized that AR with a built-in explicit strategy/scaffold for historical source analysis (SCIMC: Summarize, Contextualize, Infer, Monitor and Corroborate) could support in-situ analysis of various historicalsources while leveraging the power of context and place to motivate and sustain students within and through ahistorical inquiry as they learned about school segregation. Currently, the site of Christiansburg Institute, once athriving 13 building campus of over 180 acres, is little more than a single derelict building in an empty field nextto an industrial park. Few in the community know of the school, and it is truly a hidden, difficult history that theschool division is now seeking to integrate within the history curriculum.We created CI Spy to make the invisible past visible to students. That is, CI Spy was designed to helpstudents see the growth and demise of the campus by using virtual buildings to provide a sense of its physicalscale and presence. Additionally, CI Spy allowed students to “virtually” enter into the lone inaccessible derelictclassroom building (Figure 1) and two of the virtual representations of buildings - long since demolished – (Figure2) in order to collect and analyze historical sources (Figure 3) as part of a student-centered inquiry into the localhistory of school segregation.(a)(b)(c)Figure 1. An inaccessible building (a) can be explored (b) with a virtual classroom via AR (c).ICLS 2018 Proceedings136© ISLS(a)(b)(c)Figure 2. Students tap a virtual building (a), confirm they’d like to enter (b), and explore the evidence within (c).Without the use of AR this fieldtrip experience, designed to foster an inquiry and also facilitate a senseof walking in the footsteps of others, would have been impossible. A sense of place, scale, and what once existedon the now abandoned site were provided via the app, while at the same time it integrated the explicit scaffoldbased on SCIM-C to support the students’ inquiry.(a)(b)(c)Figure 3. Students use the scaffold (a), explore a virtual room (b), and work in pairs to record field notes (c).Historical inquiry, explicit scaffolds and the importance of placeThe teaching of history has been observed by generations of students and researchers as clinging to a very specificpattern of teaching: the teacher talks and students listen, read, and answer questions in textbooks. Students arethen expected to memorize facts and details that for the most part are “removed from their intrinsically humancharacter” (Goodlad, 1984, p. 212) and completely at odds with visions of powerful teaching and learningelucidated by the field. What is often lost or forgotten in such teaching is a clear goal of explicitly preparingstudents to actively engage in inquiry, perspective taking, and meaning making. Historical inquiry is the processof engaging in purposeful and reflective mental activities that strategically explore multiple perspectives throughthe reasoned drawing of inferences, the integration and synthesis of information, the evaluation of reliability andperspective, and the generation of possible understandings and interpretations (Bain, 2005; Levstik & Barton,2005; Wineburg, 2001). History learning as a specific domain requires deep inquiry; considering and evaluatinghistorical sources brings disciplinary rigor into the process and helps children develop the best possible argumentsfor whatever stories are formed. Further, the process of considering different pieces of evidence from varyingsources can help elicit an understanding that alternative stories exist with varying perspectives, and the storieswith the most support may not necessarily be the stories we would prefer to tell. The recognition for perspectivesaffected by critical inquiry can help students to achieve a deeper understanding of the importance of accordingpeople in the past the same respect as we would want for ourselves (Lee, 2011).Ongoing research on explicit scaffolds in history education and beyond has established that they can beeffective in helping learners to understand the inquiry process and to analyze historical sources (Belland, Kim, &Hannafin, 2013; Hicks & Doolittle, 2008; Hicks et. al 2016). Currently there is only a small body of empiricalresearch designed to examine how digital technologies can support the teaching and learning of the doing ofhistory (Britt et al., 2000; Saye & Brush, 2002). Much of this research (Saye & Brush, 2002; Hicks, Doolittle &Ewing, 2004; Hicks & Doolittle, 2008) has sought to examine how multimedia tools can broadly scaffold theanalysis of multiple and single historical textual sources as part of the process of engaging in problembased/historical inquiry.Visitors to historic locations can experience intense engagement, a loss of the feeling of the passage oftime, and a connection with others across time and space (Cameron & Gatewood, 2000; Maines and Glynn, 1993).This suggests that placing learners within real historic contexts where they can interact with people, materialICLS 2018 Proceedings137© ISLSobjects, visual and spatial information (Schwartz & Heiser, 2006), and processes and scaffolds could enhance thequality of learning (Barron & Dobbs, 2015; Coulter & Polman, 2004; Dunleavy et al., 2008; Dunleavy & Dede,2014).Augmented reality as instructional applicationRegardless of the affordances mobile computing provides, sound pedagogy and instructional design remainprimary determinants of success. In a project using GIS (geographic information system) software and GPS(global positioning system) to engage students in inquiry-based learning, Coulter and Polman (2004) concludedthat focused curricular planning led to a more successful implementation than an “activity exposure” approach.Citing cognitive overload and unproductive mental effort as risks to learning in discovery-based learningenvironments that rely heavily on multimedia, Clark, Yates, Early, and Moulton (2010) support the use of guidedtraining methods instead. Nevertheless, in a recent review of AR teaching and learning Dunleavy & Dede, (2014)contend that, “as a cognitive tool or pedagogical approach, AR aligns well with situated and constructivist learningtheory as it positions the learner within a real-world physical and social context, while guiding, scaffolding andfacilitating participatory and metacognitive learning process such as authentic inquiry …” (p.737).Research designThe provenance for our methodology is informed by design-based research, where specific curriculum orinstructional treatments are iteratively tested within real educational settings, (Parker et. al, 2011; Saye & Brush,2017), and protocols developed by Graham Nuthall as part of the Project on Learning (Nuthall, 2000; 2005). Ourwork was designed as a unit of instruction within a locally-developed ambitious 5th grade curriculum (Kracjcik& Blumenfeld, 2006, p. 326), entitled My Place in Time and Space, to investigate a forgotten local history via thesite of a former African American school. Our research work is now in its fourth year and ongoing. Data for thispaper is predominantly from 2014-2015.Instructional treatmentOur perspectives for the design of instruction were guided by cognitive research that recognizes both thepsychological and social aspects of learning (Anderson, 2009). Specifically, we pull from the How People Learnframework (Donovan & Bransford, 2005), situated learning theory (Anderson, Reder, & Simon, 1996; Brown,Collins, & Duguid, 1989), social constructivist learning theory (O’Donnell, 2012; von Glaserfeld, 1995;Vygotsky, 1978), the motivation to learn literature (Jones, 2009), and what Newmann and associates (1996) termAuthentic Intellectual Work (AIW). As Shaffer and Resnick (1999) and Newmann et. al (1996) contend, authenticinstruction occurs when learning is personally meaningful, relates to the outside world, provides opportunities toengage in substantive disciplinary conversations as a way to facilitate participation in a “knowledge creatingculture,” and supports higher-order thinking skills that can be assessed appropriately. Sawyer (2008) also speaksto anchoring “authentic knowledge in its context of use” (p. 9). The idea of leveraging digital technologies as partof the process of “authentic instruction” to build theoretically-based and contextually aware scaffolds to supporttightly bound disciplinary specific work is also informed by the literatures on the value and impact of historicsites/buildings to “read” and engage with the past and others across time and space (Baron & Dobbs, 2015), andthe potential of problem based learning and more specifically technology enhanced problem based historicalinquiry models (Brush and Saye, 2017). Our design leverages the power of place, the context of a problem and anexplicit scaffold to embed authentic practices (historical inquiry) in a meaningful context, reduce the complexityof those practices and make them explicit (SCIM-C), and build upon prior knowledge (Edelson & Reiser, 2006,p. 336).For this project, as detailed previously, a lone remaining building remains of the former 180-plus acrecampus. This provided the basic context for our week-long fifth-grade unit. The unit itself would be framed aroundthe question: “If this building could talk, what would it tell us about the people who were here 50 years ago andtheir experience?” In order to prepare students to explore this question on the site, the unit featured two separatein-class lessons that focused on harnessing requisite skills and digital literacies for the investigation. The fact thatsite was a segregated school was not revealed to students but rather reserved as part of the investigation and leftto them to determine.Data collection and analysisThe study included 14 fifth-grade classes, comprising 288 children within one local school division. Data collectedincluded: field notes and video-recording of how the app was used in the classroom and on the field trip (thisincluded student think-alouds as they used the app on the field trip); location data for each student group includingICLS 2018 Proceedings138© ISLSa log of the order of locations visited, time at each location, number of historical sources viewed, word countduring analysis, and the number and range of sources students identified as significant; small group studentinterviews - post unit; student work samples generated as part of the unit - including detective journal and finalproducts; teacher interviews - post unit.All data was categorized by class and student teams so that interviews, data logs and student work couldbe aligned in order to trace the interactions and use of the app through to the final product. All interviews andvideo recordings were transcribed, indexed and underwent inductive content analysis to identify key themesaround motivation to learn and explicit learnings and negotiations with the app (Sawyer, 2006, p. 13).FindingsThe project’s findings reflect the complexity of capturing fifth grade students’ capacities to think historically (bothin-situ and post process) while tandemly assessing the role and impact of AR learning environments to supportstudent historical inquiry and historical understanding. Our findings are considered within the context of theresearch question/perspectives guiding this work: Can we design an authentic problem based – place based –historical inquiry unit that utilizes augmented reality and an engagement-first approach to: 1) scaffold disciplinedinquiry; 2) facilitate student understanding of change over time, and depth of understanding around schoolsegregation; and 3) motivate and sustain students through the inquiry arc? The outcomes represent bothgeneralized research findings across the 14 participating classes as well as a more specific look at the activities ofone student group, documenting their experience and perspectives in-situ.As part of the iterative design process, observations in the field and data log from our pilot test revealedthe necessity to shift from the concept of unguided student exploration of the site (where students were taskedwith simply exploring the site with the app), toward a guided exploration approach in order to sustain studentswithin the inquiry arc. The guided exploration approach enabled many students to reach beyond the “wow” factorleveraged by the initial AR experience on site and sustainably engage with evidence through the process of inquiryon site. Once the higher level of guidance was in place, data log usage revealed a general increase in time spentwith evidence and field observations noted a progression in sustained student engagement. The balance of guidedexploration coupled with an appeal to student interest via augmented reality interaction on site proved a synergisticcombination and contributive factor in sustaining inquiry with 5th graders.With regards to artifacts, students identified photographs, newspaper clippings, and the daily classschedule as the most important evidence and these items were subsequently used most heavily in student work.Students placed less importance upon oral histories and transcripts and more text heavy sources and as such citedthem less frequently within their final reports. Overall student final reports support the assertion that the AR unitcontributed to student understanding of change over time and depth of historical understanding of schoolsegregation further reflected in frequent empathetic stances invoked in student final reports.Within many final reports, students make specific links to evidence and location as they develop aresponse to their question in a letter to the chief detective. What becomes clear in their final write up is that theydirectly connect to the evidence they investigate and also pay attention to the period and context from which theevidence emerged. Typically, and importantly, all groups were capable of identifying the space within which theywere moving as previously being an African American School during the era of segregation that while prominentin the area was closed in 1966 as a result of integration.Prior to developing their written reports, data collected also suggests that the built-in historical thinkingscaffold (SCIM-C) within the app and the application of the engagement-first strategy helped students stay withinthe inquiry process and foster their understandings of the evidence in relation to the guiding question. In followup group interviews, students consistently voiced a positive interaction with SCIM-C and even reported they feltlike historians working with evidence and interpreting the past. To this end, one student noted, “by taking theevidence through analysis, we weren’t just given knowledge and that made it more fun. We had to think about itmore – and if all we did was read about it in a textbook, it’s really not going to stick in our heads.”In analyzing sources using SCIM-C, students’ analysis and engagement supported Nuthall’s (2000)assertion regarding multiple stages of interaction and its relation to acquired understanding. In reflecting on theuse of SCIM-C, one student added: “The questions helped a lot because it helped you see something that connects,so you want to go back and see and be like, oh, this connects with that.” Similarly, another student added: “I thinkthe questions were really helpful because you didn’t just read about it on the other stuff. You read about what’sin the questions and you went back and actually looked at it. That kind of helps you learn more, like, if you goback and do it again and read it again and reread. That’s how I think the questions were really, really helpful.”While it was possible to trace many team’s final written products directly to the evidence they noted inthe virtual detective note books and stored in their virtual back packs it is important to note that the amount orlevel of actual written analysis stored in their virtual back packs was not necessarily always as detailed as we hadICLS 2018 Proceedings139© ISLSinitially expected or envisioned. Analysis of response frequency within data logs showed that 94% of summarizingquestions and 86% of contextualizing questions were attempted across all 14 fifth-grade classes involved;however, only 67% of monitoring questions and only 78% of corroborating questions were attempted (typed intothe historical thinking scaffold within the app) in-situ. There was a clear discrepancy between how they talkedthrough their analysis and what they actually recorded/wrote up on site. These results suggest that as scaffoldingquestions and phases of inquiry grow in complexity and sophistication, so too does the likelihood such phaseswill be abandoned or only minimally attempted when students are expected to record their ideas through typing.However, for many groups, their final written reports clearly showed they had engaged with, paidattention to, and were now using and working across the sources to transform them into evidence to report thatthe site had been an African American school, while also providing details of these students experiences in thepast at that site. What is also revealing is that even for those groups of students whose final written reports lackedthe type of specific details that we hoped students would glean from working through the app our video recordedobservations and accompanying prompted think-alouds of student teams reveals that even these students, throughthe use of the app could (1) identify and make reference to the buildings that were no longer there that formedpart of the campus, and probably more significantly (2) verbally unpack individual sources in a systematic mannerand (3) stay with and puzzle through evidence in order to draw thoughtful inferences. For example, videotapedobservations of one group of students captures the moment that they struggle with the concept of “trades” as theyinvestigated the virtual “Trades Building.” The evidence in the Trades Building included photographs and oralhistories of students learning barbering and cosmetology. The group directly access, and refer to, specific evidenceprior to making the claim that the site may have been an African American school. What becomes important hereis that both students actively interact with their shared tablet as they look around the interior of the virtual buildingand both tap on the screen to access and look at specific evidence.Student A:Student B:Student A:Student B:Student A:Observer:Student A:[holding tablet and pointing it across the street toward a construction sitewhere the Trades Building once sat]. “So, we have to head toward the greenone?” [At the same time student B touches the screen and hits the green titledtrades building tab]. “Oh weird.” [Student B is trying to keep up with studentA as he spins to his left. They are now inside the virtual building]Are we inside? It looks like something at ... [both are touching the screenwhile student A is holding it and completes a 360-degree turn]This was called the Trades. Is trades a word for Barbershop or something likethat? Hey, is it an African American? That might prove some[Points at the screen] “Oh look, it’s a barbershop.”Yes, it’s a barbershop. Why was it called trades? I wonder why it was calledtrades then? When it’s got barbering. [Students continue turning around thevirtual building interior while looking through the tablet] let’s take a look atbarbering … it might have been an African American school.What makes you think that?I think I might have found some evidence that proved it. There is like, here[points to photograph] there is barbering and it shows, like a picture of anAfrican American, and there is like sound [oral history] … So, I’m going tolisten to that. [signals partner to get close as they play the oral history]Additionally, video recorded observations of student teams also provide examples of studentscorroborating across sources to make evidence-based claims. Such corroboration reveals that even when teamswere confused by some individual sources, they were capable of referring back to previous examined sources tosharpen their understandings of what they were now seeing and reading. Such corroboration, for a number ofgroups, occurred after visiting the third and final building – the Gym. For many groups, the issue of race and whowent to the school only began to percolate as they began to specifically investigate the photographs of studentactivities, starting in the trades building and then more systematically in the virtual Gym. However, the fact thatthe photographs were black and white served, at the time, as an initial stumbling block to making the inferencethat the site was a segregated school. Interestingly, it was only when groups started to read a short newspaperarticle – located in the virtual Gym – about a performance of the glee club and band that they slowly came to inferand make the claim that this was an all African American school.ICLS 2018 Proceedings140© ISLSStudent A:[Reading a newspaper report about a Glee Club performance aloud aftertelling the interviewer/observer that he thinks it might be an AfricanAmerican School, he quotes directly] “Negroes can excel in music andeducation” ... [looks at observer] [the school] is showing the public thatNegroes can excel. Which means that to know this, they would have had tohave Negroes at their school.Observer:Do you see any other evidence that might suggest that it was an AfricanAmerican school?Student A:Yes, because … um … [taps on tablet screen as both partners look at screen]in the other pictures [referring to the photograph in the virtual gym which iswhere they are now] and in some of the things inside of the Long Building,there was some talking about having African Americans here, or just coloredpeople here at [the school]. And the pictures show that they are not whitepeople. Although there are some white people in the picture. Like they lookkind of white, but it is black and white pictures, so it is kind of hard to tell.Um … so, I think this is actually pretty important because all the other thingslike the newspaper [points at tablet screen], not the picture especially, but thenewspaper [which he was reading earlier] is telling us that it is probably anegro or colored school. [begins one-fingered typing as part of analysis] so,errr … yep. [continues to type as partner watches]What is also striking within the student’s discussion around the sources is that as he read the article andbegan to use it to make sense of what this site was in the past, he began to use words such as Negro and Coloredthat came directly from the source. His use of such language as part of his think-aloud illustrates the extent towhich he was paying attention to the details of the sources while trying to use the sources to make a claim.Importantly, given the nature of the sources the students would interact with, prior discussions were had based onhow and why such language would not be used today, but as part of an historical inquiry, and working withhistorical sources, one has to pay attention to the language and context of the period being investigated. Our tapedobservations begin to reveal how these students used the app to access sources and persist with an inquiry in-situ,while also beginning to get a sense of this site as a place with a history that was no longer visible. Their tapedanalysis also begins to reveal how even these young fifth grade students were able to begin use individual sourcesas evidence, before working across multiple, and sometimes confusing sources, to verbally corroborate and engagein a level of disciplinary analysis that, without being recorded, would have been lost and not evident within theirfinal write up.Discussion and conclusionBy specifically seeking to illuminate the impact of an augmented reality app to support student learning andspecifically students’ abilities to think/express disciplinary thinking (both in-situ and post product), our findingsreveal the complexity inherent in both designing instruction to support the inquiry arc and developing researchprotocols that make learning visible in terms of capturing the process of young students’ disciplinary thinking.These issues are amplified by navigating place-based history education, hidden and difficult histories, elementarystudents, and an engagement first approach to the acquisition of historical knowledge. What is clear andmethodologically important is that if our analysis had purely focused on student work products in terms of theirdetective notebooks and final reports our team would have missed vital and positive insights gathered throughparticipant videotaped observations. Videotaped observations that followed students through their entire field tripclearly illuminate how they used the app to engage with the sources in terms of summarizing, inferring, andcorroborating across sources in order to verbally make evidenced based claims to answer the guiding question.While some of these claims were clearly evidenced in their final reports, this was not always the case and withoutcapturing/recording their thinking through observations such important emerging disciplinary thinking skillswould have remained invisible/ephemeral. This significant insight itself highlights the need for further refinementof the app in terms of shifting from having young students with little hands type their analysis to: (1) providingthem with the option of voice dictation to capture their ideas and analysis; and (2) developing the type of realtime actionable and explicit strategic feedback to support students’ persistence and engagement as they unpackindividual sources and look to corroborate across sources. Such feedback would replace the prompts from theresearchers in the field that encouraged students to monitor their understanding as they progressed through theinvestigation.ICLS 2018 Proceedings141© ISLSOur findings illustrate the ability for AR, when combined with an explicit scaffold, to support younglearners through an inquiry arc. The data collected illustrate a gap between the children’s ability to produceevidentiary warrant for their claims and our ability to capture that processing through quantitative data points.Only by carefully reviewing observation and interview transcripts was the process through which our younglearners unpacked evidence and made inferences revealed. Much of the terseness in the students’ written responseswas likely due to the simple fact that typing field notes on a tablet is not an easy task for a young person. However,despite hindrances like these students were capable of performing historical inquiry and creating their ownevidence-based account of a local hidden history, as articulated through their think-alouds while on site (Sawyer,2008, p. 6). The promise of this approach calls for further refinement of the experience and tools to better supporthistorical inquiry and other problem-based approaches to learning.ReferencesAnderson, J. R. (2009) Cognitive psychology and its implications. New York: Worth.Anderson, J. R., Reder, L. M., & Simon, H. A. (1996). Situated learning and education. Educational Researcher,25(4), 5-11Bain, R. B. (2005). “They thought the world was flat?”: Applying the principles of How People Learn in teachinghigh school history. In M. S. Donovan & J. Brandsford (Eds.), How students learn: History in theclassroom (pp 179-213).Baron, C., & Dobbs, C. (2015). Expanding the notion of historical text through historic building analysis. Journalof Adolescent & Adult Literacy 58(6), 462-471.Belland. B., Kim, C., & Hannafin, M. (2013). A framework for designing scaffolds that improve motivation andcognition. Educational Psychologist 48(4), 243-270.Britt, M. A., Perfetti, C., Van Dyke, J., & Gabrys, G. (2000). The sorcerer’s apprentice: A tool for documentsupported history instruction. In P. Stearns, P. Seixas & S. Wineburg (Eds.), Knowing, teaching, andlearning history: National and international perspectives (pp. 437-470). New York: New YorkUniversity Press.Brown, J., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. EducationalResearcher, 18(1), 32-42.Brush, T. & Saye, J. (Eds.), (2017). Successfully implementing problem-based learning in classrooms: Researchin K-12 and Teacher Education. West Lafayette, Indiana: Purdue University Press.Cameron, C. M. & Gatewood, J. B. (2000). Excursions into the unremembered past: What people want from visitsto historic sites. The Public Historian, 22(3), 107-127.Clark, R. E., Yates, K., Early, S. & Moulton, K. (2010). An analysis of the failure of electronic media anddiscovery-based learning: Evidence for the performance benefits of guided training methods. In K. H.Silber, & R. Foshay, (Eds.). Handbook of training and improving workplace performance, Volume I:Instructional design and training delivery. Washington, DC: International Society for PerformanceImprovement.Coulter, B. and Polman, J. (2004). Enacting Technology-Supported Inquiry Learning through Mapping OurEnvironment. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association,San Diego, California.Donovan, M. S., & Bransford, J. D. (2005). How Students Learn: History, Mathematics, and Science in theClassroom. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Dunleavy, M., & Dede, C. (2014). Augmented reality teaching and learning. In J.M. Spector et al. (Eds.),Handbook of research on educational communications and technology (pp.735-745). New York:Springer.Dunleavy, M., Dede, C. & Mitchell, R. (2008). Affordances and Limitations of Immersive ParticipatoryAugmented Reality Simulations for Teaching and Learning. Journal of Science Education andTechnology, 18: 7-22.Edelson, D., & Reiser, B. (2006) Making authentic practices accessible to learners. In R.K Sawyer (Ed.), TheCambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 335-354). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge UniversityPress.Goodlad, J. (1984). A place called school. New York: McGraw-Hill.Hicks, D., & Doolittle, P. (2008). Fostering analysis in historical inquiry through multimedia embeddedscaffolding. Theory and Research in Social Education, 36(3), 206-232.Hicks, D., Johnson, A., van Hover, S., Lisanti, M., McPherson, K., & Zuckerwar, S., (2016). Teaching withprimary sources: Junior detectives as a bridge to disciplinary literacy. Social Studies and the YoungLearner 29(1), 9-15.ICLS 2018 Proceedings142© ISLSJohnson, A., Hicks, D., Ogle, T., Bowman, D., Cline, D. & Regan, E. (2017) “If this place could talk”: Usingaugmented reality to make the past visible. Social Education 81(2), 112-116.Jones, B. D. (2009). Motivating students to engage in learning: The MUSIC Model of Academic Motivation.International Journal of Teaching and Learning in Higher Education, 21(2), 272-285.Kracjcik, J. & Blumenfeld, P. (2006). Project-Based Learning. In R.K Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbookof the Learning Sciences (pp. 317-333). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Lee, P. (2011). History education and historical literacy. In I. Davies (Ed.), Debates in history teaching. (pp. 6372). New York: RoutledgeLevstik, L. S., & Barton, K.C. (2005). Doing history: Investigating with children in elementary and middle schools(3rd ed.). Mahweh, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Maines, R. & Glynn, J. (1993). Numinous objects. The Public Historian, 15(1), 9-25.Newmann, F., & Associates. (1996). Authentic achievement: Restructuring schools for intellectual quality. SanFrancisco: Jossey-Bass.Nuthall, G. (2000). The anatomy of memory in the classroom: Understanding how students acquire memoryprocesses from classroom activities in science and social studies units. American Educational ResearchJournal, 37(1), 247-304.Nuthall, G. (2005). The cultural myths and realities of classroom teaching and learning: A personal journey.Teachers College Record, 107(5), 895-934.O’Donnell, A. M. (2012). Constructivism. In K. Harris, S. Graham, T. Urdan, C. McCormick, G Sinatra, J.Sweller, (Eds),. APA educational psychology handbook, Vol 1: Theories, constructs, and critical issues,(pp.61-84).Washington,DC,US:AmericanPsychologicalAssociation.http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/13273-003Parker, W., Mosborg, S., Bransford, J., Vye, N., Wilkerson, J., & Abbott, R. (2011). Rethinking advanced highschool coursework: tackling the depth/breadth tension in the AYP US Government and Politics course.Journal of Curriculum Studies 43(4), 533-559.Saye, J., & Brush, T. (2002). Scaffolding critical reasoning about history and social issues in multimediasupported learning environments. Educational Technology Research and Development, 50(3), 77-96.Saye, J., & Brush, T. (2017). Using technology-enhanced learning environments to support problem-basedhistorical inquiry in secondary school classrooms. In T. Brush & J. Saye (Eds.), Successfullyimplementing problem-based learning in classrooms: Research in K-12 and Teacher Education, (pp.197-238). West Lafayette, Indiana: Purdue University Press.Sawyer, R. K. (2006). Introduction: The new science of learning. In R.K Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbookof the Learning Sciences (pp. 1-16). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Sawyer, R. K. (2008). Optimising Learning: Implications of Learning Sciences Research. In Innovating to Learn,Learning to Innovate, OECD Publishing, Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264047983-4-enSchwartz, D., & Heiser, J. (2006). Spatial representation and imagery in learning. In R.K Sawyer (Ed.), TheCambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 283-298). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge UniversityPress.Shaffer, D.W., & Resnick, M. (1999). "Thick" authenticity: New media and authentic learning. Journal ofInteractive Learning Research, 10, (2), 195-215.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological process. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Wineburg, S. (2001). Historical thinking and other unnatural acts. Philadelphia: Temple University.AcknowledgementsThis research was supported by the National Science Foundation under the Cyberlearning EXP Progam, awardIIS-1318977.ICLS 2018 Proceedings143© ISLS