Open Discussions of Cultural-Historical Activity Inquiry QuestionsAlain Breuleux, McGill University, alain.breuleux@mcgill.caThérèse Laferrière, Laval University, therese.laferriere@fse.ulaval.caSylvie Barma, Laval University, sylvie.barma@fse.ulaval.caGyeong Mi Heo, McGill University, gyeongmi.heo@mcgill.caStephanie Beck, McGill University, stephanie.beck2@mail.mcgill.caNilou Baradaran, McGill University, niloufar.baradaranrahmani@mail.mcgill.caAlice Vanlint, Laval University, alice.vanlint@fse.ulaval.caAbstract: This study presents initial analyses of a sample of historical activity inquiryquestions formulated by presenters at the 2017 congress of the International Society forCultural-historical Activity Research (ISCAR) participating in an activity entitled Opendiscussions of shared problems. Results point to the problems that generated most interest(e.g., participation) and a majority of problems of a practical nature (intervention andresearch). We propose reflection on implications as regards to theory advances.BackgroundThe International Society for Cultural-historical Activity Research (ISCAR), a society that holds its congressevery three years, met in Quebec City in late August 2017. The theme of the congress was Taking a 360° viewof the landscape of cultural-historical activity research: The state of our scholarship in practice. The three mainsubthemes were: Foundations, Practices and INsights (meaning future intervention and research). In an attemptto provide opportunities for participation similar to those many ISCAR members promote when moving awayfrom “assembly-line instruction”, the Local Program Committee (LPC) introduced into the program the activityOpen discussions of shared problems (OD-SPs). At first, the online platform prompted authors submitting anabstract to also send one or more question(s) they would like to discuss. Next, we analyzed the questions in anattempt to find similarities: three themes and 14 subthemes emerged. Participation stood out, and the LPC tookit as validating its own emphasis on participation and dialogue in the congress’ program. Over 200 delegateswho clearly manifested interest in OD-SPs, and all others, were invited to join one or another of the 25-30groups that were to focus their discussions on a question or a cluster of questions. The discussions spread overthree days, and each session lasted 50 minutes. No other congress activity was scheduled at the same time.Conceptual frameworkParticipation being our organizing concept for the congress, it was natural to adapt it to the process for the ODSP activity put forward in the ISCAR 2017 Congress. We found Rogoff’s perspective on participation andactivity to be particularly suited, and we invited her to present an organizing framework. The framework builton Rogoff’s (1997, p. 266) concept of activity and the suggestion that levels of analysis ought to be integratedRogoff (1995) stressed that one “may consider a single person thinking or the functioning of a wholecommunity in the foreground without assuming that they are actually separate elements”.It also built on Rogoff’s (1995) definition of learning as transformation of participation, and her three lenses forparticipation analysis:1. Participatory appropriation, which refers to the process by which individuals transform theirunderstanding of and responsibility for activities through their own participation.2. Guided participation, which refers to the processes and systems of involvement between people asthey communicate and coordinate efforts while participating in culturally valued activity.3. Apprenticeship, a term that applies not only to individuals but also to a small group in a communitywith specialization of roles oriented toward the accomplishment of goals that relate the group toothers outside of the group.The family of sociocultural theories, of which Rogoff is a prominent figure, does not distinguish boundariesbetween theory, methods and practice (Rogoff, 1997, p. 265). This paper reports on contents and process of theOD-SP activity at the ISCAR 2017 Congress. Its three objectives are as follows:1. To document the participation process in OD-SP groups.2. To identify the preoccupations of ISCAR 2017 participants.3. To formulate promising ideas at the theoretical and methodological levels.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1153© ISLSMethodologyThe method of participation in the OD-SP was knowledge building, as defined by Scardamalia and Bereiter(2014) as “the production and continual improvement of ideas of value to a community” (p. 1370). Each groupwas to focus on a question/cluster of questions/problem, and six knowledge-building scaffolds were suggested:My theory, New information, A better theory, I need to understand, This theory cannot explain, and Putting ourknowledge together. A collaborative online platform, Knowledge Forum, was made available for extendedsocial interaction among participants within and between groups.Participants104 authors who submitted abstracts/proposals also submitted at least one question, writing a few lines to a fewparagraphs. Most of them already had a doctorate. Doctoral students and others also submitted questions. Overhalf of all registered participants (512) engaged in at least one OD-SP.Preliminary AnalysisThe analysis of the questions was conducted by the authors of this paper. Qualitative analysis procedures wereapplied for clustering them, and several iterations conducted for themes and subthemes to be identified(Charmaz, 2005). Some of the questions were reformulated by the research team to reflect a broader level ofpreoccupations or for clarity purposes. Ahead of the congress, the formulation of problems adopted a distancerelation process with participants’ original submissions.Onsite/online discussions/data collectionBarbara Rogoff kicked off the OD-SP activity. The subthemes resulting from the preliminary analysis weresubmitted to ISCAR 2017 delegates. A facilitator was attached to each group. Marlene Scardamalia joined in forthe de-briefing session that took place toward the end of the congress. The artefacts resulting from thediscussions at the congress provided further data (notes of cardboards or online, pictures) for 1) documentationof the participation process in OD-SP groups; 2) identification of the preoccupations of ISCAR 2017participants; and 3) formulation of promising ideas at the theoretical and methodological levels. Some groupsare continuing online their discussions.ResultsTable 1 presents the results. Themes and questions are supportive evidence of the preoccupations ofparticipants:Table 1: Themes and questionsFoundational conceptsZPD, learning anddevelopmentHow should/might ontogenetic questions (child development) be articulated with thenotion of learning within the ZPD?Revisiting our understanding of the “ZONE” in 2017Learning design and assessment in the ZPDAgencyIn what ways various conceptualizations of agency (ex: relational or transformative)differ from one another? (cf.: Stetsenko (2005), “collectividual” to denote theindividual within the collectivity)What are empirical indicators of transformative agency?What can be seen as indicators of transformative agency in formative interventionistresearch?What means, tools, and strategies can be used?What in a CL-process is especially critical concerning participants’ agency?ICLS 2018 Proceedings1154© ISLSPerezhivanieWhat are Vygotsky’s key ideas for a contemporary and holistic reflection onemotions?Davydov’s geneticmodel of a learningactivityWhy is it important to capture the spirit of “learning activity” as articulated byDavydov during lesson planning? How do we ensure that subjects actively transformthe object to be studied?Shall we ‘decolonize’ psychology from its non-holistic ways?What role do CHAT pedagogies play in the transformation of an education activitysystem?The abstract and the What CHAT (Cultural-historical Activity Theory) approaches are productive to moveconcretefrom abstract ideas to concrete expansions of activity systems?Participation in CommunitiesTeacherparticipation inteaching and inresearchFrom CHAT perspectives, in what ways teaching and research present potential formutual expansion?In what way does participation in research community help foster teachers’transformative agency?What drives the need for teachers to engage in consequential participation in research?In what ways do tensions impact the consequential actions of participants?In what ways can CHAT help rethink and connect pre-service teacher education andin-service professional development?Learning throughparticipation inschoolWhat formative interventions are needed to address tensions between school and nonschool ways of learning, participation in in-school / out-of-school communities, and toexamine boundaries between these communities?Research toward emancipatory responses in school to issues of inclusion, segregation,and exclusion (e.g.: children’s exploration of inclusion and exclusion processes inconflicts in play)What is the nature of the relationship between participation, belonging, sharing andfitting in on the one hand, and individuality, creativity, performance and standing outon the other?Participation inonline spaces oflearningFrom CHAT perspectives, how does learning occur in various activities supported bycollaborative digital platforms and devices (mobile tools, online communities, etc.)and how can it be scaffolded — e.g., learning mediated by tools / learning processthrough participation and reification?How are we experiencing digital devices as objects of learning that then become toolsfor productive activities?Which boundaries are crossed by ISCAR members when they actively participate inthe ISLS/CSCL community?What are the boundaries constraining ISLS/CSLC members to actively participate inthe ISCAR community?To what extent does belonging to ISCAR transforms one’s participation inISLS/CSCL and vice versa?Participation in theface of“superdiversity”What does “participation” mean in a “superdiverse community” consisting of a varietyof ways of being, acting, and understanding?CHAT’s promising ideas for rethinking and illuminating contemporary educationaland social challengesContradictions and negotiations within/between activity systems with diversityHow can we conceptualize personal and social histories and how are dominantideologies reproduced in and through interactions in activity systems?ICLS 2018 Proceedings1155© ISLSSocio-political andWhat would a cultural activist practical stance look like that can work to altereconomic exclusions (overcome)... the reproduction of inequities and injustice?as impediments toparticipationDiscussionThe rich data base developed through this inquiry is an invitation for reflection, and we believe it will be usefulto the learning sciences community to orient possible pathways for our future. The overarching themes ofagency, moving from the abstract to the concrete, and the meaning of the ZPD (Foundational concepts andMethods) emerge from the first and third congress’ subthemes: Foundations and INsights. Participation incommunities gives a clear direction to the second subtheme of the congress, Practices. Though the congressdevoted a full day to Foundations and INsights (theory and method), questions discussed revealed interventionoriented rather than research-oriented preoccupations or ideas. We found almost no discussion regarding onlinecollaborative platforms’ affordances for reification and discourse analysis. This suggests that CSCL researchresults do not impact as much as they could the research and intervention practices of the ISCAR community.ReferencesCharmaz, K. (2005). Grounded theory in the 21st Century. Applications for Advancing Social Justice Studies.In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), The Sage Handbook of Qualitative Research. (Third editioned., pp. 507-535). Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.ISCAR (2017). Congress program. Available at http://www.iscar17.ulaval.caLave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: CambridgeUniversity Press.Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive development in social context. New York: OxfordUniversity Press.Rogoff, B. (1995). Observing sociocultural activity on three planes: Participatory appropriation, guidedparticipation, and apprenticeship. In J.V. Wertsch, P. del Rio, & A. Alvarez (Eds.), Socioculturalstudies of mind (pp. 139-164). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Reprinted (2008) in K.Hall & P. Murphy (Eds.), Pedagogy and practice: Culture and identities. London: Sage.Rogoff, B. (1997). Evaluating development in the process of participation: Theory, methods, and practicebuilding on each other. In E. Amsel & A. Renninger (Eds.), Change and development (pp. 265-285).Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge building. In Encyclopedia of Education (pp. 1370-1373).New York: Macmillan Reference.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, andtechnology. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (Second Edition) (pp.397-417). New York: Cambridge University Press.AcknowledgementsWe wish to thank all the ISCAR participants who contributed their inquiry questions to the program committee.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1156© ISLS