Socio-Emotional Regulation in Knowledge BuildingMediated by CSCL ReflectionJin Michael Splichal, Jun Oshima, and Ritsuko Oshima,jin.m.splichal.15@shizuoka.ac.jp, joshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jp, roshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jpShizuoka UniversityAbstract: There are few studies focused on supporting socio-emotional regulation inknowledge building contexts, so we designed a project-based learning environment thatsupports socio-emotional regulation. Fifty first-year university students participated in theproject, using Knowledge Forum (KF) as a digital portfolio to collaboratively reflect on faceto-face activities. Metacognitive prompts were provided through KF’s scaffold function tofacilitate reflection, especially on socio-emotional aspects. Our analyses revealed that not allstudents fully regulated socio-emotional challenges encountered through experiencingcollaboration in the environment. Moreover, in the case studies, we found that students whoattempted to maintain idea diversity to rise above the ideas of individual group memberstended to resolve socio-emotional challenges, while others tried to proceed with tasks throughavoiding both consolidating ideas and regulating socio-emotional challenges. These findingsimply that in addition to socio-emotional supports, epistemic supports are necessary tofacilitate socio-emotional regulation.Keywords: idea improvement, idea diversity, rise above, socio-emotional regulation,computer-supported collaborative learningIntroductionIncorporating the processes of knowledge-creating enterprises into education has been considered as apromising approach toward helping learners meet the emerging needs of the 21st-century economy (Griffin,McGraw, & Care, 2012). Through long efforts, knowledge building theory has come to describe what should beseeping into a community of learners to transform them into knowledge-creating organizations (e.g.,Scardamalia, 2002). Knowledge building (KB) emphasizes learner autonomy and community self-organizingprocesses for creating knowledge that is of value to the community. Learners are encouraged to take ownershipof their learning for sustainably improving ideas. Central activities in KB are idea generation, co-elaboration,and diversification, which improves the depth and breadth of generated ideas (Hong & Sullivan, 2009). Learnerscollaboratively develop, improve, and consolidate ideas to innovate more complex idea structures that remainavailable for subsequent use. Scardamalia (2002) listed 12 principles for guiding these knowledge-creatingprocesses in classrooms. Closely related principles to the central activities are improvable ideas, idea diversity,and rise above. In KB, all ideas are treated as improvable and are surrounded by various other ideas, includingcontrasting ones. Knowledge-creating activities entail formulating higher-level problems through synthesizingnew ideas that supplement weaknesses of competing ideas for further knowledge advancement. Therefore,facilitating sustainable idea improvement and maintaining idea diversity are essential for improving both thedepth and breadth of ideas.These collaborative idea-developing and idea-improving activities necessitate teamwork, which is anessential skill for success in a constantly changing world (Griffin et al., 2012). Nevertheless, recent studies (e.g.,Näykki, Järvelä, Kirschner, & Järvenoja, 2014) reported that learners often fall into socio-emotional conflictsduring idea co-elaboration and diversification processes. Learners fail to negotiate a fit between their ideas andthose of other group members, resulting in abandoning idea diversity because such processes require learners tochange their initial beliefs, thoughts, and opinions. Some learners try to overrule other members’ ideas, ordisagreeably elaborate on other members’ ideas because they do not want to change their own. In suchsituations, supports for socio-emotional regulation are vital (Näykki et al., 2014). Because socio-emotionalaspects of collaboration have been neglected for so long (Dillenbourg, Järvelä, & Fischer, 2009), few studies,especially in KB contexts, have researched developing supports for socio-emotional regulation and analyzing itseffectiveness.In this study, therefore, we attempted to design a computer-supported collaborative learningenvironment for supporting socio-emotional regulation and examined how students solved socio-emotionalchallenges. Knowledge Forum (KF; Scardamalia, 2002) was used as a digital portfolio where studentscollaboratively reflect on face-to-face project-based learning with an ill-structured task from the perspective ofICLS 2018 Proceedings1013© ISLSteamwork. We provided metacognitive prompts through KF’s scaffold function to facilitate student reflection,especially on socio-emotional aspects. We assessed how students’ socio-emotional challenges emerge and howthey resolve those challenges.MethodDesign descriptionFifty first-year university students (22 female, 28 male) took a thirteen-week course for learning how to manageteamwork through participating in project-based learning. They were randomly divided into thirteen groups offour to five, then given the task of collaboratively applying data-science techniques to make innovatepropositions for improving the city where the campus is located. Four mentors supported group activities andcollected classroom observational data. Each week, students engaged in ninety-minute face-to-face sessions,then wrote their reflections on the regulatory processes on KF.The project was mainly divided into three stages. In the first stage (weeks 1–4), students were expectedto understand the basics of data-science techniques through co-constructing visualizations of restaurant datafrom four major Japanese cities, obtained from a restaurant guide website (https://tabelog.com/). Students wererequired to choose appropriate visualization methods and to adequately interpret visualizations. In the next stage(weeks 5–8), students identified problems to solve in the city where the campus is located. Students were alsorequired to gather necessary data on their own and to illustrate and support their ideas through data visualization.Students then held a poster fair in week 9 to exchange ideas on the problems and subjects they identified. In thelast stage (weeks 10–12), students co-invented propositions for improving the city based on the problems theyidentified in stage 2. Students were required to once again co-construct data visualizations that support theirpropositions. In week 13, students held a final poster fair.During this project, we asked students to collaboratively keep public group progress notes on KF andto add individual reflections as public build-on notes each week after the ninety-minute face-to-face sessions(Figure 1). To support their reflections, especially regarding socio-emotional aspects, we used KF’s scaffoldfunction to provide metacognitive prompts, based on the Adaptive Instrument for Regulation on Emotion(AIRE; Järvenoja, Volet, & Järvelä, 2013). Example prompts are “Did each member have different prioritiestoward the group task?,” “Did you find it difficult to create a collaborative atmosphere?,” “Did each memberfully commit to the group task?,” and “Is there any disagreement among group members on ideas about how toconduct the group work?” AIRE focuses on assessing learner experiences of socio-emotional challenges byasking them to rate how well generic scenarios of socio-emotional challenges that Järvenoja et al. identifieddescribe their experiences. We utilized those generic scenarios to develop the metacognitive prompts.Figure 1. Knowledge Forum view of projects by group.Data collection and analysisIn addition to the collected data on KF (group progress and individual reflection notes, mentor observationsreported in private KF notes not visible to students), we also conducted free-response questionnaire surveysICLS 2018 Proceedings1014© ISLSafter the poster fairs on weeks 9 and 13 to examine socio-emotional challenges and regulation strategies thatstudents applied during the project. In both questionnaire surveys, we asked students to individually describehow they engaged in group work (“Describe what did and did not go well in your group work. Also, describehow you or others further improved your group work.”). We also collected behavioral engagements in groupactivities using audio recorders.In the first analysis step, we assessed the questionnaire responses to reveal the number of socioemotional challenges that each student encountered and how many of them were regulated. We first countedsocio-emotional challenges and regulation strategies reported in each response to the questionnaire. We thenevaluated each reported regulation strategy for challenges that students experienced. For example, thedescription “I asked her politely to be cooperative” is a regulation strategy corresponding to “One memberdoesn’t fully commit to the group work,” which describes a socio-emotional challenge. At the end of the firstanalysis step, we counted by group the socio-emotional and challenges that were regulated, and then calculatedthe proportion of regulated challenges. In the second analysis step, we conducted case studies to furtherelucidate how students resolved socio-emotional challenges, or why they could not regulate unsolved socioemotional challenges.ResultRegulated socio-emotional challengesTable 1 shows the result of the first analysis step. We found that not all students fully regulated socio-emotionalchallenges. For example, students in group A regulated 94% of socio-emotional challenges, while half of thechallenges encountered in group B remained unresolved. To elucidate how students resolved socio-emotionalchallenges and why some students could not, we further conducted case analysis of group A as a successfulgroup and group B as an unsuccessful group. Group A had the highest and Group B had the lowest proportion ofregulated socio-emotional challenges among groups in which members encountered ten or more socioemotional challenges.Table 1: Number of socio-emotional challenges and proportion of regulated challenges by groupsGroup IDNumber of socioemotional challengesProportion ofregulated challenges (%)ABCDEFGHIJKLM17102131123641235945007710058100671001005010060Case studies: How socio-emotional challenges were regulatedSuccessful regulation of socio-emotional challengesGroup A resolved socio-emotional challenges as expected. One group member (“A1”) did not activelyparticipate in discussions at first, and was absent several times (e.g., “[A1] dozed off several times today,” froma mentor’s observation notes in week 6). Other members attempted to co-regulate her to participate indiscussions, because they wanted to involve all members in the discussion (e.g., “[A1] seemed to not be good atdiscussion, so I helped her to discuss with us,” from a group member’s responses to the questionnaire in week9). In week 13 they were able to present a proposition that included all members’ ideas.Unsuccessful regulation of socio-emotional challengesContrary to expectations, group B did not resolve many socio-emotional challenges. The group had a member(“B1”), who was resistant to other members’ ideas. Until the poster fair in week 9, they were very concernedabout the credibility of their identified city problems (“Progress is slow, though they are carefully consideringbackups,” from a mentor observation note in week 5). Due to time constraints, they decided to focus on B1’sidea (e.g., one group member said, “We shouldn’t make an incomplete presentation [in week 9],” from voicerecordings in week 8). After week 9, B1 barely incorporated other member ideas, and members ended up justsearching for data to support B1’s idea (e.g., “[B1] is strictly sticking to her idea,” from a mentor observationnote in week 10). Consequently, they created a poster based on B1’s idea.DiscussionICLS 2018 Proceedings1015© ISLSThis study aimed at designing a learning environment that supports socio-emotional regulation for acceleratingcollaborative idea development and improvement. We examine how students solved socio-emotional challengesin the environment. In the first analysis step, we found that not all of the students in our study successfullyregulated socio-emotional challenges. We thus conducted further case studies of two groups to identifyunderlying factors describing why students successfully or unsuccessfully regulated socio-emotional challengesfor future instructional design. Qualitative analysis revealed that a group that attempted to maintain ideadiversity to rise above the ideas of individual group members regulated most challenges, because improvingboth the depth and breadth of ideas necessitates socio-emotional regulation. On the other hand, a group that triedto improve only the depth of ideas could not resolve socio-emotional challenges. Members of group B appliedavoidance-focused strategies; in other words, they engaged in tasks without removing the source of socioemotional challenges (Näykki et al., 2014). This may because improving only the depth of ideas is to someextent possible without resolving socio-emotional challenges. These findings suggest that in addition to socioemotional supports, epistemic supports for broadening ideas, such as maintaining idea diversity and encouragingrise above, are essential to facilitating socio-emotional regulation.There is room for further discussion. Since we provided metacognitive prompts not for supportingsolutions to socio-emotional challenges but for student awareness of challenges, we could see that group Bmembers did not express competencies for resolving challenges, whereas members of group A did. Moreover,we can interpret that it is necessary to support students in regulating socio-emotional challenges. To preparestudents for the 21st-century economy, however, we must encourage students to be engaged in the selforganizing processes of a knowledge-creating community and let them “learn by doing.” We should thus findways to induce students’ socio-emotional regulation. In future studies, therefore, we will adopt the jigsawmethod (Miyake & Kirschner, 2014) as an epistemic support to further facilitate deeper and broader ideas bypromoting co-elaboration and diversification processes.To more rigorously test our discussion, we should first conduct further case studies of other groups.Although we highlighted two groups in which members encountered socio-emotional challenges, there weregroups in which members experienced few socio-emotional challenges. More investigations are needed toconfirm our findings. Second, we should assess students’ regulatory processes concerning specificmetacognitive prompts through analyzing weekly KF notes. We expect that such analyses would further revealthat how the supported reflection worked and theoretically contribute to establishing generalizable findings todesign learning environments. Lastly, although we qualitatively examined how students improved ideas inrelation to socio-emotional regulation, to further elucidate links between regulation and collaborative ideaimprovement, we should also quantitatively analyze idea quality and how ideas are developed.ReferencesDillenbourg, P., Järvelä, S., & Fischer, F. (2009). The evolution of research on computer-supportedcollaborative learning. In N. Balancheff, S. Ludvigsen, T. de Jong, A. Lazonder, S. Barnes (Eds.),Technology-enhanced learning (pp. 3-19). Netherlands: Springer.Griffin, P., McGaw, B., & Care, E. (Eds.). (2012). Assessment and teaching of 21st century skills. Dordrecht:Springer.Hong, H. Y., & Sullivan, F. R. (2009). Towards an idea-centered, principle-based design approach to supportlearning as knowledge creation. Educational Technology Research and Development, 57(5), 613.Järvenoja, H., Volet, S., & Järvelä, S. (2013). Regulation of emotions in socially challenging learning situations:An instrument to measure the adaptive and social nature of the regulation process. EducationalPsychology, 33(1), 31-58.Miyake, N. & Kirschner, P. A. (2014). The Social and Interactive Dimensions of Collaborative Learning. In K.Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (2nd ed.) (pp. 418-438). New York:Cambridge University PressNäykki, P., Järvelä, S., Kirschner, P. A., & Järvenoja, H. (2014). Socio-emotional conflict in collaborativelearning—A process-oriented case study in a higher education context. International Journal ofEducational Research, 68, 1-14.Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith, &C. Bereiter (Eds.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Berkeley, CA: Distributed byPublishers Group West.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 24240105 and 16H0187.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1016© ISLS