From Lurking to Participatory Spectatorship:Understanding Affordances of the Dota 2 Noob StreamChris Georgen, Indiana University, cgeorgen@indiana.eduSean C. Duncan, Indiana University, secdunc@indiana.eduLucas Cook, Indiana University, luccook@indiana.eduAbstract: From investigations in online learning and virtual communities, peripheralobservation or “lurking” has been framed as an active process in which learners alignthemselves with the practices and discourses of a community. In this paper, we furtherdevelop the notion of lurking in informal computer-mediated contexts, focusing oncompetitive gaming communities, where games are marked for the steep learning curves andplayers demonstrate an extended commitment toward mastery. In this descriptive case study,we leverage new perspectives on routes to participation in order illustrate participatoryspectatorship as integral in not only the act of becoming a player but also in learning thediscourses and practices of a larger gaming enterprise.Keywords: lurking, participatory spectatorship, participationIntroductionThe availability of online resources continues toward more open-source and collaborative spaces. Asinformation and communication channels expand and reorganize, “lurkers” have received contradictoryassessments of their validity as meaningful participants. Traditionally, lurkers are referred to as passive,participating as readers or observers but rarely – if ever – as active contributors (Edelmann, 2013). Nonetheless,lurkers make up the “silent majority” and account for the lion’s share of participants in online spaces (Nonnecke& Preece, 2000). The negative connotation aimed at the vast majority of online participants has led to their reevaluation. A more comprehensive interpretation of lurkers is as goal-oriented, active, and essential to wellbalanced online communities. As Lave and Wenger’s (1991) work on legitimate peripheral participationshowed, observation on the margins of a learning community can be quite active. With this lens, we can viewlurkers as new members of a community searching for established social norms and discursive practices, honingobservation skills, and formulating the practices of a community (Lee et al., 2006). From this vantage point,lurking is a valid and practical avenue to negotiate access to a social community.Lurking as a form of acceptable and worthwhile participation illustrates the need to understand onlineinteraction as a multidimensional and multimodal set of behaviors, purposes, and practices. The prevalence ofthis phenomenon in online forums is only a small sample of potential routes to full participation in a socialspace. We have recently seen the rise of the “eSport” in digital gaming communities as worthy of deeperinvestigation. While competitive games and even professional gaming (Taylor, 2012) have been a staple of thedigital gaming world for some time now (e.g., Quake, StarCraft), the emergence of the multiplayer online battlearena (MOBA) and the related rise of streaming services (e.g., Twitch.tv, YouTube) have introduced thesegames to millions of new players.In games and learning research to date, many have focused on the individual’s immersion in a game asa model for learning. Scholars have argued that games incorporate sound learning principles and can be used tounderstand and enhance learning (Gee, 2007; Squire, 2011; Steinkuehler, Squire, & Barab, 2012). Thisperspective often focuses heavily on engagement through play as a means for learning by doing, acting as avehicle to engage players in problem-solving and consequential decision-making. And yet, with a focus on theinformal learning contexts of games, we find that the players’ perspective is often just as integral to learning inthe larger space of computer-mediated activity.Participatory spectatorshipParticipation in competitive games is highly specialized and demanding. Relevant membership withincompetitive gaming communities requires an understanding of complicated and nuanced discourse, expertexecution of play, and high-level strategic understanding. This leads us to the question: Why do playerscontinue to persevere and pursue expertise despite a harsh learning curve and competitive atmosphere? We positthat one factor is engagement with streaming and eSports. We seek to characterize the tools that mediateenculturation in these communities by looking deeply at the structures within eSports.CSCL 2015 Proceedings581© ISLSWhile the term “participatory spectatorship” has a history in games, theatre, and invasion sports(Douglas, 2002; Jensen, 2011; Ludvigsen & Veerasawmy, 2010) in this study we characterize it as the activeobservation of a sport or spectacle in the pursuit knowledge though without requiring a recognized informationneed. Traditionally, lurking describes peripheral membership as “readers” but not “writers.” Here, the act of“watching” functions as an often overlooked element of participation and may simultaneously serve asentertainment, a means of social engagement, as well as provide opportunities for learning the game andcommunity’s discourses.Discourse analysisAs the primary aim of this study is to understand how a curated process of participatory spectatorship shapeshow learners use computer mediated-information channels, we present here a descriptive case study (Stake,1995) of an eSports stream and provide a discourse analysis of a specific exchange during a live broadcast of atournament.For this case, we focus on the The International’s Newcomer’s Stream for the eSport game Dota 2. TheInternational 4’s Newcomer’s Stream, informally referred to as the “noob stream” (located athttp://www.twitch.tv/dota2ti_noob), caters to brand new and relatively inexperienced players with the expliciteducative intent (e.g., teaching the mechanics of the game, strategies, and discourse of Dota 2 and eSports). Atthe time of our sampling, the noob stream channel had been viewed over 1.6 million times. For novice players,Dota 2 is quite difficult to follow. Watching with the support of a Newcomer’s Stream offers newcomers a basicdescription of game mechanics and a subtle introduction to the depth of eSports, serving to teach as well asintroduce new players to Dota 2 to its participatory culture (Jenkins, 2006).We conducted an exploratory Discourse analysis (Gee, 2013) on a sample from game two of TheInternational 4 Grand Finals. Of particular interest is an exchange between two noob stream announcers “A”and “B,” who utilize the space as a means to overtly instruct new players as to salient elements of the game. Inthe following analysis, we took several seconds of interaction between the two announcers, transcribed thediscussion, and reframed it in Stanza form for analysis.Stanza 1: Explanation of Actions1(A): NewBee has smoked up,2(A): meaning they’re invisible to the minimap3(A): and to the wards and whatnot.4(A): They are doing this to get a little bit of movement speed at the beginning of the game5(A): and to place wards.6(A): Wards.Stanza 2: Elaboration1(B): And not just that -2(B): Come on, it’s about trying to get kills.3(A): Of course, yeah -Stanza 3: Reframing as Strategy1(B): They are trying to find the enemy heroes,2(B):because if you kill somebody right at the…3(B):the first person that dies gives an extra reward, basically.4(B):Its called first blood and5(B):they give away an extra 200 gold.Stanza 4: Evaluation of Strategy1(B):So, using a smoke here is usually a little dangerous2(B):because it means that their supports are less likely to roam later.3(B):So, they were really hoping to get a kill thereCSCL 2015 Proceedings582© ISLS4(B):and they didn’t.Stanza 5: Prediction of Future Play1(B):So, that means that they are probably not planning to be very roamy this game.2(B):The only hero that’s going to move around is probably going to be the Earthshaker.3(B):The Ancient Apparition played by SanSheng, or Banana, sorry,4(B):is mostly going to sit up here and5(B):cover his safe lane carry.Stanza 6: Back to Original Framing1(A): Indeed, let’s go over here and2(A): just go over wards if you don’t mind.3(B): Okay.In Stanza 1, “Announcer A” described the game first at a technical level, focusing on the componentsand mechanics of the game. This emphasis carried through the theme of Stanza 1. Players’ explicit actions werepresented through the use of technical terms: “smoked up” and “wards.” This represents both game specificlexicon and discourse practices. Announcer A made unambiguous what spectators were observing but may nothave fully understood. “Wards” are considered structural components of Dota 2, and their reiteration in lines 3,5, and 6 demonstrates Announcer A’s position as to the depth of knowledge appropriate for the noob stream.In Stanza 2, “Announcer B” stepped in and elaborated on the previous observations. This sets up a shiftin the framing of the gameplay from one in which the announcer valued components and mechanics to onewhere practices and goals (“trying to get kills”) became important. This negotiation characterized the dialecticalrelationship and developing tension between Announcer A and Announcer B. Stanza 3 reframed the discussionas about strategy, and Announcer B’s strategic explanation was an extension of what was explicitly observed,building off of Stanza 1’s reflection of the spectator’s perspective with additional definitions of in-game content.In all, Stanza 3 moved beyond what is “observed” to strategic discussion.In Stanza 4, Announcer B further developed an evaluation of the strategic merits of the actionsdescribed in Stanza 1. Line 1 assessed the risk of using “smoke” at this stage of the game. This evaluation ofdecision-making was relevant, as team NewBee did not attain the hypothetical goal proposed by Announcer B(see Stanza 4, Line 4). Line 2 indicated a long-term strategic ramification of the actions described in Stanza 1:NewBee had lost ability to “roam” while aided by “smoke” to elude the vision of “wards.” Announcer B movedbeyond structures and components of “smoke” and “wards” and developed strategic hypotheticals.And so, expanding on these hypotheticals, Stanza 5 elaborated predictions. The early “smoke” signals apremeditated strategy to be less “roamy” this game. Line 2 shifted the framework from team level strategy to theapproaches of individual players. According to Announcer B, the player-controlled hero “Earthshaker” willlikely be the only “roamer.” This hypothetical is based on team-level decision-making, the actions (Stanza 1),the ramifications of actions (Stanza 2 and Stanza 3), and observable outcomes (Stanza 3). Line 3 attachedcultural significance to “Ancient Apparition” by noting the professional player who is controlling the hero.Moreover, Line 4 and Line 5 continue to process of generating hypotheticals based on situational awareness.Finally, in Stanza 6, Announcer A prompted a return to the description of the observable componentsand mechanics of “wards.” This full-circle approach is perhaps representative of a larger model of participatoryspectatorship practices: observable components and mechanics leading to hypotheticals and strategy followedby to a return to observable components and mechanics.Overall, it seems that participatory spectatorship may provide learners opportunities to assume theidentities and roles of professional players (Stanza 5, Line B), embody their actions (Stanzas 1-3), andunderstand their decision-making (Stanzas 4-5). Moreover, this form of participation hones observation of basicactivities and components of a functional game system, as well as the rules and ritual of competitive gamingcommunities. Participatory spectatorship takes the form of embodied problem-solving narratives, whereinplayers may develop and analyze hypothetical situations based in observation of play (Stanza 5).Conclusions and implicationsWe provide here a provisional analysis of the affordances of the Dota 2 noob stream, as a means of illustratingthe ways that participatory spectatorship may be consequential for enculturation into these informal learningCSCL 2015 Proceedings583© ISLScommunities and for the collaborative play found within them. Though this is but one verbal exchange within alarger set of announcer conversations, and atop a multimodal and highly interactive game space itself, thediscussions here seem to reveal patterns within the conversations that occur in these spaces. That is, spectatingthe noob stream is not a “simple” viewing of game activity, but is a complex process in which learners interpretthe announcers’ interpretations of play, reinterpret this as strategy, and model the prediction of play activity.Spectatorship becomes participatory as observations and interpretations are added to knowledge and laterembodied in practice. The predictions of play in Stanza 5 are features of a computer-mediated negotiationbetween announcers and spectators that may serve to coordinate and guide continued participation.As we saw in Stanza 1 and Stanza 6, the degree to which “wards” are emphasized develops a tensionbetween the announcers. The dialectic between announcers on the noob stream may afford spectators anopportunity to negotiate and interpret a variety of approaches to understanding the game as player. The lack of arequired information need in participatory spectatorship gives viewers the opportunity to actively transformknowledge. Information presented by the announcers is constrained by the actions in the game; however, theseconstraints also allow for the spectrum of information complexity present in Stanzas 1-6. As lurkers gatherdiscursive tools and the social capital that comes from them, they may work their way toward visibleparticipation within an online community. Similarly, participatory spectatorship can afford enculturation andknowledge construction embedded within a social community. Yet, as games are embodied forms of play,participatory spectatorship may also afford a sense of physical participation in a performance or hypotheticalscenario. The present study does not investigate how spectators engage with live streams, nor does it interpret allthe possible forms of participation surrounding Dota 2 as an eSport. It is only the first step in understanding howparticipatory spectatorship serves participants as they move toward more central membership in a larger gamingenterprise, and will serve as a basis for future work.This descriptive case study is a way to re-engage with lurking from a new direction by injecting formsof spectatorship that may afford different kinds of participation from those studied in online text-basedcommunities. The expansion of lurking into multimodal spaces opens perspectives to a variety of forms ofsociodramatic and pretend play. The lens of participatory spectatorship presents players with opportunities forlearning in complex media spaces involving a widely interconnected set of resources and the exemplification ofdiscourse practices that extend beyond the game itself. With the goal of teaching novice players a complexgame, the noob stream hones the observation of components and strategy, a level of perception that in othercircumstances may require hundreds of hours of practical experience. As participatory spectatorship, play ismodeled in real-time and in real-world (albeit digital) situations, allowing players to observe and later enactskills and practice in the form of play. This reinforces that participatory spectatorship, like lurking, is an activeprocess of enculturation into complex media spaces.ReferencesCollins, A., & Halverson, R. (2009). Rethinking education in the age of technology: The digital revolution andschooling in America. Teachers College Press.Douglas, C. (2002). "You have unleashed a horde of barbarians!": Fighting Indians, playing games, formingdisciplines. Postmodern culture, 13(1).Edelmann, N. (2013). Reviewing the definitions of “lurkers” and some implications for online research.Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 16(9), 645-649.Gee, J. P. (2013). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method. Routledge.Gee, J. P. (2007). Good video games and good learning: Collected essays on video games, learning, and literacy.New York: Peter Lang.Jenkins, H. (2006). Convergence culture: Where old and new media collide. New York: NYU press.Jensen, A. P. (2011). Convergence culture, learning, and participatory touth theatre performance. Youth TheatreJournal, 25(2), 146-158.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.Lee, Y. W., Chen, F. C., & Jiang, H. M. (2006, June). Lurking as participation: A community perspective onlurkers' identity and negotiability. In Proceedings of the 7th international conference on Learningsciences (pp. 404-410). International Society of the Learning Sciences.Ludvigsen, M., & Veerasawmy, R. (2010, November). Designing technology for active spectator experiences atsporting events. In Proceedings of the 22nd Conference of the Computer-Human Interaction SpecialInterest Group of Australia on Computer-Human Interaction (pp. 96-103). ACM.Nonnecke, B., & Preece, J. (2000, April). Lurker demographics: Counting the silent. In Proceedings of theSIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems (pp. 73-80). ACM.CSCL 2015 Proceedings584© ISLSSquire, K. (2011). Video games and learning: Teaching and participatory culture in the digital age. New York:Teachers College Press.Stake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study research. Sage.Steinkuehler, C., Squire, K., & Barab, S. (Eds.). (2012). Games, learning, and society: Learning and meaning inthe digital age. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Taylor, T. L. (2012). Raising the Stakes: E-sports and the Professionalization of Computer Gaming. Cambridge,MA: MIT Press.CSCL 2015 Proceedings585© ISLS