Student Perceptions of Object-based Learning With DigitizedMuseum Materials During Classroom Science InstructionKirsten R. Butcher, University of Utah, kirsten.butcher@utah.eduMichelle Hudson, University of Utah, michelle.hudson@utah.eduMadlyn Runburg, Natural History Museum of Utah, mrunburg@umnh.utah.eduAbstract: Digitization initiatives at modern museums have created unprecedented opportunitiesto use online collections objects in classrooms. A key question is whether digitized objects canengage students and promote perceptions of scientific authenticity. Students' perceptions weregathered via embedded surveys immediately following online investigations with digitizedmuseum objects. Responses showed strong engagement and positive perceptions of authenticity(e.g., feeling like a scientist) with bimodal patterns for negative boredom and confusion.Keywords: Object-based learning, student engagement, museum objects, digital models, middle schoolIntroductionA significant critique of classroom learning has been that it is “decontextualized from direct experiences withobjects” (Dierking, 2002, p. 4). Research on learning in museums generally has shown positive impact of objectson learner engagement and satisfying user experiences (Schwan, Grajal, & Lewalter, 2014). Because real objectshave inherent motivation, expectations, and interest (Dierking, 2002), object-based learning may have strongpotential for engaging students in classroom instruction. Some research has shown that bringing physical museumobjects into a classroom environment can increase student engagement (Wyner, Koch, Gano, & Silvernail, 2010),but authentic objects from museums can be difficult to acquire for K-12 use. Modern advances in digital imaginghave greatly increased opportunities for object-based research and learning in classrooms via digitized museumobjects, but little is known about how digitized objects are perceived by students during classroom instruction.The current research examined students' perceptions of a set of online, inquiry-based research investigations thatused digitized museum objects.MethodParticipantsData was analyzed for 617 unique session IDs (about 1234 students working in pairs) from 34 teacher accountsfor investigation 1 and 411 unique session IDs (about 822 students) linked to 37 teacher accounts for investigation2.Materials and ProcedureClassrooms used Research Quest (www.researchquest.org) investigations 1 and 2. Investigation 1 used 3D modelsof authentic museum objects (i.e., dinosaur fossils) to identify the type and species of three mystery fossils.Investigation 2 used digital museum materials (e.g., an interactive quarry map) to explore why so many animalsdied in one location. Surveys consisted of nine, Likert-type items modeled after rapid feedback “mini surveys”employed by Penuel and colleagues (Penuel, Van Horne, Severance, Quigley, & Sumner, 2016). Two itemstargeted positive emotions (confidence, excitement); two items addressed negative emotions (boredom,confusion); one item assessed perceived authenticity (feeling like a scientist); four items gauged self-reportedcritical thinking processes. Student surveys were embedded at the end of each online Research Quest investigationand were completed by a collaborative pair for each computer logged into a teacher account. Survey responseswere anonymous and logged according to a random session ID that could not be linked with individual studentsbut were linked to teacher accounts.ResultsPositive emotions and critical thinking processes showed strong patterns of agreement, with response frequenciesgrowing from slightly agree to strongly agree. Following each investigation, between 58% and 68% of studentsindicated some level of agreement with positive emotions (min = 58%, max = 68.2%), with strongly agree beingthe most frequently selected response (see Figure 1).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1683© ISLSFigure 1. Response frequencies for positive emotion items: confident (1a), excited (1b), feeling like a scientist(1c).As seen in Figure 2, frequencies of student responses to negative emotion items were largely bimodal. For theitem "Today in science class, I felt bored" (Figure 2a), the largest percentage of students chose “strongly disagree”(Inv 1: 24.6%; Inv. 2: 23.8%), but the next most common response was “strongly agree” (Inv. 1: 20.9%; Inv. 2:21.4%). Confusion showed a similar but less divergent pattern (Figure 2b); the largest percentage of studentsstrongly disagreed (Inv. 1: 24.6%; Inv. 2: 23.6%), with “slightly agree” the second most common response (Inv.1: 17.2%; Inv. 2: 19.5%).Figure 2. Response frequencies for negative emotion items: bored (2a), confused (2b).ConclusionsOverall, students who used digitized museum objects and materials for scientific investigations were highlyengaged by the digitized materials, responded positively to the perceived authenticity of the investigations, andreported strong engagement in critical thinking processes. A majority of student collaborative pairs reportedfeeling confident, excited, and like a scientist when working with digitized objects. Thus, efforts to increaseobject-based learning opportunities in classrooms may benefit from using digitized museum collections. However,results were not uniformly positive. Items gauging boredom and confusion showed bimodal responses. This mayindicate the need for more personalized scaffolds to customize investigation objects and adapt instructionalfeatures. Future research is needed to better understand when and how to engage all students in object-basedinvestigations using authentic, digitized objects. Additional research on Research Quest is using educational datamining with logged interactions to predict moment-by-moment student engagement and learning needs.ReferencesDierking, L. D. (2002). The role of context in children's learning from objects and experiences. In S. G. Paris(Ed.), Perspectives on object-centered learning in museums (pp. 3-18). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Penuel, W. R., Van Horne, K., Severance, S., Quigley, D., & Sumner, T. (2016). Students' repsonses to curriculuaractivities as an indicator of coherence in project-based science. In C.-K. Looi, J. Polman, U. Cress & P.Peimann (Eds.), Transforming Learning, Empowering Learners: The International Conference of theLearning Sciences (ICLS) 2016, Volume 2 (Vol. 2, pp. 855-858). Singapore: ISLS.Schwan, S., Grajal, A., & Lewalter, D. (2014). Understanding and engagement in places of science experience:Science museums, science centers, zoos, and aquariums. Educational Psychologist, 49(2), 70-85.Wyner, Y., Koch, J., Gano, S., & Silvernail, D. (2010). Using museum resources to develop environmental sciencemodules that link daily human behavior to ecological principles. Paper presented at the 2010 Annual Meetingof the American Educational Research Association, Denver, CO.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1684© ISLS