Supporting Elementary Students’ Science Learning ThroughData Modeling and Interactive Mapping in Local SpacesKathryn A. Lanouette, Sarah Van Wart, and Tapan S. Parikhkathryn.lanouette@berkeley.edu, vanwars@berkeley.edu, parikh@berkeley.eduUniversity of California, Berkeley School of Education and School of InformationAbstract: Our work is based on three premises: (a) children’s experiential, everydayknowledge about local spaces is a rich resource for science learning, (b) involvement in datamodeling contributes to children’s conceptual understanding, and (c) interactive maps cansupport children in leveraging their experiential, everyday knowledge about local spaces intotheir scientific reasoning. In this paper, we report on the results of a design-based researchstudy, in which 4th grade students used a web-based tool called Local Ground to collect data,model, and collaboratively analyze what’s underground in the local soil ecology around theirschool. We examine the affordances of situating children’s data modeling in local spaces andusing Local Ground as a representational medium. We find that this instructional designsupported children in integrating their experiential knowledge to reason about organisms inrelation to the environment.Keywords: elementary science education, ecological systems, data modeling, data visualization, GISIntroductionCreating, testing and revising models are central to science (Giere, 1997), reflected in a shifting emphasis withinscience education research (Lehrer & Schauble, 2015) and recent consensus documents (NRC, 2012). Yetconstructing and interpreting representational forms is challenging, with extensive literature documentingchildren’s difficulties in moving between the world and its symbolized forms. Children’s familiarity with thephenomena in question is an important but often overlooked element of deciphering representations, whereinattaining a “fluid” reading involves bidirectional movement between phenomena and various symbolic forms(Roth, Pozzer-Ardenghi, & Han, 2005; Latour, 1999).Existing science instruction, especially at the elementary school level, makes this representationalinterpretation process more challenging in several ways. First, the phenomena of study is often decontextualized(Metz, 2008) and separated from children’s everyday lived experiences (Rivet & Krajcik, 2008), with scienceinstruction seldom engaging children’s local spaces as sites for scientific inquiry. As a result, children’s relatedknowledge sources are rarely utilized, missing a key opportunity to integrate children’s extensive everyday formsof knowing with more scientific ones (Vygotsky, 1978). Second, children are often presented with “final-form”representations, offering a distorted view of the development and purpose of representational models in scienceand limiting children’s ability to participate in data transformation processes. Children’s engagement in themodeling process, through which certain aspects of the phenomena are amplified while others are reduced (Latour,1999), is crucial to both supporting children’s conceptual understanding (Lehrer & Schauble, 2012) and toconsidering uncertainty of the data (Metz, 2004). Yet in working with increasingly abstracted forms,representations inherently lose the locality and materiality of the phenomena, making it challenging for childrento connect these abstracted forms of data to the original phenomena and immediate context.Our work is based on the following design principles: (a) local spaces can serve as rich resources inchildren’s science learning, (b) children’s involvement in data modeling can play an integral part in supportingchildren’s conceptual understanding, and their ability to raise questions about the scientific process and its results,and (c) interactive digital maps can support children in leveraging their experiential, everyday knowledge aboutlocal spaces into their reasoning about relationships between organisms and their environment.Within the science education research field, recent generative work has used local spaces as a context forchildren’s data modeling (Lehrer & Schauble, 2012; Manz, 2012, 2015), with a handful of projects using papermapping as part of elementary children’s sensemaking. Other projects have used interactive digital maps, oftenfor young people to reflect on social issues in their community (Taylor & Hall, 2013; Van Wart, Tsai & Parikh2010; Enyedy & Mukhopadhyay, 2007). However, this work has not considered the specific cognitive affordancesof spatial representations (i.e. maps) in supporting children's reasoning. Additionally, while some of this work hascentered on data modeling within children’s school or neighborhood environments, it hasn’t looked specificallyICLS 2016 Proceedings570© ISLSat how children’s local knowledge of phenomena is integrated into scientific reasoning. Moreover, most of thiswork has been done with older students, usually high-school level.Work in the emerging area of Citizen Science has also investigated how to expand participation(especially local) in scientific inquiry. Much of this work has focused on citizens as data collectors - leveragingtheir local knowledge and access to contribute to aggregated data sets that support larger-scale analysis andreasoning (Bonney et al., 2009). Other projects have also looked at involving users as data analysts - leveragingtheir prior knowledge to explain and discuss interesting patterns and trends in the data (Viegas, 2007). While theseprojects have focused on adult participation, others have investigated involvement of youth and novices (Willett,Aoki, Kumar, Subramanian, & Woodruff, 2010). Yet this work thus far hasn’t focused on how and what forms oflearning are enabled by these various forms of participation, and whether we need new tools to support theselearning outcomes.In this paper, we report on the results of a design-based research study, in which 4th grade students useda web-based tool called Local Ground to collect data, model, visualize and engage in discussion about the localsoil ecology around their school. We analyze the affordances of situating children’s data modeling in local spaces,and of using this map-based representational medium to support children in integrating their experientialknowledge into their reasoning as they investigate organisms in relation to the environment. Specifically, weexplore the following research questions:1. In what ways do children reason about organisms in relation to the environment, as they engage in datacollection, modeling, and interactive mapping of their local soil ecology?2. As they reason, in what ways do children draw on their context-specific knowledge and experiences tosupport their claims?3. How do children use Local Ground’s interactive map representation in constructing and communicatingthese explanations?We begin by describing the instructional design and context of this research project, followed by our analyticalmethodology and lastly, our results and implications for future research.Instructional design and contextOur research was conducted in an urban public elementary school (K-5) in the Western United States (40% freeor reduced lunch). We worked with one fourth-grade class of 21 students that met twice a week in the Science labfor periods of 45 and 90 minutes. Working closely with the science teacher, we designed a ten-week instructionalunit focused on exploring soil ecosystems found on the school grounds. Researchers were involved in all aspectsof the design - including curriculum design, developing supporting tools, delivering instruction, designingclassroom materials and activities, and leading discussions.The curriculum was framed around four central questions: (1) What is underfoot? (2) Is it different indifferent places? (3) How can we find out? and (4) Why might these differences exist? These questions wereintended to anchor instruction by problematizing (Dewey, 1929) the physical space, raising questions of methodselection and data uncertainty, and encouraging children’s explanations of this local ecosystem. Within children’stake-up of these what, how, and why questions, we were particularly interested in the children’s integration oflocally situated knowledge sources into their reasoning, and their use of Local Ground’s interactive map interfacein constructing and sharing their explanations.During the first few lessons the researchers elicited the class’s ideas about what was underfoot aroundtheir school, grouped these ideas into biotic and abiotic “parts” of these underground places, and supporteddiscussion about ways to gather more information about them. Children then worked in pairs to choose sites ofinterest to explore these “parts” further, selected by the researchers from students’ initial ideas to represent a rangeof distinct microenvironments within the schoolyard. In these groups, children then collected data on both biotic(total invertebrate counts, earthworms, roots) and abiotic (soil moisture, soil compaction, soil color, soilcomposition) indicators. Children’s paper notes took the form of written field notes, sketches, and photographs.Back in the classroom, each pair worked together to add their data and field notes to Local Ground’sspreadsheet interface (Figure 1). The teacher-researcher then used the interactive map interface (Figure 2) toengage children in thinking about similarities and differences at the ten sites, and to reason about why theserelationships might exist. Children also physically returned to the ten original sites, to see if any additional siteinformation would be useful in making sense of the relationships (or lack thereof) in their data.ICLS 2016 Proceedings571© ISLSLocal GroundLocal Ground is a software tool designed to support children's data collection, modeling, and analysis (Van Wart,Tsai & Parikh 2010). This software allowed the research team to upload and geo-reference the various forms ofchildren's soil data (pictures, audio, video, drawings). It also allowed children to enter and edit their ownmeasurements and notes, and ultimately browse and visualize everyone’s data, using either a spreadsheet (Figure1) or interactive map (Figure 2) interface.Figure 1: Spreadsheet interface, which students used to enter/edit data into the system.Figure 2: Interactive map interface, visualizing select variables from students’ data collection.The interactive map allowed children to assign specific symbols to discrete values or ranges for each variable,and to turn on/off any combination of symbols, allowing for the exploration of multivariate relationships acrossthe schoolyard. We mapped four variables – earthworm count, soil moisture, percolation time (in seconds)indicating soil compactness, and pitfall trap count (number of invertebrates sampled). Figure 2 shows two of theseindicators, “worm count” and “soil moisture”, displayed for each of the ten sites.MethodsIn this paper, we focus on the final three class sessions of the design experiment, which consisted of one day ofteacher-led whole classroom discussion and two days of student-led informal presentations. In the teacher-leddiscussion, children explored relationships between the worm count, soil moisture, soil compaction, and totalinvertebrate counts, looking at one, two, and then all four variables on the interactive map interface. The teacherresearcher prompted the students by asking them to attend to similarities and differences across variables and sitesand to identify “puzzling” relationships. In the student-led presentations, each site group (consisting of twoICLS 2016 Proceedings572© ISLSchildren) explored the interactive map interface together on a laptop, with the same four variables as above, tofind “interesting” similarities or differences across sites and reasoning about why these relationships might exist.Then, in a whole-class discussion, each group took turns explaining their findings and related explanations to theirpeers using a large projected version of the interactive map. Children used this map to explore and discuss oneand multi-variable relationships in their data and to link their observations back to the original data collectionsites.We selected these three lessons because they show how children talked about their data observations atthe end of the design experiment, how they leveraged their earlier field and data transformation experiences intothis reasoning, and how Local Ground’s interactive map interface supported this process. Because we wanted tounderstand how the instructional design, data collection activities, and software mediated student reasoning aboutthe local environment, we created a coding scheme consisting of (1) the different forms of reasoning that childrenused and (2) the resources children drew on as they reasoned. Using video transcriptions of the last three classsessions, these codes emerged through an iterative process (Miles, Huberman, & Saldaña, 2013) of identifyingthe types of local, experiential, and map-based evidence that the students marshaled to support their what, whyand how reasoning. We started by coding the first lesson together, collaboratively identifying and defining what,why, and how forms of children’s reasoning in each turn of child or teacher talk. Using this initial coding scheme,two researchers independently coded the remaining two lessons. We then met to resolve discrepancies and refinethe codes further to reach complete agreement.Next, we coded for the different forms of evidence that children used, working together to identify thedifferent contextually-situated resources children integrated into their reasoning in one lesson and thenindependently coding the two other lessons, reaching agreement through additional discussion and revisions ofthese codes (see Table 1). We included the use of the interactive map within these resources, noting indexicalutterances (e.g. “here”) and gestures involving the map to indicate use. With these forms of reasoning andresources defined and indexed (see Figure 3), we then examined each form of reasoning and the resourcestogether, noting any repeating patterns between these two groups of codes (e.g. children’s data collectionexperiences were often leveraged during how reasoning), and how the interactive map functioned in mediatingthis process.Forms of ReasoningTable 1: Coding Definitions and ExamplesCodeDefinitionExampleWhatA simple reporting of data“They had wet soil and we had dry soil”Establishing connections between biotic andabiotic variables (and sites)“Wouldn't no worms be in compact soilbecause it would be hard to get into the soil ifit’s all crammed together?” [connectingworms to soil compaction]WhyHowReflecting on whether the data collection and “Maybe we didn’t dig deep enough to find thepresentation methods could be used to make a worms” [questioning certainty of dataparticular claimsampling techniques]Resources for ReasoningReferencing specific aspects of the dataLocal Data Collection collection experience“We both had rollie pollies but theirs werealive and ours were dead” [referring toinvertebrate collection experience]Local KnowledgeReferencing previous experiences in theschoolyard and local neighborhood“Those garden beds get watered all of thetime”Interactive MapUsing the map representation to talk about“I don’t think you’re right because one of thedata points and / or context-specific locations planters isn’t showing here [pointing to themap]”Prior KnowledgeReasoning using other forms of knowledgethat were applied to a specific contexts butseemed to be generalizable across settings“Worms can’t climb up planters”Data sources include video recordings of all classroom sessions and children’s data collection activities;videos of students’ computer screens and corresponding conversations (using the SnagIt screen capture tool);students’ written and illustrated work; and semi-structured interviews conducted during and after the final classsession with select students. In this paper, we report on an analysis of our findings from the final three classroomvideos.ICLS 2016 Proceedings573© ISLSResults and discussionIn this section, we first report on the general forms of children’s reasoning that we observed in the three lessons.Next, we discuss the different resources children drew up in their reasoning. We conclude with a vignetteillustrating how several different sources of evidence and the Local Ground interactive map were used togetherto support children’s reasoning about select variables in relation to the surrounding environment.Different forms of children’s reasoningChildren’s reasoning took many forms throughout the three lessons (see Figure 3): describing biotic or abioticdata points (coded as What), locating, considering, and refuting data relationships and explanations (coded asWhy), and raising critical questions about methods and measurement issues (coded as How). On multipleoccasions, children offered simple descriptions of the data at the ten sites (e.g. Lety: “Our site was dry”). Moreoften, children considered and contested possible explanations about these relationships across several variablesand sites. With instructional prompts that encouraged children to look for similarities and differences in the dataand explain emergent relationships, they often considered one variable across several sites (e.g. John: “They hadwet soil and we had dry soil”) and several variables within one site (e.g. Toby: “I noticed Keanu and Lety’s sitehad … um moist soil and one worm and 30 seconds or less for percolation time”). At times, several children evenconsidered multiple variables across several sites (John: “They both had no worms, moist soil, and between 20and 200 seconds [for percolation time] and … less than 10 invertebrates”). Given the complexity of the data (e.g.multiple biotic and abiotic variables at ten different sites), it is striking how children identified numerous covariaterelationships, a challenging undertaking for children and adults alike when using canonical representational formslike scatterplots (Lehrer & Schauble, 2012). Children raised considerations of uncertainty multiple times as well,often in response to puzzling or unexpected relationships in their data. Children posed questions related tosampling errors (e.g. not digging deep enough to find worms, or percolation measurement techniques) andsampling variability (e.g. changing environmental conditions due to the sequencing and timing of data collection).L17: Whole Class Discussionselapsed time (minutes):0-55-1041L18: Peer Presentations L19: Peer Presentations10-15 15-20 20-25 25-30 30-350-55-1010-1515-200-55-103552225310-15 15-2020-25Total12242640118Forms of ReasoningWhat ReasoningWhy ReasoningHow Reasoning21113433113211Resources for ReasoningLocal Knowledge12Local Data Collection32Interactive Map1111161Prior Knowledge1512521135211421121432163310Figure 3: Counts of children’s scientific reasoning and the resources they draw upon, over time. Note students’frequent use of the interactive map, integrating multiple resources as they reason about schoolyard ecosystem.Resources integrated to support children’s reasoningWhen looking at the resources children engaged during their reasoning, notable patterns emerge. Children drewfrom several different sources: experiences stemming from the actual data collection process, local knowledgedrawn from daily activities around the school, and prior knowledge not directly related to the local context. In thefollowing paragraphs, we describe the different resources in more detail and the ways in which they were used inchildren’s reasoning.Children’s data collection experienceIn most instances, children drew on their data collection experiences to raise questions about methodology andaccuracy. Interestingly, these moments occurred in response to confusing or puzzling patterns in their data. Forexample, as the class reasoned about why worms were unexpectedly found at some of the ten sites and not others,Amir interjected, “Actually, I was going to say...some people didn't find earthworms, they found these other weirdworms.” Here, Amir is referring to his group’s and another group’s discovery of a different species of wormICLS 2016 Proceedings574© ISLSduring data collection, a finding that was discussed during data collection and recorded in both groups’ scientificsketches. In light of Amir’s contribution, the class continued to reason about the puzzling relationships,considering that different worms might indeed seek out different kinds of soil.In a few instances, children also used their first-hand data collection experience to describe specific datapoints in more detail to better support their own observations or explanations. Elaborated visual or tactiledescriptions of the data points were used to describe biotic and abiotic variables in greater detail. For example, ina conversation about different soil moisture levels in two planters – and their relationship to different worm counts– Tomas described the soil at one site as “pretty wet soil and it was shiny”, combining both a description of thesoil moisture data point and referencing the visual qualities of that original phenomena. Here, students’ dataanalysis reflects a “fluid” movement between the symbolized form and students’ memories of their own datacollection experiences and those of their peers.Children’s local knowledge about the areaChildren’s local knowledge was used in more diverse ways to reason about biotic or abiotic variables and therelationship between them, most frequently leveraged in the formation of and argumentation about explanations.This knowledge included human use patterns within the school grounds, as well as “natural” context-specificattributes such as shade and sunlight patterns. Take a discussion about “puzzling” patterns in the class data,emerging from the disconnect between children’s expectation that worms prefer soil conditions with moremoisture and the children’s data on the map reflecting a different pattern:Nadia:I think it's weird because, like, worms like wet areas and rain. But we didn'tfind any worms [in our wet site].Researcher 2: Do you have any ideas about why?Nadia:I think that me and Vanessa [interrupted briefly] because... there's a lot ofchildren who play there and they might just stomp...And like the worms will goaway. Or maybe the worms are just deep down.Here, Nadia brings in her local knowledge about children’s use of the space during recess to explain why wormsmight leave the area. She also raises the possibility that worms were actually at her site but the sampling methodsdidn’t accurately capture them.Children also leveraged their local knowledge of the space to consider additional site attributesinfluencing biotic and abiotic indicators. In a class discussion highlighting similarities and differences across sitesand variables, one child, Eric, notices that two sites located far apart – one in the garden and one in a planter nextto a classroom – both had no worms. Eric says, “So I think why me and Tomas didn't find any worms [points tohis site and the other group’s site] ... I think we didn't find any worms because mine was right next to the fencewhere it gets a lot of sunlight, and Tomas's is just...just sitting out in the sun.” Here, he argues that this might becaused by the amount of sunlight each location receives, a variable not originally considered by the class in theirdata collection and field notes.Attention to sunlight and shade also emerged in several other children’s comments, wherein childrenattended to shadows created by trees (e.g., Keanu: “Because this one is more in the sunlight and that one's in theshade where the trees are.”) and buildings (e.g., Sam: “No, it was covered by the shady part of the building.”). Byconsidering these additional site attributes, children were able to reason about soil moisture and worm counts inrelation to other factors within the original environment. Making a connection between data relationships and theoriginal environment is a conceptually challenging yet crucial step in children’s understanding of organisms’ “fit”within an ecosystem (Lehrer & Schauble, 2012).Children’s prior knowledge not connected to specific sitesIn several instances, children reasoned about relationships in their data using other forms of knowledge that wereapplied to the specific context, but likely originally developed in a different setting. For example, in trying toexplain why worms would likely not climb into the planters (which were surrounded by wide expanses ofblacktop), Tomas reasoned: “Well they could...but worms don't really like sunlight. They try...try to stay in thesoil so they probably could but wouldn’t because it would be really risky.” Attending to the plants growing at twosites, one child commented that worms were found at her site and another site because “they [worms] like tomunch on leaves...and it would make sense that there are worms there.” These reasons tended to be drawn fromother experiences, yet brought to bear to reason about the specifics of their local soil ecosystem.ICLS 2016 Proceedings575© ISLSUse of interactive map interfaceThroughout the three class sessions, students used the interactive map representation to construct and supporttheir arguments (see Figure 3). In many instances, the children simply used this interface to refer back to individualand aggregate data points. Other times, it functioned like a map, wherein children pointed and gestured towardspecific locations in the original space (as in Keanu & Lety pointing to the interactive map interface, saying: “Theapple tree's right over here.”) Interestingly, at many instances, children used the representation to talk about theirbiotic and abiotic site data in relation to the specific locations, collapsing the spatial, biotic, and abiotic forms ofinformation together. In these moments, children considered spatially anchored phenomena (like sunlight/shadeand schoolchildren’s use of these spaces over time) in relation to their abiotic and biotic data points.On several occasions, the map interface supported students integrating multiple forms of contextuallysituated knowledge as they explained relationships between organisms and their environment. These momentsoften occurred during sustained engagement with particular data points and while exploring potentialrelationships, where explanations were being offered, taken up, and contested by several students. For example,in response to Eric’s prediction that the class’s data would not show worms in the planter sites “because I don’tthink worms can climb up planters”, Tomas replied:Tomas:Researcher 1:Tomas:Researcher 1:Tomas:Researcher 1:Tomas:Researcher 1:Uhhh, Eric…I don’t think you're right because one of the planters [site #2]is not showing right there.What do you mean?[Pointing to the two sites on the interactive map] There are two plantersand one of the planters was a bit to the left...like around there... yeah [inresponse to Researcher 1 pointing at site #2]Cool, so you think there should be worms in this spot? [pointing to site #2].I think its…because the planters…mine and Heather’s [pointing to his dataand site #2]…it's because ours is dry and theirs [the other planter group] isreally wet. We both had rollie pollies but theirs were alive and ours weredead.Here, right? [pointing to the two sites] Ah…so you are saying that youthink there are differences in the worms based on soil moisture?I think it was, it was because we had dry soil and they had pretty wet soiland [the wet soil] was shiny.Ah, and you were both planters, right?In this example, Tomas argues that differences in worm counts are related to soil moisture levels, not hisclassmate’s mechanistic explanation of worm’s climbing abilities. He uses the map-based representation toidentify two sites (his and another’s groups) that were both in large soil planters. In addition to the worm countdata and soil moisture data showing on the interactive map representation, Tomas also recalls and references theinvertebrate pitfall trap data collection experience, wherein both groups found rollie pollies (sowbugs) yet hisgroup’s sowbugs had all died. In this instance and several others like it, the teacher and students use the interactivemap to establish a shared understanding of the data points being discussed (worm count and soil moisture) as wellas the original context where the data was gathered (two planters on opposite sides of the schoolyard).ConclusionsOur findings suggest that situating children’s engagement in data design, collection, and analysis withinsurrounding local spaces and using interactive data maps fostered generative conditions for children to reasonabout complex biological relationships. Within this design study, children marshaled diverse sources of evidencein reasoning about their data to elaborate descriptions of biotic or abiotic data points, consider and refute often“puzzling” data relationships, and to raise critical questions about methods. Details such as sunlight against afence, shadows cast by buildings, Kindergarten-favored places to play, and a tree’s falling apples were accessibleand integrated into children’s reasoning, supporting children in sharing and considering their peers’ complexexplanations. In reasoning this way, children were able to leverage their vast experiential and everyday ways ofknowing in grappling with the complexity of a local soil ecosystem.Local Ground’s interactive map appears to be a potentially powerful representational form that warrantsfurther exploration - in both its ability to establish shared references about complex data points and of the physicalICLS 2016 Proceedings576© ISLScontext from which they come and to facilitate children’s “fluid” movement between the world and its symbolizedforms. Within science education modeling research, there has been careful attention to children’s movementbetween base and target forms to support knowledge formation. It seems fruitful to explore the potential of thismovement across the local contexts of children’s daily experiences and within the representational formsthemselves, building on the potential affordances of interactive spatial representations to help bridge material andsymbolic worlds.ReferencesBonney, R., Cooper, C., Dickinson, J., Kelling, S., Phillips, T., Rosenberg, K, & Shirk, J. (2009). Citizen science:A developing tool for expanding science knowledge and scientific literacy. BioScience, 59(11), 977-984.Dewey, J. (1929). The quest for certainty. New York: Minton, Balch & Co.Enyedy, N., & Mukhopadhyay, S. (2007). They don't show nothing I didn't know: Emergent tensions betweenculturally relevant pedagogy and mathematics pedagogy. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(2), 139174.Giere, R. (1997). Understanding scientific reasoning (4th ed). New York: Harcourt Brace.Latour, B. (1999). Pandora’s hope: Essays on the reality of science studies. London: Cambridge University.Lehrer, R., Schauble, L., & Lucas, D. (2008). Supporting development of the epistemology of inquiry. CognitiveDevelopment, 23(4), 512-529.Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2012). Seeding evolutionary thinking by engaging children in modeling itsfoundations. Science Education, 96(4), 701-724.Lehrer, R. and Schauble, L. (2015). The development of scientific thinking. Handbook of Child Psychology andDevelopmental Science, 2(16), 1-44.Manz, E. (2012). Understanding the codevelopment of modeling practice and ecological knowledge. ScienceEducation, 96(6), 1071-1105.Manz, E. (2015). Resistance and the development of scientific practice: Designing the mangle into scienceinstruction. Cognition and Instruction, 33(2), 89-124.Metz, K. E. (2004). Children's understanding of scientific inquiry: Their conceptualization of uncertainty ininvestigations of their own design. Cognition and Instruction, 22(2), 219-290.Metz, K. E. (2008). Narrowing the gulf between the practices of science and the elementary school scienceclassroom. The Elementary School Journal, 109(2), 138-161.Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldaña, J. (2013). Qualitative data analysis: A methods sourcebook. ThousandOaks, CA: SAGE Publications, Incorporated.National Research Council. (2012). A framework for k-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Rivet, A. & Krajcik, J. S. (2008). Contextualizing instruction: Leveraging students' prior knowledge andexperiences to foster understanding of middle school science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,45(1), 79-100.Roth, W.M., Pozzer-Ardenghi, L., & Han, J. (2005). Critical graphicacy: Understanding visual representationsin school science. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.Van Wart, S., Tsai, K., & Parikh, T. (2010). Local Ground: A paper-based toolkit for documenting local geospatial knowledge. In A. Dearden (Ed.), Proceedings of ACM DEV. London, UK: ACM.Taylor, K. H., & Hall, R. (2013). Counter-mapping the neighborhood on bicycles: Mobilizing youth to reimaginethe city. Technology, Knowledge and Learning, 18(1-2), 65-93.Viegas, F., Wattenberg, M., Van Ham, F., Kriss, J., & McKeon, M. (2007). Manyeyes: a site for visualization atinternet scale. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, 13(6), 1121-1128.Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Willett, W., Aoki, P., Kumar, N., Subramanian, S., & Woodruff, A. (2010). Common sense community:Scaffolding mobile sensing and analysis for novice users. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 6030LNCS, 301–318. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-12654-3_18AcknowledgementsThis work is based in part upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant Numbers IIS1319849 and IIS-1054332. We also acknowledge the support of a Sloan Foundation fellowship and a HellmanFaculty fellowship.ICLS 2016 Proceedings577© ISLS