Design in Game-Based LearningMatthew Gaydos, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,matthew.gaydos@nie.edu.sgMingfong Jan, Graduate Institute of Learning and Instruction, National Central University, TaiwanAbstract: Educational games have shown promise as a technology that can improve learning,and education, but research has yet to produce games that can consistently and sustainablyfulfill this promise. One reason to the shortcomings of research may be that game basedapproaches, including design approaches, have thus far focused on developing domain-basedtheories and methods of research and design and have tended to neglect design frameworks. Inthis paper, we identify design as an area that will be necessary to study in order to developeffective educational games and suggest that literature begins by presenting failure in designin order to identify what needs to be improved.Keywords: educational games, learning, design research, design frameworksIntroductionThe last decade’s interest in using games to help transform education for the 21st century has produced mixedresults. The results are mixed in that, while games have been repeatedly shown to have the potential tocontribute positively to learning and education, we still don’t know how to consistently design games that areregularly used, that improve learning in predictable and desirable ways, and that require a reasonable andattainable amount of resources especially when sustained at scale. That is, similar to educational technologypredecessors (e.g. LOGO), one of the major challenges that educational games faces is not whether they canproduce good learning, but how learning games can be developed, distributed, used, and supported given presentcontexts. These challenges are not insurmountable, however they require addressing a major gap within designresearch literature centered on theories of design.Design is generally acknowledged as essential for the development of education technologyinterventions that can effect authentic, local, and possibly large-scale change, as well as for conducting rigorousstudies in messy environments (DBRC, 2003; Fishman, Penuel, Hegedus, & Roschelle, 2011; Penuel, Fishman,Cheng, & Sabelli, 2011). Despite its importance, design itself has been relatively under-theorized or at the veryleast, infrequently discussed in CSCL literature (though see Kirschner, Strijbos, Kreijns, & Beers, 2004). This isespecially true in the burgeoning field of games research where the focus has been to test whether games can beuseful for learning, rather than how games can be developed to provide long-term improvements (Clark, TannerSmith, & Killingsworth, 2014). For example, in describing the development of Quest Atlantis, a virtual worldwhere student players can engage in pro-social and scientific narratives, Barab et al. (2004) use components ofethnography, design-based research, and action research to describe the conditions and processes thatcontributed to their design. As participant observers, they talk about how their designed technology wasintended to “aid children in valuing their communities and in recognizing that they have important ways tocontribute to their communities and the world” (pp 255). Conducting a “critical design ethnography” Barab etal. (2004) present a sense of why they created the program that they did, however the readers are left with littleunderstanding of the relationship between how particular elements of their design came about (e.g. why was itdigital, multiplayer, quest-based), how these elements evolved throughout the project and why certain designswere favored or emerged. As an even more specific example, consider that the authors reported that the gamecan be customized in order to fit local content and that it already contained over 400 stock quests that theteachers and players could choose from. The author’s description leaves readers guessing with regards to howthey ended up with this configuration of quests as a solution to improve flexibility or whether more quests ormore robust versions of the current ones might offer better alternatives. The critical design ethnography theyemployed was useful in conveying a sense that the project required balancing multiple agendas and that thetechnology had to be flexible in its design, especially when moving across different contexts of play. However,the ethnography does not convey how the authors determined what they needed to do to the technology to makeit flexible in the first place or a theory of design that would describe how to improve it in future versions.The purpose of this paper is to spur discussion about design, particularly the design of educationalgames and their associated learning environments. Because game-based educational technologies continue toCSCL 2015 Proceedings388© ISLSgain popularity in formal and informal educational environments, theories and guidelines regarding theparameters of future designs are increasingly necessary, both to improve research and understanding of howgames affect learning, but also to improve the designs themselves. In particular, what’s needed are “designframeworks” (Edelson, 2002), which can be produced through design studies and present “a generalized designsolution” to address the problems identified by a prior research whilst using design methods to get there. Whiledesign research has regularly focused on the development of domain theories and improving design methods,design frameworks, including how design solutions are generated, remain under-developed or at the very least,not well-shared within games literature.In the remainder of this paper, I present a brief overview of three design research approaches in whichdesign is considered essential in order to characterize its current role. I then present three frameworks that canbe useful when thinking through and sharing game-based designs. Neither this review nor the frameworkspresented are exhaustive, but are meant to serve as a point for discussion on how to directly address designs andpractices associated with game-based education, putting them on equal footing with the learning goals theycurrently serve.Three examples of design in researchTo contextualize the issue of design in game-based learning, consider three popular approaches to educationaltechnology research in which design plays a central role: design-based research (DBR), design-basedimplementation research (DBIR), and Instructional Design (ID). Generally, all three approaches address thechallenge of creating practical educational interventions that are effective in authentic learning settings (e.g.classrooms) and that simultaneously produce rigorous research.Design-based research incorporates work from both Brown (1992) & Collins (1992), fully embracingthe messiness of authentic settings and the valuable feedback that the classroom contexts can generate. Ratherthan attempting to isolate variables for later laboratory testing, however, DBR tends to use a process of iterative,theory-informed design to generate claims that can be applied to other contexts, to better understand the contextof the intervention’s enactment, and to produce demonstrable learning gains at the site of the intervention (Barab& Squire, 2004). Over the past decade, design based research has begun to find stronger footholdsinternationally, and has developed from a philosophical stance into a productive research approach.Similar to design-based research is design-based implementation research (DBIR) (Penuel et al., 2011).DBIR has four key elements:••••A focus on persistent problems of practice from multiple stakeholders’ perspectivesA commitment to iterative, collaborative design,A concern with developing theory related to both classroom learning andimplementation through systematic inquiryA concern with developing capacity for sustaining change in systems (p. 332, Penuelet al., 2011).DBIR, similar to DBR, uses design to augment research practices in order to advance theory and toachieve effective, practical interventions. A key distinction between the two comes from DBIR’s extension of“what works” to “when, how, and for whom?” (p. 335, Penuel et al. 2011), and its focus on integrating effectiveinterventions into on-going practices, settings and cultures in order to achieve long-last systemic change.Finally, instructional design has, since the late 1980s, drawn explicit attention to the intersection ofeducational practice and theory, teachers and researchers, though an orientation toward design. Reigeluth(Reigeluth, 1999) describes ID as composed of situations under which designs can and cannot be applied andthe methods by which designs can be implemented. To describe the situations, Reigeluth proposes identifyingthe conditions of instruction (e.g. who is the learner) and the desired learning outcomes (e.g. how effective is it).Methods include how to perform the intervention (e.g. pedagogy), as well as the parameters of the artifact itself(e.g. it should be realistic). Together, the components of ID provide the designed methods of instruction and theconditions under which they should be applied.Design as peripheral versus design as a focusThe goals of DBR, DBIR, and ID include gathering evidence for learning, defining theories that relate thedesigns to the learning outcomes, prescribing how designs should be used, and for DBIR in particular, how theintervention can effect systemic change. These approaches can be seen as responses to Collins’ (1992) call toapply design science to education. At the time, Collins argued, education technology research and developmentfaced major shortcomings, including a tendency to use technology developments that were atheoretical and toCSCL 2015 Proceedings389© ISLSover-emphasize the potentially biased examination of whether these technologies could produce significantgains in learning. At the same time as Collins’ work, Brown (1992) identified what she saw as major challengesto current educational research approaches, emphasizing the tension between complex, spontaneous, anddifficult to control classroom learning with laboratory-centric investigations, where isolating variables is takenfor granted. For Brown, research that moves between the classroom and the laboratory provides the best of bothworlds, allowing for the identification of learning variables in situ, coupling testing in tightly controlled settingswith a study of their effects in authentic, real-world contexts.Despite the way that design is a common factor amongst the reviewed research approaches, it has notin and of itself, been the focus. Instead, the approaches are “design-oriented” (p 12, Reigeluth, 1999) or usedesign “as an approach” (p 331 Penuel et al. 2011) in order to achieve their other outcomes. This reflects a viewof design as a means for theory testing (Cobb et al., 2001), where a researcher takes previously developedtheories or hypotheses and instantiates them as a design in order to test them. Design, generally, is a means to anend. In some cases the end is an improved understanding of the strengths and limitations of the theory orhypothesis in question while in others it’s some resolution of a local, meaningful issue (e.g. Penuel et al. 2011).Regardless, design is used in design research, not the purpose of it. Being a means to an end does not exemptdesign from critical examination or theorization.Approaches that treat designs as instantiations of (and pursuant to) particular theories are problematicfor two reasons. First, they treat design as overly rational, instead of considering what’s designed is an imperfectinstantiation of a theory at best and a lethal mutation at worst. Designs are the products of their contexts, oraccumulations of real-world development processes including hundreds of decisions about procedure, theproblem that is being solved, and the way the solution is addressed through the design (Edelson, 2002). In otherwords, design does only address the configuration of the artifact, but is the process that produces it. As analternative to the rational approach, Schon (1984) describes this process as reflection-in-action, in whichdesigners draw connections between the immediate design problem and their own prior experiences, relying onrepertoires of design they have built up through professional practice or experiences. By drawing connectionsbetween prior work and the problem at hand, designers frame the problem so that it is familiar andunderstandable. And while the designer seeks similarities between the current design and prior work in order topropose solutions, the conditions of the world “talk back” to the designer, triggering a re-framing of the problembased on evolving constraints that the design must meet, including differences between the current and priorsituations. When a problem is well-defined, generating design solutions means meeting the initial constraints ofthe project, but when working in an ill-defined problem space, the designer must actively identify thesimilarities and differences between the current design and prior work in order to evaluate potential solutions’relevance or applicability.Schon’s definition of design as a relational and active process is not the authoritative definition ofdesign, but is useful in highlighting what’s missing from current approaches. In particular, designs are oftenconveyed in terms of principles or heuristics that are overly focused on intent or method. For example, Edelsoncites van der akker’s (1999) use of heuristics to convey design principles in the form:"If you want to design intervention X [for the purpose/function Y in context Z], then you arebest advised to give that intervention the characteristics A, B, and C [substantive emphasis],and to do that via procedures K, L, and M [procedural emphasis], because of arguments P, Q,and R." (p. 9, van der akker, 1999)While heuristics such as these can clearly capture the general character of the design, the logic of thedesigners, and their recommendations for recreating desired outcomes, they rest on the assumption that design isa direct translation from intent to artefact. Because a reflection-in-action approach considers contingency as acore characteristic of the design process, it suggests a need to develop new ways to communicate designespecially conveying how the environment “talks back” to the design. Instead of expressing the characteristicsthat might be desirable within an artifact and explaining how to directly and logically instantiate them, a designframework might instead try to express the relationship between the artifact and the context as they evolve overtime.Second, placing theory above design rather than alongside it runs counter to recent calls to action ineducation research (e.g. Bang, Cobb, Jackson, Sorum, & Gutiérrez, 2014; Lave & Hall, 2014). Developingeffective educational interventions requires moving beyond measures of treatment effect to the coordination ofdesign and practice amongst researchers and practitioners. Though theory is essential, positive systemic changerequires directly addressing the interface between theory and the contexts in which a theory is applied, or inother words directly addressing design.CSCL 2015 Proceedings390© ISLSWhat to share, how to share it?As game-based learning evolves from a field that investigates whether games are good for learning to howgames can be good for learning, what’s needed is a better understanding of how and why the designedcomponents of the educational game came about, especially with regards to the intended and unintendedcomponents as well as the conditions of development and use. Design-research approaches are perhaps thecurrent best approach for tackling this problem and warrant what Anderson & Shattuck (2012) describe as a“cautious optimism” in their ability to generate testable theories and practical designs that can be used toimprove learning using methods such as iterative development and user testing. As a method, design basedresearch is useful, particularly for its role in theory generation and testing, but there is also a growing need toimprove the community’s knowledge about how to design good educational games, the varying qualities ofthese designs, the processes involved in making them, and their use in context.What’s missing in games research, as well as in education technology design generally I argue, is afocus on conveying and improving the theories that explain how we conceptualize design and the practicesassociated with how we carry it out. What’s needed are new ways of sharing design so that other researchers oreducation practitioners can adapt the design to other conditions and in so doing, improve our understanding ofwhich components are locally contingent and which are generally applicable (Hoadley, 2002). Currentapproaches that produce “design principles” or recommend including affordance X in game Y to elicit learninggain Z are insufficient for conveying the messy practices and processes that are inherent to design. Theories ofdesign like reflection-in-action provide some advancement in these regards, and suggest ways to frame whatshould be done, theorized, and shared when conducting design research that incorporate the relational aspect ofdesign. There are of course, other approaches to developing and sharing frameworks that enable the systematictesting and replication of game designs and the following section outlines one alternative, the socialinfrastructure framework.Educational games that are not accompanied by an associated theory of learning and design maygenerate findings that are difficult to replicate, generalize, or otherwise apply to other contexts. At the sametime, games that address learning without regard for design, including how the game meets pre-defined andnewly developed constraints, run the risk of games that aren’t used and interventions that aren’t used can’timprove learning, no matter how large their effect size. Though video games, generally, are impacting manyplayers’ lives and may hold potential for improving learning, more work is needed especially in advancing ourunderstanding of how good designs are produced in order to develop educational games that are not onlyeffective, but used daily and widely.Such a format for sharing educational game design has been absent thus far, especially as compared tothe other products of design research, domain theories and design methods. Domain theories, typically academicin nature, fall under models of philosophy of science, taking the form for example, of a hypothesis to be tested(group A performs better than group B) or stemming from conjectures about the nature of a thing (e.g. group Ais related to group B in some way). These hypotheses or conjectures, in turn, can be further interpreted withrespect to some disciplinary paradigm, in which an entire domain may generally adopt some keyassumptions/perspectives (Kuhn, 1962). Design methods, are similarly well-established, often described inpublished definitions of design research. For example, Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc (2004) describe a process ofprogressive refinement, in which designs are put into real-world contexts in order to see how they work and togenerate feedback in order to perform iterative design. Brown’s design experiments have as a hallmark, aprocess or method for moving between authentic classroom settings and controlled laboratory environments inorder to ensure the effectiveness of the intervention and isolate key variables. Design frameworks, unlikedomain theories and design methods, have not yet been, at least in educational game research, extensivelydiscussed or clearly detailed and thus far prior work has not been particularly useful in presenting designs.Though the role of design and its relationship to learning may vary depending on the aims of theresearch, what remains consistent across research design perspectives is the commitment to basing designs onfeedback from real-world contexts in order to generate theory that can be applied to future designs and their usein context. Even approaches that use design as a means for theory testing take into consideration the importanceof the interaction between the design and its use in context. Despite its importance, design knowledge is difficultto share, and has tended to either convey abstract principles that are difficult to put into use, or concretedecisions that are context-dependent and difficult to generalize. This is due in part because of the way thatdesign includes both deliberate decision processes and the confluence of contextual factors in which the designprocess unfolded. Design includes considerations of the tool itself as well as its adaptation to local constraints,not all of which are immediately apparent. Improving design means conveying and improving upon how weshare and address both of these design components, regardless of the role of design in research, as a learningintervention’s success depends on its design. While determining whether learning has occurred over the courseCSCL 2015 Proceedings391© ISLSof a game-based intervention is important, understanding why or how particular designs effect learning and howdesigns can be recreated in other contexts remains necessary for the field to test and advance theory and tocreate interventions that can be supported and scaled.A framework for design: Social infrastructureBielaczyc (2006) outlines four dimensions of classroom structures that can be designed: the cultural beliefsdimension, the practices dimension, the socio-techno-spatial relations dimension, and the interaction with the“outside world” dimension. The beliefs dimension includes the way that teachers and students think aboutlearning and knowing, their identities, and the purpose of the tools or technology being used. The practicesdimension includes students’ and teachers’ activities including both what they do with the tool and without it, aswell as the social structures of the participants. The socio-techno-spatial relations dimension refers torelationship between the physical and cyberspace as well as the configurations of the students, teachers, andtools within. Finally the interaction dimension considers the way that knowledge is brought into the activity,produced by the activity and consumed by others, and the way that students interact with others.These dimensions help characterize the aspects of classroom learning that are amenable to design andidentify the variables that are important for effectively integrating learning technologies. For example, to showits usefulness, Bielaczyc (2006) analyzes an already-completed study using the social infrastructure frameworkto identify the participant structures that were described but not previously connected to the way that theycontributed to the successful design of a digital collaborative learning activity.The social infrastructure framework contributes significantly to design research by identifyingdimensions that should be critically examined when designing interventions and assessing learning outcomes.Additionally, the dimensions of the social infrastructure framework can also be combined with implementationpaths or descriptions of the trajectories that teachers go through when adopting new learning technologies,providing a more complete view of a new tool’s use. The framework’s dimensions however, do not address thedynamic relationship between the dimensions and the design, including its character and what can be done tochange it. It is a useful tool presuming the researcher knows how to design well already.Design as narrativeSimilar to the notion of implementation paths is Hoadley’s (2002) design narrative. Design narratives arecharacterized by their presentation of a plot that describes and relates the important development events as theyunfold over time in a particular setting. Still, for narratives, the challenge is in identifying the components ofdesign that are important enough to convey, as generating design based research results that are credible is acore issue of DBR generally (Barab & Squire, 2005). Narratives, though they address the need to providedetails about the contingency associated with the design process, are inadequate on their own in reflecting backon the process itself – once complete, how does one improve or expand upon the design that was just developedand how do we get better at reflecting-in-action?Where things went wrongThough educational video games have been around for as long as their non-educational counterparts, they haveyet to see the same rates of adoption or impact. This is, in part, due to the way that research has focused onestablishing evidence that games produce learning, for example by 1) measuring learning gains producedthrough game play, 2) comparing game and non-game conditions, or 3) studying examples game-based learningin authentic gaming environments and linking the results of these studies back to the games’ design. Thisresearch agenda is important in that it provides the political will for supporting the use of games for learning. Atthe same time, the focus on learning has made it difficult to advance design theory or the outcomes of design.To address these shortcomings, it may be useful to begin considering how we might better communicateprojects, both in terms of their learning outcomes, but also in terms of their failures.That is, design can be considered a process of “proactive failure analysis,” in which identifying how adesign fails (or is perceived to fail) is the first step for improving it. Not reporting failures inhibits designimprovements by preventing others from understanding what needs to be “fixed.” Additionally, characteristicsof design will inevitably differ across projects or fields, and the qualities that lead to success in one classroommay be exactly the same qualities that cause failure in another. Exposing failure, connecting it to design, andexplaining context will contribute to the development of design frameworks by providing the opportunity forother designers to understand what happened and to propose alternative solutions.Finally, considering we as researchers are not the only parties invested in educational design projects,and describing what we consider to be failures may be overly narrow if it discounts other stakeholders in theproject. As Petroski (2008) writes “Maker and user, let alone middle man, can have different expectations ofCSCL 2015 Proceedings392© ISLSwhat constitutes acceptable performance (p. 106)” Addressing failure means addressing what all of theparticipating parties deem as areas of design improvement, as successful research design may not necessarilyresult in successful teaching design. If we expect the technologies that we create will be used and valued bystudents and teachers alike, considering failure may help to democratize the design process by including thevoices of other project stakeholders.To game design and beyondGames are not designed equally, and advancing “good” design is important (Gee, 2003). Game-based learningresearch has tended to leave readers guessing about how or why particular designs came about, however,making it difficult to establish what good design is or how to do it. It’s possible that this neglect may be easilyrectified, as there are many theories and approaches to design that may be applicable to educational games. Forexample, the field of instructional design has a long history of attending to the design of educational technologyand educational environments more generally (Gagne, 1981), and organizational management has theorized therole of technology as mediator within an organization (Orlikowski, Yates, Okamura, & Fujimoto, 1995).Finding common ground with educational games, fields who theorize design and applying contemporary,relational theories of learning, will likely be productive. Regardless of which fields’ cross-pollination producesfruit, addressing the literature gap in the design of educational games is the first step in designing for lastingpositive systemic impact. This paper specifies further steps for community action, calling for a discussion ofhow we may better communicate and clarify relevant 1) design theories and definitions, 2) design success andwho gets to define what counts as success and 3) design failures, including what went wrong and why.ReferencesAnderson, T., & Shattuck, J. (2012). Design-Based Research A Decade of Progress in Education Research?Educational Researcher, 41(1), 16–25. doi:10.3102/0013189X11428813Bang, M., Cobb, P., Jackson, K., Sorum, M., & Gutiérrez, K. D. (2014). Research-Practice Partnerships,Designing with Communities: Transforming Historically Powered Relations in Teaching and Learning.Keynote presented at the ICLS, Boulder, Colorado, USA.Barab, S., & Squire, K. (2004). Design based research: Putting a stake in the ground. Journal of the LearningSciences, 13(1), 1–14.Barab, S., Thomas, M. K., Dodge, T., Squire, K., & Newell, M. (2004). Critical design ethnography: Designingfor change. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 35(2), 254–268.Bielaczyc, K. (2006). Designing social infrastructure: Critical issues in creating learning environments withtechnology. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(3), 301–329.Clark, D. B., Tanner-Smith, E. E., & Killingsworth, S. (2014). Digital Games, Design, and Learning: ASystematic Review and Meta-Analysis (Technical) (p. 6). Menlo Park, CA: SRI. Retrieved fromhttp://www.sri.com/sites/default/files/publications/digital-games-design-and-learning-brief.pdfCollins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design research: Theoretical and methodological issues. TheJournal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15–42.DBRC. (2003). Design-Based Research: An Emerging Paradigm for Educational Inquiry. EducationalResearcher, 32(1), 5–8.Edelson, D. C. (2002). Design research: What we learn when we engage in design. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 11(1), 105–121.Fishman, B., Penuel, W. R., Hegedus, S., & Roschelle, J. (2011). What happens when the research ends?Factors related to the sustainability of a technology-infused mathematics curriculum. Journal ofComputers in Mathematics and Science Teaching, 30(4), 329–353.Gagne, R. M. (1981). Planning and Authoring Computer-Assisted Instruction Lessons. Educational Technology,21(9), 17–21.Gee, J. P. (2003). What Video Games Have to Teach Us About Learning and Literacy. Palgrave Macmillan.Hoadley, C. (2002). Creating context: Design-based research in creating and understanding CSCL. InProceedings of the Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning: Foundations for aCSCL Community (pp. 453–462). International Society of the Learning Sciences.Kirschner, P., Strijbos, J.-W., Kreijns, K., & Beers, P. J. (2004). Designing electronic collaborative learningenvironments. Educational Technology Research and Development, 52(3), 47–66.Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The structure of scientific revoutions. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.Lave, J., & Hall, R. (2014). Changing Practice. Keynote presented at the ICLS, Boulder, Colorado, USA.Orlikowski, W. J., Yates, J., Okamura, K., & Fujimoto, M. (1995). Shaping electronic communication: themetastructuring of technology in the context of use. Organization Science, 6(4), 423–444.CSCL 2015 Proceedings393© ISLSPenuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing Research and Development at theIntersection of Learning, Implementation, and Design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331–337.doi:10.3102/0013189X11421826Petroski, H. (2008). Success through Failure: The Paradox of Design. Princeton: Princeton University Press.Reigeluth, C. M. (1999). What is instructional-design theory and how is it changing. Instructional-DesignTheories and Models: A New Paradigm of Instructional Theory, 2, 5–29.Schon, D. A. (1984). The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think In Action (1 edition). New York:Basic Books.Van den Akker, J. (1999). Principles and methods of development research. In Design approaches and tools ineducation and training (pp. 1–14). Springer.AcknowledgementsThis paper was made possible through the support of SUG 36/13 MJG, the National Institute of Education, andNanyang Technological University. Special thanks to early draft readers, including Manu Kapur and KevinHarris and almost Nathan Patterson.CSCL 2015 Proceedings394© ISLS