Competing Epistemologies in the Construction of Popular SciencePryce Davis, University of Nottingham, pryce.davis@nottingham.ac.ukAbstract: This paper focuses on how the personal epistemologies of scientists and sciencecommunicators shape their practices and interact with one another in the construction of popularscience news. I present data from observations and interviews with scientists and reporters asthey work together to produce science news to show how competing epistemologies result incompromises that—when presented to the public—might lead readers to form understandingsthat are at odds with disciplinary knowledge.There is a rich thread of research in the learning sciences that deals with learners’ (and educators’) sense of whatit means to know something. Often categorized together as studies of “epistemology” (e.g. Hofer & Pintrich,2008), this thread is concerned with people’s understandings of what it means to know and learn in a given contextand how this impacts how people engage in knowledge construction. Scientific inquiry is a socio-epistemicpractice. As such, science is not a collection of inerrant facts, but rather a process through which groups of peoplework together to construct shared knowledge by means of questioning, observation, experiment, and analysis.Researchers interested in both science education and communication argue that when teaching or communicatingscience it is important to make the process of scientific knowledge construction visible (e.g. Lederman, 1998). Ofcourse, this is often not an easy task. This is particularly true when trying to communicate scientific research tothe public through popular science news articles. That is because scientists must convey their research throughmediators, like journalists. Journalism, too, is a socio-epistemic practice, but one with very different values,customs, and forms of discourse. Many argue that certain journalistic practices make it difficult to convey theprocess of science in news articles. In particular, the episodic nature of print stories is blamed for resulting in fewdescriptions of the scientific process or research methods (Dunwoody, 2008). Empirical studies of the content ofscience stories in the popular press seem to support this claim. Studies show that the majority of science storiescontain little or no details about the methodological process of the research on which they report (Dimopoulos &Koulaidis, 2002). These competing socio-epistemic practices cause tensions between scientists and journalistswith scientists often blaming journalists for not fully portraying the uncertainty of scientific research. Is this trulythe sole fault of the journalists?In this paper, I present research findings from a study of the individual interactions between variousactors involved in science communication. In particular, this paper reports on observations and interviews withscientists and university news reporters. Four scientists were interviewed about their recently published research.The interviews took the form of semi-structured clinical interviews. The questions required the scientists toperform a variety of tasks, including describing their research in detail, explaining their beliefs aboutcommunicating science to the public, and making judgments about the most and least important aspects of theresearch for the public to understand. Three news reporters, assigned by the university news service to write aboutthe research of the four scientists, were individually interviewed about their understanding of the research, theirprocess of writing about the research, and their beliefs about what aspects of the research will appeal to the public.Furthermore, the interactions between the scientists and the news reporters were observed and video recorded.These interactions usually took the form of interviews of the scientists by the reporters. Additionally, emailexchanges and notes between the scientists and the reporters were collected.An analysis of the interviews and observations revealed that the reporters often struggled to understandthe methods employed in the research. However, during interactions with the reporters, the scientists often leftout details of the methods. In particular, they often failed to explain the justifications for many methodologicaldecisions. Furthermore, when asked during interviews what is the least important part of the research for thepublic to understand, the scientists frequently referenced methodological details. However, when the scientistsexplained their research to me they gave much more detail about methods, justified their decisions morefrequently, and provided caveats.Gilbert & Mulkay (1985) argue that scientists frequently adopt two conflicting discursive repertoireswithin their practice. The contingent repertoire treats research as socially constructed and tentative, and treatsclaims as open for debate. The empiricist repertoire treats research as objective and unproblematic, and treatsclaims as confirmed facts. The contingent repertoire is often seen as “private” as it is commonly adopted betweenscientists themselves, while the empiricist repertoire is frequently use in “public” communications (Gilbert &Mulkay, 1985). I believe the differences in the depth of methodological description shows that the scientists inthis study were treating me as a fellow scientist and, thus, utilizing their contingent repertoire. Whereas,interacting with the reporters they adopted the empiricist repertoire.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1367© ISLSI argue that the mechanism that underlies these shifts in discourse is the instantiation of particularepistemological resources (Hammer & Elby, 2002) depending on the function and intent of their presentation oftheir research and claims. When presenting to the reporters, the participant scientists attempt to convey theirfindings as legitimate and important, and they are concerned with their knowledge claims being accepted ratherthan understood. However, when explaining their research to me, the participant scientists are less concerned withlegitimizing their work, after all I am no power to aid in communicating their research. Instead, they treated meas a “knowledgeable outsider” who can appreciate the nitty-gritty details of laboratory life and the scientificprocess. So, the lack of provided details about methods can be seen, as at least partially, the result of variationwithin the discursive and epistemic practices of science. However, that only explains the scientists’ failure toprovide details, not the journalists’ failure to ask for more detail.Journalists also utilize a variety of roles within their epistemic practice. For example, Fahy & Nisbet(2011) map nine distinct roles—each with particular commitments and practices—that a journalist might adopt.Most important for my analysis is the role of conduit that accurately explains scientific information. When actingas conduits, journalists concentrate on portraying information from a single source as accurately as possible, ratherthan attempting to evaluate the validity of that information through multiple sources. This shifts the focus fromwhether the claim is supported by evidence to whether there is a match between what a source says and what ajournalist presents. In this way, the journalist acts as a “neutral transmitter” of information (Dunwoody, 2008).This appears to be the stance adopted by the participant reporters. In essence, the participant reporters are treatingthe participant scientists as epistemic authorities—the most significant sources of information in the formation ofknowledge (Kruglanski, 1989). One can imagine reporters who, instead of given sole epistemic authority to thescientist, relies on other sources and their own perspectives. These reporters may have demanded the additionalinformation needed to make sense of the methods. In fact, other journalistic roles, such as watchdog andinterpretive reporter (Fahy & Nisbet, 2011), do adopt such epistemologies. Of course, the same universityemploys both the reporters and the scientists in this study. The journalists have investment in “selling” theresearch, rather than engaging critically with it, but this results in representations that are difficult to understandor justify.The lack of detailed methods in popular science news likely has many contributing factors. In this paper,I have argued that one of those factors is a network of competing epistemologies both within and betweenepistemic practices. Both scientists and journalists rely on multiple epistemologies and often, as is the case withthe participants in this study; their epistemologies work together to construct understandings that obfuscate detailsof process in representations of science. When these representations are presented to the public they might leadreaders to form understandings that are at odds with disciplinary knowledge (Corbett & Durfee, 2004). This isneither the fault of the scientist, the journalist, nor the lay public. Rather, all actors can be viewed as the source offailure and success in the communication of science. If the goal is to increase successful communication andpublic science engagement then scientists and journalists need work together to begin devising ways to coordinateepistemological resources to form a joint epistemic practice.ReferencesCorbett, J. B., & Durfee, J. L. (2004). Testing public (un)certainty of science: Media representations of globalwarming. Science Communication, 26(2), 129–151.Dimopoulos, K. & Koulaidis, V. (2002) The socio-epistemic constitution of science and technology in the Greekpress: an analysis of its presentation. Public Understanding of Science, 11, 225–41.Dunwoody, S. (2008). Science journalism. In M. Bucchi & B. Trench (Eds.). Handbook of Public Communicationof Science and Technology. London and New York: Routledge.Fahy, D. & Nisbet, M. (2011). The science journalist online: Shifting roles and emerging practices. Journalism12(7), 778–793Gilbert, G. N., & Mulkay, M. (1984). Opening Pandora’s Box: A Sociological Analysis of Scientists’ Discourse.Cambridge University Press.Hammer, D., & Elby, A. (2002). On the form of a personal epistemology. In B. K. Hofer & P. R. Pintrich (Eds.),Personal epistemology: The psychology of beliefs about knowledge and knowing. (pp. 169-190).Hofer, B. K., & Pintrich, P. R. (Eds.). (2002). Personal epistemology: The psychology of beliefs about knowledgeand knowing. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Kruglanski, A. W. (1989). Lay Epistemics and Human Knowledge: Cognitive and Motivational Bases. New York:Plenum.Lederman, N. G. (1992). Students’ and teachers’ conceptions of the nature of science: A review of the research.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 29(4), 331-359.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1368© ISLS