The Influence of Students’ Cognitive and MotivationalCharacteristics on Differences in Use and Learning Gain in an ELearning EnvironmentCharlotte Larmuseau, Jan Elen, Piet Desmet, Fien Depaepe;charlotte.larmuseau@kuleuven.be; jan.elen@kuleuven.be; piet.desmet@kuleuven.be;fien.depaepe@kuleuven.beKU LeuvenAbstract: Differences in use of e-learning components can be influenced by student-relatedcharacteristics. In this study, an e-learning environment was developed in line with the fourcomponent instructional design (4C/ID) model. The four components consist of authenticproblem-based tasks (i.e., learning tasks), various support (i.e., supportive and proceduralinformation) and additional drill-and practice exercises (i.e., part-task practice). This studyfirstly investigates the influence of students’ prior knowledge, task value and self-efficacy onstudents’ use of the components. Secondly, it examines the influence of students’ use of thecomponents on their learning gain, taking into account their characteristics. Results of 161students reveal a significantly negative influence of prior knowledge on students’ use oflearning tasks and part-task-practice, whereas task value has a significantly positive influenceon use of learning tasks and supportive information. Furthermore, use of learning tasks,procedural information and students’ prior knowledge significantly contribute to students’learning gain.Keywords: instructional design, e-learning, distance education, prior knowledge, motivationIntroductionAdvances in e-learning, such as virtual and asynchronous self-paced approaches, have increased learners’autonomy. Consequently, e-learners can control when, what and how to study, and accordingly students have toself-direct their learning (Joo, Lim & Kim, 2013). An instructional design model that amplifies self-directedlearning is the 4C/ID-model (van Merriënboer & Sluijsmans, 2009). A 4C/ID-based learning environmentcontains four different components: (1) concrete, authentic, problem-based, whole-task experiences (i.e., learningtasks), (2) additional drill-and-practice- exercises (i.e., part-task practice) and two categories of support such as(3) background theory (i.e., supportive information) and (4) just-in-time information (i.e., proceduralinformation). In this study, an e-learning environment was developed in line with the 4C/ID-model. The additionalexercises and various support were non-embedded. More specifically, this implies that on the learner’s initiative,additional part-task practice and/or support could be selected. Learning tasks were less optional, since studentswere strongly encouraged to consult them. Nevertheless, solving all of them or making various attempts to solvea learning task was optional. Consequently, we expected that one student would quickly proceed from learningtask to learning task, while another student would select part-task practice or consult supportive information.Accordingly, in this context, self-directed learning refers to students taking initiative in diagnosing their learningneeds by identifying appropriate resources (i.e., one of the four components), evaluating their outcomes (i.e.,scores on learning tasks) and implementing learning strategies (e.g., consulting additional exercises or support inorder to improve their results). Furthermore, prior research indicates that using different e-learning componentscan be influenced by cognitive and motivational characteristics (Greene & Azevedo, 2007; Jiang, Elen &Clarebout, 2009; Rienties, Tempelaar, Van den Bossche, Gijselaers & Segers, 2009). Therefore, the first aim ofthis study is to investigate the influence of students’ cognitive and motivational characteristics on students’ useof the four components of a 4C/ID-based e-learning environment. In accordance with prior research, students’cognitive (i.e., prior knowledge) and motivational (i.e., task value and self-efficacy) characteristics are includedin the research model. Moreover, the provision of different components that provide the opportunity to consultadditional exercises and various support can enhance students’ performance (Lust, Juarez Collazo, Elen &Clarebout, 2012). By specifically looking at the use of each of the four components, more insight can be gainedin how students’ use of a specific component contributes to students’ learning gain. Therefore, a second aim ofthis study is to measure how students’ use of the four components of the 4C/ID model, influence students’ learninggain, taking into account their cognitive (i.e., prior knowledge) and motivational (i.e., task value and self-efficacy)characteristics. Accordingly, to achieve both aims, a structural model is suggested that integrates students’ICLS 2018 Proceedings128© ISLScognitive and motivational characteristics, the four components of the 4C/ID-model and students’ learning gainin order to elucidate the relationships among these variables.Theoretical backgroundAn instructional design model that stresses integration and transfer of learning is the 4C/ID model elaborated byvan Merriënboer (1997). The 4C/ID model is acknowledged as one of the most effective models for designinglearning environments that facilitate the acquisition of integrated sets of knowledge, attitudes and skills (Merrill,2002). The basic concept of the 4C/ID model is that learning environments can be described in terms of fourinterrelated components: (1) learning tasks, (2) part-task practice, (3) supportive and (4) just-in-time information.The learning tasks are concrete, authentic, problem-based, whole-task experiences. Learning tasks are grouped intask classes and sequenced based on their degree of difficulty in order to prevent cognitive overload for thelearners, as this could hamper learning and performance (van Merriënboer & Sluijsmans, 2009). Support isprovided in two distinct manners, that is, supportive and procedural information. Supportive information isbasically, the theory and therefore supports the learning and performance of the non-recurrent, problem solvingand reasoning aspects of learning tasks. It helps learners to link the presented information to existing schemata,that is, to what they already know in order to solve the learning tasks. Procedural information is prerequisite tothe learning and performance of recurrent aspects of the learning tasks in each task class. It allows students tocomplete and learn routine aspects of learning tasks by specifying exactly how to solve the routine aspects of thetasks. It is presented just in time when learners need it. Furthermore, part-task practice supports the more complexwhole task learning by providing additional exercises for selected recurrent constituent skills (van Merriënboer,1997).A 4C/ID-based e-learning environment is claimed to stimulate self-directed learning by providingdifferent components at the student’s disposal (van Merriënboer & Sluijsmans, 2009). Moreover, by givingstudents control of the use of the different components, differences in use based on the students’ learning needscan be possible. Former research indicated that differences in use of e-learning components is influenced bylearner-related characteristics (Greene & Azevedo, 2007; Jiang et al., 2009; Rienties et al., 2009). An importantlearner characteristic that influences differences in use is students’ prior knowledge. Cognitive load theorysuggests that students with low prior knowledge cannot immediately be confronted with highly difficult learningtasks. Accordingly, students’ cognitive load can be reduced by consulting support and guidance (van Merriënboer& Sluijsmans, 2009). This implies that students who find the task difficult, benefit from various support andadditional exercises in order to improve their performance. Nevertheless, selecting various support or makingadditional exercises can be very challenging (Clarebout, Horz, Schnotz & Elen, 2010; Lust et al., 2012). Thisrequires awareness of learning gains, and therefore includes metacognitive monitoring of knowledge andcomprehension, which might be difficult to achieve when students experience high cognitive load. As a higherlevel of prior knowledge reduces cognitive load during e-learning, students with higher prior knowledge mightface lower cognitive load and accordingly, are more likely to cope with these metacognitive requirementscompared to students with lower prior knowledge. Subsequently, based on cognitive load theory, differences inuse can be influenced by the level of students’ prior knowledge (Moos & Azevedo, 2008; van Merriënboer &Sluijsmans, 2009). Despite this theoretical claim, several studies that investigated the impact of students’ priorknowledge on differences in use did not find any effect. Van Seters, Ossevoort, Tramper and Goedhaert (2011)used e-learning materials to demonstrate how 94 university students work differently based on their priorknowledge. They measured the learning paths students followed when working with adaptive e-learning material.The learning path was determined by average step size chosen, average number of tries, total number of exercisesand time needed to finish. They found that differences in students’ prior knowledge did not have an effect onstudents’ learning paths. Taub, Azevedo, Bouchet and Khosravifar (2014) studied differences in use of an elearning environment in relation to their prior knowledge. Results of 112 undergraduates revealed that all studentsvisited similar number of relevant pages regardless of their level of prior knowledge. Jiang et al. (2009) conducteda study where they measured variety in non-embedded (i.e., optional mode) tool use in an e-learning environment(e.g., checklist tool, information list, calculator etc.). Tool use was measured by frequency of tool use andproportional time spent on tools. Results of 58 bachelor students revealed that there was no influence of priorknowledge on the quantitative aspects of tool use. Aforementioned studies seem to confirm that students do notgrasp learning opportunities based on their level of prior knowledge (Lust et al., 2012).In contrast to prior knowledge, empirical evidence revealed that motivational characteristics have animportant influence on students’ learning behavior in e-learning settings (Chen & Jang, 2010; Rienties et al.,2009). According to expectancy-value theory, self-efficacy and task value are two key components forunderstanding students’ specific use and academic outcomes. Self-efficacy is defined as a learners’ ability toexecute the required behavior necessary for success (Greene & Azevedo, 2007). There is evidence that self-ICLS 2018 Proceedings129© ISLSefficacious students participate more readily, work harder and persist longer when they encounter difficulties thanthose who are uncertain about their capacities (Zimmerman, 2000). Task value essentially refers to the reason fordoing a task. More specifically, students with high task value pursue enjoyment of learning and understanding ofnew things (Joo et al., 2013). Martens, Gulikers and Bastiaens (2004) investigated the impact of task value on theuse of an e-learning environments. The participants were 33 higher education students. Results showed thatstudents with high task value did not do more, but did other things than students with low task value. Analysis oflog files showed that students with high levels of task value showed proportionally more explorative studybehavior. The explorative pages were defined as pages that students were not explicitly directed to by the externalsource. Studies also indicate relationships between self-efficacy, task value and performance. Bong (2001)conducted a path analysis to investigate the relationships between task-value, self-efficacy and enrollmentintentions i.e., use of the e-learning environment in an online learning context. Results of 168 undergraduateuniversity students showed that task value was linked to course enrollment intentions. However, no influence ofself-efficacy on course enrollment intentions was found.Furthermore, differences in use of e-learning components can also influence students’ learning gain. Lustet al. (2012) conducted a literature study which provided empirical evidence for the beneficial influence ofdifferences in tool use i.e., information, processing and scaffold tools, on students’ learning gain. In addition,former research indicated that student-related characteristics can directly influence students’ learning gain. Song,Kalett and Plass (2016) studied the direct and indirect effects of university students’ prior knowledge, task valueand self-efficacy on students’ learning gain in an e-learning environment. SEM revealed that university students’prior knowledge directly positively affected their learning gain, but no significant effects of task value and selfefficacy on students’ learning gain were found. By contrast, Joo et al. (2013) investigated 897 learners in an onlineuniversity. Using SEM they found significant positive relationships between both task value and self-efficacy onthe final grade on the course. These studies indicate, that when we measure the influence of differences in use onstudents’ learning gain, we should control for student-related characteristics. Summarized, based on theseaforementioned theoretical and empirical claims we hypothesize that (1) prior knowledge, self-efficacy and taskvalue can have an influence on students’ use of the four components and (2) that students’ use of the fourcomponents can be beneficial for students’ learning gain, taking into account student-related characteristics (i.e.,prior knowledge, self-efficacy and task value). Consequently, we formulate following research questions:•RQ1: How do students’ cognitive (i.e., prior knowledge) and motivational (i.e., self-efficacy and taskvalue) characteristics influence use of the four components of the 4C/ID-based e-learning environment?•RQ2: How does differences in use of the four components of a 4C/ID-based e-learning environmentinfluence students’ performance, controlled for students’ cognitive and motivational characteristics?MethodologyMeasurement instrumentsThe e-learning environment in the present study focuses on French as a foreign language. It contains four learningtasks and takes about 1 hour and 15 minutes to complete. The level of difficulty was aligned with the level thatstudents in the Flemish part of Belgium are expected to reach at the end of the secondary school, i.e., level B1 ofthe Common European Framework of Reference. Participants were 161 first year Psychology and EducationalScience students. The majority of the students were female (91%). The average participant was 20 years old (SD= 2.92). Participation to research is part of the students training program, but French was not a part of their trainingprogram.The administration procedure of the study consisted of two administration sessions. The firstadministration session started with a pretest, an introduction of the e-learning environment and an additionalquestionnaire on task value and self-efficacy. Task value and self-efficacy were both measured after theintroduction of the e-learning environment to make sure students had sufficient insight into the e-learning contentto form an opinion. The students were asked to use the e-learning environment at home during two weeks. As thelearning content was not a part of their educational program, they received the instructions that consulting thefour components was optional and that there was no strict trajectory to follow, but that consulting the learningtasks was strongly recommended. After the intervention of twee weeks a second administration session took placewhere students received a posttest.The learning environment is developed along the instructional design principles of the 4C/ID model. Thefirst component deals with the learning tasks in the e-learning environment. These learning tasks are based onauthentic situations for instance, ordering food in a restaurant. The learning tasks were sequenced in an easy-to-ICLS 2018 Proceedings130© ISLSdifficult order, and were clustered in a task class. At the end of the task class, students must be able to have afluent conversation at the restaurant. Students receive automatic generated feedback based on their scores. In orderto have a fluent conversation, students must master the grammar (e.g., l’article partitif), vocabulary (i.e., food),skills (i.e., listening) and attitudes (i.e., elementary courtesy in a restaurant). Accordingly, during these learningtasks students can click on links to consult one of the other three components of the 4C/ID model. Moreparticularly, students can consult additional exercises i.e., part-task practice (e.g., drill-and-practice exercises topractice food vocabulary) and support, respectively, supportive (e.g., grammar explained by theory) andprocedural information (e.g., grammar explained by using keywords). Subsequently, the supportive, proceduralinformation and part-task practice are non-embedded i.e., they are at the disposal of the students but the studentscan decide whether or not to use them. Learning tasks were partly non-embedded, since students were free tomake as many learning tasks (e.g., several attempts) as they wanted. Nevertheless, as aforementioned, they werealso partly embedded (i.e., less optional) since students were strongly advised to complete the learning tasksduring the first administration session and in addition learning tasks were clustered in a task class (i.e., predefinedorder).Measurement instrumentsTo measure the learning content a quantitative paper-and-pencil instrument on French was used as pretest (i.e.,prior knowledge) and posttest (i.e., students’ learning gain). The instrument consists of 60 items and focuses onknowledge (i.e., grammar and vocabulary) and skills (i.e., listening, writing a conversation). The level of difficultyof the test was B1 of the Common European Framework of Reference (Evens, Elen & Depaepe, 2017). Theinstruments’ reliability was explored by calculating internal consistency i.e., Cronbach’s α = .90 for the pretestand Cronbach’s α = .89 for the posttest (Cuieford, 1965).Within this study the constructs self-efficacy and task value were derived from the Motivated Strategiesfor Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ; Duncan & Mckeachie, 2005). For this study we used the constructs selfefficacy (5 items) e.g., “I expect to do well in this course”, and task value (6 items) e.g. “It is important for meto learn the course content”, of the motivation section. The questionnaire had a 7-point Likert-type responseformat with values ranging from strongly agree (7) to strongly disagree (1). The questions were translated intoDutch. Construct validity was checked by conducting a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA). The factor loadingsfrom the latent variable constructs were all significant, had standardized values ranging from .74 to .93 and anaverage variance explained (AVE) of .76 for self-efficacy and .62 for task value. This verifies that the twomeasurement models of self-efficacy and task value were each measured well in the current data (Khine, 2013).Internal consistency was investigated by measuring the Cronbach’s Alpha. The Cronbach’s Alpha for self-efficacywas α = . 94 and for task value α = .84, which indicates high reliability (Cuieford, 1965).Information of students’ use of the four components of the 4C/ID model was collected by trackingstudents’ activity, i.e., registration of views and interaction by the Moodle learning management system (LMS)during two weeks for each component. All data were collected on an aggregate module level and afterwardsmerged, based on the use of the different components. All data were anonymized through means of the use ofrandom codes to safeguard the identities of the students.ResultsStudents had an average of 50.97% (SD = 18.17) on the pretest and an average of 64.59% on the posttest (SD =15.88). The average student replied “neutral” in terms of motivation (SD = 1.13) and self-efficacy (SD = 1.10).An overview of the distribution of the use of the four components (i.e., activity tracked by Moodle LMS and theamount of students that used the different components) can be found in Figure 1. The average time spent on usingthe online learning is 66 minutes (SD = 27.34, min. = 10.44 minutes, max. = 151.43 minutes or approximately 2.5hours).ICLS 2018 Proceedings131© ISLSFigure 1. The use of the four components.Structural equation modeling (SEM; N = 161) was conducted in order to firstly, investigate the influence ofstudents’ cognitive (i.e., prior knowledge) and motivational (i.e., task value and self-efficacy) characteristics onthe use of the components. And, secondly, to investigate the influence of the use of the components on students’learning gain, controlled for student-related characteristics (i.e., prior knowledge, task value and self-efficacy).For the missing values a two-stage approach was applied. This approach obtains a saturated maximum likelihood(ML) estimate of the population covariance matrix and then uses this estimate in the complete data ML fittingfunction to obtain parameter estimates (Savelei & Bentler, 2009). Lavaan (Rosseel, 2012) converged normallyafter 59 iterations. The hypothesized model, provided an adequate fit to the given data [χ²/df = 155.56/99 = 1.4;SRMR = .05, RMSEA = .06, CFI = .96, TLI = .95]. The χ²-test indicates the difference between observed andexpected covariance matrixes and should be non-significant. However, χ²-test is highly dependent on sample sizeand therefore normed χ²-test is often considered i.e., χ²-test divided by the degrees of freedom. Values smallerthan 2.0 are considered to indicate acceptable fit (Kline, 2013). In addition to χ² statistics, the root mean squaredresidual (SRMR), the root mean squared error of approximation (RMSEA), comparative fit index (CFI) and theTucker-Lewis Index (TLI) were examined. SRMR is the difference between the observed variance and thepredicted variance. A value less than .06 is considered a good fit. RMSEA adjusts for the complexity of the modeland the size of the sample. The value for acceptance is >.05. A value of CFI and TLI between > .95 indicates goodfit. Assessing all measures and considering the above statements, the original structural model was accepted andconsidered adequate (Khine, 2013).Figure 2 gives an overview of the results of the research model. Significant influences of students’characteristics were found on the use of the components, more specifically, students’ task value influences theuse of learning tasks (β = .21, p <.05) and supportive information (β = .22, p <.05 ). No significant relationshipswere observed between students’ self-efficacy and the use of the four components of the 4C/ID-model. Asignificant negative relationship was found between prior knowledge and part-task practice (β = -.21, p <.05). Thevariance explained for the dependent variables was R2 =.07 for learning task, R2 =.03 for part-task practice, R2=.08for supportive information and R2 =.02 for procedural information. RQ2 investigated the influence of students’use of the four components of the 4C/ID model on students’ learning gain, controlled for students’ priorknowledge, task value and self-efficacy. Results reveal a significant influence of the use of components of the4C/ID-model on students’ learning gain, more specifically, the use of procedural information (β = .08, p <.05)and learning tasks (β = .12, p <.01) have a significant influence on students’ learning gain. Prior knowledge hada major influence on students’ learning gain (β = .91, p <.001). The variance explained for students’ learning gainwas R2 = .79. In conclusion, students’ differences in use of the components is influenced by students’ task valueand prior knowledge. Students’ learning gain is influenced by differences in use of learning task and proceduralinformation. Additionally, students’ learning gain is mainly influenced by students’ prior knowledge.ICLS 2018 Proceedings132© ISLSFigure 2. The research model.DiscussionThe current study strived to find evidence (RQ1) for the influence of students’ cognitive and motivationalcharacteristics on students’ use of the four components and (RQ2) for the influence of differences in use of thefour components on students’ learning gain, controlled for students’ characteristics. All variables wereincorporated in one structural research model. Our results are based on data from a pre- and posttest (i.e., priorknowledge, students’ learning gain), questionnaires (i.e., task value and self-efficacy) and platform log data from161 students. Results indicate that prior knowledge and task value induce differences in use of the components ofthe e-learning environment. More specially, prior knowledge has a significant negative influence on the use oflearning tasks (e.g., authentic problem-based exercises) and part-task practices (e.g., drill-and practice exercises).Part-task practices contain additional exercises with more recurrent content in order to prepare students to solvethe learning tasks which contain more non-routine content. Accordingly, results indicate that some students seemto be aware that they are lacking routine knowledge to solve the learning tasks. Furthermore, results indicate thatstudents attempted the learning tasks a few times in order to obtain better scores (i.e., differences in activity forthe learning tasks). These findings are in contrast to the study of Taub et al. (2014) indicating that there were nosignificant differences in students’ use of the e-learning environment (i.e., defined by the number of relevant pagesvisited) between lower and higher prior knowledge groups. Results are also different from the study of Jiang etal. (2009) which revealed no association between prior knowledge and the frequency of tool use and/orproportional time spent on tools. A possible explanation for the difference between our results and former studiesmight be that the uncontrolled setting in our study allows for more self-regulation. The study of Taub et al. (2014)and Jiang et al. (2009) were conducted in a controlled setting i.e., students worked with the e-learning environmentunder supervision. By controlling the setting students might feel the pressure to complete the tasks in a given time.As consequence students might follow a more traditional linear path. These differences in learner control can havean influence on students’ use of different tools. Additionally, results indicate that differences in use are influencedby students’ task value. Students’ task value seems to have a positive influence on the use of the learning tasks.This could imply that students put more effort in solving the learning tasks qualitatively. Students’ task value alsohas a significant influence on the use of supportive information (i.e., background information and theory in orderto understand the content of the learning tasks in its entirety). This corresponds with the study of Martens et al.(2004) who also analyzed log files and found that students with high intrinsic motivation (e.g., task value) showedmore explorative study behavior. A difference in the study of Martens et al. (2004) was that the variableexploration was calculated by dividing the number of explorative pages a student had visited by the total numberof visited pages. Finally, self-efficacy had no influence on differences in use. These findings are consistent withthe study of Bong (2002). A feature of self-efficacious students is that they work harder and persist longer whenthey encounter difficulties. As there was no influence, this could indicate that the tasks in the e-learningenvironment were not complex enough for the students to encounter difficulties (Zimmerman, 2000). Findingscould also be due to the way in which usage was measured (i.e. course activity and enrollment intentions), aspersistence is a feature that it might be possible that the spent time could give more information about thisinfluence.ICLS 2018 Proceedings133© ISLSIn this study, RQ2 investigated the influence of students’ use of the components on students’ learninggain, controlled for cognitive and motivational characteristics. Results indicate that use of the learning tasks andprocedural information significantly contributed to students’ learning gain. These results imply that the combineduse of learning tasks and procedural information influences students’ learning gain. The procedural informationin this context is just-in-time information. Therefore, consulting this particular support and guidance can preventlearners from paying attention to irrelevant task aspects and subsequently reduce cognitive load, which on its turncan improve their task performance (van Merriënboer & Sluijsmans, 2009). Regardless these results, students’prior knowledge still has a primary significant influence on students’ learning gain. This can be related to cognitiveload theory, as the online course used rich learning tasks, which are based on real-life situations, these tasks canbe highly complex. A risk of this approach is that the cognitive load imposed by the learning tasks is oftenexcessive for students with low prior knowledge and may seriously hamper learning (van Merriënboer &Sluijsmans, 2009). Furthermore, this major influence of students’ prior knowledge could also be influenced bythe study design, more specifically, the fact that a rather short intervention, spread out over two weeks, is probablynot enough to exert a major influence on students’ learning gain.Irrespective of the added value of these findings, some limitations in the current study should bementioned. Firstly, this study gives information of what is used, but little information is provided on why studentsused these specific components. For instance, combining objective information with think-aloud protocols cangive more insight in the actual cognitive processes (Winne, 2010). Secondly, by looking at the isolated use of thefour components, little is known about how the different components are used. By analyzing log-data more indetail (i.e., looking at the sequences of use of the four components), more insight could be given on effective use.A possible example of effective use would be that when a student has an insufficient score, the student decides toconsult supportive information. A third important limitation concerns the course design of the e-learningenvironment. Findings of the current study indicated that the use of learning tasks did not differ based on students’level of prior knowledge. As the learning tasks were sequenced in a simple- to -complex order, were clustered ina task class and had a predefined order, this course design probably influenced these results. It might have beenmore interesting if students had been able to select learning tasks themselves (e.g., based on their level ofdifficulty). Follow-up studies should enable students to select their future learning tasks at their option. This wouldprovide more information about the self-directed learning (i.e., evaluating their learning outcomes and selectinglearning tasks based on their performance; van Merriënboer & Sluijsmans, 2009).ConclusionThis study firstly provides more information about the influence of students’ motivational and cognitivecharacteristics on differences in use of the four components in a 4C/ID-based learning environment. Resultsindicate that students’ characteristics do influence differences in use of the four components when students receivea lot of learner control. Moreover, students seem to slightly adapt their behavior based on their specific learningneeds and interests. Accordingly, more comprehensive information (e.g., theory) might challenge more motivatedstudents. Additionally, students with lower prior knowledge seem to consult part-task practice to help them toreach a very high level of automaticity for selected recurrent aspects of real-life problem-solving tasks. As a result,findings indicate that the 4C/ID-model is an instructional design model that allows for a lot of learner control andtherefore supports self-directed learning, by providing four components containing different information (or adifferent format of information) that can be consulted freely in an non-linear trajectory. Furthermore, results revealthe importance the combined use of learning tasks and procedural information on students’ learning gain, whencontrolling for students’ characteristics. These students’ characteristics amongst which prior knowledge, seemsto have had a strong impact on learning gain. Therefore, more research should verify the impact of students’characteristics on differences in use and learning gain, using more extensive interventions. Moreover, students’cognitive load should be included to measure the impact of the complexity of the learning tasks. Overall, insightinto differences in use based on student-related characteristics is an important step from an instructional designperspective. This could provide important suggestions for intervening and adapting the online learningenvironment to students’ learner-related characteristics and associated learning behavior.ReferencesBong, M. (2001). Role of Self-Efficacy and Task-Value in Predicting College Students' Course Performance andFuture Enrollment Intentions. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 26, 553-570. doi:10.1006/ceps.2000.1048Chen. K., & Jang, S. J. (2010). Motivation in online learning: Testing a model of self-determination theory.Computer in Human Behavior, 28, 741-752. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2010.01.011ICLS 2018 Proceedings134© ISLSClarebout, G., Horz, H., Schotz, W., & Elen, J. (2010). The relation between self-regulation and the embeddingof support in learning environments. Educational Technology Research & Development, 58, 573-587.doi: 10.1007/s11423-009-9147-4Cuieford, J. P. (1965). Fundamental statistics in psychology and education (4th ed.). New York: McGraw Hill.Duncan, G. W., & McKeachie, W. J. (2010). The making of motivated strategies for learning questionnaire.Educational Psychologist, 40. 117-128. doi: 10.1207/s15326985ep4002_6Evens, M., Elen, J., & Depaepe, F. (in press). Effects of opportunities to learn in teacher education on thedevelopment of teachers’ professional knowledge of French as a foreign language. Journal of Advancesin Education Research.Greene, J. A., & Azevedo, R. (2007). A theoretical review of Winne and Hadwin’s model of self-regulatedlearning: new perspectives and direction. Review of Educational Research, 77, 334-372. doi:10.3102/003465430303953Jiang, L., Elen, J., & Clarebout, G. (2009). The relationship between learner variables, tool-usage behavior andperformance. Computers in Human Behavior, 25, 501-509. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2008.11.006Joo, Y. J., Lim, K. Y., & Kim, S. M. (2013). Locus of control, self-efficacy and task value as predictors of learningoutcome in an online university context. Computers & Education, 62, 149-158. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2012.10.027Khine, M. S. (2013). Application of Structural Equation Modeling in Educational Research and Practice.Rotterdam, NL: SensePublishersLust, G., Juarez Collazo, N., Elen, J., & Clarebout, G. (2012). Content management systems: enriched learningopportunities for all? Computers in Human Behavior, 28, 795-808. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2011.12.009Martens, R. L., Gulikers, J., & Bastiaens, T. (2004). The impact of intrinsic motivation on e-learning in authenticcomputer tasks. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 20, 368-376. doi: 10.1111/j.13652729.2004.00096.xMerrill, M. D. (2002). First principles of instruction. Educational Technology Research and Development, 50, 4359. doi: 10.1007/BF02505024Moos, D. C., & Azevedo, R. (2008). Self-regulated learning with hypermedia: the role of prior domain knowledge.Contemporary Educational Psychology, 33, 270-298. doi: 10.1016/j.cedpsych.2007.03.001Rienties, B., Tempelaar, D., Van den Bossche, P., Gijselaers, W., & Segers, M. (2009). The role of academicmotivation in computer-supported collaborative learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 25, 11951206. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2009.05.Rosseel, Y. (2012). lavaan: An R Package for Structural Equation Modeling. Journal of Statistical Software, 48,1 - 36. doi: 10.18637/jss.v048.i02Savalei, V., & Bentler, P. (2009). A two-stage approach to missing data: theory and application to auxiliaryvariables, Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 16, 477-497. doi:10.1080/10705510903008238Song, H. S., Kalett, A. L., & Plass, J. L. Interplay of prior knowledge, self-regulation and motivation in complexmultimedia learning environments. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 32, 31-50. doi:10.1111/jcal.12117Taub, M., Azevedo, R. Bouchet, F., & Khosravifar. B. (2014). Can the use of cognitive and metacognitive selfregulated learning strategies be predicted by learners’ levels of prior knowledge in hypermedia-learningenvironments? Computers in Human Behavior, 39, 356-367. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2014.07.018Van Merriënboer, J. J. G. (1997). Training complex cognitive skills: a four-component instructional design modelfor technical training. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications.Van Merriënboer, J. J. G., & Sluijsmans, M.A. (2009). Toward a synthesis of cognitive load theory. Fourcomponent instructional design and self-directed learning. Educational Psychology Review, 21, 55-66.doi: 10.1007/s10648-008-9092-5Van Seters, J. R., Ossevoort, M. A., Tramper, J., & Goedhart, M. J. (2011). The influence of student characteristicson the use of adaptive e-learning material. Computers & Education, 58, 942-952. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2011.11.002Winne, P. H. (2010). Improving measurements of self-regulated learning. Educational Psychologist, 45, 267-276.doi: 10.1080/00461520.2010.517150Zimmerman, B. J. (2000). Self-efficacy: an essential motive to learn. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25,82-91. doi: 10.1006/ceps.1999.101ICLS 2018 Proceedings135© ISLS