Emergent Leadership and Its Influence on Collaborative andIndividual ReasoningJingjing Sun, University of Montana, Jingjing.Sun@umontana.eduEmmanuella Datu, University of Montana, Emmanuella.Datu@mso.umt.eduGary Warchola, University of Montana, Gary.Warchola@mso.umt.eduRichard C. Anderson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, csrrca@illinois.eduAbstract: Collaborative discussions that feature argumentation have been shown to benefitchildren’s reasoning skills and provide an optimal environment for children to strengthen theirsocial skills including emergent leadership. As these social skills develop, it is unclear howthey impact the cognitive benefits that children yield from participating in the collaborativediscussions. This study examined the immediate and delayed impact of children’s emergentleadership on their reasoning at both the group and individual level. Results showed thatamong different leadership moves that emerged during collaborative discussions, topic controlsignificantly influences whether the discussion group and individual children consider bothsides of a controversial issue. The study implies positive influence of emergent leadership onchildren’s cognitive development during collaborative discussions.IntroductionCollaborative learning is widely recognized as an instructional format that promotes socialization and learningamong students of different levels in a variety of subjects (Mercer & Littleton, 2007). Research has shown that,when compared to direct instruction, peer-led collaborative discussions that foster argumentative dialogue canlead to children’s better comprehension of the text, development of critical and analytic thinking, and improvedargumentation skills which further transfer to their writing (Rezniskaya et al., 2009).Argumentative dialogue is a type of classroom discourse that can shape how learners reason about atopic. Based on the Vygotskian principal of internalization, argumentation has been used as a framework topromote higher-level reasoning and critical thinking skills (Andriessen, 2006). It is believed that, duringargumentative dialogue, students first learn to reason out loud with their peers and then internalize the process.When children reason together, they hear a variety of different and sometimes competing voices and opinions.In the process of internalization, children learn to consider multiple perspectives on an issue by comparing andcontrasting different, and often opposing, views that they are exposed to during the group discussion (Morris etal., in press).The social processes during collaborative discussions have been found to be an important componentfor productive collaboration in both face-to-face and online settings (Cassell, Huffaker, Tversky, & Ferriman,2006; Li et al., 2007; Sun et al, 2017b). To ensure smooth social processes within each group, children’scommunicative dynamics and effective co-regulation of learning become essential. Research has shown thatemergent leadership—a dynamic social process during which some children coordinate, enhance, or guide thebehavior of others—can help groups feel more positive towards collaboration and produce better solutions(Mercier, Higgins, & Costa, 2014; Miller et al., 2013; Sun et al., 2017a; Yamaguchi & Maehr, 2004). Sun andcolleagues (2017a) found that after experiencing a series of collaborative discussions, children developedgeneralizable social skills in leadership, and effectively applied them in cooperative problem-solving activitiesthat helped produce better problem solutions. Similarly, Ma et al. (2016) examined rotating leadership amongstudents in an online forum and found that more than half of the participant students emerged as leaders, anddeepened groups’ understanding of the scientific topics.While there is ample qualitative and experimental evidence to suggest that peer-led collaborativediscussions that feature dialogic argumentation can lead to gains in reasoning (Asterhan & Schwarz, 2017), lessis known about whether the emergence of leadership can directly impact the uptake of ideas and presenting ofdiverse perspectives in collaborative dialogue. Little do we know about whether these social processes havedownstream effects on how participants reason about a topic post-discussion.The study therefore aims to disentangle such complicated processes and advance knowledge about howthe emergence of leadership during collaborative discussions influence children’s dialogic and writtenargumentation about a complex policy issue. Specifically, we ask two research questions: 1) Does emergentleadership influence the quality of dialogic argumentation at the group level? 2) Does emergent leadershipimpact individual child’s written argumentation after the collaborative discussion?ICLS 2018 Proceedings977© ISLSMethodParticipants255 fifth graders from 12 fifth-grade classrooms from the Midwestern US of mainly African American (41.5%)and Latino (45.7%) children took part in this study. Depending on the school, between 79% and 99% of theparticipating students were registered for free or reduced-price lunch.Research designDuring the intervention, the participant classrooms studied a six-week curriculum about Wolf Reintroductionand Management in collaborative group work. The curriculum included three packets: (1) the wolves’ potentialimpact on the town’s surrounding ecosystem and (2) the town’s economy, and (3) basic concepts in relation tohow a public policy is enacted. Each packet was comprised of readings specific to the topic, and an activitybooklet that contained various activities and problems that reinforced and expanded the concepts presented inthe readings. Students role played as officials in the Wolf Management Agency while learning the curriculum,and had to make an informed decision on a Big Question about whether they should give permission to hireprofessional hunters to kill a pack of wolves that posed a threat to a fictional town.The study employed a jigsaw design. Teachers helped split their classes into three or fourheterogeneous groups, where each group was assigned to become experts on one of the three topics (ecosystem,economy, or public policy) by learning from an information booklet and completing the activities together.After finishing their expert topic, they prepared a poster and presented the core concepts to the other groups.Children were then shuffled into new groups of experts from all three topics to hold a final collaborativediscussion about the Big Question with their informed perspectives. Each student was asked to write a letterexplaining the decision after the discussion.Data sources and analysesThe data corpus includes full transcripts of 12 groups’ final collaborative discussions, one randomly-selectedgroup from each participant class, and 75 letters written by students from these 12 groups after the discussion.Coding for children’s leadershipUsing the coding scheme created by Li and colleagues (2007), we identified four major categories of emergentleadership moves by examining speaking turn by turn throughout the transcripts: turn management, argumentdevelopment, planning and organizing, and topic control. The detailed coding scheme and examples can befound in Table 1. About 20% of the leadership coding was checked separately, and the inter-rater agreementpercentage was 90% (Cohen’s Kappa = .79).Table 1: Leadership Coding Scheme Adapted from Li et al., 2017.CategoryTurn ManagementArgumentDevelopmentPlanning &OrganizingTopic ControlDefinitionDirect turns, solicit ideas, ask those who interrupt to letsomeone else talk, yield a turn to someone who wasunable to gain the floor.Prompt for reasons, evidence, and clarification fromothers, or ratifying other's arguments by restating them ormaking comments.Provide structure and monitor the group’s processes.ExampleWhat do you think?Did you want to say anything?Encourage peers to look at another side of a topic, or goback to the original topic.I think we are off topic.Should we think about the no side?Why?Where did you find that evidence?Let’s take a vote!Coding for structure of group-level reasoningTo decompose the structures of students’ reasoning during the collaborative discussions, each speaking turn wascoded for elements of argumentation, based on the coding scheme created by Anderson and colleagues (2011).We identified statements of position, reasons in support of a position, considerations of counterarguments, andrebuttals. The inter-rater reliability was 94% (Cohen’s κ = .89).Coding for structure of individual-level reasoningICLS 2018 Proceedings978© ISLSTo examine the structure of individual-level reasoning in the wolf decision letters, each letter was segmentedinto communication units (Crooks, 1990), and then coded for statements with positions, counterarguments, andrebuttals (Reznitskaya et al., 2009). The inter-rater reliability was 98% (Cohen’s κ = .92).FindingsOverall, there were 2,789 speaking turns from the 12 transcripts, of which 221 turns contained at least one typeof leadership move. A substantial number (72%) of the leadership moves were “argument development” wherestudents solicited reasons from peers, prompted for clarifications/evidence, challenged with refutation orcounterargument, or supported with ratification. Though the distribution of leadership varied across groups,three out of the four leadership moves occurred in every discussion. The fourth one, “topic control,” onlyappeared in four discussion groups. Though appearing less frequently, the topic control moves exerted asignificantly positive impact on the comprehensiveness of collaborative and individual reasoning.Immediate impact of leadership on collaborative reasoningThe immediate impact of emergent leadership on group-level reasoning was examined by coding the group’sresponses to the attempted leading moves. For example, if a child challenged his or her peer with adisagreement, did the peer respond with a counterargument?Children often used the topic control leadership move to call the group’s attention to look at the otherside of the issue. For example, in one discussion group where students expressed opposite positions at thebeginning of their discussions, a student named Shawn used this strategy to prompt the group to considerreasons for “should.” Later, after the group shared sufficient reasons about the “should” side, Shawn called thegroup’s attention again to consider reasons why they should not hire hunters to kill the wolves. His leadershipevidently facilitated the group to consider reasons on both sides.ShawnLet's go to reason why they sho-should allow [1] right now. [1]Alice[1] Yea, we should start with why they should allow.ShawnOk. Maybe they should because just like a possibility of the wolves,like, getting into Winona and umm getting into their cities, maybeattacking people.Not every group used the topic control moves in the same manner. In another group where all childrenheld the same position from the beginning, one student decided to ask the group to consider the opposite sideafter they spent a significant amount of time looking for reasons to validate their opinions on the one side.Without Karen’s leadership move, the group may reach a biased conclusion without examining the negativeimpact of wolves on the town’s economy.KarenOk. Look we already know that we want the wolves to stay, butnow we gotta think about the things that the wolves actually hurt.JayMoney.KarenHow do they hurt money?Delayed impact of leadership on individual reasoningUsing counterargument and rebuttalThere was also a notable impact of the topic control leadership move on the argument structures of children’sindividual essays. An average of 70% of children considered the yes and no sides of the issue if their discussiongroups had used the topic control leadership moves. However, for groups that contained no topic control or veryfew argument development leadership moves, an average of 30% of children wrote an essay that addressed bothsides. Below is an excerpt from one essay written by a student whose group discussion contained topic controlleadership moves. In the essay, she addressed the town people’s fear of wolves by not only showing evidencefrom the Wolf Unit text, but also providing a plausible counterargument that followed by a rebuttal.I think we should not kill the wolves. / One of the main reasons is because wolves or a healthy wolf hasno record of hurting or killing a human. / I understand you are scared that a wolf might hurt yourchild. / But you haven't seen a wolf in the town. / All of those attacks could have been wild dogs. /DiscussionEarly results from the present study suggest the positive impact of emergent leadership on children’scollaborative and individual reasoning. It is intriguing that the topic control moves during discussions are soICLS 2018 Proceedings979© ISLShighly influential on children’s reasoning, at both the group- and individual-level. Consistent with findings fromLi et al. (2007), it appears that the emergent leadership during collaborative discussions encouraged much morestudent talk and this talk was, on average, of a high quality with students making efforts to explain themselvesas well as providing challenges to one another.Results from this current study echoes Kolikant and Pollack (2015) study which found that whenadolescents held opposing views, the discussion was more energized and enriched. Similarly, Hemberger et al.(2017) argued that it was through the continuing experience of arguing with peers who held contrastingpositions that the structure of a good argument becomes crystalized. Our study adds to the literature by showingthat even when students initially had unanimous ideas, if someone in the group employed the leadership movesto draw attention to the opposing views, they would be much more likely to produce more comprehensivereasoning and internalize the structure of a good argument.As a whole, this study contributes to the field by examining the interplay between children’s social andcognitive development. It advances the understanding on the social interactions that contribute to productivecollaborate discussions and better reasoning about complex policy issues.ReferencesAndriessen, J. (2006). Arguing to learn. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learningsciences (pp. 443-459). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.Asterhan, C. S. C., & Schwarz, B. B. (2017). Argumentation for learning: Well-trodden paths and unexploredterritories. Educational Psychologist, 51(2), 164-187. doi: 10.1080/00461520.2016.1155458Cassell, J., Huffaker, D., Tversky, D., & Ferriman, K. (2006). The language of online leadership: gender andyouth engagement on the internet. Developmental Psychology, 42(3), 436–449. doi:10.1037/00121649.42.3.436Hemberger, L., Kuhn, D., Matos, F., & Shi, C. (2017). A dialogic path to evidence based argumentative writing.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 26(4), 575-607. doi: 10.1080/10508406.2017.1336714Kolikant, Y., & Pollack, S. (2015). The dynamics of non-convergent learning with a conflicting other: Internallypersuasive discourse as a framework for articulating successful collaborative learning. Cognition &Instruction, 33, 322–356. doi:10.1080/07370008.2015.1092972Ma, L., Matsuzawa, Y., & Scardamalia, M. (2016). Rotating leadership and collective responsibility in a grade 4knowledge building classroom. International Journal of Organizational Design and Engineering,4(1/2), pp. 54-84.Mercer, N., & Littleton, K. (2007). Dialogue and the Development of Children's Thinking: A SocioculturalApproach. Routledge, UK.Miller, B., Sun, J., Wu, X. & Anderson, R. C. (2013). Child leaders in collaborative groups. In C. E. HmeloSilver, C. A. Chinn, C. K. K. Chan, & A. O'Donnell (Eds.), The international handbook ofcollaborative learning. London, UK: Taylor & Francis.Morris, J. A., Miller, B., Anderson, R. C., Nguyen-Jahiel, K., Lin, T.-J., Scott, T., Zhang, J., Sun, J., & Ma, S.(in press). Instructional discourse and argumentative writing. International Journal of EducationalResearch.Li, Y., Anderson, R. C., Nguyen-Jahiel, K., Dong, T., Archodidou, A., Kim, I.-H., … Miller, B. (2007).Emergent Leadership in Children’s Discussion Groups. Cognition and Instruction, 25(1), 75–111.doi:10.1080/07370000709336703Mercier, E. M., Higgins, S. E., & Costa, L. (2014). Different leaders: Emergent organizational and intellectualleadership in children’s collaborative learning groups. International Journal of Computer SupportedCollaborative Learning, 397–432. doi:10.1007/s11412-014-9201-zReznitskaya, A., Kuo, L., Clark, A., Miller, B., Jadallah, M., Anderson, R. C., & Nguyen‐Jahiel, K. (2009).Collaborative reasoning: a dialogic approach to group discussions. Cambridge Journal of Education,39(1), 29–48. doi:10.1080/03057640802701952Sun, J., Anderson, R. C., Perry, M., & Lin, T.-J. (2017a). Emergent leadership in children’s cooperativeproblem solving groups. Cognition and Instruction, 35(3), 212-235.Sun, J., Jackson, J., Burns, M., & Anderson, R. C. (2017b). Emergent leadership and relational thinking inCollaborative Reasoning discussions. In B. K. Smith, M. Borge, E. Mercier, & K.Y. Lim (Eds.),Making a Difference—Prioritizing Equity and Access in CSCL: The 12th International Conference onComputer Supported Collaborative Learning.Yamaguchi, R., & Maehr, M. L. (2004). Children’s emergent leadership: the relationships with groupcharacteristics and outcomes. Small Group Research, 35(4), 388–406.ICLS 2018 Proceedings980© ISLS