“My Favorite Part Is When We Tell the Truth”: Identity and Agencyin Middle School Youth’s Climate Science Digital StorytellingElizabeth M. Walsh, Elizabeth Smullen, and Eugene Corderoelizabeth.walsh@sjsu.edu, elizabeth.smullen@sjsu.edu, eugene.cordero@sjsu.eduSan José State UniversityAbstract: The Green Ninja Film Academy middle school curriculum combines climatescience, art and English Language Arts to promote youth voice through youth-created filmsthat situate learners and communities in the social, cultural and environmental impacts ofclimate change. In this iterative design-based research study, data sources include surveys ofclimate science proficiency and identity and agency with respect to climate science (N=316),as well as case studies from classroom observations, interviews and curricular artifacts of onefocal sixth grade classroom. Analyses suggest youth used filmmaking as a tool of identitynegotiation and performance as they played with possible science and social trajectories.IntroductionPreparing youth and communities to equitably address the impacts of a changing climate is perhaps the mostpressing educational challenge of the current century. However, the perspectives, experiences, resources andneeds of non-dominant communities are underrepresented in climate science and climate decisions, makingforegrounding voices from these communities a priority for equitable climate action (Cook, 2015). In this work,we explore the efficacy of a middle school curriculum, the Green Ninja Film Academy (GENIE), to supportyouth voice on climate science issues. The GENIE curriculum combines the traditional processes of storytelling(selecting and researching a topic, writing a script and developing an interesting story) with a technology-richexperience. This study addresses the following research question: To what degree does participation in theGENIE unit, including creating and sharing Green Ninja films, inform students’ perceptions of andidentification with climate science, as well as personal and collective action to mitigate climate change impacts?Theoretical framingWe conceptualize and position youth as change agents and cultural historical actors in their community (e.g.,Gutiérrez 2008). We take a sociocultural perspective to examine youth science identity construction and agencywith respect to climate action and participation in social and scientific communities. We consider filmmaking asa mediator of identity construction, and explore youth-constructed “horizons of choice” - a picture of theirpossible futures - within the confines of the structures in place, such as gender, ethnicity, and social class(DeWitt & Archer, 2015, p. 2174). Here, we examine how film creation was used as a tool of identityconstruction and consider how learners position themselves as historical actors and/or change agents, and playedwith imagined futures, characters and selves in films.MethodologyGENIE is a six-week middle school unit which includes lessons in climate science, storytelling and filmmaking.The second pilot of GENIE took place in four schools in the Western and Midwestern United States inFebruary-May 2017 (N=316). Data sources include survey assessments of science, identity and agency, filmsand culminating science portfolios for all students, and video recorded observations of class meetings (~35hours), interviews, and qualitative field notes for one focal sixth grade classroom. Survey responses wereanalyzed for changes between pre and post for all students who completed both assessments (N=296).Qualitative case studies were prepared for students at Manzanita School, a K-8 inclusive school with apredominately Hispanic, low-income student population. Interview and classroom observations were transcribedand coded using a grounded theory methodology (Lofland & Lofland, 1995) to identify processes the mediatedyouth identity work, and instances in which youth navigated identity, agency or scientific content and practice.Major findingsPre- and post-assessmentsAnalysis of the science assessment for the full student population (N= 296) show gains in several areas,including identifying correct characteristics of greenhouse gases, distinguishing between climate and weather,identifying characteristics of the carbon cycle, identifying actions to reduce carbon footprint, defining theICLS 2018 Proceedings1493© ISLSgreenhouse effect, and selecting characteristics of cradle-to-cradle design. No significant changes were seenpre/post in the identity/agency instrument for the full student population, a result attributable in part to largestudent variance. However, segmenting students according to their initial interest in and identification with theenvironment as measured by Environmental Index (EI), a subset of the survey questions, revealed a negativecorrelation (R2=0.31) between EI and change in EI over time (i.e. students with low initial environmentalinterest increased EI while those with high interest decreased). Students with low initial EI reported higherlevels of recognition by peers for their scientific accomplishments in the post assessment (p<0.05).Case study: The Sapphire TableThe Sapphire Table encompassed five students: Lena, Natasha, Jacklyn, Alexis and Eva. The group’sfilmmaking process was characterized by tension over leadership of the group, authorship of the story, as wellas significant humor and engagement in the theatricality of the filmmaking process. The narrative of the filmwas based mainly on stories by Lena and Natasha, and these stories related to their own identity work and ideasof climate agency. Lena was a trilingual aspiring mechanical engineer whose story delved into reciprocalrelationships between good/bad and environment/technology. Her climate story centered on “good” and “bad”twins, and focused on dichotomous tensions that resonated with her ongoing negotiation between being good atschool and engineering and valuing this academic success, and disengaging during episodes of frustration andanger. In her survey and interview, Lena used characters from her story to express her own personalcharacteristics and relationship with the environment, suggesting that the filmmaking space was an opportunityfor her to play with possible selves or variations of self in her science identity work.Natasha drew on her aunt’s experience with cancer in her story, a narrative of how a woman becamemore environmentally friendly during recovery from an illness and was able to travel to the past. Natasha toldus that after her cancer diagnosis, her aunt “turned her life around …one of the things that she did, she helpedthe environment at the same time.” Natasha reframed this personal story as one of agency over climatesolutions, connecting a meaningful family experience and the science content. Natasha and Jacklyn agreed thattheir favorite part of making their film was having the opportunity to “tell the truth” about climate change.Jacklyn stated, “My favorite part is when we tell the truth and … make the environment healthy again,” andNatasha agreed: “Telling the truth about the environment.” Natasha constructed a personally consequentialanalogy to her life through her film that empowered her to speak “the truth” about climate impacts.Discussion and significanceAnalysis to date suggests that students on average demonstrated gains in scientific content related to climatescinece and data analysis, as measured in the science assessment through the GENIE unit. In addition, theidentity and agency survey suggests that there varied experience for youth with an initially high versus lowinterest and affiliation with science and the environment. Preliminary analyses demonstrate that case studystudents drew on ideas and values that were of personal, family and community consequence to construct theirnarratives, and that social dynamics within the group shaped the resulting film and story, as students negotiatedfor positions of authoring and power within film construction. This supports an initial assertion that the holistic,multidisciplinary GENIE filmmaking experiences allowed learners to actively situate themselves in roles andpathways as they authored identities in relation to personal and societal changes across time and space in waysthat supported hope, agency and engagement. Further the suite of possible pathways and roles was at timesshaped, constrained or afforded through negotiation with peers and instructors.ReferencesCook, K. (2015) Grappling with wicked problems: exploring photovoice as a decolonizing methodology inscience education. Cult Stud of Sci Educ, 10, 581-592.DeWitt, J., & Archer, L. (2015). Who aspires to a science career? A comparison of survey responses fromprimary and secondary school students. International Journal of Science Education, 37(13), 2170-2192.Gutiérrez, K. D. (2008). Developing a sociocritical literacy in the third space. Reading Research Quarterly.43(2). 148-164Lofland, J., & Lofland, L. H. (1995). Developing Analysis. Analyzing Social Settings: A Guide to QualitativeObservation and Analysis (pp. 181-203). New York: Wadsworth.AcknowledgmentsThis work was funded through a grant from the National Science Foundation. We would like to acknowledgeour gratitude to Ms. C, and all teacher and student participants for their generosity and time.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1494© ISLS