Designing Science Curriculum for Implementation at Scale:Considerations for Diverse and Resource-Limited SettingsDebra Bernstein, TERC, debra_bernstein@terc.eduBrian Drayton, TERC, brian_drayton@terc.eduSusan McKenney, University of Twente, susan.mckenney@utwente.nlChristian Schunn, University of Pittsburgh, schunn@pitt.eduAbstract: Designers of science curricula intended for broad use must take into considerationthe diversity of students, teachers, and material resources available across various settings.While curriculum design literature gives some guidance for designers, most work in this areafocuses on design by small design teams working on materials for relatively narrow contexts.To further inform the work of science curriculum designers, we conducted two retrospectivecase studies of curricula designed for large-scale use. Qualitative data were collected throughdocument analysis and interviews with key design team members. Data were analyzeddeductively and inductively. Here we focus on findings about the influence of policy andcultural context, and the ways in which the needs of target student and teacher populations areconsidered during curriculum development. The findings are useful to other designersconcerned with bringing science content and practices to broad audiences of diverse learners.Keywords: science, curriculum, scale, designIntroductionFew studies have explored processes of design and development of science curriculum materials which yield deepunderstanding and rich learning performance at scale. Such curricula must reflect careful attention to the widerange of human and material resources likely to be available across diverse educational settings. A wealth ofliterature exists that describes high-quality outputs of educational design, providing both theoretical and practicalguidelines in the form of models, heuristics and principles (e.g. Atkinson, Derry, Renkl, & Wortham, 2000; Davis& Krajcik, 2005; Gagne, Wager, Golas, & Keller, 2004; Van Merrienboer & Kirschner, 2007). These describeabstract features of effective final teaching and learning materials. Much has also been written about the processof designing instruction (e.g. Kemp, Morrison, & Ross, 1994), courses (e.g. Piskurich, 2006; Posner & Rudnitsky,2005; Smith & Ragan, 2004), and programs (e.g., Loucks-Horsley, Hewson, Love, & Stiles, 1998; Wiggins &McTighe, 2005). With the notable exception of Walker’s deliberative approach to curriculum development(Walker, 1990), however, there is a limited empirical basis for the literature on curriculum design processes.Moreover, available literature guiding educational design processes is insufficiently fine-grained forconcerns of scale, which involves more than reaching many users or regions (cf. Dede, 2006). We must alsoexamine characteristics contributing to scalability along salient dimensions. Our view of these aligns well withthose of Coburn (2003), who distinguishes the following dimensions: Depth: goes beyond surface structures orprocedures to alter teachers’ beliefs, norms of social interaction, and pedagogy; Sustainability: the curriculum'suse can be sustained in adopting schools; Spread: it can expand to more schools and classrooms, also spreadingreform-related norms and pedagogical principles; and Shift in ownership: the reform becomes self-generative,under authority held by districts, schools, and teachers to sustain, spread, and deepen reform principlesthemselves. To achieve success on these dimensions with continued positive impacts on learners is no simpletask. It requires addressing key tensions influencing the practicality and effectiveness of materials across contexts.In this study, we examine strategies and processes used by successful designers to render designs implementableacross the range of real-world settings common to educational practice.Theoretical underpinningsThe analysis presented in this paper focuses on how design teams create supports for curriculum enactment thatalign with their understanding of the settings, resources, and constraints likely to be present duringimplementation. In this study, implementation is defined as “the process of putting into practice an idea, program,or set of activities and structures new to the people attempting or expected to change” (Fullan, 2007, p. 84). It canbe described as consisting of three stages (Fullan, 2007; McKenney & Reeves, 2012): Adoption concerns theprocess through which a decision is reached to move forward with a particular innovation. Enactment pertains toICLS 2016 Proceedings886© ISLSputting the innovation into practice. Sustained maintenance refers to actions taken to sustain the innovation underrepresentative conditions.Environments vary in their capacity to support the implementation of new curricula. The literaturesuggests a number of factors that impact capacity for implementation, including at the teacher, school, andenvironmental/cultural levels (Rogan & Aldous, 2005; Tao, Oliver, & Venville, 2013). Material resources includethe physical condition of school facilities, library/laboratory/training facilities, consumable materials, textbooksand technological infrastructure, and exert profound influence on implementation. Similarly, the extent of humanresources such as teacher capacity and administrative support, and access to networks and communities, oftendetermine the sustained success of adoption or enactment of new approaches.Additionally, educational settings differ along many dimensions (e.g., urban/rural/suburban, studentsocio-economic status (SES)), each of which has implications for curriculum implementation. For example,Fishman et al. (2011) found that the sustained use of a technology-heavy math curriculum was positivelycorrelated with students’ SES. A thorough understanding of the setting (and of the resources and constraintsavailable) can be critical to the success of an instructional innovation.Our work examines the design of K-12 science curricula intended for large-scale use. In this paper, wefocus on the ways in which designers: (1) define the settings, resources, and constraints that will impactimplementation, (2) attend to those when envisioning enactment, and (3) manifest their ideas about settings,resources, and constraints in the curriculum materials.MethodsThis study investigated the design practices that led to curricula with demonstrated evidence of success in (someof) the aforementioned scale dimensions. We asked: (1) How did these designers define, and accommodate thesettings and resources of the target users? (2) How did designers envision enactment and accordingly designsupports, given their curricular goals and intended audiences?This data set includes projects completed at two US institutions with strong track records in curriculumdesign. The two cases analyzed in the current paper were: (1) a high school physics curriculum designed tohighlight connections between the classroom and the workplace [pseudonym Working Science] and (2) anintegrated science and literacy curriculum designed for grades 2-5 [pseudonym Literary Science]. Figure 1provides an overview of the case selection criteria, data collection, and analysis methods.Figure 1. Methods overview.The cases selected were each successful on two or more of these dimensions of scale: learnerperformance, depth of change, sustainability, spread of materials and underlying principles, or shift toward localownership. The data set included project documentation and interviews. A wide range of document types wereobtained, including grant proposals, annual and final reports to funders, evaluation reports, research reports andpublications, curriculum materials (e.g., student and teacher books/guides), conference presentations, projectmemos, and project websites. Documents were used to develop a project profile including information aboutstructural characteristics of the curriculum, a chronology of the design process, and the extent to which the projecthad achieved scale. Two rounds of structured interviews were conducted. First, an initial interview with the projectPI and senior staff was held to confirm the results of document analysis. Following this, a second round ofindividual interviews was conducted with project designers, researchers/evaluators, and project leaders. Theseinterviews investigated how designers considered their core intentions given various settings, resources, andconstraints; how designers attend to those considerations when envisioning enactment of the curriculum; and howICLS 2016 Proceedings887© ISLSattention to those considerations are actually manifested in the curriculum. Data were coded deductively intoproject-related themes and curriculum representations. Inductive coding then looked for emergent themes indesigners’ responses to implementation settings and resources. After the interviews, a second round of documentanalysis was undertaken for the purpose of triangulating findings from participant interviews and providingadditional details about events, processes, or materials described during interviews.FindingsSettings and resourcesTable 1 describes the design teams’ ideas about settings and resource considerations related to implementation,and intentions for addressing these considerations. In the section that follows, we describe how those intentionswere translated into enactment supports for teachers and students.Table 1: Designers’ intentions related to settings and available resources for each case.CurriculumLiterary Science(published 20062011)Working Science(published 2006)Settings• Students: Designed for all students, with a focus onmaking materials accessible for a diverse range ofstudents including English Language Learners.• Teachers: Designed for diverse teachers, includingnew teachers and those without a strong sciencebackground. Designed to be taught “out of the box”(without professional development).• Students: Designed for students without a strongscience/math background, not interested intraditional physics courses, and likely in vocationalprograms.• Teachers: Designed for teachers with a sciencebackground but likely unfamiliar with an inquiryapproach.Resources• Designed to provide studentswith access to potentiallyunfamiliar environments/ecosystems (e.g., “Can webring the forest into theclassroom?”).• Designed to work inclassroom with limitedfinancial resources.• Important to provide accessto community resources (i.e.,workplace connections).Enactment supportsTwo themes, emerging from inductive analysis, characterized each project’s approach to the development ofenactment supports (see Table 2). First, curriculum development work proceeds within the larger context ofeducation culture and policy. These two projects were responsive to the cultural pressures in place at the time oftheir development. Second, each project was responsive to the needs of the students in the target population.Table 2: Themes characterizing the development of curriculum enactment supports.ComparisonThemeLiteraryScienceWorkingScienceRelationship to larger movements and shiftsin education/policyDesigned to accommodate increased pressure forliteracy instruction in elementary school.• Integrated literacy-science curricula can beimplemented during literacy blocks.• Teacher support materials: (1) clearly define howmuch time is devoted to each discipline; (2) provideeducative supports for elementary teachers moreaccustomed to teaching literacy than science.Responsive to the ‘school-to-work’ movement, sciencestandards, and to increased interest in inquiryoriented science.• Educative materials support teachers in guidinginquiry.• Developers questioned their ability to change teacherpractice. Quotes about ‘getting teachers on our side’and ‘may not be possible in the scope of our work’.• Teacher materials provide explicit directions forimplementation.ICLS 2016 Proceedings888Accommodate needs of nontypical science students• Materials address the needs ofEnglish Language Learners (e.g.,limiting and focusing theintroduction of new sciencevocabulary words).• Provides teacher supports forworking with English LanguageLearners.Students not on the “academictrack”• Embodiment of unorthodoxmaterials (“job sheets”); studentresource guide instead of text.• Focus on developing sharedexperiences (e.g., workplacevisits) for under-resourcedstudents.© ISLSConclusions and implicationsOur analysis highlights the influence of policy and cultural context, and the ways in which the needs of targetstudent and teacher populations are considered during the development of curriculum intended for large-scale use.The study makes several contributions to the existing literature. First, our work contributes to educational policyscholarship by exploring how two groups of curriculum designers interpreted and responded to movements andtrends in education, and highlights how designers can leverage policy shifts in ways that support (rather than placedemands upon) educators. Second, our analysis explores design tensions and solutions related to the creation ofenactment supports for diverse learners. Future work will examine additional design projects and the specificanalysis, development, and evaluation processes behind the creation of enactment supports for diverse educationalcontexts.ReferencesAtkinson, R. K., Derry, S. J., Renkl, A., & Wortham, D. W. (2000). Learning from examples: Instructionalprinciples from the worked examples research. Review of Educational Research, 70, 181–214.Coburn, C. (2003). Rethinking scale: Moving beyond numbers to deep and lasting change. EducationalResearcher, 32(6), 3-12.Davis, E., & Krajcik, J. (2005). Designing educative curriculum materials to promote teacherlearning.Educational Researcher, 34(3), 3-14.Dede, C. (2006). Scaling Up: Evolving Innovations beyond Ideal Settings to Challenging Contexts of Practice. InR. K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences. (pp. 551-566). Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.Fishman, B., Penuel, W. R., Hegedus, S., & Roschelle, J. (2011). What happens when the research ends? Factorsrelated to the sustainability of a technology-infused mathematics curriculum. Journal of Computers inMathematics and Science Teaching, 30(4), 329-353.Fullan, M. (2007). The new meaning of educational change (4 ed.). New York: Teachers College Press.Gagne, R., Wager, W., Golas, K., & Keller, M. (2004). Principles of instructional design (5th ed.). Belmont,California: Wadsworth Publishing.Kemp, J., Morrison, G., & Ross, S. (1994). Designing effective instruction. New York: Merrill.Loucks-Horsley, S., Hewson, P. W., Love, N., & Stiles, K. E. (1998). Designing Professional Development forTeachers of Science and Mathematics. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.McKenney, S., & Reeves, T. C. (2012). Conducting educational design research. London: Routledge.Piskurich, G. M. (2006). Rapid instructional design: Learning ID fast and right. San Francisco, CA: John Wiley& Sons.Posner, G., & Rudnitsky, A. (2005). Course design: A guide to curriculum development for teachers (7th ed.):Allyn & Bacon.Rogan, J., & Aldous, C. (2005). Relationships between the constructs of a theory of curriculum implementation.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42(3), 313-336.Smith, P. L., & Ragan, T. J. (2004). Instructional Design (3rd ed.): Wiley/Jossey-Bass.Tao, Y., Oliver, M., & Venville, G. (2013). A comparison of approaches to the teaching and learning of sciencein Chinese and Australian elementary classrooms: Cultural and socioeconomic complexities. Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching, 50(1), 33-61.Van Merrienboer, J., & Kirschner, P. (2007). Ten steps to complex learning: A systematic approach to fourcomponent instructional design. London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Walker, D. (1990). Fundamentals of curriculum. San Diego: Harcourt, Brace Jovanovich.Wiggins, G. P., & McTighe, J. (2005). Understanding by Design (2nd ed.): Association for Supervision &Curriculum Development.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the curriculum designers for participating in this study. We also thank our project colleagues JacquelineBarber, Anushree Bopardikar, Natalie Pareja-Roblin, and Sara Walkup. This work was funded by NSF GrantsDRL-1251562, 1252416, 1252373.ICLS 2016 Proceedings889© ISLS