Identifying Reflective and Non-Reflective Group ConsensusStrategies for Evidence-Based Scientific ArgumentationSusan A. Yoon, University of Pennsylvania, yoonsa@upenn.eduMiyoung Park, University of Pennsylvania, parkmi@gse.upenn.eduEmma Anderson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, eanderso@mit.eduAbstract: This study examines how students come to agreement on evidentiary data theycollectively use to support scientific claims or explanations. Student groups were videotapedparticipating in high school biology units that were scaffolded in inquiry-based experimentationand argumentation with complex systems computer simulations. Interactions around theargumentation prompts revealed extraneous/non-reflective and generative/reflective strategiesfor collective evidence use. We hypothesize that access to recorded archived data along withaccess to dynamic just-in-time simulations promoted more generative/reflective strategies.Preliminary data on students’ written responses reveal stronger written argumentation responseswhen students engaged in generative/reflective strategies compared to when students usedextraneous/non-reflective strategies. Where extraneous/non-reflective strategies occur, wesuggest that teachers be made aware of the tendency toward this kind of group decision makingand that greater emphasis be placed on optimal evidence use through active modeling.IntroductionA central scientific practice that has shown great promise and great challenge in supporting student learning isscientific argumentation. Argumentation enhances students’ conceptual understanding of scientific phenomena,while also strengthening skills in scientific reasoning (Osborne, 2010). However, researchers have found thatbuilding argumentation skills and explanations based on evidence is not easily learned (Kuhn, 2010). Someresearch has shown that an emphasis on constructing explanations can prevent students from connecting evidenceto claims (Kuhn et al., 2013; Kuhn & Katz, 2009). Due to a social aspect that can influence the argumentationprocess while defending claims, students may use persuasive discourse rather than objective appeals to evidence(Berland & Reiser, 2009; 2011). Similar non-content goals, such as task completion, have been shown to inhibitstudents’ attention to meaningful data interpretation (Ryu & Sandoval, 2015). But considering the importanceplaced on group collaborative argumentation, surprisingly few studies have focused on understanding themechanisms in evidence use. Examining how students come to agreement on evidentiary data can provide insightinto developing instructional supports that can overcome the tendency toward persuasion. The research questionsunderpinning our investigation are: (1) What strategies do students working in groups use to come to agreementon the evidence they use to support claims? (2) What is the predominant strategy used? (3) How can morereflective and evidence-based strategies be supported? (4) What do students’ written argumentation responses tellus about the use of reflective and evidence-based group consensus strategies?BackgroundManz (2016) summarizes the literature illustrating the struggle that K12 students have in constructing and usingevidence, which includes not attending to relevant data, ignoring data that are inconsistent with theirunderstanding, and failing to consider sources of uncertainty and error. However, as she points out, scientificknowledge is socially constructed, which underpins the central concern about the lack of accurate use of evidencein argument through persuasion that Kuhn et al. (2013) and others have raised. Thus, it is important to examinehow groups come to consensus on their claims or explanations and how evidence is used in the process. Here wepoint to previous work that we have done on non-reflective and reflective decision-making strategies that can beuseful in framing our understanding. Yoon (2011) suggests that non-reflective strategies promote extraneousprocessing (Stull & Mayer, 2007), in which learners make decisions in ways that are unrelated to the instructionalgoal. Reflective strategies promote generative processing, in which learners engage in deeper cognitive work andattend to relevant information. We anchor our analyses in this framing to better understand the consensualprocesses students use in performing argumentation tasks while using simulations of complex scientificphenomena.MethodsICLS 2018 Proceedings224© ISLSContext and participantsThis study is part of a larger project focused on developing curriculum and instruction to support learning aboutcomplex systems in high school biology conducted 2010–2015. The broader intervention involvedimplementation of units on the topics of genetics, enzymes, diffusion, evolution, ecology, and modeling. The 3day units directed students to perform multiple experiments using different initial conditions such as varyingpopulation sizes, energy characteristics, and varying numbers of interacting simulation components. Studentsrecorded their observations and responded to tasks based on their data collection such as constructing graphs.Each unit included prompts for students to come to consensus using the argumentation structure of claims,evidence, and reasoning (Novak et al., 2009). Figure 1 depicts an example of an argumentation prompt.Figure 1. Argumentation prompt in the evolution unit.In this study, we sampled 70 (35 females, 35 males) out of 361 students we worked with in the larger study.Data sources and analysisWe conducted analyses on 33 videotaped interactions of student groups (mainly pairs). Coding was completedthrough a method of interaction analysis (IA). This involves analysis of video clips by a group of researchers toexamine the details of social interactions (Jordan & Henderson, 1995). Codes and categories in IA are meant toemerge from multiple replays of video data and negotiation of coder interpretations. This is meant to mitigateindividual researcher bias and enables mutual construction of meaning. While performing IA in this study, theresearch group (authors), referred to previous research findings that indicated content and non-content decisionmaking processes. Codes emerged as either extraneous or generative in terms of content goals. Extraneousstrategies showed non-reflective behavior where students did not engage with evidence previously collected.Generative strategies showed reflective behavior where students actively engaged with evidence in different ways.Codes, definitions and exemplars are presented in Table 1. We also present examples of transcribed footage thatprovide deeper insight into how students discussed the argumentation prompt and worked with evidence to putforth a particular claim.To understand how students’ claim selection strategies impacted their ability to construct an argument,we conducted a preliminary analysis that examined argumentation responses from their unit packet worksheets.We present two cases of students’ CER (claim, evidence, reasoning) responses for two units that showedpromising evidence of the relationship between generative/reflective argumentation strategies and correctscientific explanations. In the first case on the topic of sugar transport, students were asked to construct anargument from the following general prompt, “What is responsible for the spreading of the molecules you justobserved?” In the second case with the unit on enzymes, students were provided a choice of claims to select from.The following directions were given on the worksheet:How do the enzyme and starch (substrate) come together to interact? Discuss the followingpossibilities with your group, choose the ONE claim (either A, B, or C) you think is most likely,and write down your group’s evidence and reasoning for that choice. Run the Experiment 2simulation as many times as necessary to establish your claim. Claim A: Enzymes are drawnto substrates, like a hungry traveler without a map, in a new town, who smells pizza from adistance and heads towards the scent. Claim B: Enzymes find substrates, like a hungry travelerwithout a map, in a new town, actively looking for thick crust pizza as they walk down the street.Claim C: Enzymes find substrates, like a traveler without a map, in a new town, wandering thestreets in no particular direction, until they bump into a pizza place. Pizza happens to be theonly food they like, so they go inside to eat.ICLS 2018 Proceedings225© ISLSTable 1: Codes and examples of collaborative decision-making strategies in argumentation and evidence useCategory and DefinitionFollow the LeaderOne student (the leader)answers the question and theother group members writedown what the leader says.Extraneous/NonReflectiveGroupArgumentationStrategiesWork IndependentlyStudents work on theirargumentation responsesindependently withoutcollaborative discussion.Teacher Facilitated: NonReflectiveWhere students seek help fromthe teacher, they copy down ordo not engage with what he/shesays.Use of Already CollectedEvidenceStudents either look back at datathey collected or discuss withtheir partner what they observedfrom the simulation.Collect New EvidenceStudents rerun the simulation asGenerative/directed or modify theReflectivedirections and rerun theGroupsimulation to collect newArgumentation evidence.StrategiesTeacher Facilitation: ReflectiveWhere students seek help fromthe teacher, he/she asksgenerative questions to scaffoldstudent understanding ratherthan telling students the answer.Students engage with thecontent and construct theirresponse.ExampleA student asks the other students in her group if they knowthe answer. The other students don’t know the answer anddo not show any initiative to find out the answer. Firststudent reruns the experiment but is the only one looking atthe screen and then proceeds to tell the other three studentsthe answer to the argumentation question. The other threestudents simply write down what she said. (Teacher ID 1,Group 1-2, Diffusion Unit, 2/11/14)Two students work on their own worksheets. One studentin the pair says “it’s claim A.” He waits for the other groupmember to catch up who says “so, its claim A?” and thetwo independently complete their answers to theargumentation question. (Teacher ID 9, Group 3, GeneticsUnit, 12/10/2013)Teacher encourages the pair of students to “Play [thesimulation] again and see what you see.” Student B sitsquietly and waits until student A has figured out theanswer. Student B does not engage with the teacher’squestions. (Teacher ID 9, Group 2 Genetics Unit,12/10/2013)Two students discuss the argumentation prompt. Duringtheir exchange the students point to the graph on the screento confirm their understanding. (Teacher ID 9, Group 1Genetics Unit, 12/10/2013).Before selecting their group’s claim, they rerun thesimulation and discuss how the enzymes are acting.Eventually the students agree that the enzymes showrandom motion based on what they collectively see on thescreen. (Teacher ID 1, Group 1, Enzymes Unit,11/22/2013)Teacher encourages the pair of students to “Play [thesimulation] again and see what you see.” Student A replaysthe simulation and the teacher directs the student’s focus tothe relevant information. (Teacher ID 9, Group 2 GeneticsUnit, 12/10/2013)ResultsIn total, 38 codes were assigned to the video interactions of students in their argumentation groups of which 5were double coded. Figure 2 shows the distribution of strategies across codes. In general, student groups usedmore generative/reflective strategies. Of those codes, the highest number, 14 (38%), was found in the Use ofAlready Collected Evidence category. We believe that the curricular layout with scaffolded experiments andargumentation prompts enabled students to refer back to archived and easily retrievable information. A relativelyhigh number of codes, 7 (18%), also emerged in the Collect New Evidence category. Here, it is likely that the useof simulations enabled the dynamic, just-in-time feedback to occur where group members could watch the sameICLS 2018 Proceedings226© ISLSscreen and agree on the same evidence. However, a large number of codes, 9 (24%), was found in the Follow theLeader category, which we hypothesize may have negative consequences on some students’ learning.Collaborative Decision-Making Strategies in Argumentation and Evidence Use16141210864201497521Follow theLeaderWorkTeacherUse of AlreadyIndependently Facilitated: NonCollectedReflectiveEvidenceExtraneous/Non-Reflective StrategiesCollect NewEvidenceTeacherFacilitated:ReflectiveGenerative/Reflective StrategiesFigure 2. Graph of strategies across codes.In Figures 3 and 4, we show excerpts and commentary from discussions as students engaged in the two highestcategories of generative/reflective strategies to come to consensus on the argumentation prompt (see endnote fordiscourse analytic conventions). In the first excerpt, shown in Figure 3, two students, B (boy on left) and G (girlon right) converse with each other and use previously collected data to understand how gene regulation occurs.Discourse Interaction ExcerptCommentaryB (boy on left) and G (girl on right)1.B: ((Reads question aloud.)) Ummm…Claim A, a gene regulatorysystem is like a home heating system that is controlled by athermostat. Is not like a…((Laughs))…ummm ok2. G: What do you mean?3. B: A gene regulatory system is like a home heating system…soyou turn the heat up…and then it like goes up?4. G: Oh no it’s like the one when you, it does it itself…kind of, nowait. What?5. B: I dunno what you’re talking about.6. G: Cause the heat at my house, when it gets like, too hot, it turnsoff. But if it’s too cold, it turns on, right? Right?7. B: Ok. So, you’re like…ok, I think that’s how heating systemswork.8. G: Ok, so it is like that, right?9. B: Well is that like that, though?10. G: Yeah…(2)11. B: You sure? So when it makes, so when there’s a lot…12. G: So when there’s a lot of lactose…13. B: So when it’s up, it goes… ((Gestures with hands going up andthen down))The group starts their discussion off byfirst figuring out how a home heatingsystem works (lines 1-8).In line 9, B asks the important questionof whether gene regulation works inthe same way that a home heatingsystem (that they described) works. Inresponse, G asserts that generegulation is like a home heatingsystem, but has difficulty explainingwhy when pressed by B (lines 11-12).(19)14. B: Ok, so when it makes mRNA, right?15. G: Yeah…yeahICLS 2018 Proceedings227© ISLS16. B: Then enzymes get made to eat the lactose ((Gestures with bothhands where one hand is engulfing the other hand))…but thelactose pulls away the stuff17. G: Yeah, yeah so it is…yeah! And mRNA eats the lactose.18. B: Yeah.19. G: So it is.20. B: I dunno.21. G: It is! Cause when there’s too much, it sends something out tostop it. That’s why you don’t have hair on your liver cells.22. B: Okay.23. G: Right? ((Laughs))24. B: I guess? ((Laughs))25. G: Claim A.26. B: So our evidence…(5)27.28.29.30.31.32.B: …for thisG: It tries to like, get a medium.B: Is that our evidence, or our reasoning?G: That’s my reasoning.B: So our evidence is that…the enzymes eat the lactose?G: The evidence is that like…when the RNA polymerase goes inthe DNA…((Points her pen to the simulation that had beenpreviously run and paused))33. B: Oh it’s like feedback! Like positive feedback…or negativefeedback.34. G: Yeah, so it’s…ummmm….which one is it? I was thinkingearlier, but I forgot the name.35. B: Ok. I forget the difference…like, I know what the differenceis…but I forget the...like which one’s which.36. G: Negative’s when you add something. I mean, negative’s whenyou take something away and positive’s when you add something.37. B: So, positive, it’ll just like go up…right? So then negative…ithas to be negative then.As the conversation ensues, B starts toexplain how “enzymes get made to eatthe lactose” (line 16) and G agrees(line 17).At this point, it seems that G isconvinced that, in gene regulation, “itsends something out to stop it,” (line21) which is similar to a home heatingsystem’s feedback loop. However, B isnot quite sure (lines 20, 24).In line 25, G asserts that Claim A is thecorrect possibility and B asks for theevidence.When G explains that the system istrying to get to a medium (line 28), Basks her if that is the evidence or thereasoning, to which G responds that itis the reasoning. Knowingly orunknowingly, B seems to push G forthe evidence for their claim (line 31)and G responds by pointing to thepreviously collected evidence (line32).This reference back to the simulationseems to cause B to be thoroughlyconvinced as he exclaims, “It’s likefeedback!” (line 33). The pair endstheir conversation by coming to theconsensus that gene regulation is like ahome heating system and that it usesnegative feedback to accomplish this.Figure 3. Discourse interaction excerpt 1 (25:20-28:00) where students are using already collected evidenceIn the second excerpt shown in Figure 4, two pairs of students discuss how enzymes move and they come toconsensus using newly collected evidence on the argumentation prompt that used three different analogies of ahungry traveler looking for pizza in a new town.Discourse Interaction ExcerptICLS 2018 ProceedingsCommentary228© ISLSB1 (boy on left), B2 (boy on right), G1 (girl on left),and G2 (girl on right).1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13.14.15.16.17.B2: ((Reads question aloud.)) How do the enzymeand starch substrate come together to interact?Discuss the following possibilities with your group.Choose the one claim, either A, B, or C, you thinkis most likely and write down your group’sevidence and the reason for that choice. Run theexperiments/simulations as many times asnecessary to establish your claim. Claim A:enzymes are drawn to substrates like a hungrytraveler without a map in a new town who smellspizza from a distance and heads toward the site.B1: That’s an interesting analogy.B2: Yeah, that’s interesting.G1 and G2: ((inaudible, looking at worksheet))B1: Oh God, I find that way toofunny…((inaudible))B2: So, claim B? I kinda want to run this again…((Leans over and clicks several times with themouse and runs the simulation))G2: I am running it again.B1: ((Looking at the simulation that B2 is currentlyrunning)) Huh, intriguing.B2: Well, it’s not like the en … not like theenzymes are following the…ummm…B1: Emzymes?B2: Enzymes… Yeah, they’re not following thestarch molecules…they’re just going back andforth.B1: They’re just moving randomly. So, so ok, itcan’t be this one… ((Pointing to the worksheet))because they are moving randomly…they’re notjust following them. Ready, run it for 30 moreseconds just to see…ready? ((B1 now takes controlof the mouse and clicks on the computer to re-runthe simulation…both boys look at the computerscreen together.)) Like follow one of thesethings…they’re not following a particular…ormaybe he is!B2: Wait, run that again. ((B1 then clicks to re-runthe simulation again.))B1: Follow that one ((points to the screen)). No,okay, it’s not following. It is completely random.B2: No… so it was following this one ((Points tothe screen at a specific enzyme)) and then it wasgoing and then just completely shot off this way…B1: Yeah…B2: So it is random.Initially, B2 believes that Claim B (enzymes findsubstrates by actively looking) is the correctexplanation (line 6), but decides to run the simulationagain. Similarly, G2 states that she is also running thesimulation again.After having looked at the new evidence together, B1and B2 decide that the enzymes are just “going backand forth” and “moving randomly” (lines 11-12).B1 decides that he wants to re-run the simulation andcollect more evidence; this time, focusing onfollowing one particular enzyme for more specificinformation (lines 12-14).Through this, both B1 and B2 affirm that the enzymemovement is random (lines 15-16). Later on in theirdiscussion, they come to consensus that Claim C isthe correct explanation, which is the claim statingthat enzymes are like a traveler that wanders thestreets in no particular direction, moving randomlyuntil it happens to hit a pizza place. This is thecorrect claim and a shift from when B2 stated ClaimB as the answer in the beginning of the discussion.Figure 4. Discourse interaction excerpt 2 (1:02-3:00) where students are collecting new evidence.In the next section, we present two cases that show that students’ claim selection strategies may have had animpact on their ability to construct an argument. Table 2 illustrates the strategy used, the claim selected by eachstudent, and their evidence and reasoning rationales. The first group consisting of two students in the discussionexcerpt in Figure 4 (B1 and B2) wrote their claim, evidence, and reasoning in response to the prompt, after theyICLS 2018 Proceedings229© ISLScollected new evidence. We can see in the table that they agreed on the claim, which was the correct one. Theevidence and reasoning they used to arrive at the claim were also similar. Conversely, the second group wrotetheir claim, evidence, and reasoning after they worked independently. We can see that their responses to all threeCER sections were different. In addition to that, student 1 in the second case did not accurately describe themechanism by which molecules spread in their evidence and reasoning. We hypothesize that, because studentsworked independently in Group 2, they did not check and challenge each other’s understanding vis-a-vis thesimulation they had previously run.Table 2: Students’ argumentation responses from unit worksheetsStrategy Usedto Come toConsensus(Group)Collect NewEvidence(Group 1)WorkIndependently(Group 2)BiologyUnitEnzymesSugarTransportCERQuestionWordingHow do theenzymeand starch(substrate)cometogether tointeract?What isresponsiblefor thespreadingout of themoleculesyou justobserved?Students' CER ResponseStudentStudent 1(B1)Student 2(B2)Our claim is…Enzymes find substrates,like a traveler without amap, in a new town,wandering the streets in noparticular direction, untilthey bump into a pizzaplace. Pizza happens to bethe only food they like, sothey go inside to eat.Enzymes find substrates,like a traveler without amap, in a new town,wandering the streets in noparticular direction, untilthey bump into a pizzaplace. Pizza happens to bethe only food they like, sothey go inside to eat.Our evidencefor this is…Our reasonsare that…Enzymesmovement arerandomNo real patternto theirmovementThe enzymesare randomlymoving aroundthe screen,bumping intostarchmolecules toturn them intosugar.The enzymesfollow nospecific pattern.They moverandomly andrandomnesscauses all kindsof motion.Student 1Diffusion(random/constant motion)is responsible for therandom movement of themolecules.The moleculesmoved to areasof lowconcentrationfrom highconcentration.Diffusionmovesmolecules fromhighconcentration tolowconcentration.Student 2Diffusion is responsiblefor spreading out.No energy andmovement israndom.Diffusion israndom.Significance of the studyAs previously stated, researchers have found that building argumentation skills based on evidence is often difficultfor students (Kuhn, 2010), in part due to social dynamics that can influence how students defend their claimsusing persuasion rather than appealing to the evidence (Berland & Reiser, 2009; 2011). This study fills a gap inthe research on scientific argumentation by identifying how students come to consensus on what evidence to usewhen making claims or constructing explanations. Where we saw a large number of generative/reflectivestrategies in our study, we hypothesize that this was due to the use of carefully scaffolded inquiry-based computersimulations that required students to engage in sense-making using evidence they collected from experimentaliterations. Where we also found a large number of codes in the extraneous/non-reflective categories, we see howa portion of our students were unable to link evidence to their claims, and suggest that teachers need to becomeaware of these strategies to emphasize and model optimal evidence use.Furthermore, in response to our question of how reflective and evidence-based strategies can besupported, we offer two possible strategies. First, it may be important to ask students to re-run the simulationwhile comparing results that were already collected. In the second discussion excerpt, B2 decided to run thesimulation again, perhaps in response to following the simple instructions on the worksheet that encouragedstudents to run the simulation as many times as they wanted,. However, as Figure 2 shows, this was not the casefor every group. By having a specific task that asks students to re-run the simulation, they can be directed toICLS 2018 Proceedings230© ISLScollect new or more evidence to support their claim but this should be emphasized in instruction. Second, similarto B in the first discussion excerpt, assigning an individual in the group as the "evidence manager" or "evidenceboss," who directs the conversation of the group to the supporting evidence for the claim they chose, may furtherremind students to continually engage with the evidence.Finally, in response to the fourth research question, we identified promising evidence that reflectivegroup consensus processes such as collecting new evidence produced more accurate CER responses compared tonon-reflective group consensus processes such as working independently. Fundamentally, science is aboutexplaining the world around us—scientists look at evidence to develop claims and to negotiate their ideas aboutthe validity of each claim (McNeill & Krajcik, 2011). As is true with scientists, if a group of students engage in a“follow the leader” or “work independently” approach, they are not negotiating their ideas and ultimately may notarrive at the best explanation for a particular scientific phenomenon. For this reason, it may be important to nameand scaffold reflective group strategies when preparing students to engage in scientific argumentation. However,as these are only two cases of students’ argumentation responses, further analysis of all students’ worksheetresponses will need to be conducted in the future, using a topic-specific rubric for each of the units as describedby McNeill and Krajcik (2011) in order to see broader, more generalizable trends. Nonetheless, this study hasprovided some evidence to support the development of more explicit instructional prompts that can direct studentsto appeal to evidence via scaffolded experiences using dynamic computer supported simulations. We suggest thatdoing this can support stronger argumentation skills—both in verbal discourse and written explanations.EndnotesIn the written discourse account, gestures and descriptions of ongoing dynamics are encased in double parenthesis, e.g., (()),direct utterances are written in normal text, and time elapses are marked in single parenthesis with the number of seconds thathave gone by, e.g., (5).ReferencesBerland, L.K., & Reiser, B.J. (2009). Making sense of argumentation and explanation. Science Education, 93, 26–55.Berland, L.K. & Reiser, B.J. (2011). Classroom communities’ adaptations of the practice of scientificargumentation. Science Education, 95, 191–216.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39–103.Kuhn, D. (2010). Teaching and learning science as argument. Science Education, 94, 810–824.Kuhn, D., & Katz, J. (2009). Are self-explanations always beneﬁcial? Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,103, 386–394.Kuhn, D., Zillmer, N., Crowell, A., & Zavala, J. (2013). Developing norms of argumentation: Metacognitive,epistemological, and social dimensions of developing argumentive competence. Cognition andInstruction, 31(4), 456–496.Manz, E. (2016). Examining evidence construction as the transformation of the material world into communityknowledge. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 53(7), 1113–1140.McNeill, K. L., & Krajcik, J. S. (2011). Supporting grade 5-8 students in constructing explanations in science:The claim, evidence, and reasoning framework for talk and writing. Boston, MA: Pearson.Novak, A.M., McNeill, K., & Krajcik, J.S. (2009). Helping students write scientific explanations. Science Scope,September, 54–56.Osborne, J.F. (2010). Arguing to learn in science: The role of collaborative, critical discourse. Science, 328, 463–466.Ryu, S., & Sandoval, W.A. (2015). The influence of group dynamics on collaborative scientific argumentation.Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science & Technology Education, 11(2), 335–351.Stull, A., &Mayer, R. (2007). Learning by doing versus learning by viewing: Three experimental comparisons oflearner-generated versus author-provided graphic organizers. Journal of Educational Psychology, 99,808–820.Yoon, S. A. (2011). Using social network graphs as visualization tools to influence peer selectiondecision-making strategies to access information about complex socioscientific issues. Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 20(4), 549-588.AcknowledgmentsThis work was funded by the U.S. National Science Foundation Discovery Research K–12 (DRL 1019228).ICLS 2018 Proceedings231© ISLS