other students”; Cronbach’s α = .91), and individualistic attitudes (7 items, e.g., “I don't like working with otherstudents”; Cronbach’s α = .72), using a six-point Likert scale (ranging from 1 = strongly disagree to 6 = stronglyagree).The satisfaction with the online course was measured with a single item (“I liked the online course”),and the final grade of the online course was assessed.FindingsTo investigate RQ1, we conducted a linear regression (n = 31). Results showed no statistically significant relationbetween intrinsic motivation, the learning preferences as well as the online behavior on the platform (literatureaccess, active days, video access, completed quizzes and resource coverage) and course satisfaction, F (11,19) =1.26, p = .32, R2 = .42.A similar analysis strategy was chosen to investigate RQ2 (n = 49). Results revealed no statisticallysignificant relation between intrinsic motivation, learning preferences, online behavior on the platform and coursesatisfaction, F (11,37) = 60, p = .82, R2 = .15.To test whether the satisfaction with collaborative tasks is related to the general satisfaction with theonline course, we conducted a linear regression using the two factors liking group work and exhaustion aspredictors and the single item “I liked the online course” as the outcome (H1). Results revealed a statisticallysignificant relationship between the two factors (n = 29; factor 1: M = 3.57, SD = 1.58; factor 2: M = 4.86, SD =1.40) and course satisfaction, F (2,26) = 5.47, p < .01, R2 = .30. Furthermore, a linear regression was conducted(n = 37) to test the relationship between satisfaction with the collaborative tasks and the final grade (H2). Resultsrevealed no statistically significant influence, F (2,34) = .31, p = .74, R2 = .02. Therefore, hypothesis H1 issupported while hypothesis H2 is not supported.To test H3, we conducted a linear regression (n = 33) using learning preference cooperative as predictorand satisfaction with the collaborative task as outcome variable. Results showed no statistically significantrelationship, F (1,31) = 3.06, p = .09, R2 = .09.In order to test H4, we conducted a moderation analysis (n = 23) using the PROCESS macro for SPSS(Preacher & Hayes, 2008) with course satisfaction as predictor, factor 1 liking group work as outcome and learningpreference cooperative as moderator. Results of the overall model showed no statistically significant relationship,F (3,19) = 2.18, p = .12, R2 = .32. Results also revealed that factor 1 is a statistically significant predictor of coursesatisfaction (b = .25, t (19) = 2.49, p = .02). The interaction of factor 1 and learning preferences cooperativerevealed no statistically significant relationship (b = -.17, t (19) = -.59, p = .56). Therefore, no moderating effectof learning preferences on the interaction between factor 1 liking group work and course satisfaction was found.Conclusions and implicationsOur findings revealed no statistically significant relationship between intrinsic motivation, learning preferences,online behavior on the platform and course satisfaction or final course grade. Therefore, neither students’ traitswith regard to cooperative learning, nor their prior motivation, nor what they actually did was related to theiroverall satisfaction with the course or their performance. While this might be due to the fact that there was nosufficient variance with regard to intrinsic motivation and learning preference, the fact that behavior was notrelated to learning results is more astonishing, especially as this was demonstrated in prior studies (Ziebarth et al.,2015). We suggest that these findings need to be considered carefully, and that direct and conceptual replicationsare warranted before definitive conclusions from such counterintuitive null findings should be drawn.While the satisfaction with a collaborative task was not related to students’ final course grade, ouranalyses revealed that there was a statistically significant relationship between collaborative task satisfaction andcourse satisfaction. Therefore, the satisfaction with a single collaborative task in merely one of the altogether 14weeks is related to the general evaluation of the online course. This corroborates prior research that foundcollaborative tasks give rise to higher levels of satisfaction of students’ learning process (e.g., Bolinger, 2004).As the present study was correlational in nature, it paves the way for research employing experimental proceduresto elaborate the causal mechanisms of this relationship (e.g., investigating whether the manipulation of specificfactors that contribute to or are detrimental to collaborative task satisfaction also affect course satisfaction).This study has several limitations that should be acknowledged. Since the concept of the course was new,there were several problems, e.g., with regard to groups assignments, which did not go unnoticed by the studentsand might have contributed to a rather low course satisfaction. Also, not all students who participated in the coursetook part in the survey. Due to a database error not all weeks in which students had to work in groups could beconsidered. In sum, the statistical power for our analyses was quite low, therefore the many statisticallynonsignificant results have to be interpreted with due care.ICLS 2016 Proceedings920© ISLSNevertheless, we believe that our field study provides some relevant insight on a number of factorspreviously identified as being potentially related to groupMOOCs, and could be built upon in future research on(collaborative) learning in large scale online courses. Our study highlights that group tasks are not the panacea tohigh course satisfaction, but that they need to be planned and supervised carefully to make a meaningfulcontribution to learning outcomes.ReferencesAnderson, A., Huttenlocher, D., Kleinberg, J., & Leskovec, J. (2014, April). Engaging with massive onlinecourses. Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on World wide web (pp. 687-698). ACM.Bolliger, D. U. (2004). Key factors for determining student satisfaction in online courses. International Journalon E-learning, 3(1), 61-67.Conole, G. (2013). MOOCs as disruptive technologies: strategies for enhancing the learner experience and qualityof MOOCs. Revista de Educación a Distancia, 39, 1-17.Fabrigar, L. R., Wegener, D. T., MacCallum, R. C., & Strahan, E. J. (1999). Evaluating the use of exploratoryfactor analysis in psychological research. Psychological Methods, 4(3), 272.Johnson, D. W., & Norem-Hebeisen, A. A. (1979). A measure of cooperative, competitive, and individualisticattitudes. The Journal of Social Psychology, 109(2), 253-261.Kizilcec, R. F., Schneider, E., Cohen, G., & McFarland, D. (2014). Encouraging Forum Participation in OnlineCourses with Collectivist, Individualist, and Neutral Motivational Framings. Proceedings of the SecondEuropean MOOCs Stakeholders Summit, EMOOCs’14, Lausanne, Switzerland.Khalil, H., & Ebner, M. (2014, June). Moocs completion rates and possible methods to improve retention-aliterature review. In World Conference on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia andTelecommunications (Vol. 2014, No. 1, pp. 1305-1313).Ku, H. Y., Tseng, H. W., & Akarasriworn, C. (2013). Collaboration factors, teamwork satisfaction, and studentattitudes toward online collaborative learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 29, 922-929.doi:10.1016/j.chb.2012.12.019Müller, F. H., Hanfstingl, B., & Andreitz, I. (2007). Skalen zur motivationalen Regulation beim Lernen vonSchülerinnen und Schülern. Adaptierte und ergänzte Version des Academic Self-RegulationQuestionnaire (SRQ-A) nach Ryan & Connell. Wissenschaftliche Beiträge aus dem Institut fürUnterrichtsund Schulentwicklung (IUS) Nr, 1.Piezon, S. L., & Donaldson, R. L. (2005). Online groups and social loafing: Understanding student-groupinteractions. Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration, 8(4). Retrieved fromhttp://www.westga.edu/~distance/ojdla/winter84/piezon84.htmPreacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2008). Asymptotic and resampling strategies for assessing and comparing indirecteffects in multiple mediator models. Behavior research methods, 40, 879-891.doi:10.3758/BRM.40.3.879Roberts, T. S., & McInnerney, J. M. (2007). Seven problems of online group learning (and their solutions). Journalof Educational Technology & Society, 10(4), 257-268.So, H. J., & Brush, T. A. (2008). Student perceptions of collaborative learning, social presence and satisfaction ina blended learning environment: Relationships and critical factors. Computers & Education, 51, 318336. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2007.05.009Wentzel, K. R., & Watkins, D. E. (2002). Peer relationsips and collaborative learning as contexts for academicenablers. School Psychology Review, 31(3), 366.Ziebarth, S., Neubaum G., Kyewski E., Krämer N., Hoppe H. U., Hecking T., & Eimler S. (2015). Resource usagein online courses: Analyzing learner’s active and passive participation patterns. In O. Lindwall, P.Häkkinen, T. Koschmann, P. Tchounikine, & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.), Proceedings of the 11th InternationalConference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) - Exploring the Material Conditionsof Learning (pp. 395–402). Gothenburg, Sweden: International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS).AcknowledgmentsWe thank all participating students. This work was funded by Mercator Research Center Ruhr (MERCUR) underproject number Pr-2014-0023 entitled “Pedagogical and Technological Concepts for Collaborative Learning inMOOCs”.ICLS 2016 Proceedings921© ISLSEmbodied Search Processes in Creative Problem Solving: HowDo People Learn in Makerspaces?Michael Tan, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, michael.tan@nie.edu.sgAbstract: In creative problem solving, an essential component is the divergent idea generationphase before deciding on a plan of action for convergent, relatively well structured problemsolving. In makerspaces and other sites where problems are posed in physical form, the materialaffordances of the objects and their spatial configurations can aid or hinder the search throughproblem space for possible solutions. In this study, we present the preliminary results of a studyinvolving six pairs of grade eight students involved in a school makerspace context. Givensixteen littleBits modules housed in a small toolbox, along with some light constructionmaterials, students were tasked to produce a prototype of a device that could attract teachers’attention during class work sessions. The material actions that students made in earlyexploration of project ideas were correlated to the creative outcomes of their project.Keywords: embodied cognition, creative cognition, makerspaces, student learning, designIntroductionMakerspaces are quickly gaining prominence as sites for creative problem solving, and the acquisition of STEMskills and dispositions. However, while studies have shown makerspaces to successfully engage students in suchlearning tasks, substantially less research has taken place to discern the curriculum and learning mechanismsinvolved in tinkering and making. For instance, constructionism supposes that learning is inherent wheneverstudents have the opportunity to ‘mess around’ with things or complex systems in an intellectually engagedmanner. While this may be the case, we know a lot less about the constituent processes that inform this form oflearning. More generally speaking, beyond phenomenological analyses of learning by doing, and assertions of theprimacy of tacit knowledge (Polanyi,2009), and the anti-intellectual philosophical position taken by Ryle (1945)and more recent contemporary revisions (Brock, 2015), we really have little knowledge of the mechanisms bywhich we learn when we ‘learn by doing’. Coupled with the typical makerspace activity of tinkering, which noteddesign leaders (Kelley & Kelley, 2013) have dubbed ‘thinking with your hands’, the question arises as to themechanisms through which tinkering and making are educationally beneficial activities, and what may be thespecific benefits that may be derived from tinkering and making, beyond the much vaunted benefits of engagementand arousing interest in STEM.ReviewBased on social constructivist pedagogical principles, and sociology of science studies that repudiate the typicalclassroom practices of science instruction that privileges abstractions, makerspaces have been a recentphenomenon that has begun to receive attention of the scholarly community. Predominantly, researchers havelooked at the increased engagement, creative output, and STEM learning gains (see, e.g. edited volume by Honey& Kanter, 2013; Bevan, Gutwill, Petrich, & Wilkinson, 2014), but considerably less attention has been paid to theparticular cognitive mechanisms through which makerspaces are educationally beneficial. This considerationextends beyond research in the specific context of makerspaces, to also include general practices of ‘learning bydoing’, and the insight and tacit knowledge generated.In creativity research, a major recent change has been to consider not merely the divergent generation ofideas, but also the convergent selection and realisation of a particular creative idea. This is especially in light ofthe currently accepted dual level definition of what creativity constitutes—an idea of novelty, and of utility, asnovel ideas may be generated by random processes but may not be useful. In parallel to this, very recent work(Goel 2014, Reed 2015) have identified particular cognitive tasks that appear to be congruent to the two majorphases of what have been termed the geneplore model for creativity (Fink, Ward, Smith, 1994). Essentially, if theprocesses in creativity can be thought of as consisting of a divergent idea generation stage, followed orinterspersed by a convergent exploration stage, the cognitive tasks associated with these stages are respectivelyill-structured and well-structured problem solving.Divergent idea generation, especially when solving design problems, have similar characteristics to illstructured problem solving. With design problems, Goel and Pirolli (1992) point out that, among other things,design problems are: often large and complex; do not have right or wrong answers, only better or worse ones;ICLS 2016 Proceedings922© ISLShave many contingent interactions between components; and, components of design problems—start, goal, andintermediate states—are incompletely specified. Certainly, this is not to claim that design is solely made up ofdivergent, ill structured tasks; design solutions need to eventually be created, and the divergent possibilities needto collapse into a concrete instantiation of a design. Nonetheless, ill structured problem solving remains a centralpart of design problem solving, and the search for possible solutions within a problem space is an important taskthat designers need to grapple with. As Hills et al. (2015) point out, the process of search is a ubiquitousrequirement for life, from animal behaviour, to individual and social human behaviour, to also include abstract,internal processes. The core problematic appears to be a trade-off between exploiting known opportunities andexploring for better opportunities elsewhere: whereas exploring elsewhere could reveal richer sources of food,information, or innovative solutions to problems, this is often done at the expense of being able to exploit whateverresources one has at hand.In this regard then, we consider the design problem solving task from the perspective of search, and studythe ways in which students assigned a problem make use of material resources in an embodied manner to searchfor potential solutions. We make use of the perspective of embodied cognition to make sense of their actions andgestures. With embodied cognition, philosophers and researchers posit the hypothesis of cognitive externalisation,that is, that the world is its own best representation (Clark, 2008; Noe, 2009); and that certain actions need to beconsidered as epistemic if, as a consequence of the action, we obtain more reliable information about reality (Kirsh& Maglio, 1994). Specifically, considering the insight and divergent idea generation phase of design, we proposedthat certain actions and ways of ordering the immediate environment around oneself can serve a cognitive functionto provide insight into problems, just as trajector-based cultural practices (Hutchins, 2013) reduce the cognitiveload for embedding meaning by seeing the world in a particular way. We therefore set out to characterise actionstaken by students as they ‘tinkered’ their way to solving a design prompt.MethodsWe report here on a study conducted with six pairs of students assigned to a rapid design problem solving task.The design prompt was “Within an hour, design and make a device that could signal your teacher’s attentionduring class group work session”. The students were offered a small plastic toolbox, filled with 14 pieces oflittleBits, two A3 sized pieces of foam core cardboard, 10 wooden skewers, a box cutter, a steel rule, a cuttingmat, a hot melt glue gun, and some paper and pencil to sketch their draft ideas on. littleBits is a system ofmagnetically connectable electronics components which allows students to quickly snap together electrical andelectronic circuits with little consideration as to the polarity and other electrical constraints. They come in colorcoded modules, with the different colors representing its function as either: power supply, power/signal wire,signal input, and device output. The magnets and physical module interface ensure power, signal, and groundconnections were correctly connected. Signal inputs came in the form of human adjustable modules (buttons,potentiometers), to other sensors which could receive input from physical events. Output modules includedmotors, lights, and speakers. Some typical modules are shown below:Figure 1. littleBits modules: from left to right: power, input, output.As can be imagined, the combinatorial possibilities for connecting different modules offer a fairly widesolution space from which candidate designs may derive from. Add to this the flexibility of cutting and joiningthe other materials, the search space offered to students was wide indeed. As a means to constrain the designoutcomes between our participants, we chose a subset of all available modules, using modules that students hadfamiliarity with; we offered student pairs modules as shown in Table 1.While we initially considered a stimulated recall activity as a means to get single participants to recounttheir intentions as they proceeded in the design task, we eventually decided to get students in pairs so that theirtalk events in handling the mutual coordination of design intention could be made explicit. The task was brieflyexplained to the students and 2 volunteers were recruited per class at each available session. Student talk andaction was recorded by a pair of cameras, one in front, and another behind and above the shoulders, so that therewere no blind spots. Students were instructed to spend the first half hour planning their design solution, and thenext half hour implementing it. Because we were actually interested in the role tinkering played in their designproblem solving approach, we did not restrict their planning phase activity, and in fact suggested that they could‘play around’ with the materials as they liked.ICLS 2016 Proceedings923© ISLSTable 1: list of littleBits modules provided for teamsPowerPower (x2)9V battery (x2)InputSlide dimmerLight sensorButtonPressure sensorPulse generatorOutputDC motor (x2)Servo motorBuzzerLong LEDWireFork wires (x2)Students were grade eight students in an independent boy’s school in Singapore. These students were ofabove average academic ability, and had been participants in an art course which the teacher had deliberatelymade use of makerspace pedagogical principles. Video data were analyzed using Transana 3.0. A coding schemefor activity segments was developed and validated through consultation with colleagues. Through joint viewingsessions, pertinent episodes were identified where phenomena of interest were discussed and competitive theorygeneration was used to justify an explanation that fit the observations.FindingsWe developed a simple three level coding scheme to distinguish between low, medium, and high levels of creativeoutcome via a technique resembling the consensual assessment technique (Amabile, 1982). Briefly, a low levelindicated designs which were simple circuit-only, with no utilization of other materials provided. A medium levelwas indicated by some usage of materials in conjunction with the electronic circuits, or a complex circuit-onlydesign. A high level was indicated by an extensive use of materials in combination with a complex circuit. Asummary of the six design outcomes are as follows:Table 2. Summary of design outcomes for six pairs of studentsGroup123.4.5.6.Intended design descriptionTwo LEDs connected in parallel, one on teacher’s table, andanother on students’ desk. When button switch is pressed bystudent, both LEDs will light up, teacher will then lookaround the class for a lit box to indicate which studentneeded assistance.In parallel, three circuits: one to light up a LED, one to apulsed signal to cause a buzzer to ring intermittently, and afinal one to cause a white board to rotate to attract attention.Activated by a button, all three circuits will turn onsimultaneously.Cockpit/dashboard style display to be mounted on a wall oron teacher’s desk to indicate which team(s) needed help.In parallel, three circuits: one servo motor circuit. Secondcircuit connects to LEDs, and is mechanically supported onthe servo motor so that LEDs physically oscillate. Thirdcircuit activates a buzzer. Servo motor is always on, but LEDand buzzer can be selectively switched.Single circuit with a slide dimmer activating a buzzer. Nosignificant deployment of material resources.In parallel, three circuits: one buzzer, one servo motor, oneLED. Single switch activates all three circuits.Rating/CommentMedium. Some intelligent use of materialsin combination with circuits but design isnot practicalMedium-high*. Fairly complicated circuitwith the highest number of modules used.Material usage quite innovativeMedium. Some use of material, but circuitwas straightforward.Medium-high*. Complicated circuit, but nomaterials were used.Low*. Upon unusual prompting, studentpair decided to append an LED extension.Medium. Circuit is of medium complexity,but material usage is minimal and not wellimplemented.We developed a coding scheme to describe participant talk and action. Due to limited space, we describe a limitedselection. Of action codes, we found students ‘tinkering’; exploring material possibilities for goodness of fit todesign intent. Due to the availability of speech data, we were able to infer students’ intention. The directions offit could be ‘top down’, or ‘bottom up’, referring to, respectively, trying to get materials to accommodate a designplan, and manipulating materials to explore potential with no apparent design plan.Most of the groups did not have much by way of a systematic means of exploring the circuit resourcesavailable to them. In all cases, the time spent in bottom up tinkering exceeded top down tinkering. While somegroups did begin by brainstorming means by which they could obtain teachers’ attention, there seemed to be adistinct lack of intention in their solution attempt. For groups 1 and 3, littleBits modules had been inadvertentlyICLS 2016 Proceedings924© ISLSlaid out on their desks in a disordered manner. These groups did not further sort the modules, but instead onlypicked modules that they were familiar with (i.e., exploiting known resources), and left the rest on the desk.Of note would be the contrast shown between the two higher performing groups and the low performinggroup. As to be expected, these two higher performing groups spent the most time exploring. Both groups 2 and4 spent the time to get to know the circuit affordances of each of the parts, making use of the toolbox as a meansto distinguish between parts that they had experimented with, and parts they had not. The systematicity in theexploration of groups 2 and 4 was displayed by sequentially connecting modules taken from the box,understanding its function, and then making mental notes (as they discussed) of what they could do with eachmodule. When done, they would put aside useful modules distinct from modules that they did not find useful. Incontrast, group 5’s exploration, besides being short in duration, tended to repeat actions on modules. We couldnot infer that they had any order in the arrangement of modules (e.g. used/unusued), and they spent quite sometime in unproductive tinkering (e.g. mechanically tapping a module not connected to power, or sliding the variableresistor faster than an effect could be observed). We did not detect any group with a deliberately explicatedexploration strategy that made use of material resources as a means to reduce cognitive complexity, e.g. layingout all pieces according to color, and deciding on a strategy to sample modules. However, we cannot discount thepossibility of internally organized designations of useful piles distinct from useless ones, as we did not interviewstudents for their use of organizing routines.Limitations, conclusions, and implicationsThis is a preliminary analysis presented for comments to the community; work is currently still in progress. Alimitation of the data thus presented may be lack of diversity of participants. An effort currently underway is tocompare the actions taken by experts provided the identical task. It appears that the top down/bottom up tinkeringdistinction corresponds loosely to the explore/exploit pair in search. In seeking creative solutions to designproblems, it may be necessary to spend a balanced (not necessarily equal) amount of time in top down and bottomup tinkering modes. This finding presents a possible route for subsequent interventions—that learners need todistinguish between tinkering modes, to develop deliberately metacognitive strategies for the generation ofcreative solutions.ReferencesAmabile, T. M. (1982). Social psychology of creativity: A consensual assessment technique. Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology. 43(5). 997-1013. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.43.5.997Bevan, B., Gutwill, J. P., Petrich, M. and Wilkinson, K. (2015), Learning Through STEM-Rich Tinkering:Findings from a jointly negotiated research project taken up in practice. Sci. Ed., 99: 98–120. doi:10.1002/sce.21151.Brock, R. (2015). Intuition and insight: two concepts that illuminate the tacit in science education. Studies inScience Education. 51(2), 127-167.Goel, V. (2014). Creative brains: designing in the real world. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8(241), 1–14.Goel, V., & Pirolli, P. (1992). The structure of design problem spaces. Cognitive Science, 16, 395–429.Hills, T. T., Todd, P. M., Lazer, D., Redish, A. D., Couzin, I. D., Bateson, M., … Wolfe, J. W. (2015). Trends inCognitive Sciences, 19(1), 46-54.Honey, M., & Kanter, D. E. (Eds.) (2013). Design, make, play: Growing the next generation of STEM innovators.New York, NY: Routledge.Hutchins, E. (2013). The cultural ecosystem of human cognition. Philosophical Psychology. 27(1). 34-49.doi:10.1080/09515089.2013.830548Kelley, D., & Kelley, T. (2013). Creative confidence. New York, NY: Random HouseKirsh, D. & Maglio, P. (1994). On distinguishing between epistemic and pragmatic action. Cognitive Science. 18,513-549.Reed, S. K. (2015). The structure of ill-structured (and well-structured) problems revisited. EducationalPsychology Review. Advance online publication. doi: 10.1007/s10648-015-9343-1Ryle, G. (1953). Ordinary language. The Philosophical Review, 62(2), 167-186. doi:10.2307/218279AcknowledgmentsThis project is supported by a Singapore Ministry of Education OER grant number OER 12/14 MT. The opinionsexpressed here may not be shared by the funding agency.ICLS 2016 Proceedings925© ISLS