A Qualitative Exploration of Self- and Socially Shared Regulationin Online Collaborative LearningLauren Hensley, The Ohio State University, hensley.l21@osu.eduJessica Cutshall, The Ohio State University, cutshall.6@osu.eduVictor Law, University of New Mexico, vlaw@unm.eduKui Xie, The Ohio State University, xie.359@osu.eduLin Lu, The Ohio State University, lu.962@osu.eduAbstract: This qualitative study explored how groups with high or low self-regulation regulatedtheir collaborative behaviors. We used purposeful sampling to select two groups of students inan online course with the highest and lowest mean self-regulation scores, based on survey data.We inductively analyzed online discussion posts and identified three themes that described thegroups’ processes for externalizing and internalizing understanding: level of engagement withcontent, approach to seeking and providing help, and openness to disagreement and problemsolving. The group with the highest mean self-regulation scores elaborated upon courseconcepts, helped one another understand and apply ideas, and integrated viewpoints to carry outcourse activities. The group with the lowest scores wrote about surface-level features,exchanged help in a brief and depersonalized manner, and moved quickly to consensus withoutevaluating alternative perspectives. These patterns illustrated marked differences in thedevelopment of socially shared regulation.Keywords: self-regulation; socially shared regulation; online learning; collaborative learningIntroductionThe extant research on self-regulated learning often emphasizes examining relationships between self-regulationand students’ engagement, achievement, and affective characteristics. For group learning contexts, scholars (e.g.,Hadwin & Oshige, 2011) proposed the concept of socially shared regulation, “processes by which multiple othersregulate their collective activity” (p. 258). Researchers have studied this concept to explain how groups ofindividuals, as multiple self-regulating agents, socially regulate each other’s learning in social learning contexts(e.g., Hadwin, Oshige, Gress, & Winne, 2010; Järvenoja & Järvelä, 2009). Some studies have shown evidencethat socially shared regulation may lead to motivation and learning (e.g. Järvelä, Järvenoja, & Veermans, 2008;Lajoie & Lu, 2012). DiDonato (2013) explored how group regulation influenced students’ self-regulated learningin a middle school environment. She found qualitative evidence from students’ interactions that members of agroup could regulate others’ planning, monitoring, and evaluating of learning.It remains unclear, however, whether and how self-regulated individuals shape group-level sociallyshared regulation in collaborative learning; reciprocally, little is known about whether and how group-levelsocially shared regulation influences self-regulated individuals. Socially shared regulation of learning in smallgroup online collaborative learning often is mediated through students’ engagement in asynchronous onlinediscussions (Xie, Yu, & Bradshaw, 2014). Students post and respond to messages to externalize their knowledgeand understanding. They read to internalize the group understanding to build their own knowledge (Xie, 2013).These group dynamics may then further shape individual self-regulated learning. We conceptualize this interactiveprocess as socially shared regulation. The purpose of this study was to explore this process by examining howself-regulation of learning led to the development of socially shared regulation in collaborative learning in anonline learning environment.MethodsStudent sample and data sourcesThe qualitative case study involved undergraduates taking an elective online study-strategies course at a largepublic university in the Midwest United States in autumn 2013. Students worked in small groups of 6-7 studentsover a two-month period in 5 collaborative online discussions. Each discussion occurred in conjunction with arelated assignment; topics included note-taking, reading, charts/visual organizers, outlining, and changing habits.Halfway through the course, and prior to their participation in the online discussions, students completed aconfidential online self-report survey. The survey was based on the Motivated Strategies for LearningQuestionnaire (Pintrich, Smith, Garcia, & McKeachie, 1991) and asked students about various aspects of self-ICLS 2016 Proceedings859© ISLSregulated learning using a seven-point Likert-type response scale. We calculated the individual self-regulationscores to identify the groups with the best and worst average self-regulation scores. Consistent with case studymethodology, we used purposeful sampling (Patton, 2002) to identify groups with the highest and lowest mean,respectively (MGroup A = 4.98, MGroupB = 3.68). These groups’ discussion posts (nGroupA =120, nGroupB = 93) becamethe focus of the inductive qualitative analysis.AnalysisDiscussion posts from the course’s learning management system were exported and analyzed by the first twoauthors. In our first round of analysis, we employed open coding to annotate salient interactions and identify topicsto explore further (Corbin & Strauss, 2014). We examined all discussion posts a second time, which yielded 20codes that reflected students’ participation and engagement. We reviewed one another’s annotations and reflectivememos to reach shared understanding of the coding scheme, then met to reduce the codes into overarching themesthat characterized differences in socially shared regulation between the two groups.FindingsHigh self-regulation led to high socially shared regulation as group members externalized (i.e., articulated) andinternalized (e.g., reflected on or synthesized) their understanding. Specifically, three key differences emerged inthe posts written by students in Groups A (high self-regulation) and B (low self-regulation): (1) level ofengagement with content, (2) approach to seeking and providing peer help, and (3) openness to disagreement andproblem-solving.The theme level of engagement reflected how students explained their thinking and understanding.Interactions among students in Group A were characterized by reflection and elaboration upon course concepts.In contrast, students in Group B reused examples and descriptions from the textbook or restated content frompeers’ posts without further analysis.The second theme of seeking and providing peer help reflected how students reached out to and assistedone another to clarify understanding and address personal challenges. Students in Group A demonstrated effectivehelp seeking by providing specific explanations of their current processes and requesting assistance for particularchallenges. In contrast, students in Group B tended to pose general questions and receive vague, repetitiveresponses.The third theme of openness to conflict and problem-solving reflected how group members worked as ateam. Group A’s members expressed a willingness to disagree and explore multiple perspectives on a topic. Incontrast, Group B’s members leaned toward consensus rather than challenging another’s ideas. When it came toworking together, Group A’s members exchanged ideas to reach a productive solution. In contrast, Group B didnot have a clear sense of direction, and individuals took a passive role in asking others to tell them what to do.Conclusions and implicationsThis study illustrates key differences in the quality and depth of learning in online collaborative group discussions,while supporting the importance of shared regulation in this environment. Across the themes identified in thisstudy, common elements characterized the posts of students who had high self-regulation. These characteristicsincluded identifying tasks and needs, elaborating upon ideas, engaging in reflection, synthesizing and evaluatingconcepts, and inviting alternative perspectives. Students with high self-regulation personalized and clearlyarticulated their own examples and ways of understanding, which led to their group member’s understanding andapplication. In contrast, the more limited contributions and engagement of students low in self-regulation did notappear to promote either individual or group learning. Our study extended the understanding of the dynamicinterplay between self- and socially shared regulation to online collaborative learning contexts, where students’interactions with the content and one another often determine how well they achieve course outcomes (Didonato,2013).ReferencesCorbin, J., & Strauss, A. (2014). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developinggrounded theory. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.DiDonato, N. C. (2013). Effective self-and co-regulation in collaborative learning groups: An analysis of howstudents regulate problem solving of authentic interdisciplinary tasks. Instructional Science, 41(1), 2547.Hadwin, A. F., & Oshige, M. (2011). Self-regulation, coregulation, and socially shared regulation: Exploringperspectives of social in self-regulated learning theory. Teachers College Record, 113, 240-264.ICLS 2016 Proceedings860© ISLSHadwin, A. F., Oshige, M., Gress, C. L. Z., & Winne, P. H. (2010). Innovative ways for using gStudy to orchestrateand research social aspects of self-regulated learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 26, 794-805.Järvelä, S., Järvenoja, H., & Veermans, M. (2008). Understanding the dynamics of motivation in socially sharedlearning. International Journal of Educational Research, 47, 122-135.Järvenoja, H., & Järvelä, S. (2009). Emotion control in collaborative learning situations: Do students regulateemotions evoked by social challenges? British Journal of Educational Psychology, 79, 463-481.Lajoie, S., & Lu, J. (2012). Supporting collaboration with technology: Does shared cognition lead to co-regulationin medicine? Metacognition and Learning, 7(1), 45-62.Patton, M. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation methods (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Pintrich, P.R., Smith, D.A.F., Garcia, T., & McKeachie, W.J. (1993). Reliability and predictive validity of theMotivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 53, 801813.Xie, K. (2013). What do the numbers say? The influence of motivation and peer feedback on students’ behaviorin online discussions. British Journal of Educational Technology, 44, 288-301.Xie, K., Yu, C., & Bradshaw, A.C. (2014). Impacts of role assignment and participation in asynchronousdiscussions in college-level online classes. The Internet and Higher Education, 20, 10-19.ICLS 2016 Proceedings861© ISLS