The Development of Situational-Misconceptionsin Math Problem SolvingRotem Abdu, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel, rotem.abdu@huji.ac.ilAbstract: In this paper I use the conceptual change theoretical framework, in order todescribe and evaluate the productivity of teacher's in-situ support to Situationalmisconceptions. I illustrate a case in which two students work together in order to solve aproblem in math. The focal point is their teacher's intervention, in which she attempts to gether students out of a messy situation. This analysis helps to understand, in fine grain, theprocess – and consequences – of avoiding refutation of non-productive narratives, beforeadding new ones - in the context of math problem solving. In addition, we learn that in theprocess of solution, narratives might not always compete: ideas from two, or more, narrativescould be forged to new Situational misconceptions.Keywords: Conceptual-Change,Competing NarrativesSituational-Misconception,MathProblem-Solving,IntroductionMisconceptions could be best described as “qualitative incorrect explanations that are expressed prior to, andeven after, formal instruction” (Chi, 2012). These incorrect explanations are outcomes of naïve theories that aredeveloped and retained; theories that are many times consistent with the information that one has about thephenomena at hand, and thus, seem coherent to him (Vosniadou and Verschaffel, 2004). This notion ofcoherence will not disappear easily - causing meaningful change of some misconceptions is quite difficult(diSessa, 2006).Studies about misconceptions could be allocated to three theoretical frameworks, (diSessa, 2006). Oneline of work, claims that there are sporadic concepts that appear in various domains of knowledge, mainlyscientific in nature, such as Physics, Biology etc. These misconceptions should be mapped and treatedspecifically, in order to preform conceptual change (diSessa, 2006). The other two lines of work adopt Kuhn'sParadigm change theoretical framework. Accordingly, research about misconceptions in these lines of work,focus on the gap between misconceptions and the appropriate “scientific explanation”. This gap is illustrated byCarey (1988) as a mechanism that restricts conceptual change due to incommensurability between competingmental models. This incommensurability restricts the building of the intersubjectivity that is needed in order toform productive discourse which builds common knowledge, but also help to refute non-productive ideas(Matusov, 1996). If we look at it the other way around, awareness of an incommensurability might trigger theneed to come to shared understanding, through the process of collaborative meaning making (Stahl, 2009). Thisleaves us with the question: what are the traits of productive conceptual change? In particular, how couldmanifestations of incommensurability overcome?Several solutions has been provided in the literature. The origins of most of these approaches is theelicitation of cognitive conflict (e.g von Glasersfeld 1995) between the current mental model and a new mentalmodel. Chi (2012) for example, suggest that the solution is in a meta-strategic level: teaching students to beaware of competing narratives to approach the explanation of a phenomena, will lead to the realization of a new– maybe incommensurable – explanation. These explanations could be critically evaluated and compared;eventually, and hopefully, lead to the conceptual change. The same dialectical principle - meeting competingnarratives – is applied with refutation text. A meta-analysis about refutation text by Tippett (2010), reveals thatconceptual change could be achieved when the text (1) Starts with a description of the phenomena, (2) explainsthe misconception, (3) refutes the misconceived explanation, and finally (4) provides a new explanation thatmakes sense to the learner. In congruence, Asterhan & Schwarz (2007) show that engaging in argumentativediscussion helps overcoming misconceptions; thus intelligible discussion about competing narratives/mentalmodels, could lead to productive refutation of the "wrong" and learning the "right". This same principle wasdescribed in the context of math, as Schwarz, Neuman and Biezuner (2000) show how argumentative schemepositively affects change of the use of decimal numeral systems.Math problem solving and conceptual changeMath learning-and-instruction might benefit from adopting conceptual change models (Vosniadou andVerschaffel, 2004), since learning math often requires meeting competing narratives and choosing a productiveCSCL 2015 Proceedings78© ISLSone (Sfard, 2007). When a student holds a rigid-and-faulty narrative about the way a problem should be solved,we can address it as a Situational Misconception. In order to facilitate a shift in the narrative, a teacher mightneed to follow the core ideas of conceptual change: In terms of Posner, Strike, Hewsonand Gertzog (1982), sheneeds to make the students acknowledge that the current path does not lead them anywhere and should berefuted (dissatisfaction). In addition she should make sure that the new concept is intelligible, plausible andefficient in the eyes of her students, if she would like them to adopt this new concept.A math problem is defined by Schoenfeld (1985) as a question for which the solution path is not knownto the solver (in contrast with an exercise). Many studies in this field investigate students' attempts to solveproblems on their own, in small groups and with computers. Most of these studies adopt a constructivistapproach, with an ultimate goal of a guiding students in order to become active agents for their own learning(Zimmerman, 2008). Thus, a teacher has an important role in scaffolding such learning; she needs to serve as afacilitator of the learning, rather than mere instructor (Abdu & Mavrikis, 2016). She needs to be highly preparedto support a solution for a problem that sometimes has an open end, and usually has various paths to the solution(Abdu & Schwarz, 2012; Abdu and Mavrikis, 2016). In a way, she needs also to "unlearn" some of thematerials: Experienced math-problem-solvers usually will make automatic moves in their solution (Arcavi &Isoda, 2007). These moves are done unconsciously, since they are a part of the teachers' "tool kit". Unlearning isquite a challenge for teachers, and as a result many teachers fail to "connect" with the difficulties their studentsexperience (Ben-David, 2007).In this paper I claim that it is important to adopt the conceptual change theoretical framework for theteaching of math problem solving. I use Situational Misconception in order to describe and understand asequence of events in which teacher gives ill support to a group of two students.The context of the episodeBackgroundI analyze the behaviors of two 8th grade students who solve a math problem -”the city”, together. The problemwas designed for three double lessons. Students were instructed to use Geogebra – A software that affords thecreation of dynamic geometrical and algebraic objects in a Cartesian domain (Stahl, 2009). It is a part of a fullyear course in computer-supported collaborative math problem solving, led by an experienced teacher. Theteacher was guided to adopt a constructivist stance – acting as a moderator of learning, rather than directinstruction.The problemI bring the City problem (Based on Prusak, Hershkowitz & Schwarz, 2012), as it was presented in the beginningof the first meeting, by the teacher."...the city council is going to build an energy center[…].This energy center needs to provideenergy for the heating and cooling of seven public institutions of the city. All of the 7 publicinstitutions pay good, equal, money […] for the building of that energy center […].We need todecide where to put the energy center in a way that will make as many as possible institutions,and people, happy. Note, when the length of the tubes between the energy-provider and theconsumer increases, more energy is lost, and the energy efficiency gets smaller."From a mathematical point of view, this problem asks if there a point that is equidistant to any givenseven points?Preparing to support the solutionThis is not an easy problem for 8th graders. In congruence with Prusak, Hershkowitz and Schwarz, (2012), theteacher, along with the research team, broke the problem to three stages. First stage: there are only threeinstitutions and the distances between them are equal – they form an equilateral triangle. In this case, theequidistant point is the angles bisectors' /perpendiculars' /medians' intersection. Note that in the case of anequilateral triangle it does not matter, since the three loci are at the same point. The students are familiar withthese three concepts. Second stage: the distances between these three institutions are not equal, and they form ageneral triangle. The question in this stage is, what is the point that is equidistant to the three vertices of ageneral triangle? The former stage leads the solver to a conflict at this stage. Whereas in the former stage thesolution is quite simple, it does not work for the case of a general triangle. Instead, the point that is equidistantto all vertices of a general triangle is the (1) center of its circumscribed circle, and, (2) meeting point of the threeCSCL 2015 Proceedings79© ISLSperpendicular bisectors. Further elaboration about the math behind these solutions will be brought below. Thestudents are unfamiliar with these concepts. Third stage: Solve the problem for the case of seven points. Anequidistant point exists only when these 7 points are located on one circle. The equidistant point will be the (1)center of that circumscribed circle and (2) the meeting point of all the seven perpendicular bisectors. Again, thestudents are unfamiliar with these concepts.In accordance with these stages, the teacher first instructs the class to investigate a simpler case of theproblem (first stage) - an equidistant point to three points in an equilateral triangle. Later on they will try tosolve it for a case of a general triangle and last – try to generalize their conclusions for a case of seven points.The teacher also prepares a supporting narrative [N1] for the solution. In order to understand hersupport, let's talk math for a little bit. The Narrative that the teacher tries to promote could be explained in figure1. (1) We take the midpoint of segment FG. From this point, I, we create a perpendicular. (2) We locate point Jsomewhere on that perpendicular. (3) Points F and G are equidistant to J, since triangles ∆FJI and ∆GJI overlap.(4) Segments FJ and GJ are equal.Figure 1. Teacher's hint - If we take the midpoint of segment FG and create a perpendicular, any point J on thatperpendicular will be equidistant to F and G. Thus, FJ equals JG.From here on we have two possible solutions. The first solution: Every given point, H (See figure 2),which maintains HJ=FJ=GJ, will help forming a triangle ∆FGH. The vertices of this triangle are all equidistantto point J. The conclusion in this case is: The point (J) that is equidistant to all vertices of a general triangle isthe center of its circumscribed circle. In order to find such a point with the help of Geogebra, the students needto form a circle with Radius that is equal to GJ and FJ. The center of this circle will be located at point J. All thepoints that are on this circle are equidistant to point J, since it is the center of the circle; segments HJ, FJ and GJare the radiuses of this circle. Therefore, any point H on this circle will be sufficient to create a triangle ∆FGH,with point J as the point that is equidistant from all of the vertices of this triangle.	  Figure 2. (Left) The point that is equidistant to all vertices of a general triangle is the center of its circumscribedcircle. (Right) The three perpendicular bisectors of any triangle meet in one point; this point is equidistant fromall the vertices of that triangle.Another solution will be the three perpendicular bisectors of any triangle meet in one point; this point isequidistant from all the vertices of that triangle (same point as the center of a triangle’s circumscribed circle). Inorder to find this point, let us remember that if we take the midpoint of segment FG and create a perpendicular,any point J on that perpendicular will be equidistant to F and G. Thus, FJ = JG (Figure 1). If we take section HG(figure 2, on the right), we can create perpendicular bisector that meets line GJ at point J. Since HJ=GJ andGJ=FJ, then FJ=HJ. Thus, point J is equidistant to all three vertices F, G and H.CSCL 2015 Proceedings80© ISLSEarly stages of the solutionThe team under scope has two students: Halel and Amir. They work together on two computers, whileconstantly monitoring each other's work. They pretty quickly come up with a shared understanding, like the restof the class, that the equidistant point in the case of equilateral triangle is the angle-bisectors’ intersection. Theycome to this understanding based on models they build with Geogebra. When Halel and Amir try to find asolution for a general triangle, they split. Each of them works next to his own computer, but they communicateorally at all times. Both come to the conclusion that the solution for the first stage is not valid in this case. Theymanage to find a solution for simpler case: The equidistant point from all vertices, in the case of right-angledtriangle is the midpoint of the hypotenuse (see figure 3). On that note ends the first lesson.Figure 3. The point (D) is the midpoint of the hypotenuse, and thus is equidistant to all vertices of a right angledtriangle.The class goes back, for the second lesson. The teacher reminds the class what would be theirupcoming steps - they need to find a point that is equidistant from the three vertices of any triangle. In addition,she gives a little hint that regards N1 - "Your job now is to go to a general triangle, ok? ... Another thing thatyou can do, anyone that encounters difficulties, is to start with two points, not three, and then move on to threepoints",Halel and Amir continue to solve the problem. They build a faulty narrative [N2]: In the case of ageneral triangle, the equidistant point is on its longest edge. They investigate this point and see that thishypothesis was wrong, and as a result they try make sense of their conclusions for the case of a right-angledtriangle, trying to find out why it works for the right angled triangle but not for the case of a scalene. Amir raisesanother Narrative, [N3] Solve the problem with the use of Pythagoras’s theorem. This direction is irrelevantsince the theorem is valid only for the case of a right angled triangles.The episode: Teacher’s interventionThe teacher joins Amir and Halel at this point, and after a quick attempt from the students' side to explain theirhypotheses, the teacher recognizes that the directions they chose [N2 and N3] were non-productive. Since shewants the students to solve the problem together, she does not give them the solution and decides to assist themwith the pre-planned support [N1], without refutation of their two narratives. She ignores their narratives andhelps them to understand that there is more than one point that is equidistant from two points.Teacher:[Looks at the Geogebra model in Amir’s computer]: " Is it possible to try…It is possible totry to get you out of this mess? … Choose two points, anyone you’d like. Say, AB orwhatever, does not matter just two points. Now, look for a point that is equidistant from Aand B. "[Amir creates a median to AB, as could be seen in figure 4]Teacher:"Now, try to find another point that is equidistant from the two points."Halel:"Is it supposed to be on the median?"Teacher:"What?"Halel:"This point [D] is already equidistant...So everything that will be related to that will beequal! [Screams] Ahh, I got it!!! Move away! [To Amir]"CSCL 2015 Proceedings81© ISLSAmir:[Looks at Halel] " This is what I am trying to say to you for half an hour now!!! But youwould not listen".[Amir and Halel turn, each one to his own computer]Figure 4. In triangle ABC, point D is equidistant from A and B.At this point, three narratives are at stake. The first is the conjecture that the desired point is on thelongest segment [N2], the second is that "it has to do with Pythagoras’s theorem" [N3] and then there is theteacher’s new narrative [N1].Solution attempt 1Amir: " We know that the triangle is right angled, and we know that […] this, square [Pointsat section AC] plus this, square [Points with his fingers to section CB] equals to this,square [Points at section AB]. So we can define them [AC and CB] as half [of AB].Half of this [Points at section AB] equals to this half [Points with his fingers tosection AC] OK?...So what I am saying is [that] when you take here the median[Points at section AB] …then it [AB] equals to the two halves [AC and CB]"Figure 5. Amir's Geogebra model of a right angled triangle.Amir explains now to Halel and the teacher why he thinks the solution for the right angled triangle isthe middle of the hypotenuse. By doing so he will make two mistakes: First, he assumes that the formulaAC2+BC2=AB2 is equivalent to the formula AC+BC=AB (See Ben-David, 2007, about this particularmisconception). Second, he assumes that if AC+BC=AB (which is completely wrong), then AC=AB/2. He startswith a hasty sketch of a right angled triangle. Amir uses these wrong assumptions and moves forward, based onthese assumptions he assumes that these narratives will be applicable for the case of any triangle.Amir:"Then I moved from here to here [Moves point ‘A’ so the triangle looks like one inthe figure 5]… I now try to play with this point [Points with his fingers to segmentAB] which is exactly what I wanted to do [Grabs the computer mouse, creates amidpoint D to section AB]. So the midpoint [of section AB] …is a fixed point. Now Ineed to make another point [adds a point to the drawing] I put it on point D and canfind [equidistant point]…[Creates a point G]Amir still thinks that the "point that is equidistant from all three vertices of any triangle, is on segmentAB, which is the longest segment. His plan is to use the computer simulation, create a point [G] on segment ABand move this point along this segment in order to find the equidistant point [N2]. He bases his claim onmathematical manipulations that are derived from [N3]. In order to meet with the teacher's instructions [N1: allCSCL 2015 Proceedings82© ISLSthe points that are equidistant from A and B are on a perpendicular bisector], he integrates previous conclusion –in the case of a right-angle triangle, the point that is equidistant to all vertices bisects the hypotenuse.Now, the teacher tells the students that she needs to leave, and without diagnosing how her hint wasperceived, she takes off. After she does so, the two students keep hopping between solutions but do not appearlike they are going to solve the problem.Solution attempt 2Amir builds a perpendicular bisector to AB, from its Midpoint, D. (see figure 6).Figure 6. Amir's model - point D is in the middle of segment AB, and build a line that is perpendicular to thissegment.Amir tries to apply the teacher's narrative, for their case by building a perpendicular bisector. But hedoes not have the opportunity to develop narrative [N1] and Halel stops him with an attempt to build upon [N2]from another perspective.Halel:"Amir, can I do something?"Amir:"Just a second. [Puts a general point on the perpendicular, and erases it.] OK, you go on"[Halel sits next to Amir’s computer, as Amir looks at what he does. Halel erases the perpendicularfrom point D, and creates a midpoint E to section CA, and a midpoint F to section BC (Figure 7). Hethen tries to create three segments – EF, FD and DE and erases them at once.]Figure 7. Points D,E,F are the medians of sections AB,AC and BC correspondingly.The attempt to create a perpendicular bisector by Amir – which is closely related to [N1], is stopped byHalel. This might be a sign for Halel's inability to integrate this narrative into his mental model. Halel takes astep back and connects the three midpoint of the three segments. We cannot tell what Halel's ideas was, but itappears to be an integration of [N2] that claims that the point that is equidistant needs to be on one (longest) ofsides of the triangle and [N1] that has to do with the creation of some sort of a segment that starts at themidpoints of the segments.Let us note, in addition, that a productive path to the solution would have been a merge of thenarratives of Amir and Halel: Creating three perpendicular bisectors from the three sides of the triangle willyield the point that is equidistant to all three vertices.DiscussionThe teacher's role in this study is of a facilitator that scaffolds the learning, rather than a direct instructor. As aresult she gives the students hints, and not the solution. She comes with a pre-packed narrative, and disregardsCSCL 2015 Proceedings83© ISLSthe narratives that were brought up by the students. Webb, (2009) explains that proper scaffolding of students'collaborative learning, requires an accurate and detailed analysis of the students' thinking before giving a promptthat is a best "fit" to those states. It is easy, but somewhat unfair, to critique a teacher's work, and I would herebymention that the teacher involved is highly competent teacher. She wants her students to self-regulate theirlearning (Zimmerman, 2008). She also needs to cope with time limitation, in addition to the fact that she needsto move on and support other team’s solutions. She has little time to diagnose the students’ Situationalmisconceptions, refute them, and to make sure that her hint was to lead the students anywhere. In addition, byall means I do not wish to claim that no learning was done. On the contrary, the technological scaffold,Geogebra, serves here as a tool that allows the students to refute their erroneous narratives (Hadas, Hershkoitzand Schwarz, 2006).However, our obligation here is to use the conceptual-change framework in order to explain, where didshe go wrong? In order to use the conceptual-change theoretical framework, in the context of online monitoringand regulation of collaborative learning, I define the term Situational misconception as a faulty narrative aboutthe way the problem should be solved, which confines student's ability to solve the problem. Amir and Halelexemplify two main narratives [N2 & N3] that are situational-misconceptions. These situational-misconceptionsare manifested as Geogebra models of possible solutions to the problem. The teacher instructs them to create aGeogebra model that serve as a manifestation of a third narrative. This is a technological scaffold (Pea, 2004)that was created by the teacher in order to foster the solution. As a result of their interaction with their teacher,they were introduced to an additional narrative [N1] that led to a couple of solution attempts that failed, sincethis narrative [N1] was incommensurable with their previous narratives [N2 & N3].Failure of solution attempt 1This solution attempt starts with [N3], which relies on the faulty assumption that there is a relation between thefact that the equidistant point is in the midpoint of the hypotenuse and Pythagoras's theorem. The midpointappears in the teacher's hint [N1] as well, but has a completely different role: It defines the point from which aperpendicular is built in order to find all the points that are equidistant to the two vertices of the triangle'ssegment. Consequently, this does not change the students' assumption that the equidistant point in the case ofscalene triangle is somewhere on the long edge [N2]. This leads also to the failure in solution attempt 2.Failure of solution attempt 2The equidistant point in the case of a right angled triangle appears on one of the sections (the hypotenuse). Thus,the equidistant point in the general case might be on one of the sections (wrong!) [N2]. Since the teacher's hintinvolved a point that is on one of the vertices – a midpoint [N1] – then if we build midpoints for the threesegments of the triangle, and connect them, we might find a point that is equidistant from the three vertices.Sfard (2007) uses Kuhn's term "incommensurability" in order to describe the use of the same term intwo different conceptual frameworks. Sfard suggests that the interlocutors (students and teacher) shouldexplicate how does the term they are using fits in their narrative, in order to proceed further. In our case, this isnot a term, but a mathematical concept that was applicable in both narratives. In our case, this concept was themidpoint.Posner, Strike, Hewsonand Gertzog (1982), claim that the teacher should make the studentsacknowledge that the current narrative does not lead them anywhere, before she adds a competing plausiblenarrative. Eventually, the added narrative [N1] confuses them, as they try to assimilate it to their narratives,instead of applying deeper change (accommodation). Nonproductive narratives were not refuted, which yieldedthe creation of two solution attempts, based on the use of the same concept – in different contexts. Accordingly,these two solution attempts are hybrids of all three old narratives [N1, N2 & N3].ConclusionsFrom a theoretical perspective, the current work makes an attempt to analyze teacher's intervention in mathproblem solving, from the lens of the conceptual change framework. I use the term Situational-misconception todescribe a nonproductive narrative; and see how the addition of a narrative to that situational-misconception,without refutation, leads to farther situational misconceptions. The adoption of such a framework serves finegrained apprehension of how a misconception develops. It allows us to understand why the literature onConceptual change adheres refutation of non-productive narratives, before adding new ones.Moreover, we learn that the lack of refutation does not necessarily lead to continuity of the "old"misconception. While the literature on conceptual change mainly attempts to describe successful cases in whichfaulty concepts are replaced by new ones, the novelty of the situational misconception framework regards to theCSCL 2015 Proceedings84© ISLSidentification of a twilight-zone: two competing narratives do not really impede each other, and ideas from bothnew and old narratives merge into new misconceptions.This study contributes to in-class practice, by re-encouraging teachers to listen to their students'narratives carefully and refute them in a plausible way, when needed, before they add any competing narrative.In addition, teachers might find it beneficial to be highly familiar with possible misconceptions on the path tothe solution of a problem in math. To rest our minds, it is important to mention that later on the teacherintervened in Halel and Amir's solution again. This time she was much more explicit; and still did not refute herstudent's nonproductive narratives. This led them to solve the problem.ReferencesAbdu, R. & Schwarz, B.B. (2012). "Metafora" and the fostering of collaborative mathematical problem solving.Constructionism 2012 Conference: Theory, Practice and Impact. Athens, Greece.Abdu, R., Mavrikis, M., (2016). The role in fostering computer-supported collaborative math problem solving.International research for math education – ZDM.Arcavi, A., & Isoda, M. (2007). Learning to listen: From historical sources to classroom practice. Educationalstudies in mathematics, 66, 111-129.Asterhan, C. S., & Schwarz, B. B. (2007). The effects of monological and dialogical argumentation on conceptlearning in evolutionary theory. Journal of Educational Psychology, 99, 626–639.Carey, S. (1988). Conceptual differences between children and adults. Mind and Language, 3, 167-181.Chi, M. T. H., Roscoe, R. D., Slotta, J. D., Roy, M., & Chase, C. C. (2011). Misconceived causal explanationsfor emergent processes. Cognitive Science, 36(1), 1–61.Ben-david, H. (2007). Using student's errors as a vehicle to improve learning and enhance mathematicalknowledge (in Hebrew). Ale: The Israeli journal for math teacher 37, 81-93.diSessa, A. A. (2006). A history of conceptual change research: Threads and fault lines. In K. Sawyer (Ed.),Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Hadas, N., Hershkowitz, R., & Schwarz, B. B. (2006). Inquiry Learning with Dynamic Geometry Tools. In A.Zohar (Ed.), Inquiry Based Learning: An Ongoing Process. Magness Publishing House.Matusov, E., (1996). Intersubjectiity without agreement. Mind, Culture and Activity. 3(1), 25-45.Pea, R.D. (2004). The social and technological dimensions of scaffolding and related theoretical concepts forlearning, education, and human activity. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 423–451.Posner, G. J., Strike, K. A., Hewson, P. W., & Gertzog, W. A. (1982). Accommodation of a scientificconception: Toward a theory of conceptual change. Science Education, 66, 211-227.Prusak, N., Hershkowitz, R. & Schwarz, B.B. (2012). From Visual Reasoning to Logical Necessity throughArgumentative Design.Educational Studies in Mathematics, 79(1), 19-40.Schoenfeld, A.H. (1985). Mathematical problem solving. New York: Academic Press.Schwarz, B.B., Neuman, Y. & Biezuner, S. (2000). Two "wrongs" may make a right…If they argue together!Cognition & Instruction, 18(4), 461-494.Sfard, A. (2007). When the rules of discourse change, but nobody tells you. Journal of the Learning Sciences,16, 565–613.Stahl, G. (2009). Studying virtual math teams. New York, NY: SpringerTippett, C. D. (2010). Refutation text in science education: A review of two decades of research.International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education, 8(6), 951-970.von Glasersfeld, E. (1995). Piaget's constructivist Theory of Knowledge. In Radical constructivism. London:The Falmer Press, 53-75.Vosniadou, S., & Verschaffel, L. (2004). Extending the conceptual change approach to mathematics learningand teaching. Special Issue of Learning and Instruction, 14(5), 445–451.Webb, N. (2009). The teacher's role in promoting collaborative dialogue in the classroom. British Journal ofEducational Psychology, 79, 1 - 28.Zimmerman, B.J. (2008). Investigating self-regulation and motivation: Historical background, methodologicaldevelopments, and future prospects. American Educational Research Journal, 45, 166-183.AcknowledgmentsI would like to thank Dr. Krista Astherhan, Dr. Reuma DeGroot, Dr. Ron Pallivatikal and Prof. Baruch Schwarzfor their assistance in different parts of the creation of this paper. This study was a part of Metafora project,which was co-funded by the European Union under the Information and Communication Technologies (ICT)theme of the 7th Framework Programme for R&D (FP7), Contract No. 257872.CSCL 2015 Proceedings85© ISLS