Effects of Expertise on Teachers’ Technology-Supported TeachingScriptsChristina Wekerle, University of Augsburg, christina.wekerle@phil.uni-augsburg.deIngo Kollar, University of Augsburg, ingo.kollar@phil.uni-augsburg.deAbstract: Technology can promote learning if teachers know how to effectively integrate it inthe classroom. This might depend on teachers’ expertise. Therefore, we investigated howteachers at four different expertise levels plan their technology-supported lessons. Resultsindicate only small expertise effects. The potentials of technology are neither fully used byteachers at lower nor by teachers at higher levels of expertise.Keywords: technology-supported teaching, scripts, learning activities, technology, expertise.Problem statementTo promote learning in schools, a lot of potentials are attributed to digital technology. However, in order toexploit these potentials in the classroom, it is necessary to clarify what good technology-supported teachingactually means. Results from research that focuses on how novice and expert teachers differ in their teachingindicate that lesson plans of more proficient teachers provide more actual learning opportunities for theirstudents than those of less proficient teachers (e.g., Borko, Livingston & Shavelson, 1990). Even though thesefindings give insights in expert teachers’ planning processes, this research has mainly focused on teaching ingeneral. Yet, little is known about the extent to which these considerations also hold true for the ways teachersintend to use digital technology in the classroom.Technology-supported teaching scriptsTo conceptualize teachers’ planning processes with respect to where, when and how to embed specific kinds oftechnologies in the classroom, we suggest taking on a script perspective. A script is a cognitive structure thatguides an individual in understanding and acting in a certain class of situations. According to Fischer, Kollar,Stegmann and Wecker (2013), scripts consist of different hierarchically structured components including Play,Scenes and Scriptlets. At the top level, the Play component represents knowledge about the type of situation(e.g., ”technology-supported teaching in the classroom” play). Once a teacher selects this play, s/he willautomatically derive expectations regarding the Scenes or phases of this play (e.g., first an input phase, followedby an exercise phase) as well as the kinds of activities that are to be shown in a phase. Knowledge about theseactivities is stored in Scriptlets (e.g., students watch a video). Based on these components, we assume that it ispossible to differentiate more effective technology-supported teaching scripts from less effective ones withregard to their effects on student learning.In this paper, we are particularly concerned with the activities that teachers try to promote by usingdigital technology (Scriptlet component). Chi and Wylie (2014) differentiate between passive (e.g. watching avideo), active (e.g. pausing/forwarding a video), constructive (e.g. drawing a digital concept map) andinteractive activities (e.g. writing a joint review in a collaborative text editor). They hypothesize that on average,learning gains increase from an engagement in passive over active and constructive to interactive activities.A subsequent question is whether certain types of technology may provide more affordances tostimulate constructive and interactive learning activities than others. We suggest to heuristically differentiatebetween four types of technology (see Müller, Blömeke & Eichler, 2006): Information technology (e.g. digitalpresentations) is believed to mainly afford an engagement in passive activities. Self-assessment technology (e.g.online-quizzes) can be considered to mainly afford active and constructive activities. Editing technology (e.g.text editors) might particularly afford an engagement in active or constructive activities. Finally, collaborationtechnology re (e.g. etherpads) should afford an engagement in interactive activities. Results of previous metaanalyses on the effects of technologies on student achievement seem to go well along with these considerations(e.g., Castillo-Manzano, Castro-Nuño, Lopéz-Valpuesta, Sanz-Diaz & Yñiguez, 2016; Wecker, 2013).Research questionsWe asked two research questions: To what extent do teachers at different expertise levels differ with respect to(1) the types of learning activities they intend to promote with digital technology, and (2) the types oftechnology they intend to use in the classroom? Based on Borko et al. (1990), we assumed that teachers onICLS 2018 Proceedings1569© ISLShigher expertise levels would target more high-level learning activities (esp. constructive and interactive) andmake more use of technologies that would easily afford an engagement in these activities (esp. self-assessment,editing, and collaboration technology) than teachers at lower expertise levels.MethodN=110 pre-service teacher freshmen („Novices“; M semester =1.51, SD=0.88), N=94 advanced pre-service teachers(„Advanced Beginners“; M semester =5.77, SD=1.73), N= 25 pre-service teachers enrolled in a supplement ontechnology-supported teaching (“Competent in Theory”; M semester =8.27, SD=3.49) and N= 41 technologyexperienced in-service teachers (“Competent in Practice”; Median teaching experience =11-15) participated. They wereasked to describe an ideal technology-supported lesson and requested to select from a list (1) the kind oflearning activities and (2) types of technology which they had aimed at. For (1) learning activities, a selfdeveloped list of 21 items was used to measure the intended activity intensity with regard to participants’mentioned technologies. For (2) types of technology, participants had to pick from a list of technology types(information, self-assessment, editing, collaboration) which ones they had intended to use in the classroom.ResultsWith regard to (1) learning activities, we found a significant, but small effect of expertise (F(12,690.83)=2.46,p=.00, η²= .04). Pair-wise post-hoc comparisons showed that novices aimed significantly more at passivelearning activities than the Competent in Practice group (p= .01), and the Competent in Theory group aimedsignificantly more at interactive learning activities than Novices (p= .01) and Advanced Beginners (p=.03).Active and constructive learning activities were mentioned to a similar degree by the different expertise groups(all p>.05). With regard to (2) the types of technology, Advanced Beginners mentioned self-assessmenttechnology significantly less often than all other expertise groups (χ²(3, N=270)=17.8, p= .00). No significantdifferences were found for the other types of technology (all p>.05).DiscussionResults indicate expertise effects with regard to passive and interactive learning activities which basically is inline with findings on teacher experts’ lesson plans, even though effects are small. With regard to types oftechnology, teachers at higher expertise levels hardly seem to use technologies in their lesson plans that mightmore easily afford an engagement in higher-level activities. Differences between groups could only be observedfor self-assessment technology. This might be due to a cohort effect: Advanced pre-service teachers might havenot made own experiences with that rather new type of technology in comparison to the other groups. Overall,our results indicate a need to facilitate teachers’ technology-supported teaching scripts, for example byscaffolding their noticing and knowledge-based reasoning processes (e.g. Seidel, Blomberg & Renkl, 2013). Inconclusion, a script-based investigation of pre- and in-service teachers’ planning of technology-supportedlessons seems to be helpful to reveal that the potentials of technology are often not considered, neither by prenor by even experienced in-service teachers.ReferencesBorko, H., Livingston, C., & Shavelson, R. J. (1990). Teachers' thinking about instruction. Remedial andSpecial Education, 11(6), 40-49.Castillo-Manzano, J. I., Castro-Nuño, M., López-Valpuesta, L., Sanz-Díaz, M. T., & Yñiguez, R. (2016).Measuring the effect of ARS on academic performance: A global meta-analysis. Computers &Education, 96, 109-121.Chi, M. T., & Wylie, R. (2014). The ICAP framework: Linking cognitive engagement to active learningoutcomes. Educational Psychologist, 49(4), 219-243.Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Stegmann, K., & Wecker, C. (2013). Toward a script theory of guidance in computersupported collaborative learning. Educational Psychologist, 48(1), 56-66.Müller, C., Blömeke, S., & Eichler, E. (2006). Unterricht mit digitalen Medien – zwischen Innovation undTradition? Eine empirische Studie zum Lehrerhandeln im Medienzusammenhang. Zeitschrift fürErziehungswissenschaft, 9(4), 632-650.Seidel, T., Blomberg, G., & Renkl, A. (2013). Instructional strategies for using video in teacher education.Teaching and Teacher Education, 34, 56-65.Wecker, C. (2013, August). Does PowerPoint foster learning? A meta-analysis. Paper presented at the on 15thBiennial Conference for Learning and Instruction der European Association for Research on Learningand Instruction (EARLI). Munich, Germany.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1570© ISLS