Flow in Computer-Supported Collaborative Problem-SolvingGaëlle Molinari, TECFA-University of Geneva & UniDistance, gaelle.molinari@unidistance.chSunny Avry, TECFA-University of Geneva & UniDistance, Sunny.Avry@unige.chAbstract: This study investigated the individual experience of flow and its relations with emotions and the perceived socio-cognitive processes involved in a computer-supported collaborative problem-solving task. Participants were asked to play in dyads the video game Portal 2®and then to individually complete three subjective questionnaires (emotion, collaboration andflow). Results showed that flow is related to both the modelling of the partner’s emotions andthe perceived mutual engagement in collaborative processes such as information pooling andtransactivity. They support the idea that the flow experience should be considered as a meansto improve the quality of computer-supported collaborative learning.IntroductionOne of the main current challenges for research in the learning field is to make a shift from a strictly cognitiveapproach to an approach in which the cognitive and affective (social-emotional) dimensions of learning need tobe investigated as intrinsically interdependent. In such an approach, the experiential nature of learning, for instance, emotions that emerged as the result of subjective cognitive appraisal of control and value of the learningsituation (Pekrun, 2006), should be examined in relation to the knowledge (co-)construction process. Emotionsare seen here as forming “a critical piece of how, what, when and why people think, remember and learn” (Immordino-Yang, 2015, p.8).In the Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) domain, it is now well accepted to definecollaboration as the dynamic interaction between two spaces, a cognitive space dedicated to epistemic activities(co-producing knowledge, resolving the task/problem) and a relational space dedicated to socio-affective activities (maintaining a positive, stimulating and engaging relationship with the learning partners) (Andriessen, Baker,& van der Puil, 2011; Barron, 2003). Andriessen and colleagues argue that understanding what emotions areinvolved and how they circulate within the group is necessary in understanding how learners work and learntogether. In the EATMINT (Emotion Awareness Tools for Mediated Interaction) project (Molinari et al., 2013;2017), it has been shown that encouraging partners to explicitly share their emotions throughout collaboration(using an emotion awareness tool) positively impacts their perceived effort of modelling each other (mutual modelling; Dillenbourg, Lemaignan, Sangin, Nova, & Molinari, 2016) as well as of building on each other’s contributions (transactivity; Berkowitz & Gibbs, 1983; Molinari, Sangin, Nüssli, & Dillenbourg, 2008). Results alsosuggest that perceived transactivity and group performance positively correlate with positive emotions like enjoyment and negatively correlate with negative emotions like boredom (Avry, Chanel, Bétrancourt, Pun, & Molinari,2017). Despite the consensus regarding the importance of considering the collaborative learning experience as acontinuous cycle of tensions (and relaxations) at both the cognitive and social-emotional planes (Andriessen etal., 2011), there is still little research that go deep into the dynamics and mutual influence between emotionalstates, cognitive states and collaborative processes (Mullins, Deiglmayr, & Spada, 2013).The present research is exploratory and focuses on the individual experience of flow during a computersupported collaborative problem-solving task. In particular, our main research question concerns the relationsbetween flow, emotions and the perceived socio-cognitive processes involved in collaboration. The rationale forthis research is that there is a need to gain a better understanding of the subjective experience of individualsengaged in a collaborative task on the one hand, and on the other, of how this relates to how they perceive theway they work together to solve the problem. Such an understanding is a necessary step toward providing designprinciples for technology and environments that aim at promoting positive, engaging and meaningful collaborativelearning experiences (Riva, Banos, Botella, Wiederhold, & Gaggioli, 2012).The concept of flow as a framework (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990) is usually used to investigate students’engagement in the learning process. Flow is defined as an optimal experience in which the person feels simultaneously cognitively efficient, attentionally engaged, motivated, highly interested and happy (Moneta & Csikszentmihalyi, 1996). More specifically, it is characterized by a combination of cooccurrent states, that is, sense ofcontrol, cognitive absorption, distorted perception of time, loss of self-awareness (deindividuation), and autotelicexperience (heightened enjoyment) (Heutte, Fenouillet, Kaplan, Martin-Krumm, & Bachelet, 2016). Control, absorption, time transformation and loss of self-awareness are described as the cognitive dimensions of flow whereasautotelic experience refers to its affective dimension. Moreover, being in control and totally concentrated areconsidered both as conditions for experiencing flow whereas alteration of sense of time, loss of reflective self,ICLS 2018 Proceedings184© ISLSand well-being are considered as effects (Heutte et al., 2016). Flow is expected to occur with meaningful learningtasks, that is, tasks that provide individuals with the opportunity to master new challenges and surpass themselves,and also in situations where they perceive themselves as having the necessary skills to perform the task. In complex learning settings, D’Mello and Graesser (2012) showed that a flow state is experienced when a cognitiveequilibrium is reached and/or when learners focus on mastery of the learning task. They also highlighed a positivecorrelation between flow and learning gains. This relation is explained by the fact that flow is experienced as areward and provides learners with a motivation to persist in the task despite difficulties and obstacles to goals(that is, cognitive desiquilibrium moments). Flow can also be promoted in situations where learners experiencepositive task-related emotions such as enjoyment and curiosity whereas negative emotions such as boredom andhopelessness relate negatively to flow (Boekaerts & Pekrun, 2016).Research on the experience of flow in computer-supported collaborative/problem-solving is still relatively rare. Flow is investigated as either an individual or a mutual experience (social flow) in group settings(Walker, 2010). Walker showed that the experience of flow is more intense in group activities than in individualactivities. This can be explained by the fact that group activities are more challenging/risky and require considerable skills at both task/cognitive and social/relational levels. Moreover, the intensity of joy associated with theflow state in group settings increases with the level of interdependence between group members and is related tothe extent to which emotions are shared (e.g. through contagion) during interaction. Results also showed a positivecorrelation between flow and group performance (Admiraal, Huizenga, Akkerman, & Dam, 2011). This relationis mediated by the degree to which group members share relevant task-related information and also perceive eachother as contributing equally to the achievement of the common goal (Aubé, Brunelle, & Rousseau, 2014). Allthese results support the idea that there is a need for team managers and also for teachers to consider the flowexperience as a means to improve the quality of group processes and outcomes.In the context of this theoretical background, we propose to explore three main questions:•To which emotions is the individual experience of flow associated in the context of a computer-supportedcollaborative problem-solving task? (Question 1)•To what extent is individual flow related to participants’ ability to accurately perceive their partner’semotions during collaboration (emotion modelling)? (Question 2)•To what extent is individual flow related to participants’ perception of the interaction with their partner,i.e. to perceived socio-cognitive involved in collaboration such as grounding, information pooling, transactivity, consensus building and coordination? (Question 3)MethodSixty-four participants (12 women and 52 men; M=22.02 years, SD=3.49), grouped in 32 same-gender dyads,participated to this experiment. They were asked to play a collaborative problem-solving video game called Portal2®. This game was chosen for two reasons. First, it requires both a high individual involvement and the mutualengagement of participants to solve problems in a coordinated way (which corresponds to the criteria of a highlycollaborative task; Roschelle & Teasley, 1995). Second, it involves a set of skills necessary to academic successsuch as problem-solving skills, spatial cognition skills and persistence (see Shute et al., 2014 for a complete description of the cognitive and motivational skills involved in Portal 2®). In this game, players have to find the wayout of several closed rooms. More precisely, they have to manipulate objects in their shared environment to openup passages and move forward to a next room until the exit. It is necessary for players to jointly consider whatthey must do to progress in the game. When a potential solution is found, they have to take the current position oftheir partner into account and to engage in mutual coordinated actions.Dyads were randomly assigned to one of 4 conditions. Participants received a combination of two typesof biased feedbacks at six times during the game, namely, their dyad’s level of mastery and their dyad’s ranking(among fictive dyads). The research goal in using such feedbacks was to influence control and value appraisalswhich are assumed to shape task-related emotions (Pekrun, 2006). The purpose of the present study is not to focuson the impact of the control and value feedbacks on flow experience. There were, however, no main effects norinteraction on any of the five flow dimensions (p > .10). Regarding effects of control and value feedbacks onemotions and the perceived quality of collaboration, please see Avry et al., 2017).The members of each dyad were separated in 2 rooms. Both peers were seated in front of a computerequipped with webcam and a BioSemi® electrophysiological system. They were not able to see each other whileplaying but could communicate orally thanks to microphone headsets. At the very beginning of the experiment,an individual training phase was proposed to familiarize participants with the game. They then performed the task(30 mn). Immediately after collaboration, they were asked to complete 1) an emotion questionnaire, 2) a collaboration questionnaire and 3) a flow questionnaire. These 3 questionnaires are described below.ICLS 2018 Proceedings185© ISLSEmotion questionnaireIt was derived from the Achievement Emotions Questionnaire (Pekrun, Goetz, Frenzel, Barchfeld, & Perry, 2011),and aimed at measuring the emotions experienced during collaboration. Participants rated the intensity of boththeir own- and their partner’s emotions using a list of 4 activating negative emotions (Anxiety, Anger, Frustration,Shame), 4 deactivating negative emotions (Deception, Hopelessness, Boredom, Sadness), 5 activating positiveemotions (Hope, Pride, Joy, Enjoyment, Gratitude) and 3 deactivating positive emotions (Relaxation, Relief, Contentment). Each of these 16 emotions was thus accompanied by two 7-point intensity scales (1=very low or not atall to 7=very high), one for the participants’ emotions and one for their partner’s emotions.In a dyad with A and B as partners, the accuracy of the mental model A built of B’s emotions, i.e. Model(A, B, emotions) was computed as the absolute difference between Model (A, B, emotions) and Model (B, B,emotions); e.g. difference between the “intensity of Anxiety felt by B estimated by A” and the “intensity of Anxietyfelt by B estimated by him/herself”. This difference was calculated for each of the 16 emotions. Four modellingaccuracy scores were obtained, two for positive emotions (one for positive activating emotions and one for positive deactivating emotions) and two for negative emotions (one for negative activating emotions and one fornegative deactivating emotions). The smaller the score, the more accurate the model.Collaboration questionnaireIt was inspired from the rating scheme proposed by Meier, Spada and Rummel (2007) to assess the quality ofcomputer-supported collaborative processes. The present questionnaire was designed to measure the participants’perceptions of both their own engagement and their partner’s engagement in the collaboration process, in particular in five socio-cognitive processes that play a crucial role in the success of collaboration: Grounding (3 items;e.g. “making sure the other has understood you”); Information Pooling (5 items; e.g. “gathering as much relevantinformation as possible to solve the problem”, “eliciting personal knowledge from the other that could be usefulin solving the problem”); Transactivity (2 items; e.g. “building upon the other’s contributions by integrating theminto one’s own perspective”); Consensus Building (5 items; e.g. “looking for the best arguments for or against apotential solution”, “trying to convince the other by justifying one’s own proposals for solutions”); and Coordination (5 items; e.g. “structuring by clearly defining subtasks to perform and dividing them among you equally”;“monitoring the time remaining for the task and taking care not to waste time unnecessarily”). For each of thesecollaborative processes, items were accompanied with 2 types of 7-point frequency scales (1=never to 7=veryoften), one for the participants’ level of engagement and one for their partner’s engagement level.Flow questionnaireWe used here the first version of the EduFlow scale (Heutte et al., 2016) designed to measure flow in learningenvironments. It is a 16-item scale organized into five dimensions of flow, namely: (1) Sense of Control (3 items;e.g. “I felt I was able to cope with the high demands of the task”); (2) Cognitive absorption (4 items; e.g. “I wastotally absorbed in what I was doing”, “I felt I was completely focused on what I was doing”); (3) Alteration ofthe Sense of Time (3 items; e.g. “I did not notice time passing”); (4) Loss of Self-Consciousness (3 items; e.g. “Iwas not worrying about what my partner thought to me”); and (5) Autotelic Experience (3 items; e.g. “The activityitself gave me a sense of well-being”). For each of these 16 items, a 7-point answer scale (1=strongly disagree to7=strongly agree) was used.ResultsAll statistical analyses were performed using SPSS V.24 (IBM Corporation).Individual experience of flow during collaborationTable 1 shows that the five components of flow, that is, Sense of Control, Cognitive Absorption, Alteration of theSense of Time, Loss of Self-Consciousness and Autotelic Experience, are experienced at moderate to high levels.Table 1: Means and Standard Deviations for the 5 Dimensions of FlowMeans3.996.025.875.295.07Sense of ControlCognitive AbsorptionAlteration of the Sense of TimeLoss of Self-ConsciousnessAutotelic ExperienceICLS 2018 Proceedings186Standard Deviations1.361.061.281.471.47© ISLSWe computed correlations between the five flow dimensions. Figure 1 shows a positive correlation between the two flow conditions, i.e. Sense of Control and Cognitive Absorption. Autotelic Experience is positivelyassociated with the two other effects of flow, i.e. Alteration of the Sense of Time and Loss of Self-Consciousness,and also with the two flow conditions. The correlation between Alteration of the Sense of Time and Loss of SelfConsciousness is very weak and not significant (r = .05, n.s.). Finally, Alteration of the Sense of Time is positivelyrelated to Cognitive Absorption while it does not significantly correlate with Sense of Control (r = .08, n.s.).Finally, Loss of Self-Consciousness is the only effect of flow that is not significantly related to any of the twoconditions of flow (Sense of Control: r = .09, n.s.; Cognitive Absorption: r = .04, n.s.).Figure 1. Relations between the 5 Dimensions of Flow (Absorption=Cognitive Absorption; Sense of Time=Alteration of the Sense of Time; Self-Consciousness=Loss of Self-Consciouness; Autotelism=Autotelic Experience).Flow and emotions experienced during collaborationFlow and emotionsCorrelations were computed between the five dimensions of flow and the four types of emotions, namely positiveactivating/deactivating emotions and negative activating/deactivating emotions (see Table 2). Sense of Controland Cognitive Absorption are positively associated with positive activating and deactivating emotions. The correlation between Cognitive Absorption and positive deactivating emotions is, however, marginally significant(weak correlation). Of these two conditions of flow, only Sense of Control is negatively related to negative activating and deactivating emotions. The correlations between Cognitive Absorption and negative activating anddeactivating emotions are very weak and not significant.Autotelic Experience is positively correlated with positive activating and deactivating emotions, and negatively related to negative activating and deactivating emotions. The correlation between Autotelic Experienceand negative activating emotions is, however, marginally significant (weak correlation). Loss of Self-Consciousness is positively but marginally related to positive activating emotions (weak correlation). The correlations between Loss of Self-Consciousness and the other types of emotions (positive deactivating emotions, negative activating and deactivating emotions) are very weak and not significant. Of the three effects of flow, only Alterationof the Sense of Time is not significantly related to emotions experienced during collaboration.Table 2: Relations between Flow Dimensions and Emotions Experienced During Collaboration.Positive EmotionsNegative EmotionsActivatingDeactivatingActivatingDeactivatingSense of Controlr=.55, p=.000r=.61, p=.000r=-.46, p=.000r=-.41, p=.001Absorptionr=.38, p=.002r=.23, p=.07r=.13, n.s.r=-.08, n.s.r=.15, n.s.r=.13, n.s.r=.05, n.s.r=-.06, n.s.Self-Consciousnessr=.23, p=.07r=.18, n.s.r=-.06, n.s.r=-.06, n.s.Autotelismr=.61, p=.000r=.52, p=.000r=-.23, p=.07r=-.44, p=.000Sense of TimeICLS 2018 Proceedings187© ISLSBelow, more specific results are listed:•Sense of Control is positively correlated with seven of the eight positive emotions, the strongest correlations being with contentment (r=.61, p=.000) and pride (r=.54, p=.000). The positive correlation withhope is not significant (r=.15, n.s.). This flow dimension is negatively correlated with seven of the eightnegative emotions, the strongest correlations being with hopelessness (r=-.45, p=.000) and frustration(r=-.38, p=.002). The negative correlation with sadness is not significant (r=-.22, p=.08).•An increased Absorption on the task correlates with an increase in experience of hope (r=.46, p=.000).•Autotelic Experience is positively correlated with seven of the eight positive emotions, the strongestcorrelations being with enjoyment (r=.68, p=.000) and joy (r=.59, p=.000). The positive correlation withrelaxation is not significant (r=.19, n.s.). This flow dimension is negatively correlated with four of theeight negative emotions, the strongest correlations being with boredom (r=-.45, p=.000) and sadness (r=.38, p=.002). There are no significant correlations with anxiety (r=.10, n.s.), deception (r=-.21, n.s.),frustration (r=-.22, p=.08) and shame (r=-.21, p=.10).Flow and modelling of partner’s emotionsCorrelations were computed between the flow dimensions and the four modelling accuracy scores (i.e. one scoreper type of emotions). Please note that the negative correlations are a sign for high accuracy in assessing emotionsin the collaborative partner. As depicted in Table 3, Alteration of the Sense of Time is the only dimension of flowsignificantly related to the accuracy with which participants assess their partner’s positive emotions. The strongestcorrelation is with the modelling accuracy score for positive activating emotions.An increase in Sense of Sontrol as well as in experience of well-being (Autotelic Experience) is associatedwith an increase in the accuracy in assessing negative emotions in the partner. The strongest correlations are withthe modelling accuracy scores for negative deactivating emotions.Finally, Cognitive Absorption is linked to the ability to correctly assess negative deactivating emotionsexperienced by the other, Loss of Self-Consciousness to the mutual modelling of negative activating emotions.Table 3: Relations between Flow Dimensions and Emotion Modelling.Modelling of PositiveEmotionsModelling of Negative EmotionsActivatingDeactivatingActivatingDeactivatingSense of Controlr=.20, n.s.r=.10, n.s.r=-.23, p=.07r=-.30, p=.01Absorptionr=.01, n.s.r=.08, n.s.r=-.01, n.s.r=-.27, p=.03r=-.32,p=.01r=-.28,p=.03r=-.17, n.s.r=-.12, n.s.Self-Consciousnessr=-.10, n.s.r=-.08, n.s.r=-.30, p=.02r=-.13, n.s.Autotelismr=-.16, n.s.r=.006, n.s.r=-.38,p=.002r=-.41,p=.001Sense of TimeFlow and perceived socio-cognitive processesAll flow dimensions, except Loss of Self-Consciousness, are significantly positively related to at least two perceived socio-cognitive processes (Table 4 a/b). Flow is more strongly related to the participants’ perception oftheir partner’s engagement in the collaboration process than to their own perceived engagement.Information Pooling and Transactivity are related to both conditions of flow, i.e. Sense of Control andCognitive Absorption, and also to two out of the three effects of flow, i.e. Alteration of the Sense of Time andAutotelic Experience. Coordination and Grounding are only related to flow conditions (both Sense of Control andCognitive Absorption for Coordination; Cognitive Absorption only for Grounding). Consensus Building is relatedmainly to flow effects, more specifically to Autotelic Experience.ICLS 2018 Proceedings188© ISLSTable 4 a/b: Relations between Flow Dimensions and Perceived Socio-Cognitive Processes.GroundingInformation PoolingTransactivitySelfPartnerSelfPartnerSelfPartnerSense of Controlr=.19,n.s.r=.20,n.s.r= .28,p=.03r= .33,p=.007r= .26,p=.04r= .29,p=.02Absorptionr=.23,p=.07r=.26,p=.04r=.25,p=.05r=.34,p=.006r=.34,p=.006r=.37,p=.003Sense of Timer=.05,n.s.r=-.03,n.s.r=.27,p=.03r=.29,p=.02r=.25,p=.05r=.36,p=.003Self-Consciousnessr=.06,n.s.r=.16,n.s.r=.001,n.s.r=.10,n.s.r=.05,n.s.r=.05,n.s.Autotelismr=.14,n.s.r=.18,n.s.r=.35,p=.005r=.43,p=.000r=.43,p=.000r=.45,p=.000Consensus BuildingCoordinationSelfPartnerSelfPartnerSense of Controlr=.17,n.s.r=.20,n.s.r= .36,p=.003r= .43,p=.000Absorptionr=.23,p=.07r=.20,n.s.r= .24,p=.05r= .32,p=.009Sense of Timer=.22, n.s.r=.15, n.s.r=-.10, n.s.r=-.05, n.s.Self-Consciousnessr=.02, n.s.r=.11, n.s.r=-.14, n.s.r=-.10, n.s.r=.34,p=.006r=.35,p=.005r=.22,n.s.r=.21,n.s.AutotelismDiscussion and conclusionThe aim of the present study was to investigate the relations between individual flow, emotions and perceivedsocio-cognitive processes involved in computer-supported collaborative problem-solving. First, results show thatparticipants reported having experienced the different states of flow, namely, sense of control, cognitive absorption, distorted perception of time, loss of self-consciousness and autotelic experience. It should be stressed thatsense of control is rated as just about average. The reason for this may be that the high interdependence amongdyad members makes them feel responsible for both their own- and their partner’s actions. Results also suggestthat how the flow dimensions are interconnected in this computer-supported collaborative environment is quitesimilar to that observed in individual learning situations (Heutte et al., 2016). The two cognitive conditions offlow, sense of control and cognitive absorption, are positively related to each other. There are also relations between flow effects. More specifically, autotelic experience which refers to the affective dimension of flow, ispositively related to its two cognitive effects, alteration of sense of time and loss of self-consciousness. Theseeffects are not, however, significantly related to each other. Furthermore, both flow conditions are positivelyrelated to autotelic experience. Participants who experience a deep level of involvement in the collaborative process are also more likely to lose track of time. Loss of self-consciousness is the only effect that is not significantlyrelated to flow conditions. It can therefore be assumed that this social dimension of flow (Heutte et al., 2016)would rather depend on the level of well-being experienced during collaboration.ICLS 2018 Proceedings189© ISLSEmotions experienced during the game are significantly related to the conditions of flow and its affectivedimension (Question 1). Sense of control and autotelic experience are related to both positive and negative emotions. It is noteworthy that sense of control is more related to positive deactivating emotions and negative activating emotions while autotelic experience is more related to positive activating emotions and negative deactivatingemotions. More specifically, an increase in the feeling of being in control over the collaborative task is accompanied by an increase in contentment and a decrease in frustration. The autotelic experience is characterized by anincrease in enjoyment and a decrease in boredom. Cognitive absorption is related mainly to positive activatingemotions. Pfarticipants experience hope when they are intensively focused on what they are working on together.Alteration of the sense of time and loss of self-consciousness are two cognitive dimensions of flow that are notsignificantly (or marginally) related to the emotions felt by group members during problem-solving.Interestingly, the individual experience of flow is associated with the ability of participants to accuratelyassess emotions experienced by their partner during collaboration (Question 2). Furthermore, the flow dimensionsassociated with modelling the partner’s positive emotions are not the same than those associated with modellinghis/her negative emotions. More specifically, alteration in the perception of time is the only dimension of flowrelated to the accuracy at perceiving the partner’s positive emotions. The mutual modelling of negative emotionsis related mainly to sense of control and autotelic experience. The more participants experience control and wellbeing, the higher their accuracy is at perceiving negative emotions in their partner. Cognitive absorption is significantly related only to modelling negative deactivating emotions, loss of self-consciousness only to modellingnegative activating emotions. This means that the more participants are focused on the task, the more they areable to perceive boredom in their partner. It is also easier for them to recognize frustration in their partner whenthey are less preoccupied with themselves. It is interesting to note that alteration of sense of time and loss of selfconsciousness are related to the mutual modelling of emotions but not related to emotions experienced during thetask. This suggests that identifying emotions in others would not be necessarily linked to experiencing emotions.It could be rather related to socio-cognitive factors such as the ability to momentarily forget who we are so as tobecome one with both the activity and others.There is a relation between flow and the perceived quality of collaborative processes (Question 3). Morespecifically, all dimensions of flow (except loss of self-consciousness) are positively related to two perceiveddimensions of collaboration, i.e. information pooling (gathering information relevant to solve the problem) andtransactivity (building on the partner’s ideas). These two categories of processes are recognized as being an important part of the success of collaborative learning (Meier et al., 2007). Therefore, these results mean that participants perceive themselves and their partners as being more socio-cognitively engaged in the task when theyexperience flow. It is worth noting that flow appears to be related more strongly to participants’ representation oftheir partner’s engagement in collaboration than to their own perceived engagement. One may thus expect that itwould be easier for participants to be aware of their partner’s activity in flow situations.This study is exploratory. Its limitations lie on the fact that this is a correlational study with only subjective measures collected in a game context (individuals are more likely to experience flow in such a context).However, our motivation was precisely to focus on perceptions (flow, emotions, perceptions of the interactionwith the partner), the rationale being that a deeper understanding of the cognitive and affective quality of computer-supported collaborative learning/problem-solving experience is needed to further design environments andtools able to promote positive emotions, engagement and optimal collaborative behaviors (Riva et al., 2012).Results show that the individual experience of flow is related to both the perceived socio-cognitive processesinvolved during interaction and the mutual modelling of emotions. They also suggest that experiencing a flowstate could encourage participants to pay more attention to their partner. Overall, these results support the ideathat the flow experience should be considered as a means to improve the quality of collaborative processes andoutcomes. A further analysis is needed to investigate the extent to which individual flow is also related to groupperformance and to objective measures of the quality of collaboration. We are also interested in exploring how toinfluence the flow experience in CSCL. For instance, the focus could be to manipulate the characteristics of theCSCL environments so as to influence the control and absorption dimensions of flow.ReferencesAdmiraal, W., Huizenga, J., Akkerman, S., & Ten Dam, G. (2011). The concept of flow in collaborative gamebased learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 27(3), 1185-1194.Andriessen, J., Baker, M. & van der Puil., C. (2011). Socio-cognitive tension in collaborative working relations.In S. Ludvigsen, A. Lund, I. Rasmussen & R. Saljo (Eds.), Learning across sites: new tools, infrastructures and practices (pp. 222-242). London: Routledge.Aubé, C., Brunelle, E., & Rousseau, V. (2014). Flow experience and team performance: The role of team goalcommitment and information exchange. Motivation and Emotion, 38(1), 120-130.ICLS 2018 Proceedings190© ISLSAvry, S., Chanel, G., Bétrancourt, M., Pun, T., & Molinari, G. (2017). Feedbacks de contrôle et de valeur dansun jeu vidéo de résolution collaborative de problèmes : Effets sur les émotions et la qualité perçue de lacollaboration. In Proceedings of EIAH (Environnements Informatiques pour l’Apprentissage Humain)’2017, Strasbourg, France.Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The journal of the learning sciences, 12(3), 307-359.Berkowitz, M. W., & Gibbs, J. C. (1983). Measuring the developmental features of moral discussion. MerrillPalmer Quarterly (1982-), 399-410.Boekaerts, M., & Pekrun, R. (2016). Emotion and emotion regulation in academic settings. Handbook of educational psychology, 76-90.Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990) Flow: the psychology of optimal experience (New York, Harper Row).Dillenbourg, P., Lemaignan, S., Sangin, M., Nova, N., & Molinari, G. (2016). The symmetry of partner modelling.International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 11(2), 227-253.D’Mello, S., & Graesser, A. (2012). Dynamics of affective states during complex learning. Learning and Instruction, 22(2), 145-157.Heutte, J., Fenouillet, F., Kaplan, J., Martin-Krumm, C., & Bachelet, R. (2016). The EduFlow model: A contribution toward the study of optimal learning environments. In Flow Experience (pp. 127-143). SpringerInternational Publishing.Immordino-Yang, M. H. (2015). Emotions, Learning, and the Brain: Exploring the Educational Implications ofAffective Neuroscience (The Norton Series on the Social Neuroscience of Education). WW Norton &Company.Meier, A., Spada, H., & Rummel, N. (2007). A rating scheme for assessing the quality of computer-supportedcollaboration processes. Intl Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2, 63-86.Molinari, G., Avry, S., & Chanel, G. (2017). Les émotions dans les situations de collaboration et d’apprentissagemédiatisées par ordinateur. In G. Poizat & M. Bétrancourt (Eds.), Technologies numériques et formationdes adultes : Enjeux et perspectives (pp.123-136). Raisons Educatives n°21, Université de Genève.Molinari, G., Chanel, G., Bétrancourt, M., Pun, T., & Bozelle, C. (2013). Emotion feedback during computermediated collaboration: Effects on self-reported emotions and perceived interaction. In N. Rummel, M.Kapur, M. Nathan, & S. Puntambekar, S. (Eds.), To See the World and a Grain of Sand: Learning acrossLevels of Space, Time, and Scale: CSCL 2013 Conference Proceedings (Vol. 1, pp. 336-343). International Society of the Learning Sciences.Molinari, G., Sangin, M., Nüssli, M. A., & Dillenbourg, P. (2008). Effects of knowledge interdependence withthe partner on visual and action transactivity in collaborative concept mapping. In Proceedings of the 8thinternational conference on International conference for the learning sciences-Volume 2 (pp. 91-98).International Society of the Learning Sciences.Moneta, G. B., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). The effect of perceived challenges and skills on the quality ofsubjective experience. Journal of personality, 64(2), 275-310.Mullins, D., Deiglmayr, A., & Spada, H. (2013). Motivation and Emotion Shaping Knowledge. In M. Baker, S.Järvelä, & J. Andriessen (Eds.), Affective Learning Together (pp. 139-160). Routledge.Pekrun, R. (2006). The Control-Value Theory of Achievement Emotions: Assumptions, Corollaries, and Implications for Educational Research and Practice. Educational Psychology Review, 18(4), 315–341.Pekrun, R., Goetz, T., Frenzel, A. C., Barchfeld, P., & Perry, R. P. (2011). Measuring emotions in students’learning and performance: The Achievement Emotions Questionnaire (AEQ). Contemporary educational psychology, 36(1), 36-48.Riva, G., Banos, R. M., Botella, C., Wiederhold, B. K., & Gaggioli, A. (2012). Positive technology: using interactive technologies to promote positive functioning. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking,15(2), 69-77.Roschelle, J., & Teasley, S. D. (1995, August). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problemsolving. In Computer-supported collaborative learning (Vol. 128, pp. 69-197).Walker, C. J. (2010). Experiencing flow: Is doing it together better than doing it alone?. The Journal of PositivePsychology, 5(1), 3-11.AcknowledgementsThe experiment described here was designed and carried out with the help of Mireille Bétrancourt (TECFA, University of Geneva), Guillaume Chanel (CISA, University of Geneva) and Thierry Pun (CVML, University ofGeneva). It took part of a larger project (EATMINT) on “Affective Computing and Emotion Awareness Tools forComputer-Mediated Collaboration”. EATMINT was a research project of the Swiss National Center of Competence in Research in Affective Science funded by Swiss National Science Foundation.ICLS 2018 Proceedings191© ISLS