Eliciting Student Explanations in an Undergraduate Biology CourseAnna Strimaitis Grinath, Middle Tennessee State University, anna.grinath@mtsu.eduSherry A. Southerland, Florida State University, ssoutherland@fsu.eduAbstract: Our research described discourse patterns during a planned elicitation discussion inan undergraduate biology laboratory course taught by undergraduate teaching assistants(TAs). We examined how discourse patterns changed from the first to the second semester ofthe TA’s appointment. Conference participants will discuss the usefulness of organizingdiscourse patterns within a two dimensional space along axis of TA talk moves for visualizingchange in ambitious science teaching practice and the implications for TA professionaldevelopment.Keywords: ambitious instruction, elicitation discussion, teaching assistant, professional developmentUndergraduate biology laboratory courses and scientific discourseVisions for undergraduate biology education and sociocultural theories of learning highlight studentparticipation in scientific discourse as a cornerstone for learning (AAAS, 2011; Lemke, 1990; Warren et al.,2001). However, supporting discursively rich scientific experiences in the classroom is challenging, especiallyfor novice teaching assistants (TAs). To support TAs in this challenge, we drew on ideas of ambitiousinstruction that have been described for K-12 teachers and may also be fruitful for postsecondary TAs(Windschitl et al., 2012). Teacher preparation programs for elementary and secondary teachers haveincorporated ideas of ambitious instruction and some research examines how teachers appropriate andimplement moves associated with ambitious instruction (Stroupe, 2016; Thompson, Windschitl, & Braaten,2013). However, there is a need for research describing how postsecondary TAs implement ambitious scienceteaching practices. This research focused specifically on the practice of eliciting student ideas as a basis ofinstruction. We asked two research questions: (1) What patterns of discourse emerged across multiple iterationsof a planned “elicitation discussion” in a biology lab course? and (2) How did discourse patterns for the sameplanned “elicitation discussion” change between a TA’s first and second semesters teaching the course?MethodsStudy context and participant selectionThe course was a biology lab for non-science majors taught by undergraduate TAs at a large research universityin the Southeastern United States. The curriculum included 12 labs where students collected evidence toconstruct a scientific argument in response to a guiding question. We used a criterion sampling strategy (Milesand Huberman, 1994) to select participants that met the following criteria: (1) they taught the course for the firsttime in Fall 2015 and (2) they taught for a second time in Spring 2016. Thirteen of the 21 undergraduate TAsmet the criteria. TAs attended weekly 2-hour professional development sessions to learn biology content, towitness models of ambitious instruction and discuss instructional moves to enact ambitious instruction, and toanticipate what students may say or do in response to instruction. Additionally, TAs were required to observe apeer teaching the lab investigation each week and keep a reflective teaching journal. All 1000 students enrolledin the course each semester were asked to participate in the study and 75% agreed each semester.Data sources and analysisEach lab investigation began with a planned “elicitation discussion” intended for TAs to elicit students’ initialideas about a phenomenon (Michaels & O’Connor, 2012). The data sources included transcripts of the Lab 2elicitation discussion from each semester for the 13 participants and each TA’s reflective teaching journal. Weanalyzed the Lab 2 elicitation discussion to allow TAs and students to adjust to course norms during Lab 1before we captured the discourse patterns in their first semester as a TA to compare to discourse patterns of thesame discussion one semester later. The planned aspects of the Lab 2 elicitation discussion were: (1) studentshave a common experience with the “fight or flight” response, (2) the TA elicits student observations of theirphysiological responses to the stimuli, (3) the TA presses students for possible explanations of how thesephysiological responses occurred, (4) students observe an earthworm and a cricket’s response to stimuli, and (5)the TA presses students to consider how the explanations they co-constructed for humans may or may not applyto other organisms. The transcripts were blinded and analyzed using an a priori coding framework based on theclassroom talk literature (e.g., Oliveira, 2010; Windschitl et al. 2012) and for explanatory rigor of student talkICLS 2018 Proceedings1451© ISLS(Thompson et al., 2016). Cases were individually developed for each TA, compared, and categories weredeveloped iteratively to qualitatively describe common discourse patterns that emerged, how discourse patternschanged over time, and how change in TA practice was connected to teaching reflections.Findings and implicationsFour distinct discourse patterns emerged from the analysis: “Mostly Facts”, “Mostly Observations”, “Facts,Observations, and Explanations”, and “Observations and Explanations”. The poster presentation will includefigures and further discussion of the discourse patterns. The patterns of student contributions were related topatterns of TA talk moves. To portray these relationships, we positioned each of the four student discoursepatterns on a two-dimensional plane based on how the initial question elicited student thinking (horizontal axis)and how the TA response extended student thinking (vertical axis) (see Figure 1A). This framework allows us tolocate a TA’s practice within this space and could be useful to design professional development to support TApractice along the appropriate axis (initial questions or responses) to elevate explanatory rigor. We examinedchange in TA practice over time by mapping maintenance (O) and movement () within this space and patternsof change corresponded to the focus of TAs’ reflective teaching journals (e.g. classroom and time management,classroom climate, student thinking) (see Figure 1B). Further discussion of these connections and the utility ofthis framework for designing TA professional development will be held at the poster session.(a)(b)Figure 1. The four discourse patterns mapped onto TA talk move space (a) and TA change within that space (b).ReferencesAmerican Association for the Advancement of Science. (2011). Vision and change in undergraduate biologyeducation: A call to action. Washington, DC: AAAS.Lemke, J. L. (1990). Talking science: Language, learning, and values. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.Michaels, S., & O’Connor, C. (2012). Talk science primer. Cambridge, MA: TERC.Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994) Qualitative data analysis: A sourcebook of new methods (2nd ed.).Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Oliveira, A. W. (2010). Improving teacher questioning in science inquiry discussions through professionaldevelopment. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 47(4), 422-453.Stroupe, D. (2016). Beginning teachers' use of resources to enact and learn from ambitious instruction.Cognition and Instruction, 34(1), 51-77.Thompson, J., Hagenah, S., Kang, H., Stroupe, D., Braaten, M., Colley, C., & Windschitl, M. (2016). Rigor andresponsiveness in classroom activity. Teachers College Record, 118(7), 1-58.Thompson, J., Windschitl, M., & Braaten, M. (2013). Developing a theory of ambitious early-career teacherpractice. American Educational Research Journal, 50(3), 574-615.Warren, B., Ballenger, C., Ogonowski, M., Rosebery, A.S., & Hudicourt-Barnes, J. (2001). Rethinking diversityin learning science: The logic of everyday sense-making. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,38(5), 529-552.Windschitl, M., Thompson, J., Braaten, M., & Stroupe, D. (2012). Proposing a core set of instructional practicesand tools for teachers of science. Science Education, 96(5), 878-903.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1452© ISLS