Students’ Everyday Experiences as Resourcesin Whole-Class ConversationsAnniken Furberg, University of Oslo, anniken.furberg@ils.uio.noKenneth Silseth, University of Oslo, kenneth.silseth@iped.uio.noAbstract: This paper reports on a study of whole-class conversations in science education,with a specific focus on how students’ everyday experiences can be used as resources forexploring scientific concepts. The empirical basis is a genetics project involving secondaryschool students and their teacher. A combination of quantitative methods, in the form offrequency counts of structural features of whole-class conversations, and detailedmicroanalyses of student–teacher interactions are employed. Findings are that, when theteacher orchestrates whole-class dialogues in which students are positioned as active partnersin the conversations, more references to everyday experiences are made. In addition, theanalysis shows that the mobilisation of everyday experiences enables the students to reasonabout complex issues related to genetics as well as enables the teacher to display thiscomplexity and coexisting perspectives. The findings are discussed according to possibleimplications for instruction and dialogic whole-class activities.IntroductionEven though whole-class conversations have been described by many scholars as problematic because theyoften are associated with the triadic initiation–response–feedback (IRF) structure (Nystrand, 1997), scholarshave shown more productive aspects of such conversations (Wells & Arauz, 2006). According to Mercer(2004), teachers in whole-class settings can provide conceptual support, such as elicitation of students’understanding, contextualisation, and rephrasing of students’ utterances through the application of morescientific terms. The importance of facilitating learning spaces in which students are enabled to participate asauthoritative and accountable persons has been emphasised within the Learning Sciences community (Greeno,2006). One way to provide opportunities for students to become authoritative and accountable participants is toinclude students’ everyday experiences in classroom learning. By everyday experiences we mean knowledgeand experiences that are relevant in some of the practices in which students participate outside school. Everydayexperiences, for example, can be knowledge about celebrities in popular culture, characteristics of familymembers, knowledge gained from watching documentaries on TV or the internet, and characteristics of thestudents’ local community. Scholars have shown that mobilising students’ everyday experiences in conceptuallyoriented classroom conversations can support learning (Silseth, 2018; Warren, Ballenger, Ogonowski, Rosebery,& Hudicourt-Barnes, 2001). For instance, Warren et al. (2001) found that, when language minority studentswere encouraged to use their first language and to use everyday experiences when verbalising their reasoning ina science project about metamorphosis, it resulted in a supportive learning space as well as invoked multipleperspectives on the scientific topic.In this paper, we explore the relationship between designing talk in whole-class conversations and themobilisation of everyday resources. The data consist of videotaped student–teacher interactions during a scienceproject in a lower secondary school. We employ a sociocultural approach to the study of meaning-making inwhich learning is described and analysed as a social and contextual process involving students’ activeunderstanding in a practice that is created by people and cultural tools (Mercer, 2004). The following researchquestions guide the analysis: RQ1: What structural features characterise the whole-class conversations? andRQ2: How are students’ everyday experiences used as resources in the whole-class conversations?Research contextThe data were produced during a science project about genetics, and the participants were one class of 38 lowersecondary school students, aged 15–16 years, and their science teacher. The genetics project comprised severalthematic subunits, such as the genetic material (chromosomes, DNA, and genes), cell division (meiosis andmitosis), environment, and heredity. In addition to the whole-class sessions, the project contained both groupand individual activities. The teacher was not given any specific instructions regarding his role as a teacher inthe science project nor how to carry out the sessions, and he was fully responsible for implementing theinstructional design without interference from the observing researchers.ICLS 2018 Proceedings989© ISLSMethods and data analysisThe science project was carried out during 11 school lessons (each of 60 minutes). Five and a half hours of thetotal 11-hour long project involved whole-class conversations. The main data material applied in the studyconstitutes the five and a half hours of transcribed video recordings of all student–teacher interactions that tookplace in the whole-class conversations. Ethnographic observation notes taken during classroom observationsprovided supplementary contextual data for the analyses of the participants’ interactions. A combination ofquantitative methods in the form of a) frequency counts of structural dialogue features and b) microanalyses ofstudent–teacher interactions were used (cf Furberg, 2016; Hmelo-Silver, 2003). The frequency count analysisinvolved coding and categorising the student–teacher interactions that took place in the whole-class settings.The applied coding scheme is based on an adaptation of selected categories from a more substantive codingscheme developed by Wells & Arauz (2006). Of particular interest for the current study are conversationsequences identified as “triadic” and “true discussion”. Triadic sequences are characterised by a structuralfeature commonly referred to as the IRF structure. Two forms of triadic sequences were identified: 1) triadicsequences initiated by a teacher, followed by a response by a student, and then succeeded by teacher feedback(coded as (T)Triadic); and 2) triadic sequences involving the teacher and one student, where the initiations wereprovided by the students (coded as (S)Triadic). True discussion sequences are speech-units defined by “the freeexchange of information among at least three participants, with or without the inclusion of the teacher” (Wells& Arauz, 2006 p. 391). The coding allows for a two-fold approach to the corpus of whole-class dialogues; first,it allows for an identification and quantification of dialogic patterns within the total corpus of student–teacherinteractions within the whole-class settings and, subsequently, how the identified dialogic patterns link with theoccurrence of references to students’ everyday experiences. In order to explore how the teacher and studentsinvoked everyday experiences in conversations about complex scientific concepts related to genetics, as well ashow everyday experiences were used as learning resources, excerpts of teacher–student interactions wereselected for detailed analysis. The applied analytical procedure was interaction analysis involving a sequentialanalysis of the talk and interaction between interlocutors (Jordan & Henderson, 1995). A sequential analysisimplies that each utterance in a selected excerpt is considered in relation to the previous utterance in the ongoinginteraction. As a result, the focus is not on the meaning of single utterances but on how meaning is createdwithin the exchange of utterances.FindingsThe identification of conversation sequences shows that the whole-class conversations were dominated bytriadic conversation sequences—conversation exchanges involving the teacher and one student. Morespecifically, 61% of all identified conversation sequences were in the form of triadic sequences following the(T)Triadic IRF structure. Furthermore, 20% of the identified dialogue structures constituted reverted triadicconversation exchanges—student-initiated exchanges between one student and the teacher. Only 19% of allconversation sequences were identified as those involving the exchange of information among at least threeparticipants (i.e., “true discussions”) (cf Wells & Arauz, 2006).Table 1: Observed frequency (and total percentage) of conversation sequencesConversation sequences(T)Triadic(S)TriadicTrue discussionTotalFrequency1665451271Percentage61%20%19 %-The frequency count analysis also enabled a quantification of accounts coded as initiations (i.e., accounts wherestudents or the teacher introduce new but related topics, issues, or focus during a conversation). The analysisshows that, in conversation sequences identified as triadic (i.e. (T)Triadic and (S)Triadic sequences), 68% of theinitiations originated from the teacher, whereas 32% originated from the students (see Table 2).Table 2: Observed frequency of initiations made by teacher and students according to conversation sequencesConversation sequencesTriadic ((T)Triadic + (S)Triadic)True discussionICLS 2018 ProceedingsInitiations290240990Teacher196 (68%)88 (37%)Students94 (32%)152 (63%)© ISLSIn sequences identified as true discussion, 63% of the initiations originated from the students, whereas only 37%were put forward by the teacher. Concerning references to everyday experiences, the vast majority of suchreferences (both made by the teacher and the students) were made within conversation exchanges identified astrue discussions. More specifically, 61% of all conversation sequences identified as true discussion containedreferences to everyday experiences, whereas only 12% of all (T)Triadic and 22% of (S)Triadic sequencescontained references to everyday experiences. These findings indicate that, in dialogues identified as truediscussions, the students were more often provided with opportunities to influence the topic, content, and focusof the conversations, implying that the students’ own interests, challenges, and inquiries were put to the fore.Based on the frequency count analysis, all dialogue sequences identified as true discussion containingreferences to everyday experiences were analysed. In order to illustrate some central findings from themicroanalysis, we provide a detailed turn-by-turn analysis of one episode in which everyday experiences weremobilised. In the following episode, the participants engage in a discussion about whether different humancharacteristics, in this case, “short hair,” are a result of heredity or the environment. There are conflictingopinions among the students. Most argue in favour of the environment, but a few argue for heredity. The teacherdecides to linger on the different positions. We enter when the teacher invites Frode to share with the class:___________________________________________________________________________________1Frode:2345678Teacher:Erik:Frode:Arne:Tom:Arne:Frode:9101112Teacher:Frode:Teacher:Frode:13 Teacher:14 Else:15 Teacher:16 Else:17 Teacher:Yes, there is a soccer player who doesn’t, yes, who used-- He doesn’t getlonger hair than this, this long. ((shows with his fingers))Yes, like this. ((shows with his fingers))Rooney?Yes, Rooney doesn’t get longer hair than this.It has something to do with age.He used, like, implants.Perhaps it has something to do with age.Yes, he used implants. It can’t be just because. He doesn’t do that on purpose;then he would have used a lot of money on implants. Then, it has to be becauseof heredity.It isn’t just because he has small frizzy curls?No. No, he has, like, these small stubbles on his head.Mm, yes, perhaps age is involved here?He is 26, 27 or something. Don’t know; something like that. He has never hadmuch hair on his head, never.Twenty-six, yes. He’s not older, no. It’s an interesting case. This is not asclear as we perhaps might think. Else did you have some inputs?Yes, I was about to say that. It depends on where you’re from. Like, forexample, in India, you get really long hair because the hair is so strong, butothers, like, grow, but it gets very worn, so it doesn’t get much longer.Yes?It has to do with heredity too.So, if we think, if we nuance a little bit how long the hair gets, then aheredity factor is present, but if we just think short hair, like Truls or Erik,right, then we agree upon that we are here ((points to the word “environment”that appears on the blackboard)).When Frode brings up Wayne Rooney as an example of someone who is not able to grow hair, several studentsenter the conversation. Arne adds that hair length can be related to age (lines 5 and 7), something that isnuancing the discussion. Backing up Frode’s heredity position, Tom brings in the issue of hair implants (line 6),and Frode then argues that, since Rooney is spending a considerable amount of money on implants, having shorthair cannot be an act of Rooney’s decision (i.e., related to environment) but must be a result of heredity (line 8).As a response to the students’ input, the teacher points out the complexity of the topic they are discussing, andthen nominates Else to contribute. By referring to people living in India supposedly having strong and long hair,Else argues that the ability to grow long hair depends on the quality of the hair, which in turn depends on whereyou are from (line 14). Else’s argument indicates that she takes a heredity position. However, her account in line16, “It has to do with heredity too” (our emphasis), shows that she argues in favour of both an environmentaland a heredity position. In line 17, the teacher wraps up the conversation by revoicing what they have discussed,thus appropriating the different voices and ideas and explaining that the question of environment and heredity isrelated to the perspective you adopt when addressing the issue and that these things are dependent on context.While doing this, he uses the students as examples to make his points more concrete.The microanalysis displays two important aspects of true discussions involving everyday experiences.The first aspect concerns how the participants engage in this type of conversation. With the analytical focus onthe teacher in these settings, he provided more open-ended questions, refrained from providing the “correct”answer, invited more students into the conversations, and prompted the students to respond to other students’input. With the analytical focus on the students, they were more likely to provide input in the form of commentsand references to their own experiences and ideas instead of providing contributions in the form of questionsICLS 2018 Proceedings991© ISLSmainly addressed to the teacher. Furthermore, they also tended to follow up other students’ contributions andnot only the teacher’s—as was the case with triadic conversations. The second aspect concerns how everydayexperiences were used as resources for unpacking complex conceptual issues related to genetics; everydayexperiences were invoked both by the teacher and the students in order to explain, contextualise, and show therelevance of general scientific principles.Conclusions and implicationsScholars have demonstrated the potential of whole-class conversations as instructional activities that mightsupport student reasoning about academic matters (Wells & Arauz, 2006). By combining frequency counts ofstructural features of whole-class conversations, and detailed microanalyses of student–teacher interactions, thecurrent study adds to this body of research by relating structural features of conversations and the mobilisationof students’ everyday experiences. Furthermore, the microanalysis of teacher–student interactions illustrateshow students’ everyday experiences can be used as resources during whole-class conversations. Echoingfindings from previous studies on whole-class conversations, the frequency count analysis showed that themajority of the whole-class activities were dominated by triadic dialogue structures (Nystrand, 1997; Wells &Arauz, 2006). In line with Wells and Arauz’s (2006) study, the current study shows that most initiations weremade by the teacher. Exceeding this finding however, the current study shows that, in conversations identifiedas true discussion, the vast majority of initiations were made by the students. In other words, in dialogues wherethe students have the opportunity to initiate, and by that, influence the topic, content, and focus of theconversations, more students engaged in the conversations.Previous studies have demonstrated that students’ everyday experiences can be used as resources forsupporting students’ conceptual learning and invoking multiple perspectives on scientific issues (Silseth, 2018;Warren et al., 2001). The current study confirms, as well as expands, the findings from previous studies. Inaddition to containing more student initiations and multiple student participations, conversations identified astrue discussion involved substantially more mobilisations of students’ everyday experiences—both by thestudents and the teacher. The microanalysis showed how everyday experiences were used as resources forunpacking a scientific concept in ways that support students’ conceptual learning. Furthermore, the mobilisationof everyday experiences enabled the students to reason about complex issues related to genetics as well asenabled the teacher to display this complexity and these coexisting perspectives. Overall, the analyses suggestthat orienting to students’ everyday experiences in whole-class conversations might enable the teacher toposition students as active partners in inquiring into science topics. The current study provides knowledge thatcan be useful for teachers and teacher educators in designing productive whole-class conversations that supportstudent learning. The empirical findings highlight the importance of designing whole-class dialogues thatexplicitly invite students to initiate and share their interests and challenges. They also highlight the importanceof actively mobilising students’ everyday experiences, and provide opportunities for students to invoke theireveryday experiences.ReferencesFurberg, A. (2016). Teacher support in computer-supported lab work: Bridging the gap between lab experimentsand students’ conceptual understanding. International Journal of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning, 11(1), 89–113.Greeno, J. (2006). Authoritative, accountable positioning and connected, general knowing: Progressive themesin understanding transfer. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(4), 537–547.Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2003). Analyzing collaborative knowledge construction: Multiple methods for integratedunderstanding. Computers & Education, 41(4), 397–420.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39–103.Mercer, N. (2004). Sociocultural discourse analysis: Analysing classroom talk as a social mode of thinking.Journal of Applied Linguistics, 1(2), 137–168.Nystrand, M. (1997). Opening dialogue: Understanding the dynamics of language and learning in the Englishclassroom. New York: Teachers College Press.Silseth, K. (2018). Students’ everyday knowledge and experiences as resources in educational dialogues.Instructional Science. doi:10.1007/s11251-017-9429-xWarren, B., Ballenger, C., Ogonowski, M., Rosebery, A. S., & Hudicourt-Barnes, J. (2001). Rethinkingdiversity in learning science: The logic of everyday sense-making. Journal of Research in ScienceTeaching, 38(5), 529–552.Wells, G., & Arauz, R. M. (2006). Dialogue in the classroom. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(3), 379–428.ICLS 2018 Proceedings992© ISLS