Playing Well With Others: An Ethnographic Examination of aCross-Disciplinary Science-Theatre CollaborationAriella Suchow, Boston College Lynch School of Education, suchow@bc.eduAbstract: This piece describes a participatory ethnographic study of a cross-disciplinarycollaboration between science education researchers and theatre educators creating a sciencebased play for middle-school youth that aims to dismantle stereotypes about participating inscience and becoming a scientist. The ethnography aimed to identify factors that contribute tosuccessful cross-disciplinary collaborations and to understand why interdisciplinarycollaboration is essential to designing learning environments that engage students unengagedwith or intimidated by typical schooling contexts.PurposeInformal learning environments are important and influential spaces that can foster positive attitudes towardsscience (Bell et al., 2009). In these environments, science can, for instance, be approached through narrative andstorytelling, affect, and drama (Owen, 2014). Learning environments that fuse science education with theatreprovide a unique and essential learning context for students intimidated by or otherwise disengaged with sciencein typical schooling environments. These cross-disciplinary designs enable students to reimagine what it meansfor them to participate in and enjoy science (Long, 2014) and empower students to establish personalconnections between the scientific material and their own lives (Ødegaard, 2003).Despite the benefits of designing learning environments that combine theatre with science education,significant barriers exist to creating and accessing these learning environments in the United States, particularlyin public schools. For instance, in the U.S. only 28% percent of secondary public schools with highconcentrations of poverty offer theatre-education classes (Parsad & Spiegelman, 2012).From a design perspective, cross-disciplinary collaboration — particularly communication andestablishing expectations — can be especially challenging between scientists and theatre artists, since these twocommunities generally have vastly different metrics for defining and evaluating “good” work (Friedman, 2013).Despite these challenges, researchers must understand how to foster cross-disciplinary collaborations in order tocreate new learning environments that benefit more students.This piece describes a participatory ethnographic study of a cross-disciplinary collaboration betweenscience education faculty and graduate researchers at a research institution, and theatre educators andplaywrights from a professional children’s theatre in the Northeast United States. The study examines thecollaborative efforts of the science- and theatre-education teams throughout the preparation for and execution ofthe team’s first intervention: an original play for middle-school-aged youth aiming to dismantle stereotypesabout what it means to “do science,” and who can pursue a career as a scientist. The study aimed to (1) examineand identify factors that shaped the collaborative efforts between the two disciplinary teams; (2) understand howtheir collaborative efforts influenced the creation and implementation of the intervention; and (3) determineimplications for designing interdisciplinary science-based learning environments.Conceptual and analytical frameworksThe conceptual framework was grounded in collaborative creativity, a shared creation or discovery made bytwo or more individuals incapable of making that discovery on their own (Hargrove, 1998). The data analysiswas informed by activity theory, a psychological and multidisciplinary theory with a naturalistic emphasis thatoffers a framework for describing activity and provides a set of perspectives on practice that interlink individualand social levels (Engeström, 1999). Here, the author was interested in understanding how the collaborationbetween members of the science and theatre teams impacted the nature, structure, and form of the play. Usingactivity theory, the author discerned how power and leadership was distributed through the actions, activities,and goals of participants throughout the creation and implementation of the play.Inquiries and data sourcesData consisted of the ethnographer’s notes from group meetings and three semi-structured interviews withparticipants (N=7) — the two principal investigators (one a science education faculty member, one theproducing artistic director at the partnering children’s theatre), another science education faculty member, aseismologist, the playwright, and three graduate student researchers. The author conducted these interviews atthe beginning, middle, and end of the play’s development and implementation, which spanned 14 months, fromICLS 2018 Proceedings1707© ISLSAugust 2016 to October 2017. The interview questions encouraged participants to reflect on the crossdisciplinary collaborative process; the creation, application, and effectiveness of the intervention; and theevolution of participants’ thoughts about working with individuals from different disciplines. These questionsaimed to capture a holistic view of the collaborative process. The participatory nature of the study emergedwhen the ethnographer, also the lead graduate student on the project, implemented participants’ ideas after eachinterview.ResultsPreliminary analysis using a grounded theory approach — specifically, Initial Coding and In Vivo Coding(Saldaña, 2015) — identified three factors as crucial for a successful cross-disciplinary collaboration: (1)frequent and clear communication, (2) firm establishment of common goals at the beginning of the process, and(3) a willingness to “hear all voices.” In fact, it was this openness of the team that appeared to mediate thescience/story tension that drove much of the structure, nature, and design of the learning environment. Twoparticipants explicitly acknowledged the importance of having a liaison (the ethnographer, in this case) who wascomfortable working within both science and theatre education domains and who communicated regularly withboth teams. Although five participants explicitly mentioned the benefits of having frequent face-to-facemeetings, another suggested that frequent meetings are tedious and labor-intensive, preferable only in theory.Figure 1 captures how these elements interact during the collaborative process and illuminates whether theseelements should be acted upon in person or remotely.Figure 1: The interaction of preliminary findings from this study.SignificanceThis work can provide guidance for future cross-disciplinary education collaborators seeking to examine andimplement necessary elements for successful cross-disciplinary collaborations, particularly in reference to anintermediary who understands the working and communication styles of both or all disciplines. It also demandsthat future researchers further examine the roles that personality, identity, and disciplinary culture play in crossdisciplinary collaborations, and to understand how these factors can inhibit or further the design andimplementation of learning environments for students.ReferencesBell, P., Lewenstein, B., Shouse, A., & Feder, M. (Eds.). (2009). Learning science in informal environments:People, places, and pursuits. Washington DC: National Academies Press.Engeström, Y. (1999). Innovative learning in work teams: Analyzing cycles of knowledge creation inpractice. Perspectives on Activity Theory, 377–404.Friedman, A. J. (2013). Reflections on communicating science through art. The Museum Educator, 56(1), 3–9.Hargrove, R. A. (1998). Mastering the art of creative collaboration. New York: McGrawHill.Long, S. (2014). The matchmakers: Exploring science and society stories with scientists. Dimensions, 34-37.Ødegaard, M. (2003). Dramatic science. A critical review of drama in science education. Studies in ScienceEducation, 39, 75–101.Owen, T. (2014). Stories make science stick. Dimensions (July/August), 22-25.Parsad, B., & Spiegelman, M. (2012). Arts Education in Public Elementary and Secondary Schools: 1999–2000and 2009–10. NCES 2012-014. National Center for Education Statistics.Saldaña, J. (2015). The coding manual for qualitative researchers. Sage.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1708© ISLS