The Study of Cognitive Development in the StructuredCollaborative Learning Task Mediated by Semantic DiagramToolsHuiying Cai, East China Normal University, huiyingcai2012@gmail.comXiaoqing Gu, East China Normal University, xqgu@ses.ecnu.edu.cnAbstract: This paper presents the findings from a recent study of two collaborative conceptmapping task mediated by semantic diagram tools with grade 7 students (n=25) in an urban highschool in Canada. Data was collected from the pre-post paper-based test to evaluate student’sunderstanding of the learning topic and from the Mural map to evaluate student’s CPSengagement and interaction in different learning task. The result was that the cognitivedevelopment is improved in the structured CPS learning tasks under the mediation of semanticdiagram tools. While, the basic understanding, rather than the high level understanding oflearning topic is improved. What’s more, the CPS interaction, rather than the CPS engagementmake the positive contribution to the cognitive development. This finding gives some insight ofdesign of the CPS learning task and semantic diagram tools in the future study.Keywords: learning task, CSCL, visualization tool, cognitive development, engagement, interactionIntroductionHow to support student’s cognitive development in the computer-supported collaborative learning environmentis an important research issue. Based on the social-cultural perspective of learning, many pedagogical andtechnological supports have emerged from CSCL research (Kobbe et al., 2007). The consensus in the field is thatcollaborative problems solving (CPS) process and outcomes can be improved greatly when they are appropriatelystructured (Ertl, Fischer & Mandl, 2006). What’s more, visualization tools support collaborative problem solving,allowing learners to construct representations jointly, by providing external mental processes in the form ofconcept maps, diagrams and, and text (Lu, Lajoie & Wiseman, 2010). Therefore, in this study semantic diagramtools are argument with those kinds of visualization tools to support CPS process to maximize the benefit ofcollaboration for individual cognitive development. The goal of the study is to preliminarily investigate the effectof cognitive development in the structured collaborative learning task mediated by semantic diagram tools. Theresearch questions are: (1) What’s the result of cognitive development in the CPS mediated by semantic diagramtools; (2)What’s the difference of learner’s CPS engagement and interaction in the different collaborative learningtask with the mediation of semantic diagram tools; (3)What’s the impact of learner’s CPS engagement andinteraction on the student’s cognitive development?In order to answer those research questions, a designed-based method was employed to create a 4-dayCPS learning project with a 7th grade classroom teacher. In the CPS learning project, students worked in varioussmall group configurations to understand topics of food and nutrition, culminating in an activity where theycreated a healthy food plan. The web-based software Mural acted as semantic diagram tools in this study. It hasthe basic technological function for concept mapping. For example, it allow student to add visual objects such asshapes, sticky notes, arrows, or picture that reflect their understanding of the specific learning topics. But also, ithas some extra technological function for social interaction. For example, it allows multiple users to be online,editing the same concept map simultaneously – seeing one another’s edits, and communicating through a chatwindow, make some comments to any visual objects. After examine the pre-post test data and the learning processdata in the Mural in the CPS project, some findings were revealed for each question. These first-round findingswill inform our next design iteration, to focus more on support the high level understanding of the learning topicmeditated by semantic diagram tools.MethodsParticipants and study contextThis study involved 25 female students in an urban high school in Canada. The participants were 7th grade takingregular high school health science classes. The teacher was a veteran of more than 10 years’ experience workingat this school, and an important member of the curriculum design team. A design-based research method wasemployed to design a learning project on Food and Nutrition in the WISE platform which orchestrating theICLS 2016 Proceedings990© ISLSdelivery of materials (including many suitable visualization tools) and collects all student learning process andresult data for purposes of analysis.ProcedureThe CPS project took over four 70-minute class periods in this study. In the first class period, the teacheradministered a 30-minutes pre-test and then make some introduction of the learning topic, the learningenvironment WISE, the semantic diagram tools Mural. In the second class period, teacher made some orientationlearning activity, and then student logged in the Mural and finished the learning task 1 about drawing the nutrientmap. The learning goal was to help student understand the function of each nutritional category. The 25 studentswere assigned into 6 groups, with each group responsible to make a collaborative concept map of one of thenutritional categories, based on their readings of relevant learning materials. We designed a “starter map” thatincluded some of the basic nutritional elements (see Figure 1), and some starter links, such as “role within thebody”, and “supplied by what sources”. This served to scaffold students in creating maps with relevant conceptualconnections, focusing on the salient aspects of their food category.Figure 1. The starter map in the learning task 1.Figure 2. The starter map in the learning task 2.In the third class period, firstly the teacher made some orientation learning activity. Then students loggedin the Mural and finished the learning task 2. Compared with the learning task 1, the second one was more openended, which was about How to make a healthy food plan. They should think of a healthy food plan for a fictionalstudent named Jennifer, who had been introduced earlier in the first class period. In this activity, new Mural groupswere created with 6 students using a jigsaw pattern, where new groups of six students were assembled frommember each of the previous groups. They were required to make a Mural map for “How to make a healthy foodplan for Jennifer”. Once again, a “starter map” was created (see Figure 2), this time in the form of a time line,from 6 AM to midnight, with a clear prompt in the area above the time line, “Foods we think Jennifer should eat”and below “our ideas about nutrition and energy”. Students were asked to draw as many lines of connectionbetween different foods, and ideas, as possible. In the four class period, the students were allowed to review theirlearning artifacts on the Mural map, and then made their conclusions of the CPS learning project. The post-testwas finished in this period.Data collection and analysisData from pre-tests and post-testsIn this study, student’s cognitive development is measured in the identical paper-based tests before and after theCPS learning project. The 30-mins test included eight true-or-false items and three fill-in items that aimed toevaluate students’ basic levels understanding of learning topics. The two open-ended items were used to evaluatestudents’ high level understanding of the learning topic. For the eight true-or-false items and three fill-in items,“1” or “0” were recorded for the “correct” or “incorrect” answer. For the two open-ended items, a knowledgeintegration rubric (Linn, Lee, Tinker, Husic, & Chiu, 2006; Liu, Lee, Hofstetter, & Linn, 2008) was employed tocode students’ depth of understanding. The knowledge integration scores ranged from 0 to 4 and higher scoresindicate more right and reasonable understanding about food and nutrition. Therefore students earned highestscores by showing their understanding of the relationship between food and nutrition.Data from MuralIn this study, student’s CPS engagement and interaction are evaluated from the Mural tracing data. Specifically,six episodes of group’s learning tracing were collected from six Mural maps in the task 1. Four episodes of group’slearning tracing were collected from four Mural maps in the task 2. The recoding form from Mural map recodethe student’s manipulation on the interface is [user’s name A], [performance], [the visual object], [time]; [user’sname B], [performance], [the visual object], [time]. Specifically, the “performance” includes deleted, added andICLS 2016 Proceedings991© ISLSso on. The visual object includes text, image and arrow. Take the Figure 3 for example, Candice Chow add animage 11:18AM. And then Emily Zhang deleted a sticker at 11:18AM. While, Beral added a sticker at 11:18AM.Each episode of Mural tracing data was firstly transferred into Excel in terms of the four fields, such aswhat time, who, the manipulation times of the visual objects, what kind of the visual objects(such as text, imageand arrow). One episode of Mural tracing data is visualized according to the four fields, as shown in Figure 4.Based on that, the student’s status of engagement and interaction can be analyzed. For student’s CPS engagementin each task, it can be measured by the ratio of the certain student’s manipulation times in the Mural interface tothe whole group’s total manipulation times in the Mural interface. For example, in the learning task 1, Jenmanipulated 18 times on the Mural map, while her group managed 94 manipulation times. Therefore, Jen’sengagement in learning task 1 is 18/94, namely 0.194. In the learning task 2, Jen manipulated 35 times on theMural map, while Jen’s group managed 243 times manipulation. Therefore, Jen’s engagement in learning task 2is 35/243, namely 0.144.For student’s interaction in each task, it can be measured by the degree of centrality inthe group, which is a simple tally of the number of people attached to each person. It can be calculate by themethod of social network analysis by the social network analysis software, UCINET.Figure 3. The example of Mura tracing data.Figure 4. The visual Mural tracing data in the time sequence.FindingsAnalysis of cognitive developmentTable 1: Result of Student’s Cognitive developmentTable 2: Result of Student’s engagement and interactionPre-test(N=19)Mean SDPost-test(N=19)MeanSD0.570.170.790.13Task1(N=19)MeanSD0.270.140.500.150.460.171.070.271.250.23BasicunderstandingHigh levelunderstandingTotalunderstandingCPSengagementCPSinteraction0.250.11Task2(N=19)Mean SD0.170.060.180.05A paired-sample t-test was employed to compare the students’ pre-test and post-test scores to evaluate student’scognitive development during the CPS learning project. Means scores and standard deviations of learning gainand concept map items in the pre-test and post-test are present in Table 1. As shown in Table 1, there is significantdifferent between pre-test and post-test scores in term of total understanding of the learning topic (t=-3.86,P=0.001<0.05). It means that student’s cognitive development of the learning topic were improved after the CPSlearning project. Besides, there is significant different between pre-test and post-test scores in terms of basicunderstanding of the learning topic (t=-6.89, P=0.000<0.05). This indicates that as a result of the intervention,students’ conceptual understandings of food and nutrition have made some change for the better (e.g., of topicssuch as which foods are not nutritional, and which foods are in certain categories). However, no significantdifferent exists between pre-test and post-test in terms of high level understanding (t= 0.90, P= 0.379>0.05),indicating that students’ understanding of the relationships between food and nutrition did not improve. As a resultof this project, students may not have formed deep understanding about the functions of different nutritionalcategories and the relationship among food, nutrition and body.Analysis of CPS engagement and interaction in different tasksA paired-sample t-test was employed to evaluate the student’ CPS engagement and interaction in the two differenttasks. Means scores and standard deviations of CPS engagement and interaction in task 1 and task 2 are presentICLS 2016 Proceedings992© ISLSin Table 2. As shown in Table 2, there is significant different between task1 and task 2 in term of CPS engagement(t=2.92, P=0.009<0.05) and CPS interaction (t=2.92, P=0.009<0.05). The students have engaged more in the task1(M=0.27, SD=0.14) than they have in the task 2(M=0.17, SD=0.06). The students had more intensive interactionwith each other in the task 1(M=0.25, SD=0.11) than they have in the task 2(M=0.18, SD=0.05). The task 1 isdesigned based on the basic knowledge of food and nutrition, while the task 2 is designed based on the intentionof allowing students apply what they have learned to solving a real problem. In terms of complexity, task 2 ismore complexity than task 1. Whether the complexity of learning task affect student’s CPS engagement andinteraction needs further investigate.Analysis of the relationship between cognitive development and CPS engagementand interaction in different tasksThe path analysis by Amos software is employed to evaluate the relationship among cognitive development, CPSengagement and interactions in different tasks. Figure 5 portrays the result of this analysis. From the positive pathcoefficient of CPS interaction with cognitive development of the learning topic, it can be inferred that CPSinteraction mediated by semantic diagram tools in the task 1 and task 2 make positive contribution to the student’scognitive development. It means that collaborative concept mapping individual’s knowledge and understandingin the semantic diagram tools is a promising way for student’s cognitivedevelopment. In the shared learning space, students can create the learningartifacts that present their knowledge and understanding of the learning topic,they can view the learning artifacts from their peers, which may stimulate themto think, or allow them to help the creators to make the learning artifacts better.On the other hand, for the negative path coefficient of the CPS engagement inthe task 1 and task 2 with the cognitive development of the learning topic, it canbe inferred that students may unconsciously manipulate the visual elements onthe Mural map, which do not stimulate student’s deep thinking or reflection. Ituncovers our researchers that there should be some apparent and directed hintsfor students’ manipulation of the visual elements to stimulate student’s deepFigure 5. The result of path model.thinking.Conclusions and implicationsThis paper reports the first stage of our study, which is to investigate the effect of cognitive development in thestructured collaborative learning task mediated by the semantic diagram tools. An important outcome of the studyis that integrating semantic diagram tool into the CPS learning task is a promising way to support student’scognitive development. In terms of analysis of the learning process, it could be found that, semantic diagram toolintegrated the CPS learning task open a new window to investigate student’s process status in the collaboration.The CPS interaction and CPS engagement mediated by semantic diagram tools in different task and theirrelationships with the cognitive development is explored in this study. How to take the advantage of semanticdiagram tools to support the CPS interaction and engagement in structured CPS task in order to improve the deeplearning should be the focus in the further study. What’s more, those preliminary finding in this iteration couldgive some insight of future research, such as how to design suitable complexity learning task in CPS to supportstudent’s cognitive development; how to make student engage into the CPS learning task; how to support the deepthinking in the CPS mediated by semantic diagram tools and so on.ReferencesErtl, B., Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2006). Conceptual and socio-cognitive support for collaborative learning invideoconferencing environments. Computers & Education, 47(3), 298-315.Lu, J., Lajoie, S. P., & Wiseman, J. (2010). Scaffolding problem-based learning with CSCL tools. InternationalJournal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 5(3), 283-298.Kobbe, L., Weinberger, A., Dillenbourg, P., Harrer, A., Hämäläinen, R., Häkkinen, P., & Fischer, F. (2007).Specifying computer-supported collaboration scripts. International Journal of Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning, 2(2-3), 211-224.Linn, M. C., Lee, H. S., Tinker, R., Husic, F., & Chiu, J. L. (2006). Teaching and assessing knowledge integrationin science. Science, 313(5790), 1049-1050.ICLS 2016 Proceedings993© ISLS