Using Example-based PF Conditions to Investigate PreparatoryEffects of Problem-solving Prior to InstructionChristian Hartmann, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, christian.hartmann@rub.deNikol Rummel, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, nikol.rummel@rub.deTamara van Gog, Utrecht University, T.vanGog@uu.nlAbstract: Research on the effectiveness of Productive Failure has demonstrated that promptingstudents to solve a problem before they get instruction about the canonical solution, aids theirlearning compared to getting instruction first, even if they generate incomplete or erroneoussolutions. However, it is still unclear how failing to solve a problem prior to instruction preparesstudents for learning. In two studies, we used example-based conditions to investigatepreparatory effects of problem-solving prior to instruction.IntroductionOne theoretical explanation for the beneficial effects of the Productive Failure (PF) approach highlightsdeveloping an awareness of knowledge gaps as an essential preparatory mechanism of the initial problem-solvingphase in PF (Loibl & Rummel, 2014). When students produce erroneous solutions prior to instruction, they maybecome aware of the flaws of their solution attempts during the problem-solving process. This could then makethem more receptive to the subsequent instruction. As was shown by Loibl and Rummel (2014), students learnmore from the instruction after the initial PF problem-solving phase, if the instruction uses erroneous student ideasas a starting point for explaining the canonical solution. This finding supports the notion that students first needto become aware of the shortcomings of their knowledge in order for instruction to successfully overcome those.The awareness of knowledge gaps may be established at the outset of instruction (Loibl & Rummel, 2014) orbefore, through experiences of failure during the initial problem-solving phase of PF. Research has not yetestablished the link between students’ awareness of knowledge gaps during the initial problem-solving phase andtheir learning from the subsequent instruction. This lack of empirical evidence can be explained by the highdiversity of students’ problem-solving attempts. When students solve a problem prior to instruction, they generatea different quantity and quality of solutions. Examining the impact of the awareness of knowledge gaps is thuschallenging, because the solution number and quality may affect to what extent students can become aware oftheir knowledge gaps. For instance, if a student only generates one or two solutions there might be feweropportunities for becoming aware of solution limitations (and thus of associated knowledge gaps), than if he/shegenerates a higher number of solutions. In order to examine the impact of knowledge gap awareness on learningfrom PF, the number and quality of student solutions need to be experimentally controlled. A promisingmethodological approach to handle this challenge could be to use example-based PF conditions. In an examplebased PF condition, students observe solutions created by other PF students without generating own solutions.This allows to control for the number and quality problem-solving attempts students are faced with in the initialphase of PF (i.e. prior to instruction). Furthermore, example-based conditions can be varied to test additionalhypotheses: one relevant question is whether students gain a higher awareness of knowledge gaps and thus benefitmore from the subsequent instruction when they a) observe the entire problem-solving process of the model PFstudent, who is becoming aware of his/her knowledge gaps (EX process ), or b) whether it is sufficient for them tolearn from the final solutions of the model PF student (EX solution ). One limitation of example-based PF conditionscould be that observing a failing student in developing awareness of knowledge gaps has a lower impact on studentlearning, than experiencing one’s own failure. However, Kapur (2014) found that observing solutions created byother students also prepares students for the subsequent instruction. Although the observing students gained lessfrom the instruction than students who experienced own failure, the example-based condition outperformed adirect-instruction condition, which is the usual control condition for PF. When the examples do not only includethe final solution, but the process of attempting to solve the problem, benefits of observing PF might be stronger.MethodsIn two studies at secondary schools in Germany, we implemented example-based PF conditions to investigatewhether students need to become aware of their knowledge gaps prior to instruction. Study 1 had a quasiexperimental design with four conditions (PF, two example-based PF conditions, direct Instruction; N = 75; M age= 16.08, SD = 1.87). Study 2 had an experimental design with three conditions (PF, two example-based PFconditions; N = 177; M age = 16.06, SD = .76). In this paper, we zoom in on the two example-based PF conditions.In Study 1, the students in the PF-condition produced solutions on tablet-PCs while thinking aloud. By recordingICLS 2018 Proceedings1681© ISLSthis process (video and audio recordings), we created the content for our example-based PF conditions. Only theaudio recordings include process information about the PF student’s awareness of knowledge gaps. In oneexample-based PF condition (EX process ), students’ observed the full process of how a PF student generatedsolutions (video) and what the PF model said while thinking aloud (audio), whereas in the other example-basedPF condition (EX solution ), the students only viewed the final solutions of a PF-student (picture). After studying thePF examples, the students of both conditions received an instruction about the canonical solution, followed by aknowledge post-test (conceptual and procedural knowledge). We hypothesized that the EX process condition, inwhich students have access to the model’s knowledge gap awareness (displayed by the processes), leads to betterconceptual knowledge than displaying only the final solutions to students (EX solution ).ResultsAlthough students of the EX process condition descriptively outperformed the EX solution condition in both studies(see Table 1), Mann-Whitney U tests revealed no significant differences for conceptual knowledge in Study 1 (U= 110.5, p = .371), or study 2 (U = 1433.0, p = .074).Table 1: Descriptive statistics for post-test scores on knowledge (Study 1 & Study 2)N151833Conceptual & Procedural(max. 12 points)MEAN (SD)6.03 (2.47)5.61 (2.46)5.80 (2.44)Conceptual(max. 7 points)MEAN (SD)2.43 (1.62)1.94 (1.55)2.17 (1.58)Procedural(max. 5 points)MEAN (SD)3.60 (1.56)3.67 (1.50)3.64 (1.51)57621195.50 (3.11)4.94 (3.21)5.21 (3.16)2.99 (1.48)2.52 (1.78)2.74 (1.65)2.51(1.99)2.42 (1.92)2.46 (1.95)Study 1ConditionEX processEX solutionTOTALStudy 2EX processEX solutionTOTALAdditional analyses revealed, that students’ (self-reported) awareness of knowledge gaps after studying the PFexamples did not significantly differ among the EX process (M = 2.07; SD = .99) and the EX solution condition (M =2.15; SD = .91) as revealed by a T-Test (t(117) = -.476, p = .635). Looking at each condition separately, we founda significant correlation between students’ perceived competence and their conceptual knowledge for EX process (rs= .417, p < .01), but not for EX solution (rs = -.037, p = .780). Therefore, students in the EX process condition seem toassess their competence more accurately according to their post-test performance.DiscussionContrary to our hypotheses, the results of both studies do not support the assumption that displaying processinformation prepares EX process students more effectively for instruction than observing only the outcome of PF.Furthermore, the two example-based PF conditions did not differ in their self-reported awareness of knowledgegaps. As shown by Loibl and Rummel (2014), contrasting incorrect student ideas with the canonical solutionshowed much stronger effects on learning than problem solving first, and being instructed afterwards, but withoutusing incorrect student ideas during this instruction. Because EX process as well as EX solution obtained an instructionwith contrasting incorrect student ideas, it may be sufficient to only provide solutions in the first place to aidlearning. However, we found differences regarding the perceived competence among students in the in the twoexample-based PF conditions, which hint at beneficial effects of observing process information. Our analysesrevealed that only if students have access to the entire problem-solving process (EX process ), the perceivedcompetence positively correlated with students’ performance on the post-test. Students who had access to theentire problem-solving process therefore seem to assess their learning more accurately according to their post-testperformance, which at least partially supports the assumption that being aware of knowledge gaps preparesstudents for the subsequent instruction.ReferencesKapur, M. (2014). Productive Failure in Learning Math. Cognitive Science, 38, 1008-1022.Loibl, K., & Rummel, N. (2014). Knowing what you don’t know makes failure productive. Learning andInstruction 34, 74-85.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1682© ISLS