Learning Scientific Practices Through Participation as a VolunteerCommunity ScientistRebecca D. Swanson, Leighanna Hinojosa, and Joseph L. Polmanrebecca.swanson@colorado.edu, leighanna.hinojosa@colorado.edu, joseph.polman@colorado.eduUniversity of Colorado BoulderAbstract: An ethnographic study of community scientist volunteers in a museum-embeddedgenetics lab clarifies how participants are afforded or constrained in opportunities to learnscientific practices through an apprenticeship-model program. Guided participation in the labresults in participatory appropriation of scientific practices by volunteers. Communityscientists enter as newcomers, then gain experience through opportunities to observe andengage in a range of scientific practices associated with studies on genetics of taste andeveryday lab support tasks.Keywords: community science, citizen science, apprenticeship learning, informal learningIntroductionOver the last two decades, there has been an increased focus on the participation of members of the generalpublic in aspects of scientific research, commonly referred to as citizen science. These types of volunteerprograms, also referred to as Public Participation in Scientific Research (PPSR, Shirk et al., 2012) or“community science,” generally provide opportunities for volunteers to contribute to various aspects ofscientific research. While the availability of volunteers to collect data is of clear benefit to science researchers,there is an ongoing question as to the benefit of such participation to the volunteers themselves. Too often,volunteers can be relegated to the role of “databots” guided in collecting rigorous data following protocols,without an understanding of the scientific issues that render it meaningful (Pea, et al., 1997). What benefit dothe community scientists themselves derive from their participation in such practices and others designed intocommunity science programs? We examine one program in detail to answer the question: How do individualsvolunteering as community scientists in a museum-embedded genetics lab learn scientific practices through theirparticipation in ongoing studies of the genetics of taste?Theoretical frameworkWe draw on Rogoff’s (1995) framework of learning through participation on three planes of socioculturalactivity: apprenticeship, guided participation, and participatory appropriation. The broadest plane is thecommunity level of activity, which Rogoff refers to as apprenticeship, as newcomers to the community learnnew skills through first-hand participation (Lave & Wenger, 1991). The next plane of activity focuses on theinterpersonal level of participation – guided participation – which describes how multiple individuals interactwithin the context of the mutual activity. The final plane of activity narrows the focus to an individual’s processof learning new tasks and using new skills to participate in activities in more knowledgeable ways. Rogoff refersto this plane as participatory appropriation. Community scientists are positioned as novices within thecommunity, embedded within existing institutional systems that proscribe engagement in the activity, with tasksdirected by more experienced individuals. In this way, we identify learning as a change in participation inpractices, looking for evidence of learning within and through the three planes of analysis.MethodsThis study took place inside a genetics lab embedded within an exhibit on the human body in a large naturalhistory museum in the Western U. S. The work of the community scientists who volunteer in this lab is directedon a day-to-day basis by a lab manager and three museum staff members. The community scientists in the labare responsible for daily maintenance tasks related to the exhibit-associated experiment area as well as enrollingmuseum guests in ongoing genetics studies and other study-related tasks.We took an ethnographic approach, engaging the first and second author in participant observations oflab operations. The researchers participated in the normal onboarding process for all museum volunteers. Overthe course of 16 months, they completed 52 observations (>156 hours) across all 14 volunteer shifts. Allcommunity scientist volunteers were asked to consent to being observed while working in the lab, with apurposive sub-sample asked to participate in interviews. For analytic purposes, based on our observations ofICLS 2018 Proceedings1517© ISLSlearning opportunities, we partitioned community scientists into one of three groups based on career phase: preprofessional, early/mid-career, or late-career/retired.Primary sources of data included detailed observation notes of all consented community scientists(N=35), interviews of a subset of participating community scientists (N=13), exit interviews of five departingcommunity scientists, demographic survey results, and associated artifacts. Observation notes and interviewtranscripts were coded using both inductive and deductive codes (Miles, Huberman, & Saldana, 2013).FindingsOn the community and institutional plane, the volunteer program represents a small community of volunteerswhose formation is supported by the larger volunteer program in which it is embedded. This natural historymuseum has over 1800 volunteers each year, representing 230,000 person-hours or 114 full-time positions. Thevolunteers are treated by the institution as valuable and necessary to the successful operation of the museum.On the interpersonal level of participation, novice volunteers in the genetics lab are apprenticed into thecommunity, supported and mentored by both lab staff and more experienced community scientists as theyengage first-hand in the everyday tasks of the lab through a process of guided participation. One frequentlyobserved example is how novice community scientists learn how to micropipette, a scientific skill requisite foractivities such as DNA extraction and analysis, by being shown how to use a micropipette, then being observedby a skilled lab member while practicing, followed by opportunity to practice independently with a follow-up.On the final plane of activity, novice community scientists demonstrate participatory appropriationthrough use of learned scientific practices both in and out of this particular lab. For example, we observedKaitlyn [early/mid career] using her micropipette skills to extract DNA from the previous genetics of tastestudy, and Aiden [pre-professional] reported using his new micropipetting skills during a lab at his high school.However, despite ample observations of community scientists engaging in the learning of newscientific practices, we identified patterns of participation that were often mediated by the career phase of theparticipants in ways that afforded or constrained their participation. For example, pre-professional communityscientists such as Aiden were not able to enroll participants because they were not yet 18 years old, so they wererelegated to non-study related lab tasks. Early/Mid career community scientists were often focused on acquiringnew marketable science skills and as such, were often offered more opportunities to learn such skills. Latecareer/retired community scientists frequently identified the purpose of their participation as more sociallyoriented and were mainly happy to complete rote tasks rather than engage in learning new scientific practices.Conclusions and implicationsOverall, we found that ample opportunities to learn about scientific practices are embedded as part of regularparticipation in the ongoing activities in this genetics lab. Community scientist programs need to be designed toprovide meaningful opportunities with enough flexibility to support the goals of diverse individual participants.This is a challenging balance to strike, particularly within the context of institutional guidelines and whilemaintaining rigorous protocol standards.ReferencesLave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge Univ Press.Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldana, J. (2013). Qualitative data analysis: A methods sourcebook. SAGE.Pea, R. D., Gomez, L. M., Edelson, D. C., Fishman, B. J., Gordin, D. N., & O’Neill, D. K. (1997). Scienceeducation as a driver of cyberspace technology development. In K. C. Cohen (Ed.), Internet links forscience education: Student–scientist partnerships (pp. 189–220). New York:Plenum Press.Rogoff, B. (1995). Observing sociocultural activity on three planes: Participatory appropriation, guidedparticipation, and apprenticeship. In Wertsch, J. V., del Rio, P., & Alvarez, A., Sociocultural studies ofmind (pp. 139–164). New York: Cambridge University Press.Shirk, J., Ballard, H., Wilderman, C., Phillips, T., Wiggins, A., Jordan, R., ... & Bonney, R. (2012). Publicparticipation in scientific research: a framework for deliberate design. Ecology & Society, 17(2), 29-48.AcknowledgementsThis project was supported by the Office Of The Director, National Institutes Of Health under Award Number1R25OD021909-01. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent theofficial views of the National Institutes of Health.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1518© ISLS