Transporting Knowledge: A Case Study of Meaning Making on thePathways of Science CommunicationPryce Davis, University of Nottingham, pryce.davis@nottingham.ac.ukAbstract: In this paper I study scientists, reporters, and news readers as they produce and/orinterpret scientific texts. Imagining all of these actors as science learners allows me to compareacross their individual understandings to follow ideas through the pathways of sciencecommunication. I provide a case study of how one scientist’s understandings causes difficultiesfor a reporter and two news readers. This case problematizes popular assumptions about thecauses of public misunderstandings of science.Popular science texts and readersIn this paper, I address a topic usually considered the realm of research in science communication—how scienceknowledge moves from scientist to the public—using tools and methods more common in the learning sciences,in order to construct a model of how the various actors and texts shape each other’s understanding of science inthe moment. In particular, I present findings from a study that used video-based observation, semi-structuredclinical interviews, think aloud protocols, and textual analysis of scientists, university news staff, and membersof the general public as they interacted—in person and through various texts—in an attempt to make sense of newscientific research in order to produce or consume popular science news articles. Scientific knowledge changesas it flows through the pathways of science communication mediated by these various actors (Cloître & Shinn,1985) and socially-constructed texts (Bazerman, 1983). So, how do various actors interact with one another andwith texts in order to make sense of and construct knowledge about scientific research?Data collection and analysisTo begin addressing the research question I recruited twenty adult participants (aged 24–67) from a large US city,four scientists from a large university, and three university news reporters around three pieces of recentlypublished scientific research. Each news reporter was interviewed about his or her assigned research both beforeand after writing their story. Additionally, I recorded their interactions with the scientist and collected copies ofall texts, including article drafts and email exchanges. At the same time, I interviewed the scientists about theirresearch. Next, the twenty adult participants were asked to think aloud as they read one of the news stories aboutthe focal pieces of research. Finally, the participants were interviewed about their interpretation and understandingof the article’s content. From this data, I present a case study constructed from content logs, transcripts, and thickdescriptions of the observations and interviews, and content analysis of relevant texts. In order to analyze the inthe-moment sense making of each actor, I adopt the dual lenses of knowledge analysis (e.g. diSessa & Sherin,1998)—which catalogs the resources of knowledge used moment by moment with the assumption that they arebeing drawn on from a complex mental ecology of resources based on contextual factors—and interactionanalysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995)—which describes interactions that shape thought and behavior.A case study of an idea moving along a pathway of science communicationThe research central to this case study is a biomedical study which—using data from a veterans’ hospital—conclude that prescriptions of protein pump inhibitors (PPIs) are overprescribed to veterans at higher doses andfor longer than recommended by experts. This is, of course, a very simplified description of the research, but it isenough to highlight how the various actors make sense of its meaning.During my interview with Shannon—a writer and editor for the university’s news service—I ask her todescribe the research she gave me a general overview and then began explain her particular interpretations of theresearch. At one point, she said the following: “This is in the veteran population and I think the point of that isthis is, like, taxpayer money and we need to kind of know what’s going on.” The detail that the population of thestudy was veterans became a very important and hard to interpret idea. Here, Shannon latches onto this idea theveterans’ healthcare is paid by taxes, and, thus, the over prescription of PPIs would result in wasteful tax spending.Later, when Shannon is interviewing Jacob—a research fellow at the university’s medical school and co-authorof the focal research—they have a conversation about the research. During their discussion they both casuallymention the study being about veterans, but neither make an attempt to explain why the study is about veterans.Jacob does not provide any warrants or justifications for this detail. He does, however, frequently mention thatPPIs are the most common prescription drug in the U.S “in terms of number of prescriptions and the amount ofmoney.” When Jacob mentions money, Shannon sees her opportunity to bring up her idea about the importanceICLS 2018 Proceedings1603© ISLSof the veteran population being supported by taxpayers: “U.S. tax dollars too, right?” Jacob does not seem toknow how to react to this suggestion, as this was not a part of his research. He responds with mild confusion, andShannon drops the idea of using the taxpayers as an angle and it does not appear in her finished story. However,Jacob does not recognize that the reason Shannon is able to make such an inference is that he fails to make clearwhy he chose veterans as his study population. Shannon is confronted with an unexplained detail (veteranpopulation) and a framing of cost, and so she reasonable tries to reconcile these details to make sense of theresearch, using what she knows about this population and healthcare costs. Her framing of taxpayer money ismuch the result of Jacob’s underdetermined explanations. Shannon’s final text appears much like Jacob’sdescription—she mentions the population of veterans, but does not provide explanations, instead focusing on thepopularity of PPIs. So, how do her readers make sense of this text?During my observations and interviews with members of the general public, the idea that the populationin the study was veterans became problematic. Steven, a 24-year-old high school graduate, noticed this fact almostimmediately while reading the story. After reading the title, headline, and first paragraph, Steven thinks aloud,“Oh, veterans in particular, huh?” Here, Steven is trying to make sense of veterans being the chosen populationof study. This statement shows that he is inferring that the population was chosen for a reason, but he cannotdetermine this reason. Later, during my interview with Steven, I asked him what the least important aspect of thestudy was and he mentions the “emphasis placed on these patients being veterans.” Steven never finds a reasonfor the emphasis to be placed on veterans, so he struggles to make sense of the research. He suggests a possiblejournalistic angle that the story is trying garner sympathy for an at-risk population, but he ends up rejecting thatinference, and simply deciding that the choice of population does not make sense and so is not important. A similarreaction can be seen with Alyssa, a 32-year-old college graduate. While reading the lead paragraph, Alyssa says,“I’m thinking about my dad, because he used to get heartburn pretty regularly.” Here, Alyssa is drawing on apersonal experience to make sense of the research. Later, during the interview Alyssa incorrectly states that theresearchers were the one’s giving the drugs to the veterans. When asked why the chose veterans she concluded,“A lot of veterans experience heartburn.” While, Alyssa obviously struggles to make sense of the research, Iargue that at least part of the problem is the lack of specificity in the description of the study design choices. Thislack of specificity allows Alyssa to make inferences about the study based on personal experience: drawing aconnection between her father’s heartburn and the heartburn of the veterans. What explains this lack ofexplanation about such a seemingly important detail?During my interview with Jacob, I asked him the most important part of his research for the public tounderstand. He replied: “For me the most important part is that it gives insight into how these prescriptions areinitially prescribed and continued over time.” Not only does Jacob not mention the veteran population here, hehardly mentions them directly during the whole interview. They simple are not an important part of the study forhim. Actually, more than that, when I ask him about weaknesses of his study, Jacob replied: “It was done at aV.A. which can be a disadvantage.” So, not only does Jacob not highlight the focal population, he actively believesit to be a weakness of the study. What is going on here? Jacob’s interest in the study is the over prescription ofdrugs, and the veterans are a convenient sample based on the funding (Veteran’s Affairs). Of course, tradeoffslike this are common in the social work of science, and must be communicated in the science literature. However,when this detail goes beyond the rhetoric of science, Jacob does not provide any explanation for his sampling ofveterans. This places the responsibility of justifying this detail and evaluating the validity of claims solely on theaudience. It is then not surprising that the news reporter and both members of the general public assert their owninferences about the detail. Without seeing Jacob’s role in creating a space for these inference, it would be easyto dismiss other actors sense making as unreasonable, but seeing the interaction of all actors allows us to see howthe system of science communication is actually an interconnected web of science learners who directly influenceeach other’s interpretation of scientific research. This is obviously an imperfect first step in understanding theimpact of individuals on one another on the pathway of science communication. However, continuing work willallow us to piece together a grander picture of how people learn from popular science texts throughout their lives.ReferencesBazerman, C. (1983). Scientific writing as a social act. In P. Anderson, R. Brockman, & C. Miller (Eds.), NewEssays in technical writing and communication. Farmingdale, NY: BaywoodCloître, M., & Shinn, T. (1986). Enclavement et diffusion du savoir [Restriction and diffusion of knowledge].Information sur les Sciences Sociales, 25, 161-187.diSessa, A. A., & Sherin, B. (1998). What changes in conceptual change? International Journal of ScienceEducation, 20(10), 1155-1191.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39–103.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1604© ISLS