Failure to Replicate Using Dialogue Videos in Learning: LessonsLearned from an Authentic CourseLu Ding, Joshua Adams, Michelle Stephens, Sara Brownell, and Michelene T. H. Chiluding@asu.edu, jradam12@asu.edu, mstephens@asu.edu, sbrownel@asu.edu, mtchi@asu.eduArizona State UniversityAbstract: Previous laboratory studies have found that students learned significantly more fromdialogue videos compared to monologue videos. However, these studies were conducted inlaboratory conditions, which do not adequately reflect the characteristics of an authentic courseenvironment. Therefore, we replicated the study in an actual blended biology course to test ifthe benefits of dialogue videos still remain. Contrary to laboratory studies, no significantdifference was found in students’ learning between the two groups. We then posited that theintegrated content, chose of tutees, and students’ preference to monologue videos may havecaused the discrepancies in the findings. Relevant evidence was provided to support ourhypotheses. Implications and limitations were also discussed.Learning by observing others learn is a promising instructional approach for learning. Studies conducted on thisapproach have demonstrated the effectiveness with respect to learning gains of having students observe an experttutoring a novice as they working through a problem compared to the conventional style of only an expert workingthrough a solution in a monologue format (Driscoll et al., 2004). We henceforth call the first type of videos asdialogue videos, and the second type of videos as monologue videos.Videos are the most common instructional approach in online learning or blended learning (Kay, 2012).With the dramatic growth of online or blended learning in higher education, it is imperative to investigate thepotential benefits of the application of dialogue videos in an online/blended college-level course environment.However, most of the previous studies were conducted in lab conditions, which were not an accuraterepresentation of an authentic learning environment. The current paper aims to fill the gap in the existing literatureby presenting a replication of using dialogue videos in an authentic blended STEM course.Relevant literatureLearning from observing dialoguesFor decades, numerous studies have been carried out to prove that individuals can learn actions or behaviors fromobserving others. For instance, aggressive behaviors can be learned by observing others displaying them; novicescan learn work-related skills via observing experts performing work activities; children can imitate behaviors byobserving adults acting.Can one also learn cognitive-related skills from observing? Observing just the overt outputs of learningalone presents many challenges. One would not see the underlying many-to-one cognitive processes that underpinlearning (Chi & Bjork, 1991). For example, when an expert is solving a math problem, some covert reasoningprocesses cannot be demonstrated by her overt behaviors. To overcome the many-to-one cognitive processingissue, one possible solution is that the expert explains her thinking while solving the problem (Collins, Brown, &Holum, 1991). However, studies have shown that experts are notorious for not being able to convey their entirethinking process to novices (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977), and novices cannot learn very well from hearing experts’didactic-like explanations (Chi, Siler, Jeong, Yamauchi, & Hausmann, 2001). One reason why a novice cannotlearn well from an experts’ didactic-like explanations is because the expert cannot gauge the novice’sunderstanding level (Chi, Siler, & Jeong, 2004).Observing dialogues between an expert tutoring a novice to solve problems poses a possible solution.Engaging a novice in dialogue with expert can force the expert to bring their cognitive level down to level of thenovice as they exchange ideas, thus reaching a common ground by which a student can observe both the outputsand cognitive processes that accompany expert-level thinking. During the dialogues, the misconceptionsexpressed by the novices and the correcting information provided by the experts enable observing students reflecton their understandings, and thus learning occurs (Chi, Kang, & Yaghmourian, 2017).Previous studies of observing dialogue videosDialogues between a teacher and a student are critical in observers’ learning (Cox, McKendree, Tobin, Lee, &Mayes, 1999). Observers who watched the dialogue videos in dyads learned substantially more than those whoICLS 2018 Proceedings953© ISLSwatch monologue videos in solo or in dyads (Chi et al., 2017). Several studies have shown that even when theobservers watch the dialogue videos in solo, they still can learn more in comparison than the observers whowatched the monologue videos individually. For example, Driscoll and colleagues (2004) found that students whooverheard the dialogues between a virtual tutor and a tutee wrote significantly more content than those studentswho were in monologue condition. Similar results were found in two other studies (Muller, Bewes, Sharma, &Reimann, 2008; Muller, Sharma, Eklund, & Reimann, 2007), in which observers watched dialogue videosoutperformed those observers who watched monologue videos. However, all of these studies were conducted inlaboratory conditions. It is necessary to replicate these studies in an authentic course, and to investigate if thebenefits extend to the online and blended learning environments.MethodsParticipants and study siteThis study was conducted in an upper level biology class. Two-hundred and ten students consented to be enrolledin the study, in which 49.1% of the students were Caucasian, and the following were Hispanic (19%), Asian(18.1%), and African American (4.0%). The rest of the students indicated their ethnicity as other. The majority(87.2%) of the students declared their major as Biology (Medical) Science, with 3.5% students in Genetics, andthe rest of the students were either from Psychology or the Public Health department.Video creation and proceduresEight dialogue- and eight monologue-videos were filmed. In the dialogue videos, the course instructor tutors atutee who works through a set of biology problems, asking questions. Four students who completed the course inthe previous year were recruited as tutees for creating dialogue videos. Each tutee filmed two videos: one from afirst set of four and one from a second set of four. The monologue videos only present the instructor solving thesame set of biology questions. Therefore, both dialogue- and monologue videos use the same set of biologyquestions. Each week, a worksheet containing the same questions in the videos was handed out to each observerstudent. Observer students watched the assigned videos and completed the worksheets on Thursday as pre-classassignments, and attended a recitation on Fridays. Students were randomly assigned to two groups, each observingone type of video for the first four weeks and the other for the second four weeks. That is, one group of studentswatched dialogue videos for the first four weeks, and monologue videos for the second four weeks. The othergroup of students first watched monologue videos and then switched to dialogue videos. The topics covered inthe videos including Homeostasis, Information Flow, and Adipocyte Cells, etc.MeasuresEight quizzes were created by the instructor to measure students’ learning from the videos. Each quiz consistedof 10 to 12 multiple-choice questions, totaling 89 questions. Each week, the first ten minutes of Friday recitationwere devoted to in-class quizzes. At the end of week 8, students were asked to indicate their preferences for thevideos, and explain why.ResultsBecause all students viewed both monologue and dialogue videos, we used a repeated-measures model to comparestudents’ aggregate dialogue scores to their aggregate monologue scores. To address the issue of missing data, weused a mixed model to estimate parameters with maximum likelihood estimation and a compound symmetrycovariance structure specified to make the model an analogue of a repeated measures ANOVA. We found nosignificant difference between student performance when using monologue videos (M = .80, SD = .09) anddialogue videos (M = .790, SD = .10); F = 2.26, p > .05.Prior laboratory studies suggested that the dialogue videos were more beneficial to learning the tasks thatrequire higher-order thinking skills (Muller et al., 2008, 2007). Therefore, to further test if the dialogue videosinfluenced on students’ performance on higher-order cognitive tasks, 16 questions that required students totransfer their knowledge to new scenarios were identified by two experts together in biology field. However, usingthe same statistical model specified above, the results revealed a significant trend, in which the monologue group(M = .88, SD = .12) performed better than the dialogue group (M = .86, SD = .13); F = 3.90, p = .05004.Possible reasons of a failure and implicationsWhy would the studies in laboratory conditions favor the dialogue videos but in an authentic course yield a failure?Our discrepant findings may be attributable, in part, to several factors, including the nature of authentic courses,ICLS 2018 Proceedings954© ISLSdesign of the dialogue videos, and students’ reactions to the videos. In this section, we attempt to discuss thepossible reasons and their implications.Integrated contentUnlike a laboratory experiment, the learning content in an authentic course is always more likely to be integrated.That is, the content presented in later videos was more likely to be built upon previous videos. Students may havealready established clear understandings of the concepts from other learning materials or the previous videos, thusdiminishing the main benefits of the dialogue videos (i.e., reflect on misconceptions).In comparison to Muller and colleagues' (2007, 2008) studies, in which the dialogue videos were usedfor Newton’s First and Second Laws which are notoriously difficult to learn, the content that covered in our videoswas relatively less difficult. Due to the difficulty, Newton’s First and Second Laws easily evoke misconceptions(Mayer, 2004), and a clear understanding cannot be easily established. The dialogue videos provided greatopportunities to the students in Muller and colleagues' (2007, 2008) studies to reflect on their misconceptions.Therefore, we proposed that dialogue videos should be used for introducing novel concepts that are more likelyto be misunderstood and require higher-order cognitive processes to maximize their benefits.Video designIncluding tutoring in videos aims to elicit more dialogues between experts and novices, and hence scaffolding thecognitive process for problem solving. Observing students can thus learn from the process of an expert correctingerrors made by a novice. However, the tutees in the dialogue videos for the current study completed the course inthe previous year. Compared to the observing students, the student tutees in the videos were more familiar withthe concepts covered in the videos. Therefore, the number of questions asked by the tutees were less than whatone would expect the observing students would ask. We thus proposed that the discrepancy in the findings of thisstudy and the literature may have arisen from the dialogue level between the instructor and the students in thevideos. To test our hypothesis, we analyzed the dialogue videos based on the instructor-student interaction levels.Each of the videos was segmented into episodes based on the questions (i.e., each video consisted of two to sixepisodes). The episodes were coded as no interaction, less interaction, and rich interaction. Only one question andone feedback between the instructor and the student was coded as less interaction, whereas the episodes containedat least two questions and feedback were coded as rich interaction.Two researchers coded the first two dialogue videos independently, and then met to discuss anydiscrepancies in their coding until 100% agreement was achieved. The rest of the six videos were analyzed by thesecond researcher. A total of 36 episodes were identified from the videos. Seventeen episodes (47.2%) werecategorized as rich interaction, 17 episodes (47.2%) were less interaction, and two episodes (5.6%) had nointeraction. We, therefore, posited that the benefits of dialogue videos may have been minimized due to only lessthan half of the videos containing rich interactions. In future research, to maximize the advantages of dialoguevideos, two approaches can be taken. First, students who have never taken the course and are not familiar withthe topics in the course should be recruited as tutees for the videos to promote richer interaction that better matchesthe mastery levels of the observing students enrolled in the course. Second, the dialogue between instructors andstudents in videos can be specifically scripted so that more rich interactions can be included in the videos (Mulleret al., 2007).Preference of monologue videosAmong the students who indicated a preference for the types of videos they observed, 59.9% (N = 124) of thestudents reacted favorably to the monologue videos, and only 20.3% (N = 42) of the students favored dialoguevideos. For decades, a substantial body of studies have evidenced that positive affect improves students’performance on higher-order cognitive tasks (see Isen, 2008, for a review). We posited that the strong preferenceof the monologue videos may have influenced students’ cognitive processing. Therefore, no learning differencesbetween the two groups were detected.To find out if this is true, we analyzed students’ responses to the “why” question for their preferences.Two researchers applied thematic analysis on the responses independently (Braun & Clarke, 2006), and met todiscuss the discrepancies in their codes until 100% agreement was reached. The two main factors that influencedstudents’ preferences were: 1) the monologue videos were more straightforward (N = 69), and 2) the dialoguevideos were more likely to create confusion when students in the videos made mistakes (N = 42). However,confusions can actually inspire greater depth of cognitive processing if appropriately regulated (Craig, Graesser,Sullins, & Gholson, 2004). A failed confusion regulation is more likely to yield negligible learning (D’Mello,Dale, & Graesser, 2012). In our study, when confusion occurred, there was no direct channel for the students toimmediately resolve it. A possible solution to overcome this issue can be allowing students to observe the dialogueICLS 2018 Proceedings955© ISLSvideos in dyads. Therefore, when confusion occurs, students will have peers to discuss and to resolve the confusionimmediately.Conclusion and limitationsThe goal of this paper was to replicate laboratory studies of using dialogue videos to enhance observing students’learning. However, no significant difference in learning was found between the dialogue group and the monologuegroup in this replication. We therefore provided three possible reasons to explain why there was a discrepancy infindings between prior laboratory studies and our replication study. We proposed possible solutions to overcomethese issues for future research.In addition, we need to highlight some limitations of this study. One pressing concern is that there is nolog data of the students. No instructional material can be beneficial if students do not utilize it. Due to the lack oflog data, the analyses for student learning outcomes were based on the suppositions that all students have watchedthe videos. Second, since students were enrolled in the same course, there are chances that students from the twogroups discussed their video types. Thus, a threat to internal validity of the study may exist.ReferencesBraun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3(2),77–101. https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oaChi, M. T. H., & Bjork, R. A. (1991). Modeling expertise. In D. Druckman & R. A. Bjork (Eds.), In the mind’seye: Enhancing human performance (pp. 57–79). Washington, DC: National Academy Press.Chi, M. T. H., Kang, S., & Yaghmourian, D. L. (2017). Why students learn more from dialogue- than monologuevideos: Analyses of peer interactions. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 26(1), 10–50.https://doi.org/10.1080/10508406.2016.1204546Chi, M. T. H., Siler, S. A., & Jeong, H. (2004). Can tutors monitor students’ understanding accurately? Cognitionand Instruction, 22(3), 363–387. https://doi.org/10.1207/s1532690xci2203_4Chi, M. T. H., Siler, S. A., Jeong, H., Yamauchi, T., & Hausmann, R. G. (2001). Learning from human tutoring.Cognitive Science, 25(4), 471–533. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0364-0213(01)00044-1Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Holum, A. (1991). Cognitive apprenticeship: Making thinking visible. AmericanEducator, (12), 6–46.Cox, R., McKendree, J., Tobin, R., Lee, J., & Mayes, T. (1999). Vicarious learning from dialogue and discourse:A controlled comparison. Instructional Science, 27, 431–458. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1003489631631Craig, S. D., Graesser, A., Sullins, J., & Gholson, B. (2004). Affect and learning: An exploratory look into therole of affect in learning with AutoTutor. Journal of Educational Media, 29(3), 241–250.https://doi.org/10.1080/1358165042000283101D’Mello, S., Dale, R., & Graesser, A. (2012). Disequilibrium in the mind, disharmony in the body. Cognition andEmotion, 26(2), 362–374. https://doi.org/10.1080/02699931.2011.575767Driscoll, D. M., Craig, S. D., Gholson, B., Ventura, M., Hu, X., & Graesser, A. C. (2004). Vicarious learning:Effects of overhearing dialog and monologue-like discourse in a virtual tutoring session. Journal ofEducational Computing Research, 29(4), 431–450. https://doi.org/10.2190/Q8CM-FH7L-6HJU-DT9WIsen, A. M. (2008). Some ways in which positive affect influences decision making and problem solving. In M.Lewis, J. Haviland-Jones, & L. F. Barrett (Eds.), Handbook of Emotions (pp. 548–573). New York, NY:Guilford Press.Kay, R. H. (2012). Exploring the use of video podcasts in education: A comprehensive review of the literature.Computers in Human Behavior, 28(3), 820–831. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2012.01.011Mayer, R. E. (2004). Teaching of subject matter. Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 715–744.Muller, D. A., Bewes, J., Sharma, M. D., & Reimann, P. (2008). Saying the wrong thing: Improving learning withmultimedia by including misconceptions. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 24(2), 144–155.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2729.2007.00248.xMuller, D. A., Sharma, M. D., Eklund, J., & Reimann, P. (2007). Conceptual change through vicarious learningin an authentic physics setting. Instructional Science, 35(6), 519–533. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11251007-9017-6Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports on mental processes.Psychological Review, 84(3), 231–259.AcknowledgementsWe are grateful for funding for this project provided by the National Science Foundation: Grant No. 1504893.ICLS 2018 Proceedings956© ISLS