Indoor Positioning Technology and Enhanced Engagement in EarlyElementary Systems Thinking and Science LearningKylie Peppler, Naomi Thompson, Joshua Danish, Armin Moczek, and Shenshen Hankpeppler@indiana.edu, naothomp@indiana.edu, jdanish@indiana.edu, armin@indiana.edu,shenhan@indiana.eduIndiana UniversityAbstract: Indoor positioning (IP) technology is sought after for applications in gaming,commercial spaces, and education. While several types of IP systems have become available,none offer tracking of multiple agents that balances high accuracy with low cost. This paperhighlights new 3D IP technology designed for educational contexts, which coordinates as fewas 4 and as many as 80 physical “tags.” The tags act both as anchors to delineate the playspace and as trackers that send high-accuracy location data to a server in real time that canlater be played back. To test the impact of the technology on learning, we compared it to aparallel non-IP environment that approximates locations between two points in classroomsettings. Findings demonstrate how the IP technology supports students in engaging deeplywith complex systems concepts that require students to look closely at the local behavior of anorganism such as an ant.IntroductionSystems thinking is the ability to recognize and reason about complex systems. This difficult skill is rarelytaught explicitly in schools (Hmelo-Silver & Azevedo, 2006; Resnick, 1999), and is rarely taught in earlyelementary school. While previous work has shown success in teaching early systems thinking concepts relatedthrough traditional and participatory simulations (Danish, 2014; Colella, 2000), efforts are ongoing to enhancethese learning experiences and make use of young children’s play practices.Participatory simulations (Colella, 2000) based on agent-based modeling simulations have been shownto be useful for helping children think about complex systems from a first-person perspective. Similar to roleplaying games, actors in a participatory simulation enact the roles of individuals in a system, enabling them tomake personally meaningful connections to the behaviors that make up that system (see Klopfer, Yoon & Rivas,2004). Work has also shown that young children can deeply explore a variety of scientific concepts wheninteracting with technologies that leverage physicality and embodiment (see Montemayor et al., 2002). Thus, wehave developed two versions of a participatory simulation (Colella, 2000), that offer a first-person look into thecomplexity of honeybee and army ant colonies. Representing two design iterations, our army ant participatorysimulation integrated indoor positioning (IP) technology to further leverage how young children learn from playand embodiment.Here, we explore the affordances of the IP environment used in a systems-thinking curriculum centeredaround army ants in relationship to an earlier iteration centered around honeybees. First grade students engagedin 10-day implementations focused on systems thinking through the lens of honeybees or army ants in ways thatutilized both first-person and third-person perspective taking. Emergent findings indicate that the IP technologysupports new kinds of engagement because of the way it allows students to engage with high-resolution data.This work has implications for designing for increased engagement in systems thinking among early elementarystudents in ways that utilize technology in making systems elements salient.Social insects and systems thinkingBoth honeybees and army ants are social insects with similar structures, including one egg-laying female andmassive numbers of workers that gather food and protect the colony. For bees, this food is gathered fromflowers while army ants forage on the forest floor. Both must search to locate plentiful food sources and havedeveloped methods to communicate the location of these food sources to others. Honeybees use the waggledance, a phenomenon in which bees move their bodies in particular patterns that use the sun as a reference pointto communicate direction, distance, and quality of a flower. Army ants leave pheromone trails as they walk.These trails are not directional, and as more ants walk along the trail between the food source and the colony,the trail becomes stronger, encouraging more and more ants to continue following the trail.Conceptually, both honeybees and army ants represent the systems thinking concept of a feedback loopcreated in the process of food gathering. In both cases, a lack of food is conveyed through the absence of thepositive feedback action. Additionally, both insects have physical constraints on how long they can search forICLS 2018 Proceedings1077© ISLSfood and how much food they can carry. Accurately simulating the ants’ non-directional pheromone trail wasthe main influence of the IP technology and the main difference between the two implementations.Indoor positioning technologyIndoor positioning (IP) technology is sought after for applications in gaming, commercial, and educationalspaces. While several types of IP systems have become available, few are able to track multiple agents in a waythat balances high accuracy with low cost - a necessary quality for educational uses. Consequently, we designeda new 3D IP technology (patent pending) for such educational contexts that is capable of coordinating manyactors in a space. In this system, “tags” act both as anchors to delineate the play space and as trackers that sendhigh-accuracy location data to a server in real time that can later be played back.We adopted ultra-wideband (UWB) technology for our purposes. UWB can provide highly accurate(Karbownik, et al., 2015) distances through a computation of time-of-flight of the wireless signals. In ourapproach, at least 3 UWB anchors need to sit at the corners of the tracking area. These physical locations can bepredetermined, as we use a trilateration (Cook, et al., 2005) algorithm to compute the tracked positions from theprecise distance data provided by the anchors. As an UWB tag device moves within the tracking area or thecommunication ranges of the anchors, the distances of the tag to all the anchors are reported to a designatedcomputer in real-time for trilateration computation and visualization.Study design and data sourcesFour first-grade classrooms participated in the IP ant implementations (n = 71), while three first-gradeclassrooms and one mixed first- and second-grade classroom (n = 85) participated in the non-IP beeimplementations. All classrooms were located in a mid-sized, midwestern city. Both implementations werebased on a previously successful bee curriculum (Danish, Thoroughgood, Thompson, & Peppler, 2017), movingfrom simple to more complex systems thinking concepts over 10 sessions.In the bee non-IP implementations, students moved around the room with an electronic bee puppet (seeFigure 1) to collect virtual nectar from larger-than-life flowers. The flowers held RFID tags that the puppetscould scan; LEDs on the puppet provided information on how much nectar the bee was holding and how muchenergy it had available. The ant IP implementations proceeded similarly -- the ant push toys (Figure 1) alsocontained RFID scanners and LEDs. Additionally, each ant puppet contained a UWB tag that allowed thepuppet’s movements to be tracked in real time. iPads revealed whether a source had food available when an antpuppet approached. Students needed to leave virtual pheromone trails for other ants to follow to food sourcesthrough pushing a button on the ant-toy handle when students thought appropriate. The IP system tracked eachant to identify where students left trails. Additional LEDs on the ant provided information about when an antwas close to or following an existing trail. Students could then review their activities using a birds-eye viewprojected onto a screen. While both approaches visualize information, the specificity and gesture of themovement is maintained in the IP condition (i.e., learners can “see themselves” in the tracking data). This addednuance was introduced to help students explore the nature of the pheromone trails in ways that we felt the earliertechnology would not have supported. This shift in designs represents both a shift in conceptual focus (on themovement path instead of the destination) along with the technology needed to support that shift in focus.Figure 1. Army ant push toy and bee puppet.All sessions were video and audio recorded. Here, we look at excerpts from video recorded debriefingdiscussions where teachers and students reflected upon the game play. As systems thinking is difficult forlearners at all stages, we looked for evidence of engagement with complex systems thinking concepts. Ratherthan assuming students will approach systems thinking in adult ways, we define engagement for earlyelementary students here as talk about and reflection on how movements and actions have consequences in theICLS 2018 Proceedings1078© ISLSsystem. Here we focus primarily on moments related to the Playback feature that allows participants to rewatchtheir own prior movements and actions played on a screen in real time. This is a particularly fruitful time forteacher-supported noticing and reasoning, and is where we found that the high resolution information providedby the IP technology added the most value.FindingsComparisons of the discussions in the non-IP and the IP versions of Playback indicate that the IP technologyaffords new and different reasoning about systems thinking concepts by allowing students to explore this newcontext (pheromone trails) where those nuances are highly relevant. See Table 1 for a representative example ofa conversation in the non-IP classroom. Here, the student uses general terms to describe paths and locations. Forexample, the phrase “around to this side” in line 2 indicates a general area, rather than a specific location.Similarly, “hopping from place to place” in line 1 does not reference specific paths or locations, but does reflectthe images on the Playback. The bees do in fact appear to be “hopping” from flower to flower, as there is nodata about the paths between flowers. For example, a student with a bee puppet could walk up to a number offlowers before scanning an RFID tag - in this case the Playback would portray the bee as waiting at the firstflower until the second tag is scanned.Table 1: Noticing Bee Actions on Playback, non-IP1Ms. Kay2Ezekiel3Ms. KayThey came out, and look at them hop all around. So at the beginning, they went to a flower andwent back in. Now, they’re coming out and hopping around and around and around. Why doyou think it would have changed like that? Ezekiel, why?I know that, that, that my side, like two, after a little while, every flower didn’t have any nectarin it, so people were going around to this side to get nectar, and people were just hoppingaround from place to place everywhere because they couldn’t find any.Oh! So the way the bees are behaving changed because of how much nectar there was out inthe field.It is important to note that this is considered a high quality interaction in the bee implementation. In thehoneybee system, concepts such as feedback and emergence are not necessarily embedded in the exactmovements and locations of the individual actors. This exchange demonstrates exciting evidence of emergingunderstanding of relationships between systems elements and actor behaviors.Table 2: Noticing Ant Pathways on Playback, IP123Mrs. ArrowStanleyMrs. Arrow456789ClassMrs. ArrowStanleyMrs. ArrowClassMrs. ArrowSo I noticed this ant was doing a good job of leaving a trail and then it stoppedAnd started going all over the placeAnd started going all over the place. I think that it was at that good food source and thencame over here and was checking another food source. Is that what it should have done?No!What should it have done?Followed its own trailIt should have left a trail straight back to the...Hive!Colony, yeah.Table 2 shows a discussion about ants in the IP version of Playback. Here, the teachers and students areable to discuss in much more detail where the ants went in the room, and make judgments about the usefulnessor efficiency of those paths. Here, “all over the place” line 2 refers to real time, on the ground movements ratherthan “hopping from place to place.” The students are also able to talk about, visualize, and reflect on theimportance of following a trail as a more efficient strategy for food collection, which is not possible in the nonIP version. With the IP technology, children can notice when their path was inefficient, when they missed afruitful food source, or did not pick up on a nearby pheromone trail.The differences between these two exchanges may be subtle, but are highly consequential. Thediscussion in Table 2 sets the students in this classroom up to make additional conjectures about theICLS 2018 Proceedings1079© ISLSconsequences of “going all over the place.” They can make predictions about why the ant acted in that way, andwhat might have been different had the path been more efficient. With the previous technology used in the beeimplementations, this type of discussion would not have been possible. While the interaction in Table 1 ispromising as related to the honeybee system, it would not be enough to highlight the specific phenomena of thepheromone trails present in the army ant system where movement and location are key. Here, the unique blendof consequential system elements and technology leads to new support for classroom reasoning.DiscussionThe early evidence seen here suggests new affordances for using indoor positioning technology to exploresystems concepts that are tied to a nuanced understanding of where students move throughout a physical space.Participatory simulations have long made use of technology to enhance learning environments through newaffordances and productive constraints (e.g., Colella, 2000). Here, it seems that specific types of reflection arepossible by this unique combination of IP technology and the Playback feature. It has been noted that both firstperson and third-person perspectives play important and complementary roles in systems thinking education foryoung learners (Danish et al., 2017). The Playback feature provides an intersection of these perspectives,wherein learners can see themselves and their actions reflected in the data, while also viewing the simulationfrom a detached, bird’s eye view. The IP technology deepens this interaction where movement and location wasparticularly consequential, making the first-person perspective more accurate and realistic.While approximations of actor location in a classroom were useful when location was not a keycomponent of the system, the addition of the indoor positioning technology allowed us to explore a differentphysical phenomenon that required a more nuanced understanding of the movement around the classroom. TheIP technology discussed here has potential for use in educational spaces, and more research is needed as wecontinue to consider how technology can be used in systems thinking education to highlight system elementsand phenomena. It will be important for researchers to continue to explore what information needs to be madevisible across systems as we build and utilize technologies that support learning through embodied interaction.ReferencesColella, V. (2000). Participatory Simulations: Building Collaborative Understanding Through ImmersiveDynamic Modeling. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 471–500.Cook, B., Buckberry, G., Scowcroft, I., Mitchell, J., & Allen, T. (2005, September). Indoor location usingtrilateration characteristics. In Proc. London Communications Symposium(pp. 147-150).Danish, J. A. (2014). Applying an activity theory lens to designing instruction for learning about the structure,behavior, and function of a honeybee system. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 23(2), 100-148.Danish, J., Thoroughgood, L., Thompson, N., Peppler, K. (2017, April). BeeSim: Re-Mediating Students’Engagement with Honeybees Collecting Nectar from a First and Third-Person Perspective.Presentation at 2017 Annual Meeting of AERA, San Antonio, TX.Karbownik, P., Krukar, G., Shaporova, A., Franke, N., & von der Grün, T. (2015, October). Evaluation ofIndoor Real Time Localization Systems on the UWB Based System Case. In 2015 InternationalConference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN2015), Banff, Canada.Klopfer, E., Yoon, S., & Rivas, L. (2004). Comparative analysis of Palm and wearable computers forParticipatory Simulations. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 20(5), 347-359.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Azevedo, R. (2006). Understanding complex systems: Some core challenges. Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 15, 53–62.Montemayor, J., Druin, A., Farber, A., Simms, S., Churaman, W., & D'Amour, A. (2002, April). Physicalprogramming: designing tools for children to create physical interactive environments. In Proceedingsof the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 299-306). ACM.Resnick, M. (1999). Decentralized modeling and decentralized thinking. In W. Feurzeig & N. Roberts (Eds.),Modeling and simulation in precollege science and mathematics (pp. 114–137). NY, NY: Springer.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation underGrant No. 1324047 awarded to Kylie Peppler, Joshua Danish, and Armin Moczek. Any opinions, findings,and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do notnecessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. Thank you to Janis Watson, and the manyteachers and students who made this work possible.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1080© ISLS