An Analysis of Collective Knowledge Advancement andEmergent Nature of Ideas in Subject-Matter LearningJun Oshima, Shizuoka University, joshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jpTakashi Tsunakawa, Shizuoka University, tuna@inf.shizuoka.ac.jpAbstract: The idea emergence is a critical nature of collective knowledge advancement incollaborative learning contexts. Although recent advancement of data-mining proceduremakes it possible to detect emergent ideas, classroom teachers also like to know how muchtheir students engaged in the discourse around their study topics. In this study, we propose ananalysis combining socio-semantic network analysis for collective knowledge advancementand data-mining for detecting students’ ideas in their discourse.Keywords: idea emergence, collective knowledge advancement, subject-matter learningBackground and research purposeFor analyzing student learning in the classroom from the perspective of knowledge creation, we need to developa new analytic framework to capture collective knowledge advancement and the emergence of ideas throughstudent discourse (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2013). We have been developing metrics of student collectiveknowledge advancement in their discourse by socio-semantic network analysis (SSNA) (e.g., Oshima et al.,2012). Ordinary social network analysis (SNA) visualizes the social patterns of learners. As de Laat et al. (2007)suggested, this approach is informative when we examine developments or changes in the participatory structureof learners. However, several studies argued that existing social network models are not sufficient to examinehow learners engage in their collective knowledge advancement through their collaboration (e.g., Schaffer et al.,2009). Instead, we used a procedure similar to ordinary SNA but proposed a different type of social network,one based on the vocabulary learners use in their discourse. We compared this socio-semantic network—inwhich words were selected as nodes representing learners’ knowledge or ideas during a discourse on a studytopic—with a network of words from the discourse of a group of experts on the same topic. The results showedcritical differences in the collective knowledge of elementary school students and experts regarding thevocabulary centered on the networks. SSNA could provide a new representation of collective knowledgeadvancement, enabling researchers to adopt a new complementary assessment technique for investigatingmodels of knowledge-building communities. In recent years, this SSNA approach has been adopted in CSCLstudies to analyze student roles in collaboration and to detect productive interaction patterns (e.g., Ma et al.,2016; Oshima et al., 2012).Studies in the field of learning analytics have accelerated the development of SSNA to analyze studentcommunication online. One recent advancement in the field is the implementation of the data-mining procedureto select vocabulary for SSNA from natural discourse in collaboration (Lee & Tan, 2017). If we are moreinterested in the emergence of new ideas through learners’ discourse, we cannot determine a list of vocabularybeforehand. The data-mining procedure can make it possible to detect vocabulary by which learners intensivelyuse at any point in time of their discourse. On the other hand, however, when students are working on anysubject matter, teachers are more interested in how much their students engage in the discourse related to thesubject matter they study. If we use SSNA with the aim to examine student knowledge advancement in thesubject matter, we should determine and use a list of vocabulary representing the study topic.In this study, for solving the conflict in methodological approaches to examining idea emergence andlearning of subject matter knowledge in the classroom, we examine student collective knowledge advancementin discourse by combining the advantages in both approaches discussed above.MethodStudy contextThe target data in this study was student collective discourse in jigsaw instruction (Miyake & Kirschner, 2013).In the jigsaw instruction, three students in a group were given a challenge such as “Can you explain howvaccinations protect us from infections?” then provided three study documents, each of which was necessary forsolving the challenge. In the first phase, one student from each group gathered to form an expert group andworked on their allocated materials over 1.5 lesson periods (each lesson period was 50 min.). After the expertgroup activity, students returned to their original group (the jigsaw group), where students had different piecesICLS 2018 Proceedings1757© ISLSof knowledge to share and integrate for solving the challenge problem. This jigsaw activity took another 1.5lesson periods. Group composition in both group activities (thirty-nine students in twelve groups) was designedby the teacher.Data collection and analysisWe used two types of data for the analysis. The first was students’ learning outcomes. The pre- and post-testswere conducted for evaluating their conceptual understanding. Based on their performance, we categorized eachjigsaw group into high or low learning-outcome group.The second data was video-record of their collaboration in the jigsaw group activities. Their discoursewas transcribed for SSNA. In the first phase of our analysis, we calculated term frequency tf(t, d) of wordsrepresenting students’ understanding of the human immune system by using the following equation: tf(t, d) = 1+ log(ft, d). Then we further tested significant differences in the means of word vectors between the high andlow learning-outcome groups. In the second phase of analysis, we visualized student collective knowledgeadvancement by SSNA with a list of vocabulary representing their study topic, human immunity system, andpresented critical differences between the high and low learning-outcome groups.Results and discussionWe found three high learning-outcome groups and nine low learning-outcome groups based on our criteria(Oshima et al., 2017). There were no significant differences in the means of tf word vectors among groups, F(11,198) = 2.35, p > .05. SSNA revealed that students in the high learning-outcome groups were more engaged intransactive interaction such as building their ideas on others. With results of our analysis, we conclude thatstudents who acquire higher learning-outcomes do not necessarily talk much about the study content butmanipulate their ideas in the transactive way that are not usual in lower learning-outcome groups.Referencesde Laat, M., Lally, V., Lipponen, L., & Simons, R.-J. (2007). Investigating patterns of interaction in networkedlearning and computer-supported collaborative learning: A role for social network analysis.International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2(1), 87–103.Lee, A. V. Y., & Tan, S. C. (2017). Temporal analytics with discourse analysis: Tracing ideas and impact oncommunal discourse. In Proceedings of the Seventh International Learning Analytics and KnowledgeConference (pp. 120-127). ACM.Ma, L., Matsuzawa, Y., Chen, B., & Scardamalia, M. (2016). Community Knowledge, CollectiveResponsibility: The Emergence of Rotating Leadership in Three Knowledge Building Communities. InLooi, C. K., Polman, J. L., Cress, U., & Reimann, P. (Eds), Transforming Learning, EmpoweringLearners: The International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) 2016, Volume 1 (pp. 615–622). Singapore: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Miyake, N. & Kirschner, P. A. (2013). The social and interactive dimensions of collaborative learning. In K.Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences, the Second Edition. (pp. 418–438).NY: Cambridge Univ. Press.Oshima, J., Ohsaki, A., Yamada, Y., & Oshima, R. (2017). Collective knowledge advancement and conceptualunderstanding of complex scientific concepts in the jigsaw instruction. In Smith, B. K., Borge, M.,Mercier, E., and Lim, K. Y. (Eds.), Making a Difference: Prioritizing Equity and Access in CSCL, 12thInternational Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 2017, Volume 1 (pp.57–64). Philadelphia, PA: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Matsuzawa, Y. (2012). Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer: A social networkanalysis application for knowledge building discourse. Educational Technology Research &Development, 60, 903–921.Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (2013). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, andtechnology. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences, the SecondEdition. (pp. 397–417). NY: Cambridge Univ. Press.Schaffer, D. W. et al. (2009). Epistemic network analysis: a Prototype for 21st Century assessment of Learning.International Journal of Learning and Media, 1(2), 1–21.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the participating teacher and students. This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number16H0187.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1758© ISLS