Instant Sharing Makes Task More Engaging in Computer AidedClassroomRafikh Shaikh, Harshit Agrawal, Nagarjuna G., and Mrunal Nachankarrafikh@gnowledge.org, harshitagrawal.iitr@gmail.com, nagarjun@gnowledge.org, mrunal@gnowledge.orgHomi Bhabha Centre for Science Education, Mumbai, India.Abstract: With the advent of networked computers sharing of information and artifacts havebecome very convenient. From online multi-player games to social networking sites, instantsharing has become the norm of the day. Educational tools are trying to harness sharing as apotential tool to engage students in learning processes. But, does sharing lead to animprovement in academic performance? The present study investigates the role of instantsharing in the context of learning in a classroom setting. Two groups of students, from asuburban school in Mumbai, India, played an arithmetic game over a period of 7-8 months.The experimental group played on a platform that supported instant sharing, while theplatform for the control group was standalone. All other aspects of both platforms were same.Analysis of process data of the two groups reveals that instant sharing increased engagementwith the game. Students from control group lost interest in the game after some days, whileexperimental group students remained active on it till the end of the four-month period.IntroductionLearning activities can broadly be thought about as self-learning, group mediated learning or learning bymentorship. Computer-based self-learning activities through standalone applications impose no time andlocation restrictions on the user. With advances in ICT (Information and Communication Technology), robustshared platforms are now possible. Networked computers have opened up many new possibilities for groupactivities. Learners no longer require to be in the same physical space to be able to participate in a groupactivity. Synchronous and asynchronous sharing makes varied types of interactions possible among peers in agroup.Measuring learning in computer-supported environments is a difficult task (Stahl, Koschmann, &Suthers, 2006). In such environments engagement has been used by researchers as one of the yardsticks formeasuring learning. Engagement is considered as a good predictor of academic performance (Wise, Skues, &Williams, 2011). Student engagement is not an easy concept to define, there is a lot of literature which tries toestablish its definition. For this paper, we borrow Wise et al., (2011)’s idea of student engagement. According tothem, student engagement has three aspects: affective, behavioral and cognitive. Wise et al., (2011) also talkabout the affective aspect of engagement as being a gateway to the behavioral and cognitive aspects ofengagement. In this paper, we are only focusing on the behavioral aspect.Researchers and educators are working with computer applications having sharing (synchronous orasynchronous) features and testing them through the lens of engagement. Some have found that sharing helps inlearning (Shaikh, Nagarjuna, & Chandrasekharan, 2013; Junco, Heiberger, & Loken, 2011) whereas others saysharing increases social engagement but does not guarantee learning (Wise et al., 2011). The contradictingresults of these studies indicate a lack of clear understanding of the interplay between sharing, engagement, andlearning. The question which needs to be answered is: What does sharing add to (or subtract from) a learningactivity?There aren’t many studies which look at the changes in learning processes when sharing is involved,especially for primary students. Most of the existing literature focus on the effect of sharing in distance learningwhich introduces many variables which are difficult to control (Kreijns, Kirschner, & Jochems, 2003). Thepresent study is situated in a classroom space with synchronous sharing for the experimental group with tightcontrol over variables. The study tries to analyze the effect of instant sharing on learning strategies.Design featuresMany computer applications today allow sharing of a screen space among multiple users where posts/entries byone user are instantly available to all the other users. From the perspective of distributed cognition framework,the shared screen is an extension of the user’s memory to which others have access, which we term as “sharedmental space”. In the present study, instant sharing was instantiated by the use of shared screen ( or “sharedmental space”) among multiple users.CSCL 2017 Proceedings609© ISLSOLPC (One Laptop Per Child) laptops called XOs with SLP (Sugar Learning Platform) operatingsystem were used in this study. Papert’s (1980) constructionist theory had a big influence on the laptop’s design(hardware and software) and the theoretical framework being used for the present study. Every application inOLPC laptops is called “Activity”. A simple arithmetic task was implemented as two activities, one with thefeature of screen sharing across all the participants while the other one being standalone. Both the activitieswere designed to help the student learn arithmetic skills.44 students (16 girls and 28 boys) of 4th grade from a single classroom in a local MunicipalCorporation school in suburban Mumbai were selected for the study. The medium of instruction was Marathi(vernacular language) and one female teacher taught all the subjects. The students were divided into two groups,each consisting of 22 students. Researcher played the role of participant observer. Each group interacted withcomputers on alternate days for one hour. The same researcher conducted the one-hour sessions for both groups.Figure 1. Experimental Setup.Figure 1 shows the experimental setup followed for the study. The two groups were equivalent as basedon an arithmetic test. Additionally, students of both the groups belonged to the same locality, studied in thesame classroom, were taught all the subjects by the same teacher, used same laptops. While the experimentalgroup played with/against their peers, the control group played against the computer. Activity for the controlgroup was called Chat Studio Self (CS-Self) activity and activity for the experimental group was called ChatStudio Group (CS-Group) activity. The facilitator did not force the students to work on the activity designed forthe experiment. The students were free to explore other applications present on the computer.Data collectionThe study was carried out over a period of 64 working days spanning over a period of 7-8 months. Datacollected during the period included computer logs, computer meta-data, audio recordings of classroomtransactions, video recording of few sessions, field notes taken by the researcher, students and teacherinterviews and the arithmetic test performance before and after the study.Results and discussionThe collected data are currently being analyzed, we are only presenting the analysis of computer logs and metadata. The operational definition of engagement used in this paper (as we are only focusing on the behavioralaspect of engagement currently) is number of sessions of an activity. A session is a game completed by astudent. Preliminary analysis shows different engagement patterns (number of sessions per day) for theexperimental and control groups.CSCL 2017 Proceedings610© ISLSConsidering the number of sessions (1 session = 1 game) of the designed activities (CS-Self and CSGroup), experimental group (n = 649) had played more number of sessions than the control group (n = 252).Considering the number of sessions of activities other than the designed ones (CS-Self and CS-Group), controlgroup (n= 792) had more sessions of such activities than experimental (n= 540) group. The sessions of thedesigned activity (CS-Self and CS-Group) will now on be referred to focused sessions, while the sessions ofactivity other than the designed activity will be referred to as exploratory sessions.Figure 2. Number of focused sessions vs. time.Figure 3. Number of exploratory sessions vs. time.A deeper look at computer logs and meta-data showed that not every student from each group playedthe designed activities. 5 to 7 students from each group had only 1 or 2 focused sessions. Removing the data ofsuch students from the analysis, top 15 students out of the total 22 students from each group were selected.Figure 2 and 3 show data of these top 15 students of both groups. Figure 2, the number of focused sessionsplotted against time, shows that while the number of focused sessions for control group (CS-Self) is decreasingwith time, it is increasing for the experimental group (CS-Group). A possible explanation could be the presenceof instant sharing in the experimental group considering that all other known variables are controlled. Figure 3,shows that the control group was more consistent in exploring compared to the experimental group.Both the groups showed significant improvement in performance on an arithmetic test (p=0.009 for thecontrol group and p=0.068 for the experimental group). The process data offers some patterns to understandwhat lead to the apparent learning in both groups. A fairly strong correlation (r=0.67042) was found betweenimprovement in arithmetic score and number of sessions of focused activity (CS-Group) for the experimentalgroup, meaning students who played more session learned more. The same correlation (r=0.0260) does not holdfor the control group.With some confidence, it can be said that the experimental group students have learned arithmetic byplaying focused activity but we cannot draw the similar conclusion for the control group. Students from thecontrol group have learned arithmetic operations but the source is not focused activity (CS-Self) but somethingelse. It can be exploratory sessions (many non-focused applications on the computer had some element ofarithmetic) or it could be something extrinsic to the study.CSCL 2017 Proceedings611© ISLSA major chunk of the data (computer logs, meta-data, focused group interviews, audio and videorecordings and field notes) is yet to be analyzed. A definitive conclusion cannot be made at this point, but thepatterns emerging from data suggests that availability of instant sharing (shared mental space) in an activity(application) increases the probability of student engaging with that activity for longer time. In this study, theengagement with the arithmetic task was sustained for months in the experimental group.Once students are engaged with an activity their chances of learning does increase but socialengagement does not necessarily guarantee learning (Wise, Skues, & Williams, 2011). In the present case, itappears that student engagement has lead to learning. It seems that sharing emerges as a design feature foreducation tools to increase engagement and learning. The improvement in the performance of the control andexperimental group in the arithmetic test suggests that there can be multiple routes to learning. As the datasuggests, the experimental group was engaged with the designed task which could have resulted in learningwhile the exploratory nature of the control group sessions could have lead to learning in the control group. Thepresent correlation data does not necessarily mean a causal connection. Further quantitative and qualitativeanalysis of data will bring more clarity, which could eventually bolster or enervate the claim.ReferencesJunco, R., Heiberger, G., & Loken, E. (2011). The effect of Twitter on college student engagement and grades.Journal of computer assisted learning, 27(2), 119-132.Kreijns, K., Kirschner, P. A., & Jochems, W. (2003). Identifying the pitfalls for social interaction in computersupported collaborative learning environments: a review of the research. Computers in humanbehavior, 19(3), 335-353.Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorm. Basic Book, New York.Stahl, G., Koschmann, T., & Suthers, D. (2006). Computer-supported collaborative learning: An historicalperspective. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 409-426).Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University.Wise, L. Z., Skues, J., & Williams, B. (2011). Facebook in higher education promotes social but not academicengagement. Changing demands, changing directions. Proceedings ascilite Hobart, 1332-1342.CSCL 2017 Proceedings612© ISLS