“But We Don’t Have Beta-Cells”: Agent-Based Models to SupportHealth EducationDubovi Ilana, Utah State University, ilana.dubovi@usu.eduLevy T. Sharona, University of Haifa, stlevy@edu.haifa.ac.ilLevy Milana, Rambam Health Care Campus, mil_levy@rambam.health.gov.ilZuckerman-Levin Nehama, Rambam Health Care Campus, n_zuckerln@rambam.health.gov.ilDagan Efrat, University of Haifa, edagan@univ.haifa.ac.ilAbstract: This paper seeks to support science learning within the health-related education, thediabetes education domain. With this aim, we evaluated the impact of deep biochemicalunderstanding on behavioral patterns of young patients with type 1 diabetes. The findingspropose, a strong significant correlation between youths causal biochemical understanding totheir behavioral patterns of glucose self-regulation. Consequently, in order to promote thisbiochemical understanding, we introduce an agent-based learning environment (SimDCell)which supports exploration of glucose equilibrium interactions that facilitate relation andconnection of the biochemical processes to youth with type 1 diabetes own body functioningand to their daily based medical decisions.IntroductionHealth-related education has thus far occupied a modest space in the learning sciences (e.g. Reeve & Bell, 2009;Ching & Schaefer, 2015). To encourage additional learning sciences research in health education and todemonstrate the potential of applying existing approaches in this space, this paper presents an agent-basedmodeling approach to teaching the biochemical processes relating to the treatment of type 1 diabetes.Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) is a life-threatening, chronic illness that affects youth and requireslifelong insulin therapy. The youth and their families must develop new routines for monitoring and tracking ofblood glucose data (Lee, Thurston & Thurston, 2017). To maintain the delicate balance of blood glucose levels,adolescents must quickly learn to apply complex disease-related knowledge to daily self-treatment decisions.Much is still unknown about how learning interventions could better support type 1 diabetes management, aknown problem for adolescent youth.In response to this problem, we hypothesized that increased causal understanding of the biochemicalprocesses underlying blood glucose might improve adolescents’ glucose self-regulation. Based on the crosssectional study results, described below, this hypothesis appears to be supported. In light of this finding, we havedeveloped an agent-based modeling environment, the Simulated Diabetes Cells (SimDCell), as a tool to supportyouth with type 1 diabetes examine and learn more about biochemical processes related to their disease. In thispaper, we present vignettes from a single youth with type 1 diabetes interacting with this tool to illustrate thekinds of connections and discoveries characteristics that could be made with such an environment.Simulated Diabetes Cells (SimDCell) learning environmentThe SimDCell learning environment was designed in NetLogo (Wilensky, 1999), an agent-based modeling(ABM) environment, which is extensively used to model complex systems in science and to support learningabout systems in classes (e.g., Dubovi, Dagan, Sader-Mazbar, Nasar & Levy, 2018; Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006;Levy & Wilensky, 2009). Complex systems are comprised of numerous micro-level entities, whose interactionsemerge into a higher-order behavior, a macro-level phenomena. The diabetic process and its medical treatment isa prime example of a complex system. Many different molecules interact with one another, with drug molecules,and with normal body processes leading to the emergence of therapeutic or toxic effects. Medications are aimedat restoring physiological factors that maintain equilibrium in the body. However, equilibrium, as a complexphenomenon, is difficult to teach and to understand (Zion & Klein, 2015), since it encompasses dynamic processesthat take place while the system is at a constant state.The SimDCell learning environment is comprised of multiscale biochemical models embedded in apedagogically-supportive e-learning management system (Figure 1). These agent-based models simulate therelevant anatomy of glucose equilibrium. Two central representations were used: 1) cell models (pancreas cells,muscle cells and liver cells), and 2) plots showing the numbers of various molecules. Each cell model includesthe main organelles and molecules that participate in the metabolic processes and insulin mechanisms thatmaintain blood glucose equilibrium. The models are used to demonstrate the effects of various activities and dietson both healthy and T1DM body functioning. Participants can add different doses of insulin-based medications,ICLS 2018 Proceedings949© ISLSmanipulate multiple characteristics and habits (such as fasting or sport activities), and observe the subsequentbody reaction. The plots show the number of insulin and glucose molecules in the various relevant body parts.The use of multiscale models enables participants to zoom in on each type of cell separately or to zoom out toview how the different types of cells work synchronously for a more comprehensive exploration of glucoseequilibrium.Figure 1. A screenshot of SimDCell environment and a picture of adolescent learning with the environment.MethodsResearch design and participantsA mixed methods approach was used to understand the relationship between adolescents’ biochemical knowledgeand glucose control effectiveness. We conducted a cross sectional employed research with type 1 diabetesadolescents between 12 and 18 years old (n=55) who are treated at the diabetes clinic in a large hospital in northernIsrael. The sample comprised of patients who are treated with either insulin pump (n=34; 61%) or with multipleinjections (n=21; 39%), and lived with T1DM for an average of 5±3.4 years. To examine how adolescents mightuse the SimDCell environment to learn about their disease, we employed case study methods with a 13-year-oldfemale participant, “Michelle”.Data collection instruments and data analysisThe cross sectional studyDiabetic biochemical knowledge. We designed three open-ended questions to evaluate adolescents’ knowledgeabout biochemical processes of glucose equilibrium. The first question asked participants to describe the role ofinsulin within human body by using terms such as cell, receptor, transporter, energy, ATP, etc. The secondquestion presented the case of “John”, who has T1DM and is currently experiencing high blood glucose levels.The participants were asked to explain whether high blood glucose levels enable John’s cells to produce moreenergy compared to a heathy body. The third question asked the participants to describe the differences betweeninsulin secreted from a human pancreas and insulin administered as a treatment. The content of the items wasreviewed by diabetes experts to ensure accuracy. The language of the items was compared to school sciencecurricula to ensure they were written at an appropriate level for the young participants. The responses were codedas correct or incorrect, and the total score was calculated as the percentage of correct answers.Glucose control. Glycosylated Hemoglobin (HbA1C) is a blood test which estimates the glucose level averageover a period of 2-3 months. HbA1C was obtained from the patients’ medical records. In order to prevent diabeticcomplications, the clinic guidelines’ recommendation for all adolescents is to keep HbA1C below 7.5% which isequivalent to a blood glucose level of 169 mg/dl.Case studyFor the case study, we used screen recording software to capture Michelle’s interactions with the SimDCelllearning environment. While leaning with SimDCell, Michelle was asked to use a think aloud protocol, withadditional information elicited by a supporting researcher. A video-based discourse analysis was conducted toexplain the interaction between the young participant, the learning environment, and the researcher (Jordan &Henderson, 1995). The researchers carefully transcribed then coded each video entry. The resulting codes werecompiled into a codebook for illuminating how the participant used the provided data representations, how sheinterpreted the processes depicted, and how she resolved conflicts raised when comparing the SimDCellrepresentations with her own bodily experiences.ResultsICLS 2018 Proceedings950© ISLSThe association between biochemical knowledge and glucose controlA significant negative correlation was found between the level of biochemical knowledge and the glucose balanceas measured by HbA1C (Pearson r =-0.57, p<0.001) among adolescents who used the insulin pump for treatment.Hence, the higher the biochemical understanding the lower HbA1C, which means better metabolic control. Nosignificant difference was found among adolescents using treatment based on multiple daily injections (Pearsonr =-0.23, p=0.29).Learning with multiscale biochemical modelsWhen introduced to the SimDCell learning environment, Michelle quickly began to manipulate the model cells.The learning environment was designed to expose the sophistication of the cell models gradually. On the firstscreen, only a single muscle cell is displayed; on subsequent screens, users can manipulate new characteristicsand new organelles and cells are revealed. Michelle was eager to explore the new features of the model to advancethrough the screens. After exploring the muscle cell, Michelle moved to another screen to explore a beta (pancreas)cell. After a quick inspection of the cell model, Michelle’s attention fell quickly to the presence of insulin in thecell representation.Michelle:[pointing to the beta cell model] So, if this cell is not insulin dependent, whydoes it still have an insulin inside it?Researcher:Please try to switch to the muscle cell, and then compare between the cells,between the beta and the muscle cells.[Michelle switches to the muscle cell, clicks several different buttons, thenobserves the effects for several seconds]Michelle:I see… The beta cell produces insulin and then secretes it. While the muscle celluses this insulin as a mediator for glucose entrance within the cell.Researcher:[pointing to the beta cell] Now try to add glucose by clicking inside the modeland see what happens.Michelle:[clicks rapidly on the screen, which creates multiple glucose molecules] It’s fun!See… I filled it with glucose. [pauses for observation] More insulin is secretednow. Ah, I see, that’s actually what is happening within a healthy body. But we(people with type 1 diabetes) don’t have beta cells, so we don’t secrete insulin.Here they called it bolus, we also call our injections “bolus”. Only here it’s abolus of insulin in a healthy body.By giving Michelle the opportunity to explore the function of muscle and beta cells and compare them, SimDCellprompted Michelle to compare the representations and the interactions to the function of her own body. Moreover,she was able to comprehend that the insulin bolus that she receives multiple times a day is actually a mimic of theinsulin bolus secretion from a healthy pancreas. The understanding of normal beta cell function helps to clarifyreasons for the T1DM insulin regimen, which includes different injections during the day. In the next excerpt,Michelle explores the function of another molecule she had used in her treatment—glucagon.Michelle:[exploring the liver cell at the model] I understand now. When insulin is attachedto its receptor on the liver cell membrane, then the glycogen is constructed fromglucose. And when glucagon is attached, it causes the breakdown of glycogen.Researcher:So then, why do you think you have to carry glucagon injections with you?Michelle:So, when I am passing out, the glucagon takes the glycogen out of the liver celland breaks it down to glucose molecules, and then the blood glucose level willrise.Researcher:I hope you won’t pass out.Michelle:But if we, people with diabetes, have normal glucagon in our body, why do weneed these injections of glucagon if we already have it?Researcher:Try it with the model. See what happens when the model cells are inhypoglycemia.ICLS 2018 Proceedings951© ISLSExploration of cells models in the SimDCell environment gave Michelle the opportunity to relate complexunderstanding of glucose equilibrium toward her own body and make sense of treatments that she is receiving(e.g., glucagon kit that she carries with her).Discussion and conclusionThis study among adolescents with type 1 diabetes provides preliminary results showing the importance of youngpatients having causal biochemical knowledge about their disease (Lee et al., 2017). Our findings show thatadolescents’ glucose levels, measured by HbA1C, were significantly and strongly associated to the adolescents’causal understanding of biochemical processes. That is, when the level of biochemical understanding was higher,the glucose balance was better, i.e., the HbA1C was lower. A closer look at our data suggests this effect is trueonly for patients whose treatment is based on the insulin pump. This can be explained by the greater number ofdecision-making processes that insulin pump users have to make compared to treatment with multiple dailyinjections. Administration of insulin through multiple daily injections is based on blood glucose levels only, whileinsulin pump treatment also requires increased glucose monitoring, counting dietary carbohydrates and judgingthe impact of exercise on insulin infusion rates. This additional consideration illuminates the importance of causalbiochemical understanding for such complex daily decisions.The current study also builds upon previous research regarding the value of exploring computer modelsfor science learning (e.g., in physics: Sengupta & Wilensky, 2009), by extending it to understand how modelsbased on a complex-systems perspective may support adolescents learning to self-regulate their diabetes. TheSimDCell environment is a novel approach in diabetes education and helps adolescents draw connections betweenpathophysiological-biochemical processes and their application to diabetes treatments. As they explore dynamiccell models, young people are able to relate the processes represented in the models to the functions of their ownbody and improve their mechanistic understanding about diabetes. More research is needed to explore the relationof casual biochemical explanations of a disease management and consequent health outcomes.ReferencesChing, C. C., & Schaefer, S. (2015). Identities in motion, identities at rest: Engaging bodies and minds in fitnessgaming research and design. In V. R. Lee (Ed.), Learning Technologies and the Body: Integration andImplementation in Formal and Informal Learning Environments (pp. 201-219). New York, NY:Routledge.Dubovi, I., Dagan, E., Sader-Mazbar, O., Nasar, L., & Levy, S.T. (2018). Nursing Students Learning withComplexity-Based Computerized Models the Pharmacology of Diabetes Mellitus: A QuasiExperimental Study. Nurse Education Today,Jacobson, M. J., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educational importanceand implications for the learning sciences. The Journal of the learning sciences, 15(1), 11-34.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The journal of the learningsciences, 4(1), 39-103.Lee, V. R., Thurston, T., & Thurston, C. (2017). A Comparison of Discovered Regularities in Blood GlucoseReadings across Two Data Collection Approaches Used with a Type 1 Diabetic Youth. Methods ofInformation in Medicine, 56(2017), e84- e91.Levy, S. T., & Wilensky, U. (2009). Students’ learning with the Connected Chemistry (CC1) curriculum:navigating the complexities of the particulate world. Journal of Science Education andTechnology, 18(3), 243-254.Reeve, S., & Bell, P. (2009). Children's self-documentation and understanding of the concepts 'healthy' and'unhealthy'. International Journal of Science Education, 31(14), 1953-1974.Sengupta, P., & Wilensky, U. (2009). Learning electricity with NIELS: Thinking with electrons and thinking inlevels. International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 14(1), 21-50.Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo. Center for Connected Learning and Computer-Based Modeling. NorthwesternUniversity. Evanston, IL. Retrieved: 16 July 2013. http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogoZion, M., & Klein, S. (2015). Conceptual understanding of homeostasis. International Journal of BiologyEducation, 4 (1),1–27.AcknowledgementsThis study was funded by D-Cure, advancing diabetes care to cure fund, medical funds and the Israeli Ministryof Health, OTZMA project #3-12108 2808. We are grateful to the adolescences and their parents for their effortsand for devoting their time and willingness to participate in study. We thank Mr. Joel Drake for his carefullanguage editing.ICLS 2018 Proceedings952© ISLS