Do Alternative Instructional Approaches Result in DifferentLearning Progressions?Moraima Castro-Faix, Rutgers University, moraimac@rutgers.eduAmber Todd, Wright State University, amber.todd@wright.eduWilliam Romine, Wright State University, william.romine@wright.edu,Ravit Golan Duncan, Rutgers University, ravit.duncan@gse.rutgers.eduAbstract: Learning progressions (LPs) are the hypothetical pathways that students may take asthey learn about core ideas in a domain. LPs take a developmental approach to learning andassume that there are constraints that drive the learning paths. The question then is: how strongare the constraints of the learning process? We report on a comparison of two distinctinstructional interventions informed by the same genetics progression that were implementedwith introductory biology students (10th and 11th grades). The interventions targeted the ideasin the LP but differ in the: (1) sequencing of instruction, (2) focus phenomena, and (3) activities.To determine the learning paths for each instructional intervention we used causal model searchand path analyses to explore relationships within and between these ideas. Our findings mayindicate that the two instructional contexts result in maps that have both differences andsimilarities providing further evidence about the strengths of conjectures in LPs.IntroductionLearning progressions (LPs) are hypothetical pathways that students may take as they develop more sophisticatedways of reasoning about important ideas and practices in a domain (Alonzo and Gotwals, 2012;Duncan & HmeloSilver, 2009). LPs begin with a consideration of students’ prior knowledge and initial understandings to definethe lowest level (lower anchor) of the LP. The uppermost level of the LP explicates target understandings (upperanchor) in the domain and is based on analyses of the domain and societal expectations (what students shouldknow by the end of a specific grade or grade band). Between the lower and upper anchors of the LP aredescriptions of intermediate levels of growing sophistication. The intermediate levels are derived from researchon student thinking and learning in the domain. Movement along the progression depends on carefully designedinstruction (Corcoran, Mosher and Rogat, 2009).In essence, LPs take a developmental approach to learning with the underlying assumption that there aredevelopmental constraints and affordances that drive the learning path. We use “developmental” in the sense thatacquisition of new knowledge depends on existing knowledge (Wiser, Smith, & Doubler, 2012); thedevelopmental constraints in this sense are not necessarily related to age. From a cognitive perspective, thequestion is: how strong are the constraints of the learning process? It may be that constraints are relatively looseand many different learning paths exist between the same start and end points. Theories of learning that take amore situated, knowledge-in-pieces, perspective (diSessa, 1988; Lave & Wenger, 1991) suggest that this may bethe case. Alternatively, it may be that the constraints are strong and that there are very few possible paths that aremost effective and efficient in promoting learning. Research on second language acquisition has shown thatlearning of certain grammatical features follows a “natural order” (Krashen, 1981 p. 10) suggesting that, at leastin some domains, there are strong constraints on learning and a predictable path. If the developmental constraintsare strong, then LP scholarship can help us identify such constraints and inform curriculum and instruction.However, the constraints are weak, and there are numerous possible paths, it is not clear whether LPs cancontribute to the development of a best–practice instructional approach. Understanding the nature of theconstraints on learning and how these impact learning paths is a currently unresolved issue of interest in LPresearch (Duncan & Gotwals, 2015; Sevian & Talanquer, 2014).One way to explore this issue is to develop different instructional interventions informed by the sameprogression; that is, both interventions target the same core ideas but differ in how and when (sequence) they aretaught. If the developmental constraints are strong one would expect that learning will follow the same pathregardless of the specific instructional intervention. However, learning may be less efficient with an instructionalintervention that is not well aligned with the hypothesized trajectory (levels of the progression). Learning underthe conditions of an intervention that is better aligned with the LP will be more efficient. This is akin to buildinga complex Lego structure using one of two sets of instructions. One set, the “aligned” set provides instructionsthat call for the pieces in the “right” order; the other “non-aligned” set calls for the same pieces but in an orderthat is not ideal. In both cases the Lego structures will eventually be built, but it will be a much more troubled andcumbersome process with the non-aligned instructions. Note that both sets of instructions involve the sameICLS 2018 Proceedings808© ISLSbuilding blocks and the final structure is the same, but the order of assembling the blocks is different. A radicallydifferent conceptualization is the assumption that the learning constraints are very soft or non-existent, and in thatcase the two instructional interventions will lead to very different outcomes. In our analogy this means that thedespite having the same building blocks the final Lego structures themselves will be entirely different. Therefore,having an experimental design with two different instructional approaches can potentially provide evidence thatcan differentially support one of the two hypotheses (strong versus weak constraints).Here we report on such a comparison in the context of two distinct instructional interventions informedby the same genetic progression that was developed and revised by the authors (Shea & Duncan, 2013; Duncan,Rogat & Yarden, 2009; Todd & Kenyon, 2015). Both interventions were implemented with students learningintroductory biology at the high school level (10th and 11th grades). The interventions targeted the same core ideasin the LP but the order of addressing these ideas, the focus phenomena, and the specific instructional activitieswere different. Students learning in both instructional conditions were assessed with written assessments that usedordered multiple-choice items (Briggs & Alonzo, 2009; Briggs et al., 2006).To determine the learning paths in each condition we used causal model search and path analysis toexplore relationships within and between these ideas, and how the modeled relationships fit with the data. Thefollowing two research questions guided our analyses: 1) How do two different instructional interventionsdeveloped using the same progression influence high school students’ core ideas and the connections betweenideas in an LP? 2) What do the progression maps suggest about the nature of the constraints on learning? We nextdescribe the genetics learning progression that informed the design of the instructional interventions in the twoconditions and then describe the two interventions.Theoretical framework: The genetics LPThe genetics progression was developed using the framework of genetics literacy by Stewart, Cartier andPassmore (2005) to identify core genetics ideas. The framework for genetics literacy depicts three interrelatedconceptual models: (a) the inheritance model, which explains the probabilistic patterns of correlation betweengenes and traits; (b) the meiotic model, which explains the cellular processes that allow for the transfer of geneticinformation from one generation to the next; and (c) the molecular model, which explains the cellular andmolecular mechanisms by which genes bring about their physical effects within an individual. The genetics LPdescribes learning for grades 5-10 and includes eight core ideas, or constructs, grounded in the three conceptualmodels described above (Duncan et al., 2009). In this paper we focused our analyses on two constructs that captureideas from the molecular model—constructs B and C; and two constructs that capture ideas from the inheritanceand meiotic models—constructs E and F, respectively.To simplify matters, we refer to constructs B and C as the molecular genetics constructs. Construct B is about thenature of the genetic information. It embodies the idea that genes are instructions that encode the structure ofproteins. Construct C, in turn, deals with the roles of proteins in genetic phenomena. Proteins are essentially themediating mechanism between genes and traits; they carry out a variety biological functions such as: channels,structural support, sending messages within the cell, etc. Protein function impacts the structure and function ofcells and those in turn impact the structure and functions of tissues and organs. When proteins malfunction (dueto a mutation in the genetic instructions for them) this may alter the function of the cells, tissue, organ, and wholeorganism.We refer to constructs E and F as the classical genetics constructs. Construct E describes how genes arepassed from one generation to the next though sex cells (sperm and egg). It involves understanding the equalcontribution of genetic material from both parents, the random distribution of genes in sex cells, and the processof meiosis. Construct F involves the patterns of correlations between the gene variants (alleles) and the physicalcharacteristics (traits). Examples of these patterns include: recessive, dominant, sex linked, etc. Individuals havetwo alleles for each gene (one from each parent) that can vary in terms of their DNA sequence. The higherlevels of construct F also involve understanding patterns of inheritance at the molecular level.While we anticipate that the constructs are all related to each other, both within and across the geneticsmodels, the progression as developed (Duncan et al., 2009) did not include any conjectures about how theconstructs relate to each other. There was simply not enough research to merit making such assertions. Laterwork using data from empirical studies of the progression has begun to characterize relationships betweenconstructs (Shea & Duncan, 2013; Todd & Romine, 2017). The analyses we conducted for this paper alsoprovide valuable information about potential dependencies and relationships between constructs and how theserelationships develop under different instructional conditions.MethodsICLS 2018 Proceedings809© ISLSStudy contexts and instructional interventionsWe report data from two research groups that developed instructional materials using the same genetics LP. Theinstructional interventions developed were implemented with HS students. In the next section we discuss eachimplementation context and the different instructional interventions.Research Group 1 contextThe Research Group 1 implementation study was carried out with 285 students in the classes of five 11th gradebiology teachers in a suburban eastern United States high school. The school’s students come from diversebackgrounds: 47% African-American, 23.7% Caucasian, 17% Hispanic and 12% Asian with 44% of the studentsconsidered economically disadvantaged. In collaboration with the participating teachers we developed a 10-weekinstructional unit in genetics that consisted of three modules focusing on concepts in molecular (4 weeks), classicalgenetics (4 weeks), and a bridging unit (1 week) that connected ideas in molecular and classical genetics. Themolecular module addressed constructs B and C of the progression while the classical genetics module addressedconstructs E and F (Duncan et al., 2017). The bridging module connected the molecular and classical geneticsmodels by helping students develop molecular-based explanations of inheritance patterns.For the purposes of a larger project we had two instructional conditions. About half of the studentslearned with the molecular genetics module first followed by the classical genetics module and then the bridgingmodule- this is the MC condition. The other half of the students learned with the classical genetics module firstfollowed by the molecular module- this is the CM condition. Each teacher taught classes in both conditions (withinteacher assignment). Thus even within Research Group 1 we have two instructional interventions that vary insequence, but not in content. Table 1 illustrates the MC condition in the first column.All modules focused on model-based inquiry and students developed and evaluated models of geneticmechanisms using evidence. The modeling activities were followed by benchmark lessons that synthesized whatwas learned in the modeling activities, introduced relevant terminology, and provided opportunities to practiceusing the newly learned ideas. More information can be found in: Todd, Romine, and Cook-Whitt, 2017 (SeeTable 1).Table 1: Instructional interventionsResearch Group 1Instructional DesignResearch Group 2Instructional DesignMolecular Module (M)Molecular and Classical ModulesDoes HIV resistance exist? (1 week, modeling)Use evidence to develop models of the molecular basisof genetic HIV resistance- Constructs addressed:B,CWhat is the link between genes and proteins ingenetic disorders? (1.5 week, modeling)Jigsaw activity in which: students construct models,using evidence, for DMD, Albinism, or Diabetes.Constructs addressed: B,CGenetically Modified Organisms: (1.5 week,modeling) Use evidence to evaluate 3 competingmodels about taking a gene from one species andputting it into another.Constructs addressed: B, CHow Do Cells Become Cancerous (2.5 weeks, intervention lessonset, problem-based). Examine cell types, structure/functionrelationships, cellular differentiation.Constructs Addressed: B, CWhy Are Siamese Cats Colored The Way They Are? (2.5 weeks,intervention lesson set, problem-based) Examine enzymes andproteins, structure/function relationships, protein denaturation.Construct and revise models of how activity of proteins can lead tovisible traits. Constructs Addressed: CHow Can Hyla chrysoscelis, A Native Frog, Tolerate BeingFrozen? (1.5 weeks, problem-based) Examine protein functions.Constructs Addressed: CClassical Module (C)How Can We Reduce the Risk of Obesity in Our Community?(2.5 weeks, problem-based) Examine protein structure/function,nutrients in body. Constructs Addressed: B, CIntroduction to Pedigrees and Punnet squares (1.5weeks, modeling)Rules of Inheritance using pedigrees from 3 Families.Build models of inheritance for dominant andrecessive disorders. Constructs addressed: E, FHow is hair texture inherited? and Why iscolorblindness more common in males? (2.5 weeks,modeling)How Can There Be A Case of Disputed Maternity? (2.5 weeks,intervention lesson set, problem-based) Examine DNA structure,chromosomes, karyotypes, meiosis, patterns of inheritance. Usepaper models of meiosis and crossing over, collect evidence tosolve case of maternity dispute. Constructs Addressed: B, C, E, FCan We Genetically Engineer a Superhuman? (2.5 weeks,intervention lesson set, problem-based) Examine diseases atgene/protein/cell/trait level, mutations, protein structure/function,ICLS 2018 Proceedings810© ISLSCo-dominance and sex-linked traits. Revise models of observed traits explained by patterns of inheritance. Constructsinheritance. Construct addressed: FAddressed: B, C, E, FHow Can We Diagnose and Develop a Treatment Plan for aSimulated Patient? (2 weeks, problem-based) Examine symptoms,Bridge Module (B)proteins, mutations, propose genetic treatment. ConstructsAddressed: B, C, E, FWhat is the link between genes, proteins and thephenotype in a genetic disorder? (1 week, modeling)Students developed models of the molecular basis ofinheritance patterns in the following contexts: bloodtypes, cancer, CF, Sickle Cell and Dwarfism.Constructs addressed: B,C,E,FResearch Group 2 contextThe Research Group 2 implementation study involved sixty-five students within a 10th grade introductory biologyclass at a Midwestern United States suburban public grade 6-12 STEM school. Student demographics representthe region with white/non-Hispanic students making up 69.9% of the school population, 12.5% black nonHispanic, 9.6% multiracial, 5% Asian/Pacific Islander, and 3.4% Hispanic; 24.5% of the school’s population isconsidered economically disadvantaged.All 10th grade students in this school received the same instruction, designed predominantly by thebiology teacher but containing four instructional intervention lesson sets targeted to the upper levels of theconstructs of the LP. Consistent with the school’s mission to utilize project-based learning and inquiry activities,the intervention lesson sets and other teacher-developed genetics lesson sets were all problem-based and centeredon a driving question (see Table 1). The students began the instructional period focused on the molecularconstructs (i.e. molecular first), learning about structure/function relationships of proteins and cells, cellulardifferentiation, and protein denaturation. These lesson sets focused on constructs B and C, among others notdiscussed in this paper. For example, at the end of the second lesson set, students were able to explain how enzymedenaturation in different parts of a Siamese cat’s body leads to the coat pattern seen. Students then learned aboutthe classical constructs, examining DNA structure, chromosomes, karyotypes, meiosis, and patterns ofinheritance. Throughout the classical genetics lesson sets, instruction also focused on integrating the molecularmodel (constructs B and C) with the classical models (E, and F). For example, in the sixth lesson set, studentsused colored pencils to illustrate how an individual with an allele coding for a light blue pigment and an allelecoding for a dark brown pigment would have brown eyes because the darker pigment masks the lighter pigment,although both are expressed. More details about the instruction can be found in Todd, Romine, & Cook-Whitt,2017 (see Table 1 second column).Data collectionThe assessments used for this study included ordered multiple-choice items (OMC). OMC items are developed tomap onto the levels described by the genetics LP (Briggs, 2016). Rather than giving right or wrong scoring toeach item response, OMC items allow for giving partial credit to each response. This is helpful for allowingresearchers to obtain more information about students’ level of reasoning about a particular construct using thesame item and reduces the number of items needed in an assessment.Research Group 1: The assessment instrument (described in Duncan et al., 2017) consisted of 56 orderedmultiple-choice (OMC) items. These items were selected from a pool of 85 OMC items that we developed, pilotedand validated in previous research (Duncan et al., 2017). The 56 items were selected included about 4–5 items perconstruct and each item included response options that mapped onto 2-4 levels of the relevant construct.Research Group 2: The assessment instrument is a previously validated Learning Progression-basedAssessment of Modern Genetics (LPA-MG, Todd, Romine, & Cook-Whitt, 2017; Todd & Romine, 2017). TheLPA-MG also consists of OMC items mapping on to the levels described in our modified version of the geneticsLP (Todd, Romine, & Cook-Whitt, 2017). The 36-item LPA-MG assesses all progression levels with eachconstruct containing three items; the item response options mapped onto the 4-6 levels of the relevant construct.Data analysisCoding of the dataBoth research groups used a Guttman coding scheme to translate students’ responses into a location along eachconstruct, using the assumption that if students’ understandings corresponded to a higher level of the constructICLS 2018 Proceedings811© ISLS(say B4), then they had previously mastered and surpassed the lower levels of the construct (i.e. B1, B2, and B3).Assuming a four-level construct, a student with a mastery level of B2 would receive a score of “1100,” indicatingnon-mastery of the two upper levels. We elicited this coding for each item, and then averaged the scores acrossthe construct. For example, a score of “0.83 0.78 0.63 0.57” for “F1 F2 F3 F4” indicates that this student heldrelatively high mastery of F1 and F2, and lower mastery of F3 and F4. After the data were coded and averagedacross the construct, we employed the techniques of causal model search and path analysis to explore relationshipsbetween these discrete ideas, and how the modeled relationships fit with the data.Model searchRelational structure in the data was sought using the fast greedy search (FGS) algorithm implemented in TETRAD(Glymour et al. 2016). This score-based algorithm was implemented in previous work with genetics learningprogressions (Todd, Romine, & Correa-Menendez, 2017), and is described in detail in Madigan and Raftery(1994). Briefly, score-based algorithms like FGS search the data for probable relationships and then combinethese relationships into a more complex structure in a way which maximizes the likelihood of the model given thedata (Raftery, 1995). We used the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) approximation to this likelihood, whichcarries with it the prior assumption that in the absence of data, all models are equally probable (Raftery, 1995).After searching the space of probable models, a model is selected which minimizes the BIC score as itis specified by Raftery. In order to constrain the model search space, which is hyperexponential with an increasingnumber of parameters (Madigan & Raftery, 1994) and given the extensive research on validation of theseprogressions (Todd & Romine, 2017), we added the constraint that the progression levels within each constructwere related and sequential, and required those links to exist in the model before searching for additional links.We applied the above process to three datasets: (1) Research Group 1, MC Intervention (2) ResearchGroup 1, CM Intervention, and (3) Research Group 2 MC Intervention. This resulted in a best-fitting directedacyclic graph (DAG) describing links within individual constructs as well as links between related constructs. Fitof these graphical structures with the data were then confirmed using path analysis.A model being the “best model” does not mean it actually explains the data as all models in the set maybe poor-fitting (Link & Barker, 2006). Fit of the resultant relational structure derived from the model searchprocess with the data was confirmed using path analysis. We evaluated fit of each structure with the data fromwhich it was derived using Mplus7 by comparing the covariance matrix inferred by the model to the actualcovariance structure in the data. We used three fit indices: the comparative fit index (CFI), the Tucker-LewisIndex (TLI), and the Root Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA). Values of 0.9 or above for the CFIand TLI indices indicate a good-fitting model (Hu & Bentler, 1995). An RMSEA of 0.06 or below indicates agood fitting model (Hu & Bentler, 1995).ResultsWe compared three instructional interventions developed with the genetics LP to determine the role of instruction.The progress maps suggest more similarities than differences across the instructional interventions. We firstprovide evidence for fit of the path models with the data and then discuss the patterns we noticed across theimplementations.Fit indices derived from path analysis indicate that all models uncovered by the FGS algorithm fit thedata well. The CM model from Research Group 1 had an RMSEA = of 0.058, a CFI of 0.95, and a TLI of 0.93.The MC model from Research Group 1 had an RMSEA of 0.059, a CFI of 0.95, and a TLI of 0.93. The MCmodel from Research Group 2 had an RMSEA of 0.029, and values of 0.99 for the CFI and TLI. All of theseindices exceed accepted criteria for good model fit (Hu & Bentler, 1995).Comparison between Research Group 1’s two instructional conditionsWe first compared the path analyses of Research Group 1’s two respective instructional sequences molecularthen-classical (MC) and classical-then-molecular (CM). In this comparison the students are from the sameresearch context and the intervention activities are identical except for the sequencing of the classical andmolecular modules (see Table 1). The path models in the form of progression maps are shown in Figure 1. Thenodes represent levels of the progression for each construct, i.e. B1, B2, and B3 nodes are three successive levelsof the B construct (gene code for proteins). The constructs are color coded with darker shades indicating moresophisticated levels understanding. Constructs E and F are in shaded in green and blue. The molecular constructsB and C (proteins do the work of the cell) are shaded in orange and yellow. The arrows indicate connectionsbetween levels within and between constructs. The red arrows denote connections between constructs and thestrength of the connection is reflected in the arrow width. Note that arrows are directional. A connection betweenF2 and E2 (classical constructs: inheritance patterns and meiosis, with an arrow from F to E) means that studentsICLS 2018 Proceedings812© ISLSwho achieved a level 2 understanding on construct E usually had already attained a level 2 understanding on theF construct. Knowing F at a level 2 affords learning of E at a level 2.CMMCFigure 1. Path models (progression maps) for MC (Left) and CM (Right) conditions.Figure 1 illustrates these connections, both across constructs in the same genetic model (between E andF or B and C) and between the classical and molecular constructs (between F and C, F and B). The F1 nodes inboth maps have the greatest number of connections. This means that F1 functions as a central idea in bothconditions. Interestingly, construct E is connected only to construct F in both conditions. Students’understandings of construct E (meiotic model) do not bootstrap the learning of other constructs; however,understanding the ideas embodied in construct E is afforded by understanding construct F (patterns of inheritance).This is not surprising, as students often know more about inheritance patterns compared to meiosis, as theseconcepts are often part of the middle school curriculum. The understanding that each individual has two alleles(one from each parent) can bootstrap understandings that sex cells have half the genetic content and that allelesare randomly distributed in sex cells.In comparing the two progression maps we can see that the (red) arrows in the MC condition are mostlyoriginating from construct F towards other constructs (B, C and E); thus construct F seems to be a bootstrappingconstruct in this condition. Progressing along construct F affords learning ideas in other constructs. This was a bitsurprising to us since in the MC condition students learned molecular ideas first and yet it seems that studentsmay not have fully understood ideas in other constructs before they had a strong grasp of construct F. The oppositeseems to be true in the CM condition. In that progression map for construct B levels B2 and B4 seems to point toconstruct F. This suggests that understanding construct B (genes are instructions for proteins) affords learningideas about patterns of inheritance. This makes sense given the nature of the higher levels of construct F (levels2-4), which involve understanding the molecular basis of inheritance patterns (e.g. mutations in genes can resultin recessive alleles). However, we find it odd that these connections are present in the CM condition, in whichstudents learned about classical genetics first and only then about molecular genetics. Moreover, there are noconnections originating from construct B to construct F in the MC (molecular first) condition. One potentialexplanation that may account for these seemingly unexpected patterns has to do with the bridging module. It maybe that when students in the MC condition, who had just completed the classical module, learned about theconnection between the molecular and inheritance models (bridge) they developed deeper understanding of themolecular constructs. That is the bridge helped make the more recently learned construct a scaffold for deepeningunderstandings of the molecular constructs, which were revisited in the bridge module. The opposite is true forthe CM condition. These students had just completed the molecular module before starting the bridge module. Inthe bridge module their understandings of the molecular construct B scaffolded the deeper understanding of therevisited classical constructs.Comparison between Research Group 1 and Research Group 2 interventionsBelow we show a comparison of the progression maps from the MC condition from Research Group 1 and theinstructional intervention of Research Group 2. Both of these interventions were of the molecular-first ilk butinvolved different phenomena. Further, whereas Group 1’s unit was model-based, Group 2’s unit was projectbased. In both cases students were guided by driving questions and strived to explain a variety of geneticphenomena. The best-fitting path models are shown in Figure 2. There are several points to note here. First, wewish to point out that the two progressions have different numbers of levels. This is because Group 2’s progressionis a revision of the progression used by Group 1 and it has more levels for all constructs. To help in comparingthese we color-coded the levels using similar shades. Thus for construct F, Group 2 has an extra level not includedICLS 2018 Proceedings813© ISLSconstruct F from Group 1. However, in construct C, the terminal levels are the same; C5 (Grp 2) is equivalent toC4 (Grp 1), and levels C1-3 in Group 2 are all part of level C1 for Group 1. While this is somewhat confusing,the extra levels in Group 2 do not change the overall pattern of findings.Second, there are more connections in Group 1’s map, in particular from construct F to the otherconstructs. This suggests that F is a central construct and progressing in understanding of this construct affordedthe learning of ideas in other constructs. We suspect that the bridge module may have contributed to thisphenomenon as it afforded students with additional opportunities to revisit constructs B and C in the context ofdiscussing inheritance patterns (F) right after they learned about classical genetics. It may be that learning aboutthe molecular mechanisms underlying inheritance patterns allowed students to develop more sophisticatedunderstandings of the molecular constructs in and of themselves (resulting in a bootstrapping effect between Fand the molecular constructs).Third, in both progression maps the constructs grow in sophistication meaning the arrows within aconstruct all originate from prior levels to subsequent levels and the values are all positive. Moreover, the initialand terminal nodes are very similar. Initial nodes are those that only have arrows originating with them, in bothmaps the initial nodes E1 and F1belong to the classical genetics constructs; whereas C1 is initial only in the Group1 map, and B1 is initial only in the Group 2 map. The terminal nodes, those that have only have arrows pointingto them, are also similar with F4/F5, B4/B6, and E4/E5 respectively, whereas C4 is terminal only in Group 1 map.We discuss our interpretation of the similarities and differences between these maps and theirimplications next.Grp 2Grp 1Figure 2. Path models (progression maps) of MC conditions for Research Group 1 (left) and Research Group 2(right).Discussion and instructional implicationsAs noted above, all three the progression maps (the MC, CM maps for Group 1 and the MC Group 2 map) shownoticeable similarities and differences. In terms of commonalities, the similar initial and terminal nodes suggestthat students ground their understanding of genetics in ideas from the classical genetics constructs E and F sincethese serve as initial nodes in both maps. Students begin with classical genetics ideas and then use these to developunderstandings of molecular genetics. The order of introduction of classical versus molecular genetics does notseem to matter much in terms of initial and terminal ideas (Figure 1). Students seem to have similar start and endpoints. However, the order of instruction does seem to matter in terms of which constructs bootstrap the learning,and here our findings are somewhat counterintuitive. Beginning with the molecular module does not mean thatthe molecular constructs will facilitate learning of the classical constructs, and the reverse is also true—classicalconstructs do not bootstrap learning in the classical first condition. We believe that the odd patterns we identifiedin the Group 1 progression maps may be due to the role of the bridging module in revisiting constructs that wereintroduced first and deepening them at this later stage.Differences mostly comprised the connections between constructs. There were more connections in theGroup 1 maps in comparison to the Group 2 map. This plurality of connections suggests that the instructionalintervention of Group 1 may have afforded multiple paths (while resulting in similar end points). Again, it maybe that the bridging module, by focusing on connections between ideas, allowed students to deepen theirunderstandings of different ideas and to forge new paths through the terrain of these constructs.To conclude, we wish to return to our question: What do the progression maps suggest about the natureof the constraints on learning? Our findings do not provide the clear and conclusive answer we had hoped for.Overall, we see both strong similarities and important differences between the maps across the three conditions.ICLS 2018 Proceedings814© ISLSCertain instructional opportunities and foci may impact some learning paths more than others. Overall, ourfindings do not support the existence of strong constraints on learning; however, they do imply some weakerconstraints given the similarities in initial and terminal nodes and the progression within constructs. We also pointout that the differing study contexts (e.g. schools, students) and measures may have exaggerated some of thedifferences between the two MC instructional contexts. We hope that in future collaboration between our groupswe can develop more elegant and streamlined designs that can provide stronger evidence and help us betterunderstand students’ learning trajectories and the impacts of instruction on these trajectories.ReferencesAlonzo, A. & Gotwals, A. (Eds.). (2012). Learning progressions in science: Current challenges and futuredirections. Rotterdam, Netherlands: Sense PublishersCorcoran, T., Mosher, F. A., & Rogat, A. (2009). Learning Progressions in Science: An Evidence-Based Approachto Reform. CPRE Research Report# RR-63. Consortium for Policy Research in Education.Duncan, R. G., Choi, J., Castro-Faix, M., & Cavera, V. L. (2017). A Study of Two Instructional SequencesInformed by Alternative Learning Progressions in Genetics. Science & Education, 1-27.Duncan, R. G.,&Hmelo-Silver,C.E. (2009). Learning progressions: Aligning curriculum, instruction, andassessment. Journal of Research in ScienceTeaching, 46(6), 606–609.Duncan, R. G.,&Rivet, A. E. (2013). Science learning progressions. Science, 339, 396–397.Duncan, R. G., Rogat, A., & Yarden, A. (2009). A learning progression for deepening students’ understandingsof modern genetics across the 5th-10th grades. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46, 655–674.Freidenreich, H. B., Chinn, C. A., & Bausch, A. (2011). Promoting middle school students’ understandings ofmolecular genetics. Research in Science Education, 41(2), 147–167.Glymour, C., Scheines, Spirtes, P. Ramsey, J. TETRAD [Computer software] (2016). Center for CausalDiscovery. Retrieved from http://www.phil.cmu.edu/tetrad/current.htmlGuttman, L. (1950). The principal components of scale analysis. In S. A. Stouffer, L. Guttman, E. A. Suchman,P.F. Lazarsfeld, S. A. Star, & J. A. Clausen (Eds.), Measurement and prediction (pp. 312–361). NewYork: Wiley.Hu, L.T. & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure analysis: Conventionalcriteria versus new alternatives. Structural equation modeling: a multidisciplinary journal, 6(1), 1-55.Hu, L.T. & Bentler, PM. (1995). Evaluating Model Fit. In RH Hoyle (Ed.), Structural Equation Modeling:Concepts, Issues, and Applications. Thousand Oaks: SageLave, J. (1987). Cognition in practice. New York: Cambridge University Press.Link,W.A. &Barker, R. J. (2006). Model weights and the foundations of multimodel inference. Ecology, 87(10),2626-2635.Madigan, D., & Raftery, A. E. (1994). Model selection and accounting for model uncertainty in graphical modelsusing Occam's window. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 89(428), 1535-1546.Raftery, A. E. (1995). Bayesian model selection in social research. Sociological methodology, 111-163.Sevian, H., & Talanquer, V. (2014). Rethinking chemistry: A learning progression on chemicalthinking. Chemistry Education Research and Practice, 15(1), 10-23Shea, N. A., & Duncan, R. G. (2013). From theory to data: The process of refining learning progressions. Journalof the Learning Sciences, 22(1), 7-32Todd, A. N. (2013). The molecular genetics learning progressions: Revisions and refinements based on empiricaltesting in three 10th grade classrooms. (Doctoral dissertation, Wright State University).Todd, A., & Kenyon, L. (2016). Empirical refinements of a molecular genetics learning progression: Themolecular constructs. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 53(9), 1385–1418.Todd, A., Romine, W. L., & Cook Whitt, K. (2017). Development and Validation of the Learning Progression–Based Assessment of Modern Genetics in a High School Context. Science Education, 101(1), 32-65.Todd, A., Romine, W. L., & Correa-Menendez, J. (2017). Modeling the Transition from a Phenotypic toGenotypic Conceptualization of Genetics in a University-Level Introductory Biology Context. Researchin Science Education, 1-21.Todd, A., & Romine, W. L. (2017). Empirical validation of a modern genetics progression web for college biologystudents. International Journal of Science Education, 39(4), 488-505.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the Center for Causal Discovery, supported by grant U54HG008540, for use of the TETRAD softwarepackage. The research presented herein was also supported by a National Science Foundation Award # REESE1053953.ICLS 2018 Proceedings815© ISLS