Measuring Integrated Knowledge – A Network Analytical ApproachMarcus Kubsch, IPN Kiel, kubsch@ipn.uni-kiel.deJeffrey Nordine, IPN Kiel, nordine@ipn.uni-kiel.deKnut Neumann, IPN Kiel, neumann@ipn.uni-kiel.deDavid Fortus, Weizmann Institute of Science, david.fortus@weizmann.ac.ilJoseph Krajcik, Michigan State University, krajcik@msu.eduAbstract: Scientific literacy is an important part of education. Students that demonstratescientific literacy can organize and coordinate their science ideas to interpret and explain adiverse range of phenomena. However, the complex thinking connected to this ability is notcaptured by most assessments today. We address this issue by investigating how the littleresearched construct of knowledge integration which describes how students coordinate theirideas in explanations can be measured using network analysis.Measuring what mattersA central goal of education is to prepare students to act independently and responsible in society and the world.In a world increasingly dominated by science and technology, scientific literacy is an important part of thiseducation (National Research Council, 2012). A key component of scientific literacy is students’ ability to usetheir knowledge about science to interpret and explain phenomena in diverse real-life contexts. To explain reallife phenomena, students must be able to produce coherently organized accounts by coordinating a range ofrelevant scientific ideas with evidence. As Schwartz & Arena (2013) argue, assessments of scientific literacyshould measure how well students are prepared to do so. However, instead of measuring how much students areprepared to engage in complex thinking, i.e., to what degree they are able to coherently organize relevant ideas,most current assessments focus primarily on how much knowledge students have acquired (Pellegrino,Chudowsky, & Glaser, 2004). The ability to coherently organize relevant ideas is emphasized in the knowledgeintegration perspective on learning (Linn, 2006). It focuses on how students develop increasingly morecoordinated networks of ideas, i.e., ideas are added, new connections established, and others are refined. Studentsthat have a coherently organized knowledge can rely on strongly developed idea networks that allow them toexplain real world phenomena by coordinating relevant ideas.Measuring knowledge integrationAlthough knowledge integration is important for the development of scientific literacy, there is little consensuson how best to measure it. A number of cross sectional studies used different approaches to measure knowledgeintegration. While Lee & Liu (2010) focused primarily on the number of connections between ideas and thequality of these ideas that students use to explain phenomena, Nordine, Krajcik, & Fortus (2011) operationalizedintegrated knowledge as students’ ability to consistently use central ideas across a range of phenomena. Thisillustrates that there are different perspectives on measuring knowledge integration that focus on different aspectsof the construct while leaving out others. For example, the holistic measure of the extent to which students connectideas used by Lee & Liu (2010) does not provide information about which ideas are most central to students’thinking or the relative strength of connections between ideas. However, this is helpful information for educatorsto, for example, adjust teaching or helps to improve curriculum. We address this issue by using network analysisto characterize the extent to which students’ ideas are well-integrated and how the strength and coherence ofconnections between ideas changes during instruction. As this research is part of a broader project on the teachingand learning of energy, we ask the following research question: How can network analysis be used to more fullymeasure and describe the extent to which students possess integrated knowledge of energy?MethodsA unit on energy was implemented in 7th grade at two schools in the US with N = 311 students. The teachersselected a sample of N=30 students that are representative sample regarding grades. Students were interviewedbefore and after the unit using semi-structured interviews in which students were presented 5 different phenomenafrom everyday life, e.g., a bouncing ball. The students were asked “How would you explain this phenomenon?”.The interviewers then used non-instructive probes to clarify students’ answers. Using qualitative content analysis,we coded which ideas students used to explain the phenomena (inter-coder reliability 𝜅𝜅 = 0.87). In a next step, weanalyzed which ideas students used in the explanation of a single phenomenon. We then created maps of cooccurrence of ideas across phenomena. The resulting dataset is a network that can be analyzed on individual andaggregate level for each of the measuring time points using network analysis methods (e.g., Grunspan et al., 2014).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1369© ISLSResultsThe following preliminary results are based on the analysis of interviews from 17 out of the 30 students in oursample. Based on background measures such as grades etc. we do not expect the full results which we will presentat the conference to change significantly. Figure 1 shows the aggregated pre and post networks. The ideas usedby students are depicted as circles where the size of the circle represents the number of co-occurrence with otherideas. The lines between the circles represent that two ideas occurred together and the width of the lines showsoften those ideas were used together. From pre to post we see a substantial development concerning which ideasco-occur and how often they co-occur. The energy unit used in this study emphasizes energy transfers and fieldsbetween objects, and we see that those ideas are used increasingly more often with other ideas and that the numberof those co-occurrences has increased after instruction. Energy transfer has become a more central idea during theunit as it becomes strongly connected with many other ideas. To what extent those connections are coherentlyorganized can be investigated using a coherence measure from network analysis (see e.g. Koponen & Huttunen(2013)). We find, that the post network as a whole has become more coherently organized. We used the pre topost difference in this coherence measure to predict the pre to post difference on a test that assesses how wellstudents can use energy ideas to interpret and explain phenomena. As a validity check, we used Bayesian methodsto fit a linear model that predicts the gain on the energy test using the gain on the coherence measure. Thestandardized coherence regression coefficient has a value of 𝛽𝛽 2 = .6 [.2, .9] [89% probability interval] and R2=.34Discussion and outlookConcerning our research question, the presented networks show that network analysis has the potential to showhow students integrated knowledge develops over time, e.g., the analysis shows that students develop an integratedunderstanding around the central idea of energy transfer and to a lesser degree integrate the idea of fields. Further,we interpret the strong relationship between the coherence measure and performance on the energy test that asksstudents to use energy ideas to make sense of a range of phenomena (not part of the interviews) as evidence thatthe approach is valid. Based on these results, we consider network analysis of integrated knowledge a promisingapproach to provide insight into not just whether, but how, students use a range of science ideas to make sense ofthe world. We feel that ICLS 2018 provides an excellent opportunity to share what we believe is a promisingmethod of assessing integrated knowledge and to discuss potential improvements with other researchers.Figure 1. Aggregated idea networks pre (left) and post (right).ReferencesGrunspan, D. Z., Wiggins, B. L., & Goodreau, S. M. (2014). Understanding Classrooms through Social NetworkAnalysis: A Primer for Social Network Analysis in Education Research. Cell Biology Education, 13(2),167–178.Koponen, I. T., & Huttunen, L. (2013). Concept Development in Learning Physics: The Case of Electric Currentand Voltage Revisited. Science & Education, 22(9), 2227–2254.Lee, H.-S., & Liu, O. L. (2010). Assessing learning progression of energy concepts across middle school grades.Science Education, 94(4), 665–688.Linn, M. (2006). The Knowledge Integration Perspective on Learning and Instruction. In The Cambridgehandbook of: The learning sciences. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education. Washington, D.C.: The NationalAcademies Press.Nordine, J., Krajcik, J., & Fortus, D. (2011). Transforming energy instruction in middle school to supportintegrated understanding and future learning. Science Education, 95(4), 670–699.Pellegrino, J. W., Chudowsky, N., & Glaser, R. (2004). Knowing what Students Know (3. print). Washington, DC:National Acad. Press.Schwartz, D. L., & Arena, D. (2013). Measuring What Matters Most.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1370© ISLS