Making Mathematical Thinking Visible Through TechnologyJeffrey B. Bush, University of Colorado, Boulder, jeffrey.bush@colorado.eduBrent Milne, Woot Math Inc., brent.milne@wootmath.comAbstract: At this session, we will discuss new and evolving technology that helps studentsmake their thinking about mathematics visible to their peers and teachers. Building onprototypes that have been successful in algebra and pre-algebra classrooms, we will illustratehow technology may afford new opportunities for collaborative learning and mathematicaldiscourse that exceed what is possible when supports are limited to written artifacts.Opportunities for automated analysis of digital artifacts will be discussed.IntroductionIn a mathematics class, student work provides insight into students’ thinking as well as how teachers can bestsupport them in improving their understanding of the content (Borko, Mayfield, Marion, Flexer, & Cumbo,1997). Reviewing student work in whole class or small group settings can be an effective way to show studentsthat the process of doing mathematics is valuable and that the correct answer is just one component ofmathematics. By building off of student thinking and highlighting things that students do well, discussions ofstudent work can be an encouraging and formative process (Carpenter, Fennema, & Franke, 1996). It also actsas a formative assessment by making the expectations and path forward clear to the student and by providinginformation to the teacher that can inform instruction (Black & Wiliam, 2009). This process helps clarify thelearning goals and improves both teaching and learning (Penuel & Shepard, 2008; Shepard, 2005). Student workalso provides an opportunity for mathematical discourse, a practice that has been suggested to promote equitableclassroom environments where traditional power structures can be disrupted (Nasir, Hand, & Taylor, 2008). Inthis sense, learning mathematics is viewed as a byproduct of classroom activity and participation in discourse(Cobb, Wood, & Yackel, 1993).Description of relevant features of Woot Math PollsWoot Math Polls is a math-specific digital formative assessment tool where students complete tasks on a cloudconnected device (e.g., laptop, tablet, mobile device, etc.). These tasks can involve various formats such asmultiple choice, gesture-based graphing, select a point or region of an image, fill in the blank or otherconstructed response. Students show work using a mouse or touch screen on a scratch pad that includes afunction editor, a graphing environment, a drawing tool, a calculator and a table feature. One of the features ofWoot Math Polls is that after students respond, the teacher can choose to display individual responses or anaggregate of the class’ responses. The teacher may also choose to display the work that the student did on thedigital scratchpad. Figure 1 shows an example of hypothetical student work where they showed their work butdid not get the question right. The teacher could display the work and highlight what the student did well andallow the class to suggest where they went astray.Figure 1. A screen shot of hypothetical student work displayed using Woot Math Polls.Teacher perspectiveA recent professional development study that used Woot Math Polls found that teachers highly value thedisplaying student work feature of the tool. In a post survey, an Algebra I teacher described how she used thedisplay student work feature.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1735© ISLSIt allows me to see their understanding and examples of student work (not just answers).Sometimes students are really close to getting the correct understanding and I really liked howI could pull of examples for the whole class to see and have them help pinpoint mistakes.There were a lot of 'a-ha' moments where the students could totally see what they did wrongand make a positive connection to fixing a misconception. (Teacher A, 2017)This teacher pointed out how the students seemed to gain from being able to see examples of work that wereclose to correct and identify the errors. Beyond identifying errors, another teacher remarked about how thefeature promoted discussion and comfort with talking about mistakes and how to address them.I think it started to make students feel more comfortable about talking about commonmistakes and why/how they are made especially when reviewing student work. I also thinkthat it made students excited about sharing what they understood and interested in sharing itwith each other. (Teacher B, 2017)This teacher claimed that the tool helped promote mathematical discourse in the classroom in ways thatinfluenced students’ interest in having their solution strategy contribute to the mathematics being discussed.That is, students wanted to position their mathematical activity as part of the lesson in ways that were notobserved without Woot Math Polls. This teacher also talked about how she could use the tool to move towardsmore mathematical discourse, once she became more familiar with using student understandings. The toolsupported teachers’ promotion of a classroom culture that was supportive of mistakes, positioning students’ ownproducts as opportunities to learn (De Corte, 1995). It also shows how the tool has potential in helping theteacher facilitate productive student dispositions and discussions about mathematics.Future directions and final thoughtsDigital technology affords new opportunities for collaborative learning by automatically recognizing students’work that is proximal to valid solutions. Such tools facilitate the display and analysis of student work in aclassroom setting allowing the analysis to be more efficient and more immediate compared to the use of writtenartifacts of student work that must be analyzed by hand.In addition to discussing the implications of this tool for teachers and classrooms, this poster also hopesto suggest future directions for how Woot Math Polls and similar technology can help use examples of studentwork to support mathematical discourse and growth-oriented classroom norms. Other applications includehaving the tool automatically display discussion questions, pre-determined by the teacher or task designer, thatwould help support teachers in facilitating these types of discussions. Another idea is to have the toolautomatically analyze student work and learn patterns of common errors or misconceptions. Then this could beused to categorize student responses and provide examples that would afford productive classroom discussions.ReferencesBlack, P., & Wiliam, D. (2009). Developing the theory of formative assessment. Educational Assessment,Evaluation and Accountability, 21(1), 5–31.Borko, H., Mayfield, V., Marion, S., Flexer, R., & Cumbo, K. (1997). Teachers’ Developing Ideas and Practicesabout Mathematics Performance Assessment: Successes, Stumbling Blocks, and Implications forProfessional Development. Teaching and Teacher Education, 13(3), 259–278.Carpenter, T. P., Fennema, E., & Franke, M. L. (1996). Cognitively Guided Instruction: A Knowledge Base forReform in Primary Mathematics Instruction. The Elementary School Journal, 97(1), 3.Cobb, P., Wood, T., & Yackel, E. (1993). Discourse, mathematical thinking, and classroom. Contexts forLearning: Sociocultural Dynamics in Children’s Development.De Corte, E. (1995). Fostering cognitive growth: A perspective from research on mathematics learning andinstruction. Educational Psychologist, 30(1), 37–46. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326985ep3001_4Nasir, N. S., Hand, V., & Taylor, E. V. (2008). Culture and Mathematics in School: Boundaries Between“Cultural” and “Domain” Knowledge in the Mathematics Classroom and Beyond. Review of Researchin Education, 32(1), 187–240.Penuel, W., & Shepard, L. A. (2008). Assessment and Teaching Science. International Journal of Learning(Vol. 15).Shepard, L. A. (2005). Formative assessment: Caveat emptor. ETS Invitational Conference, New York, NY.Teacher A. (November 10, 2017). Post PD Reflection SurveyTeacher B. (November 10, 2017). Post PD Reflection SurveyICLS 2018 Proceedings1736© ISLS