Introducing Bifocal Modeling Framework in Elementary SchoolLearning Science Using Concrete Modeling ToolsTamar Fuhrmann, Engin Bumbacher, and Paulo Bliksteintamarrf@stanford.edu, buben@stanford.edu, paulob@stanford.eduTransformative Learning Technologies Lab, Stanford UniversityAbstract: In this study, we implemented a Bifocal modeling unit on diffusion with physicalmodels instead of computational models, using two different tools: 1. Paper modeling, 2.Modeling with micro-robot toy. We worked with 5th grade students for a period of 5 hours.After running experiments, students developed physical models and then interacted with avirtual model. Using either tool, students significantly improved their conceptual understandingof diffusion, but engaged differently in the modeling processes.IntroductionScientific models foremost serve to explain natural phenomena; they gain their meaning in juxtaposition with thereal-world data (Duschl & Grandy, 2008). However, much of the research on model-based instruction has focusedon the support of students in the construction and exploration of models as ends by themselves (VanLehn, 2013).Little work has focused on how to get students to think with models about natural phenomena, in order to explainobservations, etc. This is the focus of the Bifocal Modeling Framework (BMF), which integrates real-worldexperimentation and computer modeling in the same representational space, enabling students to compare realworld data and virtual models explicitly and in real-time (Blikstein, 2012). While BMF can be effective for sciencelearning (Blikstein, 2012; Fuhrmann et al., 2014), programming computational models remains challenging forstudents and teachers, and the practice impedes science learning (VanLehn, 2013). In this study, we explorealternative media for modeling, which do not require programming and entail only minimal logisticalconsiderations. We implement a BMF unit on diffusion with 5th grade students, using two distinct modelingmethods: “paper modeling” with pen and paper; and the “micro-robot model,” which represents a tangible, agentbased model of diffusion. We focus on the following research questions: 1) How conducive is each tool in helpingstudents develop a conceptual understanding of diffusion? 2) Do students using these different tools engagedifferently in the modeling activity?Modeling toolsWe selected the modeling tools based on two types of criteria: access, affordability, and types of cognitiveengagement utilized during modeling. We ended up choosing two tools: 1) pen and paper; 2) Hexbugs. Hexbugsare off-the-shelf, toy micro-robots that exhibit random movements similar to the Brownian motion of molecules.In the paper-model condition, students had to draw an explanatory model using paper and colored pens. In theHexbug model condition, students were given a limited set of objects to interact with (two boxes, a sticky mat, 25hexbugs). The two tools differed in terms of medium (two-dimensional versus three-dimensional), temporalrepresentation (static versus dynamic), and the degrees of freedom for conceptual decisions to be made: in thepaper-model activity, students had to make decisions about all aspects of the model, whereas in the Hexbug model,many of these decisions were offloaded onto the model.Methods and materialsThe study was conducted with two 5th grade classes in a K-12 urban charter school (85% low-income, 68% ESL).The classes, both taught by the same science teacher, were randomly assigned to either condition (paper-model:25 students; Hexbug: 28 students). The total Bifocal Modeling unit on diffusion took 5 hours across multipledays.. The unit started out with physical experimentation. Students followed an activity guide to design and runexperiments to study the rate of diffusion, using blue food coloring, water of two different temperatures,thermometers and stopwatches. This was followed by physical modeling; students were prompted to design amodel that would explain their physical experiment using materials of their corresponding modeling conditions(see previous section). The unit ended with the exploration of a virtual model of diffusion in NetLogo(Wilensky,1999) designed by the authors. Students had to compare the virtual model’s behavior with that of theirexperiments, and use the model to explain their empirical observations. We applied a mixed-methods approach,utilizing several different data sources. We evaluated students’ content knowledge with pre-, mid- and post-tests,which included multiple choice items (Blikstein, 2012). We analyzed the students’ modeling processes based onvideo recordings of the physical modeling activities. We binned each video into 4 time sequences and coded eachsequence according to the level of “Collaboration” (students working together), “Active” (students beingICLS 2018 Proceedings1685© ISLSphysically engaged), “Planning” (students reflecting discursively prior to action), “Focus on task” (students doingtask-relevant work); each category was ranked on a scale of 0, 1 or 2.ResultsStudents in both conditions significantly improved their conceptual understanding of diffusion, with a significantmain effect of test phase (Figure 1), F(2,86)=36.6, p<.001 (repeated measures ANOVA on test scores, nestedwithin student). We found no significant interaction between condition and phase overall, F(2,86)= 1.4, p= .3.Looking at mid- and post-test only, we did find a marginally significant interaction effect, F(1,43)=3.2, p=.08.Students’ learning gains from the physical modeling activity were similar for both conditions, but the Hexbugmodel condition had higher learning gains with the virtual model than the Paper model condition. Looking at thecoding of learning processes (Figure 2), we find that most of the groups in the Hexbug model condition had higherrank-averages for “Collaboration” and “Active”, but lower ones for “Planning” than the Paper model condition.Figure 1. Proportional test scores by phase and condition.Figure 1. Avg. rank of each group per coding.Discussion and conclusionThe two tools – Hexbug and Paper model – influenced student engagement and learning differently: the Hexbugmodel condition produced more learning from the virtual model during the last activity; the Paper model yieldedmore planning, but appeared less collaborative and active. We cannot make conclusive causal claims because ofthe many differences between the tools. One key distinction is that the Hexbug model was an interactive,analogous representation of the final virtual model. Another distinction is that the objects of inquiry are tangiblein the Hexbug condition, while the paper-based representation is intangible. Further investigations are needed toexamine how the tools influence student engagement in the modeling processes. However, we argue that thedifferences between the tools have complementary beneficial effects for learning; thus, the question is notnecessarily which approach is the better to use, but rather how best to combine them. For example, the papercondition might be beneficial to elicit students’ prior ideas about a phenomenon and make them explicit in theform of external representations. Tangible, interactive models like the Hexbug model provide anotherrepresentation of the target phenomenon, which could help highlight key aspects that teachers want students tofocus on.ReferencesBlikstein, P., Fuhrmann, T., Greene, D., & Salehi, S. (2012, June). Bifocal modeling: mixing real and virtual labsfor advanced science learning. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Interaction Designand Children(pp. 296-299). ACM.Duschl, R. A., & Grandy, R. E. (2008). Reconsidering the character and role of inquiry in school science: Framingthe debates. Teaching scientific inquiry: Recommendations for research and implementation, 1-37.Fuhrmann, T., Salehi, S., & Blikstein, P. (2014). A Tale of Two Worlds: Using Bifocal Modeling to Find andResolve “Discrepant Events” Between Physical Experiments and Virtual Models in Biology. InProceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2014).VanLehn, K. (2013). Model construction as a learning activity: A design space and review. Interactive LearningEnvironments, 21(4), 371-413.Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo [computer software]. Center for Connected Learning and Computer-BasedModeling, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.AcknowledgmentsThis work was funded by NSF award #1055130 (“CAREER: Bifocal Modeling: A New Framework for theLearning of Advanced STEM Content in High-school”) and by the Lemann Center for Entrepreneurship andEducational Innovation in Brazil.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1686© ISLS