Investigating Multiple Dimensions of Student Engagement withEmbodied Science LearningMegan Humburg, Indiana University – Bloomington, mahumbur@indiana.eduJoshua Danish, Indiana University – Bloomington, jdanish@indiana.eduAbstract: This poster explores how the dimensions of behavioral, emotional, and cognitiveengagement are related to embodiment within the STEP (Science through TechnologyEnhanced Play) mixed-reality environment. We will show how these dimensions ofengagement help us analyze classroom interactions to better understand the learning processin this embodied activity context. We will also discuss design features that can leverage theinterconnected dimensions of engagement to better support learning.Keywords: Embodiment, Engagement, Science, TechnologyIntroductionAs designers of learning environments, one of our goals is to understand how we can support students inproductively interacting with our designs and each other so that they learn the target content. In the Sciencethrough Technology Enhanced Play (STEP) project, a mixed-reality learning environment that relies onembodied play as a form of interaction, we are particularly interested in how embodiment can invite and supportproductive forms of engagement with our designs. Engagement is defined in a number of ways throughout theliterature, but generally it is used as a way of characterizing students’ participation in learning environments. Itis typically associated with a range of beneficial student outcomes, such as higher grades, lower drop-out rates,and less disruptive school behaviors (Christenson, Reschly, & Wylie, 2012). Therefore, our goal is to betterunderstand how our designs can encourage and enable desirable forms of student engagement. While theengagement literature is filled with disagreements over how student engagement should be defined andmeasured, there are a few common threads. One thread is that engagement is not a single aspect of studentbehavior, but rather a meta-level construct that combines several facets of student experience, such as behavior,emotion, and cognition, under one umbrella (Fredricks & McColskey, 2012). The multi-dimensionality of theconstruct allows for analysis of how its dimensions might interact to influence student learning in complex,overlapping ways. Another common thread is that engagement is not a stable attribute but rather an “alterablestate of being” that is highly context-dependent, which highlights the need to study the dimensions ofengagement in specific learning activities (Christenson, Reschly, & Wylie, 2012).Design and approachThe STEP environment uses an embodied, mixed-reality simulation of water particles in order to help first- andsecond-grade students learn about states of matter (Danish, Enyedy, Saleh, Lee, & Andrade, 2015). As studentsmove around the classroom, they can leverage their sense of individual and collective motion to reflect on howparticles behave. The STEP environment further enhances this process by presenting students with a blend ofthe real and the digital – as students engage in embodied play, they see themselves in a projected simulation aswater particles and see their movement interpreted through the lens of the computer simulation. For example, ifthey move slowly, they are depicted as ice, or if quickly, as a gas, etc. The blend of digital and physicalexperiences augments students’ exploration of science concepts to make these complex ideas more tangible.The STEP environment consists of Microsoft Kinect cameras that track student movement as theypretend to be water particles. The tracking data is then transferred to a computer that produces a simulation ofwater particles moving around a tank. Each student has a particle avatar that is controlled via their movementsaround the classroom, allowing students to use embodiment to experience being a particle in a solid, liquid, andgas. In the current iteration, students rotate between embodied and scientist-observer roles, with observers usingiPad-based annotation tools in order to create drawings and graphs of their peers’ movements and explore howthe speed, distance, and energy of particles impacts their state of matter.Research on embodiment has shown that embodied, mixed-reality activities have the potential toengage students in immersive learning experiences (Lindgren & Johnson-Glenberg, 2013). However, a shareddefinition of engagement is difficult to find, which makes it tricky to measure moment-to-moment changes instudent engagement across activities (Appleton, Christenson, & Furlong, 2008). Behavioral aspects ofengagement can be defined as desirable classroom-related behaviors such as asking questions, contributing todiscussion, and an absence of disruptive behavior (Fredricks, Blumenfeld, & Paris, 2004; Fredricks &ICLS 2018 Proceedings1723© ISLSMcColskey, 2012). Emotional engagement has been viewed as students’ positive and negative reactions toparticular activities, which can include interest, excitement, boredom, and the value that students place onactivities (Fredricks & McColskey, 2012). Studies have also looked at cognitive dimensions of engagement,considering how student planning, self-regulation, evaluation, and making connections between aspects ofdisciplinary content is connected to other forms of participation (Fredricks, Blumenfeld, & Paris, 2004; Sinha,Rogat, Adams-Wiggins, & Hmelo-Silver, 2015). In an embodied environment such as STEP, using the body forlearning complicates the question of what counts as engagement by inviting new ways of interacting that maynot be present in traditional classroom activities. Thus, the concept of engagement helps us to better understandhow embodied activity intersects with multiple dimensions of engagement to influence student learning.Findings and significanceOur data set consists of eight days of video-recorded activities that took place in a mixed-age classroom of firstand second-graders in a Midwestern public school. Given the theoretical disagreements in the engagementliterature regarding the concept’s exact dimensions, a grounded theory approach was used to constructcategories of student engagement as they emerged in the data (Corbin & Strauss, 1990). To further investigatethe mechanisms and characteristics of these categories, interaction analysis was also conducted (Jordan &Henderson, 1995). Through a combination of these methodological approaches, multiple types of classroomepisodes emerged, and we analyzed ways in which categories of student engagement (emotional, behavioral,and cognitive) became visible and functioned differently in these different types of episodes. Some episodeswere marked by playfulness and laughter, and involved students running around as they embodied waterparticles. Other episodes were more behaviorally restrained and characterized chiefly by discussions in whichstudents cognitively engaged by making connections between their movements and the movements of particles.These discussions highlighted key science content that was later reflected in students’ learning gains on pre-posttests. As the classroom activity shifted back and forth between multiple types of interactional episodes, the roleof student engagement with embodied activity shifted as well, highlighting the inherent fluctuation and complexinteractions between the dimensions of engagement and the ways that they interact to support learning.The poster will explore ways that multiple dimensions of student engagement became visible withinthe STEP environment during different episodes of activity. We will present excerpts of classroom activity thatdemonstrate the variations in students’ emotional, behavioral, and cognitive engagement with embodimentthroughout different types of classroom episodes and discuss what implications these variations have for thedesign of embodied learning environments. These findings will help designers consider how students engagewith embodiment in multiple, interacting ways over time and how teachers can support these links betweenbehavior, emotion, and cognition as they facilitate both embodiment and subsequent discussion activities.ReferencesAppleton, J. J., Christenson, S. L., & Furlong, M. J. (2008). Student Engagement with School: CriticalConceptual and Methodological Issues of the Construct. Psychology in the Schools, 45(5), 369-386.Christenson, S. L., Reschly, A. L., & Wylie, C. (Eds.) (2012). Handbook of Research on Student Engagement.New York, NY: Springer.Corbin, J. & Strauss, A. (1990). Grounded Theory Research: Procedures, Canons, and Evaluative Criteria.Qualitative Sociology, 13(1), 3-21.Danish, J. A., Enyedy, N., Saleh, A., Lee, C., & Andrade, A. (2015). Science Through Technology EnhancedPlay: Designing to Support Reflection Through Play and Embodiment. Proceedings of the 11thInternational Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning. Gothenburg, Sweden.Fredricks, J. A., Blumenfeld, P. C., & Paris, A. H. (2004). School Engagement: Potential of the Concept, Stateof the Evidence. Review of Educational Research, 74(1), 59-109.Fredricks, J. A. and McColskey, W. (2012). The Measurement of Student Engagement: A ComparativeAnalysis of Various Methods and Student Self-Report Instruments. In S. L. Christenson, A. L. Reschly,& C. Wylie. (Eds.) Handbook of Research on Student Engagement. (763-782). New York, NY:Springer.Jordan, B. & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39-103.Lindgren, R. & Johnson-Glenberg, M. (2013). Emboldened by Embodiment: Six Precepts for Research onEmbodied Learning and Mixed Reality. Educational Researcher, 42(8), 445-452.Sinha, S., Rogat, T. K., Adams-Wiggins, K. R., Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2015). Collaborative group engagement ina computer-supported inquiry learning environment. International Journal of Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning, 10, 273-307.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1724© ISLS