Students’ Design Decisions in Collaborative Designof Location-Based Games for LearningJo Dugstad Wake, Uni Research Health, jo.wake@uni.noFrode Guribye, University of Bergen, frode.guribye@uib.noBarbara Wasson, University of Bergen, barbara.wasson@uni.noAbstract: This paper describes a study of students designing location-based games for eachother to learn history. A learning scenario was developed where groups of students create agame, receive and play another group’s game, and create a media product based on theirexperiences. We analyse the video footage of students collaboratively engaged with designingthe games and highlight how the design process involves making practical decisions, and howthe notion of the others – the students’ peers – feature in the group’s interaction. Furthermore,the analysis focuses on how the design process is coordinated and collaboratively organised,and involves translation of the source material into game information.Keywords: Learning through design, location-based games, history learning, video analysisIntroductionThis paper addresses how upper secondary students make design decisions and coordinate their work whenparticipating in a learning scenario involving collaborative design of location-based games for learning abouthistory. A learning scenario was developed in collaboration with a history teacher where groups of studentscreate a game, receive and play another group’s game, and create a media product based on their experiences inthe previous activities. The analysis of the video-based empirical material shows how the students engagecreatively with the learning material and describes the interactional organisation of the process of designinggames for another group of students. We further address the students’ practical accomplishment of game designand how engage in a design process where they integrate curricular and other historical source materials, andplace these in a narrative by constructing a number of points of interest in the location based-game. They arethus taking into account historical events, the layout of different locations, the playability of the game, and theactual game mechanics supported by the location based-game authoring tool. The location-based gamingexperience was intended to feed into the creation of a media product that enables students to demonstrate theirlearning experience.One of the goals for the scenario was to put students in a position to work creatively with the availableresources by creating products (a game and a presentation), using a game authoring tool for mobile, locationbased games, rather than reproducing curricular material. The students were allowed a great deal of freedom inchoice of historical sources to work with. The game they designed was to be used by their peers.The organisation of the paper is as follows. First, a literature review focusing on use of games foreducational purposes, mobile and ubiquitous technology in the field of CSCL is presented. Then, the learningscenario including student activities and the main technology they used is accounted for. Next, we present theresearch methods used. Then we present our analysis of transcripts of student activity, and how the activity canbe understood. Finally, we discuss the implications of our analysis.Designing mobile, location-based games for learningThe use of mobile technology to support collaborative learning has a history within the field of CSCL (e.g.,Roschelle & Pea 2002; Roschelle, Rosas & Nussbaum, 2005). Tools have been developed and studied, both tosupport collaboration in the classroom (Chang, Wang, Chen & Liang, 2009; White, 2006), and to providesupport when moving into the field (Lyons, 2009; Yatani, Sugimoto & Kusunoki, 2004; Tan, Liu & Chang,2007). Computer games have also become increasingly used and studied for their educational potential (e.g.,Kickmeier-Rust & Albert, 2012; Shute, Rieber, & Van Eck, 2011), also within the field of CSCL (e.g., Ke,2007; Rosenbaum, Klopfer, Broughner & Rosencheck, 2007; Satwitcz & Stevens, 2007; Klopfer, Perry, Squire,Jan & Steinkuehler, 2005; Bennerstedt & Linderoth, 2009).Much of the orientation in the scholarly literature on educational games is on various learning effectsof students playing computer games. Similarly, many of the educational initiatives towards design and creationof computer games concern computer game design in itself, rather than using the game design process forstudents to learn other curricula (Orvieto, 2012). One example that looks at both is El-Nasr and Smith’s (2006)two case-studies of students in computer science learning computer skills through modifying, or modding,CSCL 2015 Proceedings324© ISLSexisting games by working with the game engines. They found that game development involves many differentskills other than programming, ranging from artistic to mathematical concepts. Lim (2008) raises the idea thatstudents in school should be allowed to design their own computer games based on their own interpretations ofthe curriculum as a way to create more engagement with their own learning processes. Prensky (2008) arguesthat one way for educational games to be successful is that the students create such games themselves. Inparticular, he suggests that students create what he calls "mini-games" (Prensky, 2008, p. 1006). These minigames are made by groups of 2-3 students doing their own curriculum-based research with an advisor, andusually take around one hour to complete. Resnick (2007; Resnick, et al., 2009) describes Scratch, which is anonline system where students learn to program interactive, online media products such as games, stories andanimations, designed to foster creative and systematic thinking. In a study where twelve to thirteen year oldstudents used Scratch to modify the mathematics game Gem Game, Garneli, Giannakos, Chorianopoulos andJaccheri (2013) found that this activity increased interest in programming, although they did not find that themodification activity had a visible effect on mathematics performance.Schwarz and Stoecker (2012) describe the process of Learning Game Design as a relative new craftwhere game design and didactic design are combined. The design of a learning game potentially involves anumber of activities, including story-, visual-, sound-, interaction-, information and character design. Sharples,et al. (2014) argue that storytelling is a promising approach to support learning, and one that can aid students increating meaning from the abundance of available learning resources. Suitable for combining with virtualworlds, augmented reality or games, storytelling builds on the navigation of resources and can help with addingcoherence to learning experiences.The game design learning scenarioTo explore the creative design of location-based games for history learning, a scenario involving differentdigital tools and activities was designed. The scenario, which took place in the classroom and out in the city ofBergen, comprised three overall activities: Game creation, Game playing, and Media Product development.First, working in groups, the students tied historical themes in Bergen’s history to actual places in Bergen, andcombined these places and themes into a location-based game. Second, the students gave their game to anotherstudent group to play. Third, after playing another group’s game game, each group re-created their experienceswith the different themes in the game into a media product. Most, but not all of these products were digital,combining images, video and sound captured while playing the game.Through game creation, the students identified and combined features of the real world, represented bythe different locations in the city, and their interpretations of the different written sources available to them, intoa game narrative that would be discovered by the recipients as they played the game outdoors. The gamingaspect was about finding the locations in the game by following clues in the narrative. By creating a mediaproduct, the students were put in a position to reflect over and demonstrate what they learned about Bergen’shistory by playing another group’s game.Theme for the games: WW2 in BergenThe scenario was designed and planned in close collaboration with the teacher, both in terms of the themechosen and how to use the available technology for creating and playing the location-based games. Theparticipating teacher taught history, and was the “e-contact” at the school with expanded responsibilities relatedto the school’s ICT-systems, and helping the other teachers with digital technology. She chose Bergen historyduring the 2nd World War (WW2) as the theme for the game as 1) it fit with the current curriculum, which wasbetween “older” and “newer” history, 2) the school building was occupied by the German military duringWW2, and 3) the availability of physical locations related to the theme around Bergen. The teacher identifiedthemes and events related to 16 locations in Bergen during WW2. Examples of the themes include: ‘The attackon Bergen on April 9th, 1945. Where?’, ‘The Printed Press of Bergen during times of crisis: Illegal papers’,‘The history of Jews in Bergen’, and ‘Food and rationing’. The scenario comprised three phases:• Game Design Activity: The class was divided in half, with each half being given a list of eight of thethemes. Each half was further divided into groups of three to four students. Each group was tasked tochoose a minimum of six of the themes and events, which would form the basis of their game. Howthey ordered the locations in the game, how they assigned a theme to a location, and what they chose towrite about each, was up to them. They were also free to discover and create locations and themes bythemselves. A set of documents was made available to the students at the beginning of the scenario.These included a description of the tasks, a list of learning goals, a description of how the scenario wastied to the five basic competencies (a key aspect of the most recent reform of Norwegian education),CSCL 2015 Proceedings325© ISLS••information on assessment criteria (students were graded on their participation including collaborationand end product), a list of resources and internet-based sites with relevant historical source material,and a user manual for SILO, the authoring tool for location-based games. A collection of historicalsources relevant to the theme, such as magazines and books was made available in the classroom, andthe students were also encouraged to use local museums, the public library of Bergen, and the schoollibrary, and also to visit the sites physically.Game Playing Activity: Each team was to play the game they received, moving around Bergen andlearning about the historical sites in the game. The students were encouraged to bring cameras withthem, or to use the cameras on their private mobile phones, and record various aspects of the placesthat they visited so they could use it as source material for creating a media product after havingcompleted the game. Exactly how they chose to do this was discretional.Media Product Development: The media product the students created after playing the game could takethe shape of a video or film, a wiki or a blog, or a web page. Based on previous observation of gameplay, it was decided that the creation of a media product would not interfere too much with the funaspect of playing of the game, yet at the same time increase the learning potential of the game. As thegame application paused automatically when they were at each site, knowing they would have toinclude the location in their digital media product was intended to increase the attention they paid tothe site.Technological resources: SILOThe authoring tool the students used to create the games is called SILO. Originally SILO was designed forNokia, using Python for S60, which is the version the students in this study used. Currently it is beingredeveloped for iOS and Android, and a first basic but working version became available in 2014. SILO haspreviously been described in detail elsewhere (see Wake & Baggetun, 2009; Wake, Guribye & Wasson, 2011;Wake & Wasson, 2011; Guribye, Wake & Wasson, 2014), so only a summary of the basic functionality isprovided here for readability of this text: (1) SILO consists of a web-based game authoring tool and an app onthe phone for playing the games. (2) SILO permits a game designer to construct a storyline as a set of missions,and attach the different missions to different locations, by clicking on a map, displayed on the screen. (3) Thegame creator can add icons to locations, set limitations on time, configure user data, and a maximum of threehints on how to find each location.The phone application interprets the data, and converts it into a game to be displayed on the phone andlets the user interact using the following elements on the phone screen: (1) A scrollable map, an optional markerdisplaying one’s current position on the map, an optional track displaying the history of movement, and a gamescore. (2) A distance meter (shown in red and green numbers), displaying the remaining distance to the nextlocation, which is updated every five seconds. When a player moves within a zone of 30 meters around thelocation, the red numbers turn green, and they are permitted to ‘pick up’ the POI in the game. (3) A progress bardisplaying the icons representing the places that the participant has visited, and a number of empty spaces,indicating game progress. (4) A menu system, to access the game score and “pick up” the available POI in thegame. (5) A mission (i.e. a description of the next location from the storyline).While the game is being played the application is constantly calculating the distance to the nextlocation. The distance is displayed in red until the players near the location and it turns green indicating they canpick-up the location. They are then offered information about the current location and a text that describes thenext location. The game then pauses, to allow the group to think about what to do next, and an icon signallingthat they have picked up the previous location is displayed. The game is over when the last mission is solved(i.e. the last location is found).Research methodsThe research presented here is an ethnographic study inspired by ethnomethodology and conversation analysis,especially studies where the use of technological resources features as a central component in the analysis (e.g.,Heath & Luff, 2000; Suchman, 2007). A key feature in these studies is the use of video recordings in theanalysis (Heath, Hindmarsh & Luff, 2010). Video-based research has gained momentum in CSCL and thelearning sciences (for an overview see Derry et al., 2010). As Koschmann, Stahl and Zemel (2006), point out, akey analytical commitment in such studies is “to discover within the recorded materials what the members areactually accomplishing (...) and are making relevant (…) through their interaction” (Koschmann, Stahl &Zemel, 2006, p. 7). The same analytical commitment guides the following analysis.CSCL 2015 Proceedings326© ISLSThe main data source for this study was video, and the recordings form the basis for the analysis in thispaper. A total of six sessions were filmed. These include the teacher’s introduction, sessions which consisted ofreading and re-writing source material tied to places, sessions where they created the game in the SILOinterface, the session where they played their games, and the session where they created the media product. Therecording of the activities resulted in a total of 12 hours and 45 minutes of video footage. One group was filmedfor the whole scenario. The main researcher was present during the filming, and the recorded material wasdigitalised and reviewed after each session. To support the analysis, all the video has later been coded into adetailed activity log, describing the activities that occurred. Most sections of talk and interaction have beentranscribed. Based on a review of all the transcripts, the ones that highlight the core activities involved increating the games are presented for analysis in this text.Additionally, interviews, observation and artefacts produced by the students were collected. Eachstudent group was interviewed face-to-face two days after the scenario was completed. The groups that were notbeing filmed were observed while they worked, and field notes including which tools and sources they used,how they organised collaboratively, and so on, were recorded. The teacher was also interviewed in a morelengthy session, lasting about one hour. All interviews were recorded and transcribed. Furthermore, the studentproducts that were collected included the games that they created and the media product that they created. Thegames were copied from the SILO system to a file in MS Word.Analysis of the game design activityIn the analysis we focus on how designing games for the others−referring concretely to the group of studentsthat will receive their game−features in their design process, how the group coordinate their collaborative work,and how the creative work of designing a location-based history game involves a series of design decisions. Theexcerpts are presented using the following structure, from left to right: turn number; turn taker: transcript ofspeech based on Jefferson transcript notation; and a description of other relevant aspects of the activity to theright. Original language is Norwegian, available below each translated utterance in grey text.Excerpt 1 took place in the second session of the game design process, about an hour into the worksession. Their interaction concerns how they coordinate their work in the group. They are seated around a tablewith one computer each, and writing the optional hints that will help players who are stuck during game playfind the next location in the game. They are working with the list of themes provided for them by their teacher,and have not yet assigned all the themes to a physical location. In a previous exchange they have divided thethemes between them.Excerpt 1:1Hanna:Which one should I tie it to then? (3.0) You wrotefor number six there?Picks up pieceof paper withlist of themes2Simen:(0.7) >No for< (.) >no for< (.) for number threeLooks at thepaper3Hanna:(1.2) But we have to find out where to place itPuts down paperThis excerpt is exemplifies how they interactionally coordinate their work, and in the process make explicit thekind of work they need to get done in order to finish their task. This kind of articulation work (Gerson & Star,1986) is not a process that occurs separate from the content of their task as a kind of “meta-collaborative”interaction, but is inextricably tied to the content of their work. In Turn 1 when Hanna asks which theme she isto tie the hints that she has written to and whether Simen is already writing for theme number six, we see thismix in one utterance. It is a question of coordination and of how this ties to the actual decision she has to makeabout how to formulate the text and which location they have decided to have following the one she is writingabout. In Turn 2 Simen specifies that he is writing for theme number three. Hanna then points out that they alsoneed to place their text on a location on a map in SILO.Excerpt 2 takes place in the third session of game design. The students are discussing how to connectthe historical material with the narrative in the game.Excerpt 2:1Hanna:Is that place to be mentioned in that hint sort of?CSCL 2015 Proceedings327Sitting next toeach other© ISLS2Kaya:(.) I’m writing it like this (.) find the placewhere the Germans’ ships were (inaudible)(2.0) Yes (.) But they don’t know anything aboutthat?3Hanna:4Kaya:(.) No5Hanna:6Kaya:(.) But they are going to learn it right? I feelthat it is a little(.) Is that a little difficult?7Hanna:(.) Yes, because they have no relation to (.)(inaudible) Yes it is actually possible to imagineof courseIn Turn 1 Hanna asks whether she should include the name of the location about which she is writing,and in Turn 2 Kaya replies with giving an example of how she has written the text for one of her locations. Thetheme that she is writing about is the attack on Bergen on April 9th, 1940, and her choice is that the participantsare to search for where the German ships were moored. In Turn 3, Hanna points out that the participants won’tnecessarily know where that is, to which Kaya agrees. In Turn 5 Hanna speculates that the participants are goingto learn that, possibly through playing the game. She begins on a sentence where she assesses the difficulty infinding the location by the information they have made available. In Turn 6 Kaya finishes her statement byasking whether that is too difficult to understand. Hanna agrees that it is difficult, but not impossible if they usetheir imagination. In Turns 3, 5 and 7 in this extract the pronoun “they” is used. The use of they refers to thegroup that will play the game, and features throughout the interaction in this phase of the activity. In particularwe see it in utterances such as the ones presented here, where it is a mix of envisioning what it will be like toactually play the game, and how difficult it will be to find the different points of interest, as articulated in Turn6. This way they are explicitly bringing the other team (as players of a game) into their design decisions.Excerpt 3 took place during the first session of the scenario. They are discussing the game mechanicsas it relates to the first item on the list of themes that the teacher has provided, which they are to transform into alocation in their game. More concretely the group is discussing where in the order of the route of locations theyare to place this particular location.Excerpt 3:1Simen:We can’t put the number one first (.) because thenthey will (start on) it straight awayIs looking upfrom pc screen2Hanna:(1.5) Surely we can have the number one first (.)why not?Looks at pcscreen3Simen:(0.5) No (.) because then they will receive itstraight away (.) they won’t even have to (guess)In Turn 1 Simen comments that they shouldn’t place the top item on the list first, and argues that doingso will permit the other team (the group receiving their game) to find this location without any effort.Concretely, this location is their own school building, which was requisitioned and occupied by Germans duringWW2, and Simen is presuming that they will start the game play session there. In Turn 2, Hanna responds tothis statement by stating the opposite of Simen, which is that they can indeed place the school building first, andthen asks why not, which prompts Simen to explain further. In Turn 3 Simen responds that it would make theother team find the location straight away, because of the 30 meter circumference around the school, which theypresumably start the gameplay from, and that they wouldn’t have to search for the location (that they will startthe game from within the 30 meter circumference). His response highlights the central game mechanic elementthat gameplay is about searching for locations based on limited information, and that by placing their ownschool first, they would contradict this aspect of the game in their design. This is an important aspect of thegame design, and another group used Google Street View to study locations closely before deciding on exactlocation of the POI (to search for natural obstacles to the decided game route not visible on maps).Excerpt 4 took place in the third session of game design. They are discussing how difficult the gameshould be. Previous to Turn 1, they have discussed that they think the game should be challenging enough forthe players to have to use extra hints in places, but that the game should still be possible to complete.CSCL 2015 Proceedings328© ISLSExcerpt 4:1Kaya:Yes (.) cou::ld make it (.) But they (1.5) It isnot supposed to be like they are not to be able tomake it2Hanna:(.)3Kaya:(0.5) Yes maybe a little simple?ºThisthatºone is very simple (.) If you think likeLowers voice,both lean intothe screenIn Turn 1 Kaya agrees that the game should be challenging, but that they should not make the gameimpossible to complete or too difficult. In Turn 2 Hanna responds by talking about one concrete location in thegame, which she finds very simple. She points to the screen, highlighting the game information she is talkingabout. She lowers her voice considerably, to avoid talking loudly about game information, and both lean closerto the screen, and their body language clearly shows that they are hiding something, and that it is a matter ofsecrecy. In Turn 3 Kaya agrees that the location to which Hanna is referring might be too easy to find.The whispering illustrated in Excerpt 4, is prevalent in much of the interaction in this phase. Althoughthe whispering is partially a result of the students being placed in the same room as the team they weredesigning games for, it is clear that they orient themselves toward not revealing what they are doing for theother team.Discussion and summaryIn the game design phase analysed above, we have looked at an activity where the students are involved inlearning through design. This idea is not new and a key argument in constructionism was that having studentsengage in design activity could be a fruitful way to support learning (e.g. Papert, 1980; Resnick, Ocko & Papert,1988; Resnick, 2012). This paper offers a detailed empirical analysis of what kind of interaction the students areinvolved in when learning through design. A key observation is that the students in this learning scenario, wherethere were groups of students designing games for each other, do engage creatively with the learning materialsand the resources made available to them. They need to transform the materials and concrete locations intopoints of interest in the location-based game. Further, they relate to the historical materials and sources to createa game and thus have to make design decisions and reflect upon how the game will be received by the otherteam of students. Such considerations are visible in the interaction and a topic of discussion in the groupactivity. We have illustrated this point through showing how the students explicitly address this through the useof “they” in their interaction, and showing how they explicitly discuss what the other students will learn fromplaying the game they are designing and finding the right level of difficulty for the game-play. In this way, theother team features as putative users of the mobile game in the interaction when they are making designdecisions. This resonates with Woolgars classic study “Configuring the user” (1992) where he looks at how“along with negotiations over who the user might be, comes a set of design (and other) activities which attemptto define and delimit the user's possible actions” (p. 61). In our analysis we see an example of how the users arepresent in the design decisions of the teams where considerations of how difficult the game play will be relatesto how they define and delimit the users’ scope of action. The point that they are making a game for otherstudents also points to a pedagogical challenge for the students: They are accountable for making a game that isplayable for the other team, and the other team will evaluate them when they play the game.This discussion also pertains to how the scenario was set up to be a collaborative activity. Theycollaborate in different ways, and in the above analysis we have looked at the process of collaborative design.When the activity is organised as a collaborative design activity, the students must coordinate their decisionsand articulate content of the narrative for each other within the group.A key idea in designing the authoring tool (SILO) is that it should be easy to design location-basedgames, and the design activity is tied to the construction of a narrative and descriptive text that ties the contentto the given location. Some of the intricacies of this process are to find interesting physical locations to saysomething about a theme, to support a suitable sequencing of the POIs, and another is to place the pin and dealwith the circumference of the POI. The students deal with these aspects in their interaction and collaborativeactivity. More generally, the authoring tool is designed to support the process of designing location-basedgames, and the notion of meta-design as discussed by Fischer (2009), a way to involve end-users in design by“designing for designers” is relevant. In this study we have showed a way to use an authoring tool for locationbased games to make students designers of games and in this way get them involved in learning through designand to be creative participants in what Fischer calls “richer ecologies of participation” and not only as passiveCSCL 2015 Proceedings329© ISLSreceivers of texts and other curricular materials. This strategy is also called underdesign (Fisher, 2009) andinvolves making tools for content creation rather than ready made content to be passively consumed, andcreating technological and pedagogical conditions for participation in design activities. We see this as apromising way forward to support collaborative learning with technology.This paper has presented a scenario involving the design of location-based games, where theparticipants’ peers were to receive and play the game designed. Based on video focused on one groupthroughout the scenario, we have analysed their game design process. We studied how the notion of designingfor their peers; the others, featured in their design process, how they coordinated their collaborative work, andhow the creative work of designing a location-based history game involves a series of design decisions that haveto be made.ReferencesBennerstedt U., & Linderoth, J. (2009). The Spellbound Ones: Illuminating Everyday Collaborative GamingPractices in a MMORPG. In C. O'Malley, D. Suthers, P. Reimann, & A. Dimitracopoulou (Eds.),Computer supported collaborative learning practices: CSCL2009 Conference proceedings (pp. 404413). Rhodes, Greece, July 2009.Chang, B., Wang, H.-Y., Chen, C.-S., & Liang, J.-K. (2009). Distributed Weather Net: Wireless sensor networksupported by inquiry-based learning. In C. O'Malley, D. Suthers, P. Reimann, & A. Dimitracopoulou(Eds.), Computer supported collaborative learning practices: CSCL2009 Conference proceedings (pp.365-369). Rhodes, Greece. July 2009.Derry, S. J., Pea, R. D., Barron, B., Engle, R. A., Erickson, F., Goldman, R., Hall, R., Koschmann, T., Lemke, J.L., Sherin, M. G., & Sherin, B. L. (2010). Conducting Video Research in the Learning Sciences:Guidance on Selection, Analysis, Technology and Ethics. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(1), 353.El-Nasr, M. S. & Smith, B. K. (2006). Learning through game modding. Computers in Entertainment, 4(1), 120.Fischer, G. (2009). End-User Development and Meta-design : Foundations for Cultures of Participation.Lecture notes in computer science, Volume 5435, 3–14. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-00427-8Garneli, B., Giannakos, M.N., Chorianopoulos K. & Jaccheri, L. (2013). Learning by Playing and Learning byMaking. In: M. Ma, M. Oliveira, S. Petersen & J. Baalsrud Hauge (Eds.), Proceedings of SeriousGames Development and Applications, (pp. 76–85). Springer-Verlag Berlin HeidelbergGerson, E. M., & Star, S. L. (1986). Analyzing due-process in the workplace. ACM Transactions on OfficeInformation Systems, 4(3), 257-270.Guribye. F, Wake, J.D., & Wasson, B. (2014). The Practical Accomplishment of Location-Based Game-Play:Design and Analysis of Mobile Collaborative Gaming. International Journal of Mobile HumanComputer Interaction, 6(3), 32-50.Heath, C. & Luff, P. (2000). Technology in action. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Heath, C., Hindmarsh, J., & Luff, P. (2010). Video in qualitative research. Analysing Social Interaction inEveryday Life. SAGE Publications Ltd.Ke, F. (2007). Using Computer-based Math Games as an Anchor for Cooperative Learning. Proceedings of the8th international conference on Computer supported collaborative learning, (pp. 354-356). NewBrunswick, USA, 16-21 July, 2007.Kickmeier-Rust, M. D. & Albert, D. (Eds.) (2012). An Alien’s Guide to Multi-Adaptive Educational ComputerGames. Santa Rosa, CA: Informing Science Press.Klopfer, E., Perry, J., Squire, K., Jan, M.-F., & Steinkuehler, C. (2005). Mystery at the museum: a collaborativegame for museum education. Proceedings of the 2005 conference on Computer support forcollaborative learning, (pp. 316-320). Taipei, Taiwan, May 30 –June 4, 2005.Koschmann, T., Stahl, G., & Zemel, A. (2007). The video analyst's manifesto (or the implications of Garfinkel'spolicies for the development of a program of video analytic research within the learning sciences). InR. Goldman, R. Pea, B. Barron & S. Derry (Eds.), Video research in the learning sciences, pp 133-144.New York: Routledge.Lim, C.P. (2008) Spirit of the game: Empowering students as designers in schools? British Journal ofEducational Technology, 39(6), 996–1003.Lyons, L. (2009). Designing Opportunistic User Interfaces to Support a Collaborative Museum Exhibit, In: C.O'Malley, D. Suthers, P. Reimann, & A. Dimitracopoulou (Eds.), Computer supported collaborativelearning practices: CSCL2009 Conference proceedings (pp. 375-384). Rhodes, Greece, July 2009.CSCL 2015 Proceedings330© ISLSOrvieto, I. (2012). Developing Educational Games. In: M.D. Kickmeier-Rust & D. Albert. (Eds.), An AliensGuide to Multi-Adaptive Educational Computer Games, pp. 21-40. Santa Rosa, CA: Informing SciencePress.Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: children, computers and powerful ideas. New York, USA: Basic Books Inc.Prensky, M. (2008). Students as designers and creators of educational computer games: Who else? BritishJournal of Educational Technology, 39(6), 1004-1019.Resnick, M. (2007) Sowing the seeds for a more creative society. Learning and Leading with Technology, pp.18-22.Resnick, M. (2012). Reviving Papert's Dream. Educational Technology, 52(4), 42-46.Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Monroy-Hernández, A., Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., Brennan, K., Millner, A.,Rosenbaum, E., Silver, J., Silverman, B., & Kafai, Y. (2009). Scratch, Programming for All.Communications of the ACM, 52(11), 404-428.Resnick, M., & Ocko, S. (1991). LEGO/Logo: Learning Through and About Design. In: I. Harel & S. Papert(Eds.), Constructionism. Ablex Publishing.Resnick, M., Ocko, S., & Papert, S. (1988). Lego, Logo, and Design. Children's Environments Quarterly, 5(4),14-18.Rosenbaum, E., Klopfer, E., Broughner, B., & Rosencheck, L. (2007). Engaging Students in ScienceControversy Through an Augmented Reality Role-Playing Game. Proceedings of the 8th internationalconference on Computer supported collaborative learning, (pp. 608-612). New Brunswick, USA, 1621 July, 2007.Satwitcz, T., & Stevens, R. (2007). Tools of Play: Coordinating Games, Characters, and Actions WhileLearning to Play Video Games. Proceedings of the 8th international conference on Computersupported collaborative learning, (pp. 629-638). New Brunswick, USA, 16-21 July, 2007.Schwarz, D. & Stoecker, M. (2012). Designing Learning Games. In: M.D. Kickmeier-Rust & D. Albert. (Eds.)An Aliens Guide to Multi-Adaptive Educational Computer Games, (pp. 5-19). Santa Rosa, CA:Informing Science Press.Sharples, M., Adams, A., Ferguson, R., Gaved, M., McAndrew, P., Rienties, B., Weller, M., & Whitelock, D.(2014). Innovating Pedagogy 2014. Open University Innovation Report 3. The Open University, 2014.Shute, V. J., Rieber, L., & Van Eck, R. (2011). Games . . . and . . . learning. In R. Reiser & J. Dempsey (Eds.),Trends and issues in instructional design and technology, 3rd Edition, (pp. 321-332). Upper SaddleRiver, NJ: Pearson Education Inc.Suchman, L. (2007). Human-Machine Reconfigurations. Plans and Situated Actions, 2nd ed. New York:Cambridge University Press.Tan, T.-H., Liu, T.-Y., & Chang, C.-C. (2007). Development and Evaluation of an RFID-based UbiquitousLearning Environment for Outdoor Learning. Interactive Learning Environments, 15(3), 253-269.Wake, J.D. & Baggetun, R. (2009). "Premierløitnant Bielke". A Mobile Game for Teaching and LearningHistory. International journal of Mobile and Blended Learning, 1(4), 12-28.Wake, J.D., Guribye, F. & Wasson, B. (2011). The Interactional Organisation of Location-based Gaming. In: H.Spada, G. Stahl, N. Miyake & N. Law (Eds.), Proceedings of CSCL 2011, Hong Kong, China, June 4to 8, 2011, (pp. 136-143). ISLS.Wake, J.D. & Wasson, B. (2011). Supporting creativity in teaching and learning of history through small-groupproduction of mobile, location-based games In: Proceedings of mLearn 2011. 10th World Conferenceon Mobile and Contextual Learning, pp. 180-188. Beijing, China, 18-21 October 2011.White, T. (2006). Code talk: Student discourse and participation with networked handhelds. InternationalJournal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 359-382.Woolgar, S. (1992). Configuring the user: The case of usability trials. In Law, J. (Ed.), A Sociology of Monsters.Essays on Power, Technology and Domination (pp. 58-99), Routledge, London.Yatani, K., Onuma, M., Sugimoto, M., & Kusunoki, F. (2004). Musex: A system for supporting children’scollaborative learning in a museum with PDAs. Systems and Computers in Japan, 35(14), 54-63.AcknowledgmentWe foremost thank the participants; the teacher and the students at Bergen Handelsgymnasium that allowed ourpresence in their classroom and subsequently helped us gain insights into how they worked when provided anddiligently engaged with this new method of learning history.CSCL 2015 Proceedings331© ISLS