Process and Output: Relation Between Transactivity, TemporalSynchronicity, and Quality of Group Work During CSCLVitaliy Popov, University of San Diego, vpopov@sandiego.eduAnouschka van Leeuwen, Utrecht University, A.vanLeeuwen@uu.nlStan C.A. Buis, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, s.buis@vu.nlAbstract: Do the simultaneous alignment of student activities (temporal synchronicity) andstudents successively building on each other's reasoning (transactivity) predict the quality ofcollaborative learning products? A mixed method approach was used to study 74 first yearuniversity students who were randomly assigned to work in dyads on an ill-defined problem ofbiodiversity collapse in tropical forests within a CSCL setting. The study results revealed thatneither temporal synchronicity nor transactivity correlated with the quality of group products.The qualitative analysis of chat transcripts showed the variability between the groups can beexplained by group dynamics, students’ prior knowledge, confidence in managing the learningtask, collaborative strategy, and communication skills.IntroductionRecent advances in the Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) literature indicate that the efficacyof collaborative learning effort is thought to be influenced by the extent to which students can ensure theconsistency of the joint work product by temporally synchronizing their collaborative activities (Erkens, Jaspers,Prangsma, & Kanselaar, 2005), and by transacting on each other’s ideas (Stahl, 2013). Building on previousresearch, this study investigates whether these two properties could predict the quality of group products.Synchronizing collaborative activities across time and appropriate distributions of efforts and resourcesare of critical importance to the group’s performance (Erkens, Jaspers, Prangsma, & Kanselaar, 2005; Rummel &Spada, 2005). According to Baker (2002), “the degree of alignment refers to the extent to which participants are‘in phase’ with respect to different aspects of the problem-solving activity, that is, to what extent they aregenuinely working together” (cited from Arvaja, Häkkinen, & Kankaanranta, 2008, p. 268). Collaborativeproblem solving is non-aligned or non-synchronized when, for instance, one partner focuses on individualachievement over collective teamwork or there is no mutual agreement on a chronological order of activities.Failure to maintain continuous attention and reflection on one’s own understanding as well as fellow groupmembers can negatively affect temporal synchronization and lead to process losses (Baker, 2002; Schneider &Pea, 2013; Rummel & Spada, 2005). The type of CSCL environment in terms of synchronous or asynchronousforms of working and communicating has distinct variations of temporal synchronicity and its measurement ranging from being in the same working space at the same time to coordinated effort over time (e.g., 24-hourknowledge factory well known in CSCW).It is assumed that students working in groups adopt shared understanding and negotiate the meaningabout a topic by asking questions, discussing, explaining, and providing extra information to support theirviewpoints (De Lisi & Goldbeck, 1999). This type of group discussion is known as transactive discussion, i.e.students successively build on each other's reasoning by interpreting the meaning of their logical statements onthe task at hand (Teasley, 1997). The way collaborating students build on each other's contributions can be carriedout at low and high levels of transactivity (Noroozi, Weinberger, Biemans, Mulder, & Chizari, 2013). At thelowest level, simple consensus occurs when group members accept what is said or done without further discussion.At the highest level of transactivity, a joint decision is made as a result of a dynamic incorporation of bothagreements and disagreements between partners (Molinari, Sangin, Nüssli, & Dillenbourg, 2008). Previousresearch has shown that the highest level of transactive discourse increases the probability that learners triggercognitive activity fostering individual and group performance (Stahl, 2013).The present study was undertaken to combine the lines of research explained above into one set-up. Thefollowing research question was addressed: To what extent do temporal synchronization of collaborative activitiesand the use of high levels of transactive discourse affect the quality of group products during synchronous CSCL?ICLS 2016 Proceedings354© ISLSMethodsParticipantsThe participants in this study were 74 first year university students enrolled in an Environmental Sciences MScprogram in the Netherlands. The sample comprised of 18 Dutch and 56 international students; 53% were women.The age of the respondents ranged from 19 to 37 years, with a mean age of 24 years (SD = 3.2); 96% of theparticipants were under the age of 30. The participants were randomly assigned to work in dyads. One dyad wasexcluded from the study as they did not use the CSCL-environment for communication, but used face-to-facecommunication.Assignment and procedureThis study used an assignment that was part of an introductory course for MSc students, called Principles ofEnvironmental Sciences. To fulfill this assignment, students had to analyze the problem of biodiversity collapsein tropical forests. While collaborating in dyads within a synchronous CSCL environment students were expectedto inductively solve an environmental problem, by following three consecutive steps: (1) analyzing the problemof biodiversity loss by identifying causes and effects, (2) proposing possible Responses (solutions) to avert thebiodiversity loss, and (3) selecting the most viable ways to tackle the problem of biodiversity loss by prioritizingthe Responses. Students were expected to fill in a Driver–Pressure–State–Impact–Response (DPSIR) model foran ill-defined environmental problem to which several solutions could be proposed (i.e. DPSIR is a frameworkthat helps to identify and describe processes and interactions in human–environmental systems, Fortuin, Koppen,& Leemans, 2011).In the study, there were one introductory (plenary) and two online group work sessions over three days.The overall time required for completion of the assignment was about 8.5 hours. In the plenary meeting the DPSIRmodel was introduced. In the first group working session on day 2, students started by spending a few minutesgetting to know each other and then they continued by studying the task materials at an individual computer.Students were then given time to post their individual thoughts, and to exchange ideas with their peers afterwards.On day 3, students continued working on the collaborative problem-solving task and a solution evaluation phasetook place, which consisted of three subtasks. Namely, making a DPSIR-model, making a list of possibleResponses, and reporting the overall prioritization of the Responses. The assignment ended in a finished DPSIRmodel, which was assessed. All online activity was automatically captured in log files, which were furtheranalyzed for temporal synchronicity and high level transactivity (see below).The dyads collaborated in a digital learning environment called Virtual Collaborative Research Institute(VCRI; Jaspers, Broeken, & Erkens, 2004). The VCRI groupware program incorporated both personal tools(Sources-tool and Notes-tool) as well as shared tools (Chat-tool, Cowriter-tool, and Diagrammer-tool) as shownin Figure 1. The Chat-tool allowed students to communicate with their collaborative partner. In the Cowriter-toolstudents wrote their Responses. In the Diagrammer-tool students edited elements of the DPSIR model.Figure 1. Screenshot of the VCRI environment, with Chat-tool (upper left), Sources-tool (upper right),Cowriter-tool (bottom left) and Diagrammer-tool (bottom right).ICLS 2016 Proceedings355© ISLSInstrumentsTemporal synchronicityLog files were automatically generated of each dyad’s activities in VCRI, including which tools were opened andwhat actions were performed within the tools. It was quantified whether the members of a dyad mirrored eachother’s activity by opening and working in the same tool. An automatic coding mechanism, using Multi EpisodeProtocol Analysis (Erkens, 2005), was developed which coded at each time point whether or not the two membersof the dyad were temporally synchronized, and if so, in which tool. The following two conditions had to be metin order for a dyad to be coded as temporally synchronized in a particular tool:1) The dyad performed at least five consecutive actions within one specific tool, with the inclusion ofChat-messages. Because the Chat-tool was the primary medium for communication, the consecutive actions in atool still count if an action in the Chat-tool occurs within this row of five activities.2) The row of (at least five) consecutive activities includes activities produced by both members of thedyad. For example, five activities by member 1 in the diagrammer do not count as the dyad being temporallysynchronized.Thus, when a sequence of activities met the criteria, all activities in those sequences were coded astemporally synchronized. The percentage of the total number of activities that was coded temporally synchronizedwas used as the measure of temporal synchronicity for each dyad.TransactivityStudent chats were analyzed for the occurrence of high levels of transactivity, namely Integration according toNoroozi’s hierarchy (Noroozi et al., 2013; table 2), which means that learners adopt the perspective of their peersand build syntheses of the (counter) arguments uttered by their peers. A randomly selected third of all chats werecoded by the three researchers and the outcomes were discussed until consensus about the coding was reached.After that the rest of the chats were divided between the researchers for coding all the remaining chats. In chatepisodes where disagreement about the correctness of coding as high level of transactivity in the integrationcategory occurred, consensus was reached through discussion by all three researchers. For all dyads the percentageof chat utterances that were coded as integration was then calculated by dividing the number of utterances in allintegrative episodes by the total number of utterances in the chat conversation. Also, for each episode of highlevel transactivity discourse in the integrative category, it was checked whether the students transferred thediscussed concept to the DPSIR diagrammer. The percentage of concepts in the diagrammer that was discussedon a high level of transactivity was then calculated.Quality of students’ group workThe assessment of the quality of the students’ constructed DPSIR diagrams (obtained from the Diagrammer-tool)was made on a 5-step rating scale (5 being the best score) for three assessment criteria: width (the number ofconcepts in the diagrammer), correctness (the amount of concepts that is correct), and structure (the way conceptsare grouped and related within the diagrammer). Two teachers coded all students’ DPSIR diagrams independentlyand all disagreement and discrepancies were discussed until they reached an agreement. Both inter-rateragreement between two expert coders (Cohen’s k= 0.82) (Landis & Koch, 1977) and intra-coder test-retestreliability for each coder for 15% of the data (90 % identical scores) were sufficiently high. Subsequently, allpoints assigned to each student dyad per criterion were added together and then divided by 3 (i.e. the total numberof criteria). Each group of students could get a mean quality score of between one and five, which was convertedto the Dutch 10 point grading scale. Scores below 5.5 were regarded insufficient to pass the course.AnalysesA multiple regression analysis was performed to investigate whether temporal synchronicity and high level oftransactivity predicted the grade that the dyads received for their diagrammer final product. The quantitativeresults were extended by adding qualitative descriptions of the dyads’ collaborative processes.For the qualitative analysis all dyads were categorized and placed in a table based on their qualitativecharacteristics. Dyads were categorized as having either high or low occurrences of high level transactivity (moreor less than 33.3%), high or low temporal synchronicity (more or less than 33.3%), or an sufficient or insufficientgrade (higher than or equal to or lower than 5.5). The collaboration of all dyads within each cell of the table wasthematically analyzed by looking at the chat conversation as well as the ordering of events within the log files.To analyze the chat conversations, an open coding approach was used to identify meaningful events suchas the occurrence of disagreement between group members or reaching a shared solution to a question (cf., Barron,2003; Rummel and Spada, 2005). Each event consisted of an episode in which each student had more than oneICLS 2016 Proceedings356© ISLSchat utterance. Using an iterative process, all chat transcripts were analyzed based on the emerged themes. Then,the three researchers wrote brief summaries of the way students collaborated. When there was doubt about theaccuracy of a summary, a second researcher analyzed that dyad. From the summaries of all dyads per type, acharacterization for each dyad type was composed.FindingsRelation between high level transactivity, temporal synchronicity, and quality ofgroup productTable 1 displays the descriptive statistics for percentage of activities that was temporally synchronized, percentageof high level transactive utterances in the chat conversation, number of concepts in the diagrammer that wasdiscussed transactively on a high level, and final grade for the diagrammer. As can be seen, on average the dyadsachieved a relatively high level of temporal synchronicity, meaning that almost half of the time collaboratingpartners were using the same tools at the same time, including direct communication through the chat. Thepercentage of high level transactivity in the chat was relatively low (on average 15.09%), while about a third ofthe concepts in the final diagrammer product were discussed on a high level of transactivity. The average gradewas 6.42, and out of 36 dyads, only five dyads did not achieve a sufficient grade.Multiple regression analysis showed that neither temporal synchronicity (t(35) = -.451, p = .655) norhigh level transactivity (t(35) = .177, p = .861) was a significant predictor of the grade that the dyads receivedfor their diagrammer final product.Table 1: Descriptive statistics for main variablesTemporalsynchronicityHigh leveltransactivity in chatNumber ofDiagrammerconcepts discussedtransactively in chatGradeM (%)40.81SD (%)8.71Min24.99Max62.2815.0910.870.045.9539.5023.070.085.716.420.973.828.36Qualitative description of dyadsNo significant relationship between grades, high level transactivity and temporal synchronicity was found. In fact,both relatively low and high scores on high level transactivity lead to sufficient grades in this study. To explainthese findings, qualitative descriptions of collaboration types that occurred in the dyads are provided in Table 2.These qualitative descriptions shed some light on the variability in outcomes between dyads. It also showscontrasts between groups with different characteristics and similar outcomes in grade, as well as groups withsimilar characteristics but different outcomes in grade.A categorization of dyads was made based on three dimensions: synchronicity (low versus high), highlevel transactivity in discourse (low versus high), and grade (insufficient versus sufficient), leading to eightcategories. Table 2 displays the distribution of dyads among these categories. As can be seen, one type of dyaddid not exist in our dataset, namely the combination of low synchronicity, low occurrence of high leveltransactivity and an insufficient grade (Cell A).In the sections below, we illustrate and contrast the types of dyads that showed similar processcharacteristics, yet differed in the grade they received. For example, dyad types A and C both show lowtemporal synchronicity and a low number of concepts discussed on high level transactivity, yet type A achievesan insufficient grade and type C a sufficient grade.Dyad type A and CContrary to our expectations all dyads with lack of temporal synchronicity and a low number of concepts discussedon high level transactivity fell into dyad type C (sufficient grade) in our study. Further analyses of dyads type Crevealed that in some cases the dyads consisted of two strong students that could manage their own tasks bydistributing the workload and coordinating their actions, instead of trying to collaborate and learn from each other.In other cases, some of the students took almost full control of the task and finished the whole assignment on theirICLS 2016 Proceedings357© ISLSown. As an example, we consider one dyad from type C (see excerpt below), where one student is responsible for98% for all activity in the Diagrammer-tool and as a group they had only 2.8% of the high level transactivediscussions. Still, in contrast to dyad type A, this dyad achieved a high grade (8.4 out of 10 points). Student 2gives Student 1 barely a chance to participate, as evidenced by the use of the phrase “my diagram”. As a result ofthis disproportional cooperation dynamic, the dyad achieves little high level transactivity and little temporalsynchronicity.Student 1:Student 2:Student 2:Student 1:Student 2:Student 1:Student 2:Student 2:Wow, you have finished the whole assignment.I already made something but don’t know if its correctDo we need to put all driving forces, for instance, in 1 box or in seperate[separate] boxes?I'm thinking about it now...I think we should ask someone else or the teather[teacher]You're messing up my diagram :PI'm trying to find out if I can add a box..I can do it if you wantand you can chat me if you agree with what I addTable 2. Summary of types of dyads, sorted according to temporal synchronicity, number of Diagrammer conceptsdiscussed on high level transactivity in chat, and grade.Synchronicity0.0% 33.3%Synchronicity33.3% 66.6%Grade< 5.5InsufficientLow occurrence of high leveltransactivity(number of concepts discussed onhigh level transactivity < 33.3%)An=0Grade> 5.5SufficientCn=5SUMMARY: The dyads all divide thetasks between them, leading tocooperation instead of collaboration,and little temporal synchronization.Grade< 5.5InsufficientEn=2SUMMARY: The dyads have a lack ofhigh level transactivity, in one casebecause the dyads divide the tasks andcooperate; in the second case becausethe students are too insecure to movebeyondmerelyexchanginginformation.Gn = 10SUMMARY: The dyads collaboratedefficiently but showed no high levelsof transactivity. There was a lack ofchallenging each other, insteadquickly agreeing when the otherproposed a solution. The dyads consistof motivated students with a focus oncompleting the assignmentGrade> 5.5SufficientICLS 2016 Proceedings358High occurrence of high level transactivity(number of concepts discussed on high leveltransactivity > 33.3%)Bn=1SUMMARY: This particular dyad collaborated butwas not critical of each other’s work. They regularlywanted to show their work to the teacher, possiblybecause they were insecure.Dn=3SUMMARY: The dyads all divide the tasks betweenthem, leading to cooperation instead of collaboration,and no temporal synchronization. The dyads havesome moments where their activities intersect and atthose points they discuss the task material on highlevel transactivity.Fn=2SUMMARY: The dyads showed collaboration,including high level transactivity in discourse, andoften challenged each other. The low grade may beexplained in one case because the dyad based theirdiscussion on incorrect information, and in the othercase because the dyad spent too much time on figuringout the DPSIR model they had to construct.Hn = 13SUMMARY: The dyads collaborated efficiently andwith regular occurrence of high level transactivity.Ideas are constantly challenged in a friendly way, andthe students regularly check whether they are still onthe same page. Input from both students is combinedinto a co-constructed solution. The dyads consist ofmotivated students.© ISLSDyad type B and DDyad type B occurred only once in our data set, whereas dyad type D had three instances. Both types of dyads, Band D, demonstrated similar style of working together. Namely, they discussed most subject matters in an openand constructive way. These dyads discussed their plans/activities verbally, agreed on what needed to be done,and then proceeded individually, without temporal coordination. Qualitative analysis of chat transcripts revealedthat dyad type B had to ask the teacher for help over 10 times, partly because they thought they had to, and partlybecause they felt insecure about what they had produced (see excerpt below). In contrast, dyads type D managedtheir collaborative work without teacher’s help and all content-related questions were discussed between theparticipants themselves.Student 1:Student 2:Student 2:Student 2:Student 1:Student 1:Student 2:Student 2:so the diagrammer doesn't need to be modified .every item of response should bemore specifici don't knowmaybe we could ask to a teacher isn't it?did you saw what I posted about the 2 last points/Yesand i post the 1it seems to be goodwe should show the complete work to the teachersDyad type E and GFrom the dyads that achieved a high level of temporal synchronicity in their collaboration and discussed a lowpercentage of their concepts of high level transactivity, 2 dyads scored an insufficient grade (dyad type E) and 10dyads scored a sufficient grade (dyad type G). Overall, the dynamic of these two types of dyads was set oncompleting the DPSRI assignment, but not on learning from each other and understanding more about the subjectmatter. In situations when one student would pose a question or a suggestion, the other student would usuallyrespond very briefly or agree very easily. The difference in grades may be explained by the dynamics ofcollaboration that these two types of dyads demonstrated. Collaborating students in both types of dyads, E and G,worked very closely with each other in terms of space/tools use, but dyads in type E spent more time figuring outthe assignment and doubting actions (i.e., one dyad in type E used the word “Maybe” 42 times throughout theirentire chat conversation) compared to dyads in type G. This is shown in the excerpt below.Student 1:Student 1:Student 1:Student 2:Student 1:Student 2:but the problem is that I don't know if we have to focus on the case described inthe article or if we can find another impacts that are not in the textbut I think you are right actuallyand you speak about 50% forest loss but maybe we should put that in the pressues[pressures], as an explanation and proof of deforestationmaybe you are rightand the other ones, maybe we can develop a few by sentences from the textI don't know if we can find some impacts that are not in the text, too. so, maybenow we can just use the things given in the article or in the filmDyad type F and HFrom the dyads with both high occurrence of high level transactivity and temporal synchronicity, only two dyadsscored an insufficient grade (dyad type F), and 13 dyads scored a sufficient grade (dyad type H). This supportsour expectation that high occurrence of high levels of transactivity and temporal synchronicity may lead to qualityof group work. Further analyses of dyad type F shows that both dyad types are very polite, constructive andfriendly in their chat. However, one of these two dyads had a low score (2 out of 5) on the correctness criterion,possibly indicating that they based the concepts in their diagrammer on misconceptions. The other dyad spent alot of time figuring out what the assignment was about and what the idea behind a DPSIR model was, thesedifficulties in understanding the assignment seemed to be increased by language barriers between the two studentsin the dyad.Twelve of the 13 dyads in dyad type H are characterized by challenging each other in a friendly andmotivating way, showing patience and checking each other’s ideas to come to co-constructed refined solutionsICLS 2016 Proceedings359© ISLS(see excerpt below). One dyad however, started working on the diagrammer very early on in the assignment, butthen had an argument the students themselves called a ‘serious situation’. When the students realized the argumentlasted for too long and they had to hurry to complete the assignment, they stopped arguing in the chat and wereable to finish the assignment.Student 1:Student 1:Student 2:Student 2:Student 1:Ah it belongs to air pollutionor climate changetrue, but emissions is a pressure and it pollutes the air. Shall I add it to thepressures?and air pollutions keeps standing there as a stateyes! perfect!To summarize, the qualitative descriptions showed the variability between the groups in terms ofcharacteristics such as group dynamic, students’ content knowledge, confidence in managing the learning task,collaborative strategy (cooperation versus collaboration), and communication skills.DiscussionFindings and implicationsIn contrast to expectations, neither temporal synchronicity nor high level transactivity correlated with the qualityof group products. Sufficient grades were achieved with only a high occurrence of high level transactivity, only ahigh level of temporal synchronicity, and even with low levels of both high level transactivity and temporalsynchronicity. This suggests that none of these variables is vital for collaboration to lead to sufficient final product.The qualitative analysis of collaborating dyads showed that there were a number of variables, besides the twounder direct investigation, that influenced whether a dyad would succeed or not. The clearest finding was that bydiscussing their activities and agreeing on a clear task division, two students with strong content knowledge canwork independently from each other and still achieve a good grade.The most surprising type of dyad we encountered was the type that scored an insufficient grade eventhough they had high levels of temporal synchronicity and high level transactivity. A possible explanation is thatthey reasoned on false beliefs, meaning that their misconceptions about the task material remained undetected bythe students themselves. This finding shows the importance of both social aspects as well as cognitive/task-relatedaspects of collaboration. Perfect socio-collaborative skills are only beneficial when students challenge eachother’s statements continuously and keep checking their output for correctness. Since it is a demanding task forteachers to monitor and regulate multiple collaborating groups at the same time (Van Leeuwen, Janssen, Erkens,& Brekelmans, 2015), automated moderation of discussions on both socio-collaborative and cognitive dimensionsof collaboration could be beneficial. Some of the processes we observed in the dyads, such as the ‘overruling’behavior when a dominant student was coupled to an insecure student, could be prevented with adequatemoderation of discussions. Thus, there is a challenge here to take into account not only differences between dyads,but also differences within dyads.Limitations and directions for future researchThis study was carried out in an authentic learning environment, but the results of this study should be interpretedin light of some limitations. First of all, the task students worked on did not include an incentive to shareknowledge - there was no dependency between the students within dyads. For example, if students had been givendiffering task materials, they would have had to share and discuss, and high level transactive discourse may havebeen more likely to occur. Another limitation of the study design is that we did not measure individual knowledgegains. It could be that although the investigated variables did not predict quality of the group product, the studentsin various types of dyads may have differed on individual knowledge gains.Concerning temporal synchronicity, we checked whether both students had the same workspaceactivated, but not whether both students were actively contributing nor whether they actually acknowledged eachother’s presence. It could be argued that the two students need to demonstrate awareness that “they are attendingto something in common” (Tomasello, 1995, pp. 106). However, research on temporal synchronicity in the fieldof CSCL is relatively scarce (Rummel & Spada, 2005). It is not yet clear to what extent implicit coordination suchas temporal synchronicity differs or correlates to explicit types of coordination (in which students openly discussICLS 2016 Proceedings360© ISLScoordination of activities), which is a much more common area of research (Järvelä & Hadwin, 2013). In thisrespect, we hope to have given input for future research.Finally, in our analysis we did not take into account the role of students’ cultural background. Studentsmay have had communicative barriers that hindered high level transactive and synchronized collaboration (Popov,Biemans, Brinkman, Kuznetsov & Mulder, 2013). Indeed, our results pointed out the importance of groupdynamics for dyads to succeed on the task. This could be a relevant direction for future research, also given theincreasing numbers of massive open online courses (MOOCs) in which students from different countries andcultures participate. The observed differences, and different combinations of dyad characteristics, show the needfor personalized support.ReferencesArvaja, M., Häkkinen, P. & Kankaanranta, M. (2008). Collaborative learning and computer-supportedcollaborative learning environments. In J. Voogt & G. Knezek (Eds.), International Handbook ofInformation Technology in Primary and Secondary Education (pp. 267-279). New York: Springer.Baker, M.J. (2002). Forms of cooperation in dyadic problem-solving. Revue d'Intelligence Artificielle, 16(4-5),587-620.Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 307-359.De Lisi, R., & Goldbeck, S. L. (1999). Implication of Piagetian theory for peer learning. In A.M. O'Donnell & A.King (Eds.), Cognitive perspectives on peer learning (pp. 3-37). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Erkens, G. (2005). Multiple Episode Protocol Analysis (MEPA). Version 4.10 software. Utrecht University, TheNetherlands.Erkens, G., Jaspers, J., Prangsma, M., & Kanselaar, G. (2005). Coordination processes in computer supportedcollaborative writing. Computers in Human Behavior, 21, 463-486.Fortuin, K. P. J., Van Koppen, C. S. A., & Leemans, R. (2011). The Value of Conceptual Models in Coping withComplexity and lnterdisciplinarity in Environmental Sciences Education. Bioscience, 61(10), 802-814.Jaspers, J., Broeken, M., & Erkens, G. (2004). Virtual Collaborative Research Institute (VCRI) (Version 2.0).Utrecht: Onderwijskunde Utrecht, ICO/ISOR.Järvelä, S., & Hadwin, A. (2013). New Frontiers: Regulating learning in CSCL. Educational Psychologist, 48(1),25-39.Landis, J. R., & Koch G. G. (1977). The Measurement of Observer Agreement for Categorical Data. Biometrics,33(1), 159-174.Molinari, G., Sangin, M., Nüssli, M.-A., & Dillenbourg, P. (2008). Effects of knowledge interdependence withthe partner on visual and action transactivity in collaborative concept mapping. In G. Kanselaar, J. vanMerriënboer, P. Kirschner, & T. de Jong, (Eds.), Proceedings of the Eight International Conference forthe Learning Sciences (ICLS 2008): Part 2 (pp. 91-98). Utrecht, The Netherlands: ISLS.Noroozi, O., Weinberger, A., Biemans, H. J. A., Mulder, M., & Chizari, M. (2013). Facilitating argumentativeknowledge construction through a transactive discussion script in CSCL. Computers and Education,61(2), 59-76.Popov, V., Biemans, H. J. A., Brinkman, D., Kuznetsov, A., & Mulder, M. (2013). Facilitation of ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning in Mixed- versus Same-Culture Dyads: Does a Collaboration ScriptHelp? The Internet and Higher Education, 19, 36-48. doi: 10.1016/j. iheduc.2013.08.002Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate: An instructional approach to promoting problemsolving in computer-mediated settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 201–241.Schneider, B., & Pea, R. (2013). Real-time mutual gaze perception enhances collaborative learning andcollaboration quality. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 8(4), 375397.Stahl, G. (2013b). Transactive discourse in CSCL. International Journal of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning. 8(2), 145-147.Teasley, S. D. (1997). Talking about reasoning: How important is the peer in peer collaboration? In L. B. Resnick,R. Säljö, C. Pontecorvo & B. Burge (Eds.), Discourse, tools and reasoning: Essays on situated cognition(pp. 361-384). Berlin: Springer.Tomasello, M. (1995). Joint attention as social cognition. In C. Moore & P. J. Dunham (Eds.), Joint attention: Itsorigins and role in development (pp. 103-130). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Van Leeuwen, A., Janssen, J., Erkens, G., & Brekelmans, M. (2015). Teacher regulation of multiple computersupported collaborating groups. Computers in Human Behavior, 52, 233–242.ICLS 2016 Proceedings361© ISLS