Using Multiple Embodied Representations to Support Learners inMaking Connections Across Modeling ActivitiesChris Georgen, Indiana University, cgeorgen@indiana.eduAbstract: My research aims to help students see familiar cultural practices, such as dance, as aresource in understanding scientific concepts and building bridges from their everyday lives todisciplinary norms. I build on the previously successful Science Through Technology EnhancedPlay (STEP) mixed-reality learning environment that combines motion-tracking technologywith a computational simulation and provide learners the opportunity to use dance, a fun andfamiliar practice for all participants, to share their understanding from STEP and why it mattersto them.VisionEmbodied theories of learning highlight the processes in which expressive gesture and body movement act as keyrepresentational resources (Abrahamson & Sánchez-García, 2016). The role of the body in learning is well-studiedin laboratories and formal environments, but the potential for using familiar embodied activity to help bridgebetween out of school practices and scientific ones is understudied and under-utilized. The goals of my dissertationare to: (1) support science learning across contexts by connecting multiple representations that leverage the body;(2) expand participation in science by studying how embodied representations can support the engagement ofstudents from diverse backgrounds in science activities across learning contexts, and; (3) explore how dance, afamiliar and popular form of embodied activity, might connect their informal experiences with science.My dissertation builds on evidence that early elementary students can construct explanatory andpredictive models. While existing literature suggests young children are capable of sophisticated modelingpractices, focus is predominately on modeling by individuals and models as visual representations. By contrast,my dissertation will address this gap by investigating two forms of models that are instead collective andembodied: participatory models (Danish, 2014) and ensemble dance. Collective embodied models are powerfultools for cooperative and coordinated reasoning as they ask learners to move and think relative to each other. Forexample, in a participatory model learners physically enact parts of a complex system and in doing so learn itsmechanisms and rules. Similarly, in an ensemble dance individuals move together in locally valued and mutuallyunderstandable ways to co-create shared meaning.Students, ages 6-8, participating in a performing arts summer program will progress through a five-weeksequence of modeling activities to explore the relationship between macroscopic states of matter and microscopicparticle behaviors. Each activity is divided into two parts. In the first part, students will engage in embodiedscientific modeling, which targets exploring and learning science concepts. Then, during the second part, studentswill be asked to choreograph and perform a dance to represent what they learned and why it matters to them. Thus,students will be building on local dance practices and personal connections to make sense of the science, affordingan opportunity to engage in science in a way that is both fun and familiar. The participatory modeling activitiesbuild on the previously successful Science Through Technology Enhanced Play (STEP) mixed-reality learningenvironment that combines motion-tracking technology with a computational simulation (Danish et al., 2015).Dance-based activities will be co-designed with local performing arts instructors and focused on the genres andtechniques of dance the students are already interested in and engaging with.Analysis will focus specifically on how interactional mechanisms (e.g., talk and embodied action) areassembled to evaluate the rules of science, representational infrastructures, and social participation. Through thisin-depth analysis of the video data, I aim to locate the representational resources that support learners’ movementfrom disciplinary to dance-based embodied representations (and back again), and what is learned during thisprocess. Given the importance of connecting science with students’ everyday lives, my dissertation will advancedesigning for learning across disciplines and settings by leveraging the body as a primary representationalpathway.ReferencesAbrahamson, D., & Sánchez-García, R. (2016). Learning is moving in new ways: The ecological dynamics ofmathematics education. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25(2), 203-239.Danish, J. A. (2014). Applying an activity theory lens to designing instruction for learning about the structure,behavior, and function of a honeybee system. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 23(2), 100-148.Danish, J. A., Enyedy, N., Saleh, A., Lee, C., & Andrade, A. (2015). Science through technology enhanced play:Designing to support reflection through play and embodiment. Intl. Society of the Learning Sciences.1883