Collaborating With Stakeholders in STEM StudiosKate Thompson, Griffith University, kate.thompson@griffith.edu.auLes Dawes, Queensland University of Technology, l.dawes@qut.edu.auTanya Doyle, James Cook University, tanya.doyle@jcu.edu.auHarry Kanasa, Griffith University, h.kanasa@griffith.edu.auKatherine Nickels, Queensland University of Technology, katherine.nickels@qut.edu.auDavid Nutchey, Queensland University of Technology, d.nutchey@qut.edu.auAbstract: Studio-based learning provides an environment in which a collaborative, problembased approach to learning Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) isencouraged. In this project, the STEM Studio approach was used with school students informal and informal learning environments for preservice teacher education. Building onresearch from orchestration and learning analytics identifying stakeholders, and part of anationally funded, multi-institutional project, we examine the complexity and diversity ofcommunities in three STEM Studios. Using multiple data sources, the aim of this paper is toidentify the stakeholders and the relationships between them in order to visualize thecomplexity of the networks and to compare (1) changes in networks over time; (2) differencesbetween the learning contexts; and (3) the implications for preservice teacher education.IntroductionInterest is growing in collaborative, constructive, problem-based approaches to learning knowledge and skills inSTEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics). Studio approaches (Brandt et al., 2013) encouragelearners to link core disciplinary knowledge to solve a given problem. With investments by schools anduniversities in new learning spaces, teachers are incorporating many elements from these informal settings. Inorder to provide appropriate training for preservice teachers, it is important to understand considerations for thedesign of STEM units of work, and one important factor is stakeholder collaboration and coordination.We report on research from a project that investigated the application of studio-based approaches topreservice teacher education using a STEM Studio approach. Part of a nationally funded, multi-institutionalproject, three variations of the STEM Studio are compared: formal education with secondary students; informaleducation with middle school students; and informal education with primary students. Using video and audiorecordings to inform researcher observations, interviews with participants, and questionnaire data, we identifythe stakeholders and the relationships between them to visualize: the complexity of the networks; changes innetworks over time; differences between learning contexts; and implications for preservice teacher education.BackgroundThe studio approach to teaching and learning has a history in areas such as architecture or industrial design(Brandt et al., 2013). The studio approach is a variant of project based learning, and core features are iterativedesign, and self-reflection (Brandt et al., 2013; Hoadley & Cox, 2009). Schon (1987) suggested that thisapproach could be adopted in any discipline area, and since it has been applied in STEM disciplines (e.g.Shaffer, 2005). The studio leverages opportunities to engage students in rich and open-ended challenges thatrequire and support complex problem solving, application of multi-disciplinary knowledge and fosters theenactment of creative strategies. With teaching more readily considered to be a design profession (Laurillard,2012), there has been a movement towards adopting a studio approach to preservice teacher education. In thisstudy, we used the studio model to create a “third space” (Zeichner, 2010, p.89) in which pre-service teacherscould practice innovative pedagogy and develop pedagogical content knowledge in relation to a range ofcontemporary STEM topics. The third space provides a temporary learning community for collaborative selfstudy and professional learning where participants seek new experiences, approaches, and roles in their teachingpractice. Using the third space distances preservice teachers from the pressures of assessment of their practice asexperienced in both schools and university settings, and encourages collaborative and reflexive practice.An important factor in the success of studio approaches in informal learning environments is the accessto expertise with the creative community. In formal education, this requires stakeholder collaboration andcoordination. Research on the design of CSCL has focused on stakeholders related to design and research (e.g.Rose et al., 2016), as well as those related to enactment in the classroom (e.g. Prieto, Dimitriadis, Asensio-Pérez& Looi, 2015). We used an iterative method to identify stakeholders, their influence on the design andenactment phases, and relationships between them (Bryson, 2004). We adopt Goodyear, Jones & Thompson’sCSCL 2017 Proceedings621© ISLS(2014) definition of CSCL, which refers to situations in which computer technology plays a significant role inshaping the collaboration, whether online, face-to-face, visualizing activity, or scaffolding learning, and arguethat teachers need to be provided with tools to identify stakeholders in STEM Studio approaches, as well as tocollaborate during design, enactment, and assessment. We produce stakeholder maps of the relationships beforeand after the STEM Studios to identify the interactions that exist beyond the peer-to-peer or student-teacherinteractions in the classroom. It is this complex network that we seek to capture, with the view to betterunderstand activities such as the STEM Studio approaches, and, more generally, the design work of teachers.MethodsThe STEM studio model was replicated in three university settings in Queensland, Australia, with each settingadapting the model so as to respond to relevant resourcing and demography constraints within each situation:formal education of high school students; informal education of middle school students; and informal educationof primary school students. Common to each variant of the STEM Studio model were the interactions in theexploratory third space between STEM experts, mentor practicing teachers and novice preservice teachers.High school students (formal education) consisted of design challenge based activities within a schoolbased STEM program. The model involved collaboration between classroom teachers, preservice teachers,teacher educators and STEM experts to design, develop and deliver transdisciplinary, problem-based STEMunits of work. The design of the STEM units of work was inspired by the core tenets of Universal Design forLearning (Courey, Tappe, Siker & LePage, 2013) and the Exploratorium (The Art of Tinkering, 2015). A corefeature was that students, preservice teachers and classroom teachers worked with STEM Experts oncontemporary research problems. The STEM Experts included PhD students and academic staff from a range ofdisciplines (e.g. Astrophysics, Biomedical Science, Civil Engineering, Robotics). STEM experts were involvedduring the design and enactment of STEM units of work. They collaborated with the preservice teachers viaemail, phone, and face-to-face to discuss the unit of work, concepts, ideas and real world examples. For each ofthe 19 STEM Studios offered, one STEM Expert was selected based on the topic area chosen by the school.Each comprised of four meetings, and STEM experts participated in the classroom in at least one of these.Middle school students (informal education) involved a structured, out-of-school, STEM enrichment programopen to young people in years 5-8 in the district surrounding the host university, in regional Australia. TheCommonwealth Government, a local museum, and the local City Council, City Libraries program providedsupport that included human resources and physical spaces to meet. Preservice teachers volunteered to facilitatethe STEM Studio meetings for credit towards community service. Each week, the preservice teachers workedwith an experienced STEM educator, supported by a teacher educator who mentored the inquiry-basedpedagogical approach, as well as STEM Experts from the fields of medicine, geology and biology who assistedwith three of the fifteen weekly activities. Over 15 weeks, 50 school students attended the program. Primaryschool students (informal education), was carried out in the science teaching labs at the host university. Duringan existing Outside School Hours Care (OSHC) program, students, years Prep-6, and staff were invited to attendthe STEM Studio for up to two hours per week, for eight weeks. The STEM Experts included graduateengineering students. The STEM Experts and the pre-service teacher volunteers were offered training focusedon an inquiry-based pedagogical approach. During the STEM Studio, students were given structuredinformation about STEM methods of inquiry, and undertook a design exercise to identify their final project.They formed groups based around common interests and identified three projects: (1) making a three piece icecream machine; (2) Bunsen burner investigations; and (3) programming and robotics.Stakeholder maps were constructed for each setting to depict the stakeholders and interactions beforeand after the STEM Studio. The maps were created using a process similar to Bryson (2004). The first step wasto identify the key stakeholders and rank their importance as major or minor based on time, influence, andsupport (represented in Figure 1 by the circle size). Researcher observations were used to identify stakeholders,and researchers from each institution discussed and agreed upon the classification in terms of student learningand pre-service teacher education. The second step was to identify relationships between stakeholders andclassify these according to personal, professional or occasional (represented on the map by the weight of theline). The identification and classification was determined using the results of questionnaires, interviews, as wellas observations by researchers in the STEM Studios as well as video and audio recordings. The stakeholdermaps are presented in the results section. Interview data with stakeholders was also used to consider theimplications of stakeholder relationships for the design of STEM Studios and pre-service teacher education.Results and discussionThe stakeholders were identified for each of the STEM Studios in terms of design as well as enactment. Theidentified stakeholders included individuals from the host Universities (researchers, STEM Experts, preserviceCSCL 2017 Proceedings622© ISLSteachers, technical staff and teacher educators); schools (classroom teachers, students, principals, parents), andother (Commonwealth Government, Museum, Local Council, and Out of School Hours Care (OSHC) staff).Each of the STEM Studios was characterized by a different configuration of stakeholders, withinfluence specific to the purpose of their involvement. The high school STEM Studio included teacher educatorsas influential stakeholders, the middle school STEM Studio considered the teacher educators to be moderatelyinfluential, and the primary school STEM Studio did not include teacher educators as stakeholders. The middleschool STEM Studio involved important interactions with other government groups (e.g., museums), whereasthe primary school STEM Studio was conducted through the outside school hours care (OSHC) program.Differences between the design phase and enactment were observed in the influence assigned to stakeholders. Inthe primary school STEM Studio the influence of the STEM Experts was greater during enactment, as were theOSHC staff. The strength of relationships between these stakeholders were then determined These resultantstakeholder maps can be seen in Figure 1, which show the relative importance of the stakeholders by the size ofthe ellipses and the strength of the interaction by the weight of the connecting lines.DesignphaseEnactmentHigh school studentsMiddle school studentsPrimary school studentsFigure 1: Stakeholder maps for STEM Studio contexts, before and after the STEM Studio.Examination of the design phase maps shows few interactions between the stakeholders. Small, subnetworks existed within institution types, such as the school based networks and that between the communityorganisations in the middle-school situation. During enactment, the number of relationships increased, as did thecomplexity of the networks. In addition to highlighting the differences between the designs of each of the threeSTEM Studio variants, Figure 1 also demonstrates the difference in the focus. In the high school situation, thefocus is on preservice teachers. In the middle-school student stakeholder map, the focus is more balanced, withmany layers of network. The primary-school student stakeholder map shows the increased influence of OSHCstaff and STEM experts, during enactment. The number of connections was expected to be greater duringenactment, however, this did not occur uniformly, and the data collected through interviews and questionnairescan help to understand the implications for preservice teacher education.Initial analysis of the questionnaire data for the high school and primary school situations showedpositive changes in preservice teacher self-efficacy after teaching in the STEM Studio, particularly in regard toeffective instruction, motivating students and coping with change in the classroom. In both, preservice teachersworked with a variety of stakeholders including experienced educators (classroom teachers and OSHC staff).The importance of the collaboration is supported through the interview data in the high school situation: “Thisstrong collaboration between top scientists, tertiary educators and high school students has been an excellentCSCL 2017 Proceedings623© ISLSway to inspire students through engaging in innovative learning activities.” (classroom teacher). In the middleschool situation, preservice teachers reported a high level of confidence in developing approaches forcommunication with school students, but moderate for STEM knowledge and skills, and for pedagogicalknowledge related to inquiry approaches. The middle school situation is by far the most complex. Initialattempts to form a STEM Studio without broad community connections were unsuccessful. The resourcingrequired to initiate and support the STEM studio model could only be realised through a partnership approach.Each of the identified community partners corresponds to a different physical STEM Studio, and the STEMexperts at each influenced the learning outcomes identified through thematic coding of the qualitative responsesabout what students learned. Those at the Museum reported development of knowledge and understanding,while those located at the University reported on a sense of creativity, inspiration and enjoyment, both reportedsimilar identification of learning of skills.ConclusionsAs schools and universities move towards more inquiry and project-based learning approaches to teaching andlearning, particularly within the STEM fields and preservice teacher education in the STEM fields, we need tounderstand the necessary factors for the success of such approaches. We sought to expand our understanding toinclude the many stakeholders involved. In doing so, we considered the complexity of interactions that teachersneed to account for in the design of STEM Studios, and thus, how we prepare them to do so. This goes beyondcollaborative teaching, and moves closer to understanding some members of these networks as part of aninterdisciplinary team of educators, all of whom contribute expertise about pedagogy, subject matter, or aboutthe learners themselves. We need to prepare our preservice teachers to lead interdisciplinary teams of educators,with computer-based tools to support collaboration, if they are to negotiate the complexity of project-basedlearning approaches as observed in STEM Studios. Future work will consider these networks of stakeholders interms of power relationships and the identification, role and impact of key stakeholders.ReferencesBrandt, C. B., Cennamo, K., Douglas, S., Vernon, M., McGrath, M. & Reimer, Y. (2013). A theoreticalframework for the studio as a learning environment. International Journal of Technology DesignEducation, 23, 329-348.Bryson, J. (2004) What to do When Stakeholders Matter: Stakeholder Identification and Analysis Techniques.Public Management Review, 6 (1), 29-30.Courey, S. J., Tappe, P., Siker, J., & LePage, P. (2013). Improved lesson planning with universal design forlearning (UDL). Teacher Education and Special Education, 36(1), 7-27.Goodyear, P., Jones, C., Thompson, K. (2014). Computer-supported collaborative learning: Instructionalapproaches, group processes and educational designs. In, J. M. Spector, M. D. Merrill, J. Elen, M. J.Bishop (Eds.), Handbook of research on educational communications and technology, (pp. 439-451).New York: Springer.Hoadley, C., & Cox, C. (2009). What is design knowledge and how do we teach it? In, C. DiGiano, S. Goldman,& M. Chorost (Eds.), Educating learning technology designers: Guiding and inspiring creators ofinnovative educational tools, (pp. 19–35). NY: Routledge.Laurillard, D. (2012). Teaching as a Design Science: Building Pedagogical Patterns for Learning andTechnology. Abingdon, UK: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group.Prieto, L. P., Dimitriadis, Y., Asensio-Pérez, J. I., & Looi, C. K. (2015). Orchestration in learning technologyresearch: evaluation of a conceptual framework. Research in Learning Technology, 23.Rose, C. P., Gaesevic, D., Dillenbourg, P., Jo, Y., Tomar, G., Ferschke, O., Erkens, G., van Leeuwen, A.,Janssen, J., Brekelmans, M., Tan, J., Koh, E., Caleon, I. S., Jonathan, C. & Yang, S. (2016). Analyticsof social processes in learning contexts: A multi-level perspective. Paper presented at the 12thInternational Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2016), Singapore, 20-24 June 2016.Schon, D. A. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner: Toward a new design for teaching and learning in theprofessions. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Shaffer, D. W. (2005). Studio mathematics: The epistemology and practice of design pedagogy as a model formathematics learning (WCER Working Paper Series No. 2005-3). Madison, WI: University ofWisconsin-Madison, Wisconsin Center for Educational Research.The Art of Tinkering. (2015). Retrieved March, 2016, from http://tinkering.exploratorium.edu/Zeichner, K. (2010). Rethinking the Connections between Campus Courses and Field Experiences in Collegeand University-Based Teacher Education. Journal of Teacher Education, 61(1-2), 89-99.CSCL 2017 Proceedings624© ISLS