Learning the Learning Sciences:An Investigation of Newcomers’ Sociocultural IdeasYotam Hod, University of Haifa, yotamhod24@gmail.comOrnit Sagy, University of Haifa, ornit.sagy@gmail.comAbstract: The sociocultural perspective is one of the key ideas of the Learning Sciences. Forthe field to sustain and expand its collective knowledge and practices, it is vital to enculturatesociocultural thinking to new generations of scholars and practitioners. In this short paper, weadvance this goal by investigating the way students who study the Learning Sciences come toview learning from a sociocultural perspective. Here, we focus upon one case study within thecontext of an affiliate of the Network of Academic Programs in the Learning Sciences. Ourfindings indicate three ideas that signify sociocultural thinking: (1) Collaboration-as-learning;(2) Culture as relevant to learning; and (3) Learning as a process.Keywords: collaboration, enculturation, higher education, learning community, socioculturalThe teachers of the future will be knowledge workers… They will deeply understand the theoreticalprinciples and the latest knowledge about how children learn. (Sawyer, 2014, p. 730)IntroductionThe aim of this research is to elucidate the way students come to view learning from a sociocultural perspective.This is the subject of intense interest for the Learning Sciences (LS) research community, which has been deeplyinfluenced by sociocultural theories and seeks to sustain and expand its collective knowledge and practices to newgenerations of scholars and practitioners. While there have been many efforts to make LS content accessible tostudents, such as through textbooks like How People Learn (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000), an extensivecollection of webinars that cover the foundations of the discipline (isls-naples.psy.lmu.du), and in dozens ofinternational graduate programs, only few empirical studies relate to how students learn the ideas of the disciplineitself (e.g., Rogoff, 1994). By focusing upon the sociocultural perspective, we may not cover the entire field, butdo capture some of the most significant and complex ideas that newcomers must master to participate in LSdiscourse (Sawyer, 2014).This research is motivated by our experiences as graduate students, instructors, and researchers within aunique learning community: The Educational Technologies Graduate Program (Edtech) at the University of Haifa,Israel. Founded in 2005, Edtech has gradually grown over the years to include approximately 20 Master’s levelstudents in each of the two annual cohorts, 20 doctoral and post-doctoral researchers, and five full-time faculty.While LS literature has always been at the center of studies, Edtech formally joined the Network of AcademicPrograms in the Learning Sciences (NAPLeS) in 2013. From the very start, Edtech was designed to enculturateits students into the LS. One prominent design feature that was derived from this approach was the idea that theprocess of learning must match the content. As students study ideas such as communities of learners (Brown &Campione, 1994), they participate in a learning community (Hod & Ben-Zvi, 2014, 2015).We report upon a specific case of a master’s level student as a step in more generally elucidating the waystudents come to view learning from a sociocultural perspective. In the following section, we provide aninterpretation of the sociocultural perspective which provides the framework used to interpret our findings.BackgroundSociocultural theory is rooted in Vygotskian thought, and particularly in his idea that learning is mediated bycultural and historical tools that individuals internalize and appropriate as they are socialized throughout theirlifespans. Human higher mental functioning occurs first on an intermental plane, and with the aid of mediatorssuch as tools, signs, and language, it continues on an intramental plane (Wertsch, 2007). Such an “outside in”perspective contrasts sharply with cognitive views which emphasize learning processes which are initiated firstinside a person’s head, then socially, “inside out” (Collins & Bielaczyc, 1999).Vygotskian ideas have germinated into many directions (e.g., activity theory, distributed cognition). Dueto space considerations, we will limit ourselves to situated learning and the discursive approach. One majorICLS 2016 Proceedings807© ISLScontribution to situated learning is based on Lave and Wenger’s (1991) ideas of Communities of Practice (CoP).This view of learning “implies becoming a different person [and] involves the construction of identity” (p. 53).Meaning, learning is a process whereby a newcomer in a CoP, who is initially a legitimate peripheral participant,gradually takes on more meaningful roles within the CoP and thus enculturates its practices.Lave and Wenger’s sociocultural framework has become the basis of many key ideas within the LS,particularly due to its commitment to education (Sawyer, 2014). By identifying enculturation as a key constructin the learning process, researchers have found useful ways to talk about the problems of instructionist pedagogiesand to think in new ways about how to design for authentic learning. As Brown, Collins, and DuGuid (1989)pointed out, traditional education too often fails to give students experience in the relevant domain culture. Forexample, students learning mathematics in school may practice solving long lists of equations so they can performsuccessfully on a test, a practice that hardly resembles the way the community of practicing mathematiciansengage in their discipline. The implication of this view for schools has been to re-conceptualize classrooms fromplaces where knowledge is transmitted to learning communities (Bielaczyc, Kapur, & Collins, 2013). In taking acommunity perspective, an array of mediators beyond just transmitted content becomes the subject of educationaldesign.The discourse about learning and education in the years that followed these large insights was analysedby Sfard (1998), who very lucidly showed how this new “sociocultural way” of talking about learning stood incontrast to cognitive views. The key insight was that sociocultural views looked as learning as an action, whilecognitive views reified these actions into objects. These two views are expressed in discourse as differentmetaphors of learning. Whereas metaphors that are sociocultural include participation, being a part of, andenculturating, cognitive metaphors objectify these actions into knowledge and concepts that can be acquired andpossessed. This discursive perspective was not only useful in clarifying how these perspectives differed, itprovided a clear operationalization for analyzing students’ views on learning.We see these different but interrelated views of sociocultural thought as tools to examine students’developing sociocultural ideas. Given the situativity of learning, we don’t expect to find direct correlations ofstudents’ understandings with what we have presented here. Rather, we would like to examine the relationshipbetween students’ knowing about sociocultural ideas with their coming to be part of Edtech.MethodsThe findings presented here are part of a larger case study of Master’s level students within Edtech. This specificpaper follows one of these students. Our data sources included careful observations of face-to-face coursemeetings, online artifacts from students’ work, and periodic interviews. Data were analyzed using micro-genetictechniques, looking at a fine-grained level of detail at meaningful episodes of learning where they were situated.As our interpretations emerged throughout careful examination of the data, these were triangulated only aftermultiple sources of data were found.Preliminary findingsWe focus upon Andrea, a central member in the National English Teachers’ Community. Andrea entered Edtechas an experienced elementary school English teacher who engaged in numerous educational activities thateventually transformed into other professional roles. She received recognition for creating and maintaining a vastportal for online English learning resources. Moreover, Andrea was on national committees to develop Englishcurriculum and led teacher training programs. She received a national teacher of the year award.As an incoming student to Edtech, Andrea was immersed in numerous web communities such as Twitter,Google Plus, and the blogosphere. Andrea’s offline behavior in Edtech was consistent with her online activities.She was very social and popular with other students. Even in her studies, she was among the most active andcontributing student across all the courses that she participated in.Andrea was in many ways a perfect fit for Edtech due to her technological prowess and central role inthe teachers’ community, where there was heavy focus on practice and technology. This often contradicted thenorms of Edtech’s culture of learning, such as deep inquiry, revision, and collaboration. The contrasts betweenthese communities made Andrea an interesting case to study, which we report upon here.Sociocultural idea 1: Collaboration-as-pedagogy to collaboration-as-learningAlthough Andrea was a social person, her ideas about collaboration when she entered Edtech developedthroughout her studies. At the start, Andrea focused upon collaboration as a structured activity:ICLS 2016 Proceedings808© ISLSThe instructors around me can put in front of me all the good opportunities for learning, but theprocess itself I do by myself, alone. The community can sit together, the group can worktogether and in great collaboration and also with the product of a certain project that was builttogether, still the learning is personal, individualistic…By the end of the program, she shifts from talking about the pedagogical aspects of collaboration toconsidering its part within the learning process:Every word and every little bit... had to go through this thin sieve and those unforgiving eyesup to the process in which I learned to know that nothing can be taken for granted and ahead oftime I started thinking of all the directions I expected Nora to come with. Slowly we started towork collaboratively with mutual respect and the knowledge that the two of us together aremuch better than each of one on her own.Sociocultural idea 2: Culture as relevant to learningHalfway through the first semester of studies, Andrea took part in a collaborative activity where students wereasked to read Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning (Brown et al., 1989) and create concept maps torepresent their shared understandings of it. Andrea played a leading role in her group. The final version includedseparate collections of key terms from the article. However, there was no evidence that culture was in any waymeaningfully related to learning, rather, it was presented as an isolated idea.In reflecting about an incident towards the end of the first year, Andrea pinpointed the first time whereshe saw the relevance of the idea of culture in relation to learning:We knew where we are going and we knew what we want, but we didn’t know how to call ittill Cindy casually noted, “you want a change in the instructional culture.” And from there itwas clear what is the name of the place that we want to reach.Sociocultural idea 3: Learning as a process instead of productAndrea’s background attests to the product-orientation that she had as a learner upon entering the program. Withinthe first few weeks, the culture clash between her ways of working and the norms in Edtech created tension thatshe described. In her work culture, her practice was to complete tasks as efficiently as possible. But under a similarload in Edtech, she had to think about how to proceed so that she could learn in the best way possible. Her culturalhabits of getting things done created tension for her:There are critical assignments that must be implemented immediately. There is the conceptmap, initiatives, diary… So please someone explain how I can live with all this? Is it possible?Even if I slow down reality doesn’t change.By the end of the program, a noticeable shift in Andrea’s expectation of herself when faced with a heavy load wasevident. In the context of an ongoing collaboration that she had with another student, she showed deep appreciationof the role that the collaborative process has in learning, instead of racing to achieve a product:The process throughout the project... taught me what is design research and what is the placeof the whole process… If I wouldn’t have gone through all the mistakes we made andexperienced all the difficulties on the way, I wouldn't have reached all these insights… TodayI am at the start of the road.Discussion and conclusionsAs sociocultural thinking involves some of the most significant ideas of enculturating LS discourse, this ongoingstudy attempts to elucidate the way students come to view learning from this perspective. In the case presentedhere, we show some of Andrea’s preoccupations when she studied within a context that was designed based onICLS 2016 Proceedings809© ISLSsociocultural ideas, and where students study sociocultural content. We have found three ideas that are relevantto the development of sociocultural views.As we show in the background section, sociocultural thinking involves both ideas about learning andpedagogical ideas that stem from them. However, teachers entering programs such as Edtech often focus uponpedagogical ideas before they develop their understanding of the principles that underlie them. Andrea exemplifiesthe vital transformation in the first idea, collaboration-as-pedagogy to collaboration-as-learning, from focusingupon her situated experiences from a pedagogical lens into a learning lens.The idea and relevance of culture is fundamental to understanding sociocultural thinking. Without seeingthe relevance of culture to learning, Vygotsky’s entire idea of the interpersonal plane is lost. Likewise,participating within a CoP has no relevance if the community itself does not have certain norms or practices,which are the ingredients that form a culture. Thus, the second example where Andrea sees culture as relevant tolearning is a seemingly small, yet vital, step towards thinking socioculturally.In the third finding, the shift from viewing learning as a product to a process relates to Sfard’s discursiveview, where cognitivist perspectives see learning as an object, while the sociocultural perspective views learningas an action. The objectification of learning gives finality to the process. Once acquired, there is a final productthat has been achieved. In contrast, participation in action connotes a dynamic and never-ending process. Andrea’sfocus on learning as a list of tasks to be completed suggests that she didn’t recognize the ongoing activity as thelearning. Her reflection upon the process shows how she came to understand that everything that had to be doneon the way to these products was the learning.These three ideas are not the only aspects of sociocultural thinking, but do signify sociocultural thinking.If, as the conference theme states, we want to transform learning and empower learners, understanding thedevelopment of sociocultural ideas can help the LS accomplish these goals.ReferencesBielaczyc, K., Kapur, M., & Collins, A. (2013). Cultivating a community of learners in K-12 classrooms. In C. E.Hmelo-Silver, C. A. Zhang, C. K. Chan, & A. M. O’Donnell (Eds.), International handbook ofcollaborative learning (pp. 233–249), New York, NY: Routledge.Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (2000). How people learn: brain, mind, experience, and school(Expanded ed.). Washington, DC: National Academy Press.Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.),Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 229-272). Cambridge, MA.Collins, A., & Bielaczyc, K. (1999). The enculturation of educational thinking. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 8(1), 129-138.Hod, Y., & Ben-Zvi, D. (2015). Students negotiating and designing their collaborative learning norms: A groupdevelopmental perspective in learning communities. Interactive Learning Environments, 23(5), 578-594.Hod, Y., & Ben-Zvi, D. (2014). A group psychotherapeutic perspective on transforming participation in a learningcommunity. Instructional Science, 42(6), 949-970.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.Rogoff, B. (1994). Developing understanding of the idea of communities of learners. Mind, Culture, and Activity,1(4), 209-229.Sawyer, K. (Ed.) (2014). Grounding educational innovation in the learning sciences. The Cambridge handbook ofthe learning sciences: 2nd edition (pp. 726-746). NY, NY: Cambridge University Press.Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one. Educational Researcher,27(2), 4-13.Wertsch, J. V. (2007). Mediation. In H. Daniels, H., M. Cole, & J. V. Wertsch (Eds.). The Cambridge Companionto Vygotsky (pp. l78 - 192). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.ICLS 2016 Proceedings810© ISLS