Future Learning Spaces for Learning Communities:New Directions and Conceptual FrameworksYotam Hod (co-chair), University of Haifa, yotamhod24@gmail.comElizabeth S. Charles (co-chair), Dawson College, echarles@dawsoncollege.qc.caAlisa Acosta, University of Toronto, alisa.acosta@utoronto.caDani Ben-Zvi, University of Haifa, dbenzvi@univ.haifa.ac.ilMei-Hwa Chen, University at Albany, mchen@albany.eduKoun Choi, The Pennsylvania State University, kuchoi@psu.eduMichael Dugdale, John Abbott College, michael.dugdale@johnabbott.qc.caYael Kali, University of Haifa, yael.kali@gmail.comKevin Lenton, Vanier College, lentonk@vaniercollege.qc.caScott P. McDonald, The Pennsylvania State University, smcdonald@psu.eduTom Moher, University of Illinois at Chicago, moher@uic.eduRebecca M. Quintana, University of Toronto, rebeccamquintana@icloud.comMichael M. Rook, The Pennsylvania State University, michael@mrook.comJames D. Slotta, University of Toronto, jim.slotta@utoronto.caPhil Tietjen, The Pennsylvania State University, ptietjen@psu.eduPatrice L. Tamar Weiss, University of Haifa, plweiss@gmail.comChris Whittaker, Dawson College, cwhittaker@place.dawsoncollege.qc.caJianwei Zhang, University at Albany, jzhang1@albany.eduKaterine Bielaczyc (co-discussant), Clark University, kateb369@gmail.comManu Kapur (co-discussant), The Hong Kong Institute of Education, mkapur@ied.edu.hkAbstract: This symposium presents our efforts to reconceptualize learning spaces from theirtraditional notions as bound and immutable to a view in which the physical and socialboundaries are flexible and dynamically connected to the learning itself. We present the workfrom five international research centers that consider space as a multi-dimensional mediationaltool that shapes, and is shaped by, the learning communities who use them. In each case,researchers will present their innovative spaces along with the learning community frameworksthey use to describe and design them. Each study demonstrates specific insights regarding howto conceptualize and design Future Learning Spaces for Learning Communities.Keywords: design, future learning spaces, learning communities, socioculturalThe various arrangements among humans, computers, and space within a particularclassroom context impact the dynamics of the learning environments created. (Bielaczyc,2006, p. 304)The classroom is significant not just as a material location in which education research islocated..., but also as a conceived or imagined space—an imagined geography of a particularkind. (Leander, Phillips, & Taylor, 2010, p. 331)IntroductionThis symposium addresses the conference theme of Transforming Learning, Empowering Learners by unitingtwo theoretical issues of vital interest in the learning sciences: Future Learning Spaces (FLSs) and LearningCommunities (LCs). The timeliness of this conversation is critical given the current state of educational reformsaround the globe whereby large and expensive infrastructure decisions are being made such as in renovatingschools and classrooms. History has taught us that these reforms often fail to impact learning because they arebased on “more of the same” instructionist pedagogies (Cuban, 2001; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006) or fanciful“futurist” visions of physical learning environments that are not connected to any specific pedagogical principle.While there is often a great deal of hype in popular media about new educational architectures (1), such ideasfrequently overvalue the role of space without giving deep consideration to the principles of learning underlyingthese projects. Coherent frameworks that are based on principles derived from the learning sciences are needed toguide the construction and use of new spaces so they are used in pedagogically meaningful ways (Sawyer, 2014a).ICLS 2016 Proceedings1063© ISLSOur combined projects can offer important contributions to the exciting and ongoing LC research withinthe learning sciences. As LC thinking evolves, there are new possibilities for what can be done by considering thespaces where they are situated. For example, new technologies that are reported upon in this symposium allow fordistant knowledge building communities to learn from each other’s collective idea threads (see Zhang & Chen).Embedded “Wallscopes” allow students to carefully observe life cycles of multiple habitats within the walls ofone classroom (see Slotta, Cober, Acosta, & Moher). Pod-like furnishings and arrangements in undergraduatephysics classrooms promote active learning and community-based knowledge (see Charles, Whittaker, & Lenton).Flexible walls, easily combinable furniture, and embedded screens allow for opportunistic collaboration withinan emergent-design (see Ben-Zvi, Hod, Kali, & Weiss). Finally, open technology-enabled collaborative spacesallow multiple LCs to enact their practices (see Rook, McDonald, Choi, & Tietjen). Together, these projects showhow LCs can be refined by considering the way space constrain or give new opportunities to certain kinds ofactivities and practices.As there is greater public acceptance around the need to reshape educational spaces (The New YorkTimes, 2013), the learning sciences has an increasingly challenging role of translating its findings to the publicsphere. By deeply studying how learning communities interact with their physical environments, we hope to offera coherent vision to guide reform, which includes the physical and locational aspects of learning. While thissymposium is a small step forward in this disciplinary endeavor, it is invariably important to the goal oftransforming learning and empowering learners. In the following sections, we provide a background to theseissues in learning sciences research, laying the theoretical grounds to consider the five innovations in thissymposium.The future of learning and educationIt is important to interpret the emergence of the LC approach and FLSs within the present cultural and historicalcontext. Whereas knowledge and skill acquisition were once vital for economic growth in the industrial era,today’s society demands that its participants have more generic problem solving and communication skills,including the ability to find and learn from various media, solve ill-structured problems and collaborate with peers.Recent advances in technologies such as smartphones and online communities have significantly extendedopportunities for the development of these skills, increasingly questioning the relevance of traditional schooling(Sawyer, 2014b). It is becoming ever more important for education to customize learning, make use of diverseknowledge sources, specialize assessment, and provide opportunities for students to learn-by-doing. These newdemands in an emergent innovation society have led to incompatibilities with the traditional educational system,such that many consider the current disruptions as revolutionary (Collins & Halverson, 2009).While the learning and education that will take place in the future is still a matter of some conjecture,learning sciences research on FLSs and LCs are closely connected with this developing trend, and can help guidethe complex transition through a rigorously advanced body of knowledge. Whereas classrooms have traditionallybeen seen as immutable containers for the transmission of knowledge, today issues of space have entered learningsciences research to support the new demands on education and learning. Likewise, innovations in educationalthinking over the past several decades have led researchers and practitioners to develop coherent classroomdesigns that capture the large ideas of a new theory of learning (Brown & Campione, 1994). Together, FLSs andLCs offer two key interrelated perspectives that stand at the heart of the disruptions in education and which havethe potential to transform learning and empower learners for the 21st century innovation society (Facer, 2014).Learning communitiesOne of the useful ways that learning scientists have approached the problem of re-conceiving and re-designingeducation has been by adopting sociocultural perspectives of learning. Rooted in Vygotskian thought, thisperspective views learning as mediated by cultural and historical tools that individuals internalize as they aresocialized throughout their lifespan (Wertsch, 2007). Educational researchers have extended this view byconsidering learning as a matter of transformational participation in certain ways of knowing (Rogoff, 1994), suchas in the practices or discourse of particular communities (Lave & Wenger, 1991). In this perspective, the designof educational content and learning environments moves beyond the domain of transmitted content.LCs, which are a translation of these theoretical ideas into practice (Bielaczyc & Collins, 1999), havebeen a long-standing interest of the learning sciences (2). Early studies advocated LC models as a means oftransforming classrooms to be relevant for contemporary society (e.g., Brown & Campione, 1994; Scardamalia &Bereiter, 2006). In addition to establishing a culture of learning that emphasized collective knowledge building,these LC models valued contributions of diverse members, advanced collective knowledge, emphasized learninghow to learn, and developed mechanisms for sharing the community’s knowledge (Bielaczyc & Collins, 1999).Based on the LCs framework and spurred by emerging collaborative technologies, the past 20 years has seen aICLS 2016 Proceedings1064© ISLSproliferation of exciting ideas and models. These have come about within various educational settings like schools(e.g., Herrenkohl & Mertl, 2010; Hogan & Corey, 2001), universities (Fischer, Rohde, & Wulf, 2007; Hod & BenZvi, 2014), professional settings (Stoll, Bolam, McMahon, Wallace, & Thomas, 2006), informal settings (3), andmore recently online (e.g., Kafai & Fields, 2013; Kidron & Kali, 2015; Resnick et al., 2009).Learning spacesAlong with new conceptions of pedagogies, activities, and assessment practices that have come with LCs, spacehas gained relevance as a mediator of social configurations and interactions for students’ transformation ofparticipation (Jordan & Henderson, 1995). One line of research that has emerged is the exploration of how physicalarrangements are designed meaningfully to foster students’ trajectories from vernacular discourses and peripheralparticipation to authentic discourse and practices (Roth et al, 1999).This increased focus on socio-materiality has come as part of a growing recognition that space is onlyone among the ubiquitous mediating structures that support the development and distribution of cognition incomplex relationships (Pea, 1993). Instead of treating learners and their contexts separately, research on learningspaces emphasizes space within the other situationally related tools such as activity, social or epistemic norms,assessment, and learning trajectories. This integrated view of space and the mutual fertilization of mediators withinlearning ecologies is one of the greatest opportunities and challenges of coming to theorize the role of space inlearning.An additional factor is the concept of learning space itself. While space is often considered as the physicalor locational aspects of a room (e.g., Moher et al., 2015), there is also recognition that space is socially constructed.Meaning, space can be seen as not just a material object in a learning environment, but as an “imagined geography”(Leander, et al., 2010, p. 331). The idea behind a “fun space” or even “future learning space” are examples of thetype of ongoing negotiation around this idea. New mobilities of learning due to the changing social spaces affordedby new technologies make such conceptions increasingly relevant (Leander, et al., 2010).Symposium structureTo put into practice some of the common ideas that the contributors seek to present, this symposium will beorganized as an interactive poster session so that participants can be active and develop collective knowledge(e.g., Kali et al., 2015). The format of the session will include an introduction, led by the session co-chairs, whichdescribes our framework to consider five diverse, international lines of research on FLSs for LCs. Following this,contributors will briefly describe their research to the participants, who will engage in interactive discussionsaround each poster. The co-discussants will then provide their perspectives, which will be followed by amoderated whole group discussion. To support this session, we will create a shared online space, consisting oflinked Google documents where participants will add and discuss their ideas.Interconnecting the knowledge spaces of different communities for sustainedknowledge buildingJianwei Zhang and Mei-Hwa ChenReal-world knowledge-creating communities achieve productivity through sustained inquiry and progressivediscourse by which ideas are continually developed, refined, and built upon, giving rise to more advancedconceptualizations and deeper goals (Sawyer, 2007). Such efforts are further supported by interactions acrosscommunities that work as an interconnected intellectual field (Csikszentmihalyi, 1999). Educational efforts tocreate LCs for knowledge building need to enable similar social and cognitive dynamics sustained over longperiods of time (Engle, 2006). This research aims to create socio-technological spaces that connect the knowledgeof different communities across classrooms and school years. Existing designs of collaboration across LCs relyon directly sharing the original online discussion space—a single layer sharing. However, doing so proves difficult(Laferrière et al., 2012), as it requires students to read the messy and lengthy discourse of others to understandtheir progress, causing high cognitive and collaboration load (Dillenbourg & Bétrancourt, 2006).This project adopts a multilevel design to create a macro-level, cross-community knowledge space onthe top of the discourse spaces of different local communities. The macro-level knowledge space is enabled bythe platform of Connecting Idea Threads of Youth (CITY) developed on the basis of Idea Thread Mapper (ITM),a Web-based tool to trace conceptual trajectories in long-term online discourse (Chen et al., 2013). CITYinteroperates with Knowledge Forum (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006) and other tools for collaborative discourse.As members in each community engage in sustained discourse in their protected online space, they review theirunfolding idea threads, each of which consists of a set of idea contributions that address a shared theme or problemICLS 2016 Proceedings1065© ISLS(Zhang et al., 2007). Organizing distributed discourse entries into timeline-based idea threads helps to make thecollective progress visible for reflection. Different communities then select and publish productive idea threadsfor cross-community sharing and build-on. Social interactions in CITY allow members to discover, follow,comment, cluster, and adopt the idea threads from different communities for mutual learning and dynamic ideacontact.A series of design-based studies have been conducted in Grade 3-6 classrooms (Zhang et al., 2013, 2014,2015). Students engaging in collaborative reflection on unfolding idea threads were able to develop moreconnected and sustained discourse to address deepening issues. They further compared their own idea threadswith those of other communities. Doing so helped them to better monitor their advances and weak areas, examinediverse perspectives, and adopt helpful questions, ideas, and inquiry resources to enrich their discourse.Knowledge construction in the instrumented classroom: Supporting studentinvestigations of their physical learning environmentJames D. Slotta, Rebecca M. Quintana, Alisa Acosta and Tom MoherWe present research that leverages the physical classroom space to support a knowledge community in aclassroom (e.g., Brown & Campione, 1996; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006). Our pedagogical model, known asKnowledge Community and Inquiry (KCI), builds on the foundation of knowledge communities, with an addedmajor emphasis on scaffolded inquiry (Slotta & Linn, 2009). The present research was conducted within aninstructional environment referred to as Embedded Phenomena for Inquiry Communities (EPIC; Slotta,Tissenbaum, Lui, & Zukowski 2012), where KCI was applied as a pedagogical model to develop a knowledgecommunity for elementary students to investigate Embedded Phenomena. In EPIC classrooms, students workcollaboratively (i.e., in small groups) and collectively, sharing information and solving problems. Interactions,including the exchange of data and theories, are carefully designed to support the growth of collective knowledgeconcerning the EP under investigation, as captured in various representational forms.We employed the WallCology EP as the setting for whole-class inquiry, targeting life sciences topics ofbiodiversity and population ecologies (Moher et al, 2008). Over several weeks, 42 students from two grade-5/6classes observed a digital ecosystem consisting of dynamic animations of insects and vegetation, visible throughdisplay monitors called “Wallscopes.”. The ecosystem comprised four differentiated but interconnected habitats,one on each wall of the classroom, which varied in terms of environmental conditions (temperature, light andhumidity). In our EPIC activity, students made observations about the morphologies and behaviors of organismsto determine their life cycle relationships. Constructing a representation of the lifecycles of any species was achallenging task; it was not always clear which organism belonged to which species (e.g., does the adult form ofthe “green bug” hatch from the white egg or blue egg?). It required careful observation (and maybe a bit of luck)for students to actually “see” life events like laying and hatching unfold. Additionally, since each monitordisplayed a different habitat, students at one monitor see something different than students at another monitor,necessitating the sharing of observational data across various locations in the room, and over time.The goal of EPIC is to create a more powerful means of sharing and working with such observations, byaggregating individual or group inquiry actions, encouraging teacher and students to attend to interesting patternsin the data, revealing gaps or conflicts in the collection, where more work is needed. The present paper analyzesthe role of various visualizations of aggregate knowledge in supporting patterns of discourse within thecommunity.Designing active learning spaces to foster collaborationElizabeth S. Charles, Chris Whittaker, Kevin Lenton, and Michael DugdaleGiving serious consideration to changing the instructional paradigm to more active student participation,universities and colleges have begun to invest in the redesign of learning spaces (e.g., Beichner et al., 2007; Dori& Belcher, 2004). Often referred to as active learning classrooms (ALCs), the architecture and furnishingsintentionally use pod-like arrangements of 4-10 students to promote small group collaboration and multipletechnologies for intra- and inter-group sharing. In doing so, ALCs call for the leveraging of grounding activities(Clark & Brennan, 1991) and devices that support the indexical referring made possible through shared perceptualspaces (Roschelle & Clancey, 1992). What is often overlooked in these scenarios of designing ALCs is theplanning for the adoption of such pedagogical innovations by the users, instructors and students alike. In short,the move toward distributed authority systems puts new demands on students and instructors. It challengesstudents to take on a sense of collective responsibility (Scardamalia, 2002) and shared epistemic agency (Damşa,ICLS 2016 Proceedings1066© ISLSKirschner, Andriessen, Erkens & Sins, 2010), while requiring instructors to take up new pedagogical practices(Lasry, Charles & Whittaker, 2014).Our contribution is based on the work of a cross-institutional researcher-practitioner team made up oflearning scientists and physics instructors, at the college level in Quebec. Members of the team have been directlyinvolved in designing and fostering the effective use of ALCs over a six year period. Using reflexivemethodologies of action research and design-based research, the team has studied processes involved in adoptingand effectively using ALCs to promote learning and change instructional practices. In particular, our actionresearch has documented the development of LCs to support changing practices for instructors. Our current designresearch involves comparing the implications of the three primary models of ALCs within the college network.Differences between the ALCs models hinge on the types of perceptual spaces they provide the student groups(public vs. private, networked vs. singular, interactive vs. static) and the flexibility of the group configurations(fixed tables vs. flexible tables). These studies expand our understanding of how ALCs function and the rolesstudent LCs play in determining how resources within these new spaces are used. For this session we will drawcommonalities derived from these diverse case studies and suggest guidelines that support meaningful jointactivity mediated by the physical space and pedagogical commitment.Design of a future learning space based on learning community principlesDani Ben-Zvi, Yotam Hod, Yael Kali, and Patrice L.Tamar WeissWe have been involved in a long-term design-based research study that has examined various aspects of our LC,situated within the Educational Technologies Graduate Program at the University of Haifa. The distinguishingprinciples of this LC include a (1) design for enculturation; (2) emergent-design; and (3) humanistic orientation.As a significant part of a recent Israeli Science Foundation Center of Excellence grant, we have been engaged ina large-scale project to design and construct a new facility to house our program, giving us the opportunity toscrutinize the relationship between LCs and FLSs. Below we describe three space innovations that correspond toour LC design.To support enculturation of scientific practices, the space is designed to provide students opportunitiesto learn-to-be as well as to learn about content. Therefore, we coordinate between the processes and content oflearning. For example, students study about LCs as they participate in one. We have accordingly designed part ofthe FLS to include research facilities, giving graduate students direct access to authentic practitioners to foster theenculturation of research practices (Hod & Sagy, 2015).Flexibility is a key design aspect of the space based on the emergent-design principle. Our FLS willemploy an innovative design called learning niches, which are noise-reducing partitions that fold in and out of thewalls such that small groups of students can meet in private, with minimal interference from others but quicklybe reconfigured to support interaction with the whole class. Other ways that we support flexibility are with easilymoveable and combinable furniture, and an any-to-any communication system supported by embedded multitouch screens, allowing for individuals or groups to collaborate with others via video, either inside or outside theFLS.One unique aspect of our LC is its humanistic orientation. By this, we mean extended efforts to get toknow one another, such that group dynamics (Hod & Ben-Zvi, 2015) and transformative changes in identities andlong-held learning practices are challenged and negotiated (Gee, 2001; Hod & Ben-Zvi, 2014). To support thecreation of a safe space so that students can engage in such intimate processes within a university setting, one ofour main principles was to design the space with plants, rugs, a coffee bar, and warm colors to give it an invitingfeeling. Likewise, we have repurposed several unused outdoor spaces with wooden decks and comfortable seating.Facilitating bridges of practice among multiple learning communitiesMichael M. Rook, Scott P. McDonald, Koun Choi, and Phil TietjenThe Krause Innovation Studio on the campus of Penn State University is a technology-enabled and bring-yourown-device learning space designed to facilitate group collaboration and serendipitous learning interactions. TheStudio also supports pedagogical innovation through staff consultations with faculty on learning theory, tools, andaffordances of space. The Studio is arranged into learning pods and spaces; each pod/space is designed to facilitatesharing work via large screens. The Studio’s design is grounded in communities of practice (Wenger, 1998), andit specifically considered how LCs form and are sustained (Rook, Choi, & McDonald, 2015). In the four years ofthe Studio’s existence, the research team has collected iterative sets of data to investigate how LCs develop in theless goal-driven, open and collaborative spaces of the Studio. These data include: interviews with stakeholdersICLS 2016 Proceedings1067© ISLSduring the design and construction of the space; spatial use data (e.g., seating sweeps) collected over three years;and most recently phenomenological interviews focused on users’ experiences of the space. The data collectedthus far combine to provide an opportunity for our team to characterize the emergent and nascent aspects of anLC in an FLS designed to facilitate bridges of practice among multiple LCs.The complexity of investigating informal, open and intentionally collaborative spaces has led theresearch team to explore multiple methods and a variety of theoretical frameworks to understand how several,overlapping LCs enact their practices. Initial research led to the characterization of design principles describingthe learning theory-driven design decisions during the Studio’s development: learning spaces should scaffoldauthentic practices; allow for multiple representations of learning; and be pedagogically responsive (Rook et al.,2015). These design principles are empirical and theoretically grounded in ideas about LCs.The iterative studies also have provided us with two preliminary themes around how learners use thespace. First, learners engage in a joint enterprise of knowledge construction (Wenger, 1998). However, unlike intraditional classrooms, joint enterprise in a FLS designed to support multiple learning communities does notnecessarily map onto shared goals in the same way; instead, knowledge construction involves local goals,potentially as idiosyncratic as each LC in the space. Second, learners have a shared repertoire of practicesincluding, but not limited to: tacit interactions, spontaneous meet-ups, and a shared sense of agency in howlearners choose pods/spaces. We will present these themes with exemplars and inform the shared discussion bycontributing an understanding of how multiple LCs interact within a shared, open, and goal-diverse learning space.Endnotes(1) Some examples can be found here: http://www.techinsider.io/the-13-most-innovative-schools-in-the-world-2015-9(2) See lc.edtech.haifa.ac.il/injls for a list of articles within the Journal of the Learning Sciences that use LC frameworks.(3) www.computerclubhouse.orgReferencesBeichner, R. J., Saul, J. M., Abbott, D. S., Morse, J. J., Deardorff, D., Allain, R. J. & Risley, J. S. (2007). Thestudent-centered activities for large enrollment undergraduate programs (SCALE-UP) project. ResearchBased Reform of University Physics, 1(1), 2-39.Bielaczyc, K., & Collins, A. (1999). Learning communities in classrooms: A reconceptualization of educationalpractice. In C. M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional design theories and models: A new paradigm ofinstructional theory (pp. 269-292). Mahwah NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Brown, A. L. & Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.)Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 229-272). Cambridge, UK:The MIT Press.Charles, E. S., Whittaker, C. (2015). Active learning spaces: Blending technology and orchestration. In O.Lindwall, P. Hakkinen, T. Koschmann, T. Tchounikine, & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.). Exploring the MaterialConditions of Learning: The CSCL Conference, Volume I (pp. 225-226). Gothenburg, Sweden: ISLS.Chen, M.-H., Zhang, J. & Lee, J. (2013). Making collective progress visible for sustained knowledge building. InN. Rummel, M., Kapur, M. Nathan, & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), Learning across Levels of Space, Time,and Scale: The CSCL Conference, Volume I (pp. 81-88). Maidson, WI: ISLS.Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L.B. Resnick, J. M. Levine, & S. D.Teasley (Eds.). Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition (pp. 127-149). Washington DC: APA.Collins, A., & Halverson, R. (2009). Rethinking education in the age of technology: The digital revolution andschooling in America. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1999). Implications of a systems perspective for the study of creativity. In R. J. Sternberg(Ed.), Handbook of creativity (pp. 313-335). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Cuban, L. (2001). Oversold and underused: Computers in the classroom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard.Damşa, C. I., Kirschner, P. A., Andriessen, J. E., Erkens, G., & Sins, P. H. (2010). Shared epistemic agency: Anempirical study of an emergent construct. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(2), 143-186.Dillenbourg, P., & Bétrancourt, M. (2006). Collaboration load. In J. Elen and R. E. Clark (Eds.), Handlingcomplexity in learning environments: Research and theory (pp. 142-163). Pergamon.Dori, Y. & Belcher, J. (2004). How does technology-enabled active learning affect undergraduate studentsunderstanding of electromagnetism concepts? The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 243-279.Engle, R. A. (2006). Framing interactions to foster generative learning: A situative explanation of transfer in acommunity of learners classroom. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(4), 451-498.Facer, K. (2014). What is space for? Towards a politics and a language for the human in education. Technology,Pedagogy and Education, 23(1), 121-126.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1068© ISLSFischer, G., Rohde, M., & Wulf, V. (2007). Community-based learning: The core competency of residential,research-based universities. Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2(1), 9-40.Gee, J. P. (2001). Identity as an Analytic Lens for Research in Education. Review of Educational Research, 25,99–125.Herrenkohl, L. R., & Mertl, V. (2010). How students come to be, know, and do. Cambridge University Press.Hod, Y., & Ben-Zvi, D. (2014). A group psychotherapeutic perspective on transforming participation in a learningcommunity. Instructional Science, 42(6), 949-970.Hod, Y., & Ben-Zvi, D. (2015). Students negotiating and designing their collaborative learning norms: A groupdevelopmental perspective in learning communities. Interactive Learning Environments, 23(5), 578-594.Hod, Y., & Sagy, O. (2015). Enculturating enculturation: A meta-synthesis of the learning sciences’ discourseand designs. In O. Lindwall, P. Hakkinen, T. Koschmann, T. Tchounikine, & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.),Exploring the Material Conditions of Learning: The CSCL Conference, Volume II (pp. 773-774).Sweden: ISLS.Hogan, K., & Corey, C. (2001). Viewing classrooms as cultural contexts for fostering scientific literacy.Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 32(2), 214-243.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39-103.Kafai, Y. B., Fields, D. A., & Burke, W. Q. (2010). Entering the clubhouse: Case studies of young programmersjoining the online Scratch communities. Journal of Organizational and End-User Computing, 22(2), 2135.Kali, Y., Tabak, I., Ben-Zvi, D., et al. (2015). Technology-enhanced learning communities on a continuumbetween ambient to designed: What can we learn by synthesizing multiple research perspectives?. In O.Lindwall, P. Koschman, T. Tchounikine, & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.), Exploring the Material Conditions ofLearning: The Computer Supported Collaborative Learning Conference (CSCL), Volume II (pp. 615622). Gothenburg, Sweden: The International Society of the Learning Sciences.Kidron, A., & Kali, Y. (2015). Boundary breaking for interdisciplinary learning. Research in LearningTechnology, 23.Laferriere, T., Law, N., & Montané, M. (2012). An international knowledge building network for sustainablecurriculum and pedagogical innovation. International Education Studies, 5, 148-160.Lasry, N., Charles, E.S., & Whittaker, C. (2014). When teacher-centered instructors are assigned to studentcentered classrooms. Physical Review Special Topics-Physics Education Research, 10(1), 1–9.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, England:Cambridge University Press.Leander, K. M., Phillips, N. C., & Taylor, K. H. (2010). The changing social spaces of learning: Mapping newmobilities. Review of Research in Education, 34(1), 329-394.Moher, T., Uphoff, B., Bhatt, D., López Silva, B., & Malcolm, P. (2008). WallCology: Designing interactionaffordances for learner engagement in authentic science inquiry. In Proceedings of the SIGCHIConference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 163-172). ACM.Moher, T., Slotta, J. D., Acosta, A., Cober, R. M., Dasgupta, C., Fong, C., Gnoli, A., Silva, A., Silva, B. L.,Perritano, A., & Peppler, K. (2015) Knowledge construction in the instrumented classroom: supportingstudent investigations of their physical learning environment. In O. Lindwall, P. Hakkinen, T.Koschmann, T. Tchounikine, & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.), Exploring the Material Conditions of Learning:The CSCL Conference, Volume II. Gothenburg, Sweden: ISLS.Pea, R. D. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributedcognitions: Psychological and educational considerations (pp. 47-87). Cambridge, UK: CambridgeUniversity Press.Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Monroy-Hernandez, A., Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., Brennan, K., Millner, A., Rosenbaum,E., Silver, J., Silverman, B., and Kafai, Y. (2009). Scratch: Programming for all. ACM, 52(11), 60–67.Rogoff, B. (1994). Developing understanding of the idea of communities of learners. Mind, Culture, and Activity,1(4), 209-229.Rook, M. M., Choi, K., & McDonald, S. P. (2015). Learning theory expertise in the design of learning spaces:Who needs a seat at the table? Journal of Learning Spaces, 4(1), 1-13.Roschelle, J., & Clancey, W. J. (1992). Learning as social and neural. Educational Psychologist, 27(4), 435-453.Roth, W. M., McGinn, M. K., Woszczyna, C., & Boutonne, S. (1999). Differential participation during scienceconversations: The interaction of focal artifacts, social configurations, and physical arrangements.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8(3-4), 293-347.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1069© ISLSSawyer, K. (Ed.) (2014a). Introduction: The new science of learning. The Cambridge handbook of the learningsciences: Second edition (pp. 1-20). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Sawyer, K. (Ed.) (2014b). Conclusion: The future of learning: Grounding educational innovation in the learningsciences. The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences: Second edition (pp. 726-746). New York,NY: Cambridge University Press.Sawyer, R. K. (2007). Group genius: The creative power of collaboration. New York: Basic Books.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In R. K. Sawyer(Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97-115). New York: Cambridge UniversityPress.Slotta, J.D. & Linn. M.C. (2009). Designing effective collaborative inquiry: New technology frameworks.Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning.Volume 2 (pp. 34-36). Rhodes, Greece: ISLS.Slotta, J.D., Tissenbaum, M., Lui, M., & Zukowski, M. (2012). Smart classrooms for knowledge communities:EPIC technology environment. Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference of the LearningSciences, Volume II (pp. 64-71). Sydney, Australia: ISLS.Stoll, L., Bolam, R., McMahon, A., Wallace, M., & Thomas, S. (2006). Professional learning communities: Areview of the literature. Journal of Educational Change, 7(4), 221-258.The New York Times. (2013). The Education Issue: The All-Out, All-Ages Overhaul of School Is Happening Now.New York City: New York Times.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. New York, NY: CambridgeUniversity Press.Wertsch, J. V. (2007). Mediation. In H. Daniels, H., M. Cole, & J. V. Wertsch (Eds.). The Cambridge companionto Vygotsky (pp. l78 - 192). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Zhang, J., Chen, M.-H., Chen, J., & Mico, T. F. (2013). Computer-Supported Metadiscourse to Foster CollectiveProgress in Knowledge-Building Communities. In N. Rummel, M., Kapur, M. Nathan, & S. Puntambekar(Eds.), Learning across Levels of Space, Time, and Scale: The CSCL Conference, Volume II (pp.197200). Madison, WI: ISLS.Zhang, J., Chen, M.-H., Tao, D., Sun, Y., Lee, J., & Judson, D. (2015). Fostering Sustained Knowledge Buildingthrough Metadiscourse Aided by the Idea Thread Mapper. In N. Rummel, M., Kapur, M. Nathan, & S.Puntambekar (Eds.), Exploring the Material Conditions of Learning: The CSCL Conference, Volume II.Gothenburg, Sweden: ISLS.Zhang, J., Lee, J., & Chen, J. (2014). Deepening Inquiry about Human Body Systems through ComputerSupported Collective Metadiscourse. Annual Meeting of AERA, Philadelphia, PA.Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Lamon, M., Messina, R., & Reeve, R. (2007). Socio-cognitive dynamics of knowledgebuilding in 9- and 10-year-olds. Educational Technology Research and Development, 55, 117–145.AcknowledgementsWe thank the participants and discussants for investing valued time and effort into making quality contributionsand reviewing the introduction and background collectively. This work was supported by the I-CORE Programof the Planning and Budgeting Committee and the Israel Science Foundation grant [1716/12].ICLS 2016 Proceedings1070© ISLS