Secondary Students’ Model-Based Reasoning about EarthSystems: Practice, Epistemology, and Conceptual UnderstandingCory T. Forbes, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, cory.forbes@unl.eduMark A. Chandler, Columbia University, mac59@columbia.eduDevarati Bhattacharya, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, devarati@unl.eduTina Vo, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, tina.vo@huskers.unl.eduJane Griffin, Groundwater Foundation, jane.griffin@groundwater.orgAbstract: To become scientifically-literate, students must develop competence with the use ofcomputer-based models to reason about Earth systems. In this poster presentation, we shareearly-stage work spanning multiple projects using technology-enabled modeling tools groundedin ‘big data’ with students in secondary science learning environments. The poster willshowcase the modeling tools and design-based research approaches, as well as provide a contextfor discussion about theoretical, empirical, and design aspects of the projects.IntroductionToday’s most pressing global challenges span Earth systems at local, regional, and global scales. The problemsolvers and innovators who will be faced with addressing these challenges must develop scientific literacy.Models are a critical tool with which scientists study and seek to solve these challenges. Scientists use computerbased modeling tools grounded in ‘big data’ to both explain and predict systems-level phenomena. Whiletechnology-enabled tools have been a core focus for learning scientists for many years, there remains a great dealto learn about how to make these modeling tools available to students in meaningful ways and support theirproductive by students to reason about Earth systems. We are engaged in early-stage design-based research acrossmultiple grant-funded projects to implement computer-based modeling tools in secondary (high school)classrooms. This work is grounded in a theoretically- and empirically-grounded learning performancesframework for model-based reasoning about Earth systems. The purpose of this poster presentation is to a) sharepreliminary findings from project research and b) interrogate and revisit this framework as both a theoretical andanalytical tool for understanding and studying secondary students’ model-based reasoning.Computer-based modeling toolsOur current work involves two computer-based modeling tools: The Hydrogeology Challenge (HGC) and EasyGlobal Climate Model (EzGCM). Both provide technology-enabled interfaces that allow students to ‘shortcut’the complex computations that commonly underlie numerical models. The HGC (Fig. 1) is an online, computerbased learning tool used to explore hydrologic concepts associated with subsurface water. Developed by a U.S.based non-profit organization, the HGC makes national geologic and hydrologic datasets accessible to students.Within the HGC interface, students conduct simulation-based experiments to investigate how groundwater flows,factors affecting flow rates, including gradient, porosity, and substrate. These experiments are embedded withinboth real and hypothetical real-world scenarios involving water issues.Figure 1: Hydrogeology Challenge Screenshot.Figure 2: EZ Global Climate Model Screenshot.EzGCM (Fig. 2), developed at Columbia University in cooperation with the NASA Goddard Institute forSpace Studies, is a web-based global climate modeling suite designed to provide non-scientists with authenticclimate modeling experiences. Drawing from NASA’s GCM development program and using actual data fromU.S. global climate modeling efforts, EzGCM streamlines and makes transparent the key features of climatemodels that help scientists simulate and analyze Earth’s climate system. Through EzGCM, students are able toICLS 2018 Proceedings1397© ISLSparticipate in the science of climate modeling, including running simulations, post-processing model output,analyzing model results by creating scientific visualizations, and communicating results, all crucial epistemicpractices through which students engage in model-based reasoning about Earth’s climate.A learning performance framework for scientific modelingCompetency with scientific modeling requires students develop abilities to use models in ways that mirror thepractices of science to reason about natural phenomena. Modeling competence is developed through interactionsbetween the learner, the model, and the real-world phenomenon. We draw upon Harré’s (1970) concept of‘projective convention’, situated and activity-based perspectives on learning and expertise (e.g., Engeström,2008), and scientific modeling in educational contexts (e.g., Schwarz et al., 2009) to foreground the practicebased and integrated nature of scientific modeling. Competence is defined by ‘knowledge of’ scientific modelsand modeling, as well as how users apply models to make sense of natural phenomena. These assumptions arecaptured in student learning performances (Krajcik, McNeill, & Reiser, 2007), which define practice-basedevidence of learning. The learning performances framework we articulate for scientific modeling is comprisedof three dimensions: modeling practices, epistemic dimensions of modeling, and disciplinary concepts.Research methodsBoth projects involve design-based research (Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004) to engage in iterativedevelopment of curriculum, refinement of the modeling tools, creation of research measures that embodytheoretical constructs, and data collection and analysis. Curriculum development involves a process of constructcentered design (Shin et al., 2010), through which the modeling tools are being piloted in eight secondary scienceclassrooms in the United States. We are collecting a diverse set of data in these classrooms, including studentassessments and artifacts, clinical interviews, observational data, and implementation logs.Preliminary findings and points of discussionPreliminary analyses of project data point to key aspects that will lead to productive discussions with conferenceparticipants. First, even though the learning tasks in the curriculum modules are designed to target all theoreticallearning performances, evidence for some performances is far more robust than others. Is this reflective ofstudents’ model-based reasoning within these domains, or perhaps reflective of limitations in learningenvironments design and/or measurement of anticipated student outcomes? Second, what are core epistemicelements of scientific modeling, and perhaps scientific practice more generally? While the learning performancesframework embodies contemporary perspectives on epistemological dimensions of modeling in science, not allhave proven to be equally useful and/or applicable as educational design heuristics or research constructs. Whatare key aspects of models and modeling that make them scientific? What levels of conceptual understanding dostudents exhibit and what levels should they be expected to attain? How do they manifest themselves in certainmodeling practices in which students engage to investigate natural phenomena? Conversations about the natureof epistemology as it applies to Earth systems modeling using technology-enabled tools will help clarify epistemicdimensions of students’ model-based reasoning about Earth systems.ReferencesCollins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design research: theoretical and methodological issues. TheJournal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15-42.Engeström, Y. (2008). From design experiments to formative interventions. In G. Kanselaar, V. Jonker, P.Kirschner, & F. Prins (Eds.) Proceedings of the 8th International Conference of the Learning Sciences,(pp. 3-24). Utrecht, The Netherlands.Harré, R. (1970). Constraints and restraints. Metaphilosophy, 1(4), 279-299.Krajcik, J., McNeill, K. L., & Reiser, B. (2007). Learning-goals-driven design model: Developing curriculummaterials that align with national standards and incorporate project-based pedagogy. Science Education,92(1), 1-32.Schwarz, C., Reiser, B., Davis, E. A., Kenyon, L., Acher, A., Fortus, D., Krajcik, J. (2009). Developing a learningprogression for scientific modeling: Making scientific modeling accessible and meaningful for learners.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(6), 632-654.Shin, N., Stevens, S. Y., & Krajcik, J. (2010). Tracking student learning over time using construct-centered design.In S. Rodrigues (Ed.), Using analytical frameworks for classroom research: Collecting data andanalyzing narrative (pp. 38-58). London, England: Taylor & Francis.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation (DRL-1720838) and USDANIFA (#2017-68010-25953). Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in thismaterial are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of these Federal agencies.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1398© ISLS