Authentic Learning and Teaching in an Out-of-School Lab - FirstSteps Towards Empirical Investigation of a Theoretical ModelValentina Nachtigall, Angelina Keuschnig, Lena Behrendt, and Laura Brunevalentina.nachtigall@rub.de, angelina.keuschnig@rub.de, lena.behrendt-x32@rub.de, laura.schroeder@rub.deRuhr-Universität BochumAbstract: Out-of-school labs (OSLs) aim at fostering students’ interest in natural or socialsciences by engaging them in authentic learning. However, definitions of authentic learningand explanations of its effectiveness are diverse. Therefore, Betz, Flake, Mierwald, andVanderbeke (2016) developed a theoretical model that captures various aspects of thisheterogeneous construct. Our goal in this paper is to undertake first steps towards an empiricalinvestigation of this model based on data from two pilot studies that were conducted in anOSL. In both studies, we investigated whether the intended authenticity level of the methodthat students used to solve a given task had an impact on students’ perceived authenticity andsituational interest. Our studies show mixed findings that are contrary to the assumptionsunderlying the model of Betz et al. (2016). Hence, suggestions for an advancement of thatmodel as well as implications for future research on authentic learning are discussed.IntroductionDomain specificThe goal of science education is not only to foster students’ knowledge of science (i.e., content knowledge ofscientific concepts), but also their knowledge about science (i.e., knowledge of scientific practices) (OECD,2007). Out-of-school labs (OSLs), also known as reach-out labs or non-formal student labs, seem to havepotential to offer deeper insights into the practices of scientists and to promote students’ knowledge of andinterest in scientific ways of thinking and working (Haupt & Hempelmann, 2015). To foster students’ literacyand interest in natural or social sciences, OSLs try to engage students in authentic experiential learning activities(e.g., Pauly, 2012). However, authentic learning approaches subsumed under OSLs are very diverse, and thesame holds for definitions of the term authentic learning as well as for explanations of its effectiveness. A recentmodel of authenticity (see Figure 1) was developed by Betz, Flake, Mierwald, and Vanderbeke (2016).Personal characteristics:• gender, age, social background• epistemological beliefs• prior knowledge & experience• individual interest, etc.Characteristics of the learningsetting:• materials• learning location• contents• methods• social settings• innovation• instructors, etc.Individual susceptibilityAuthenticationthroughinteractionCreation of an authenticlearning environmentIndividualfeeling ofauthenticityAffective, cognitive andbehavioral effects:•situational interest•motivation•beliefs and attitudes•declarative andproceduralknowledge•domain-specificcompetences•...Part 3Part 1Part 2Figure 1. Model of authenticity in teaching and learning contexts (grey box: adaption, see discussion).The theoretical model is divided into three successive parts. Part 1 can be characterized as the inputcomponent of the model, as it highlights the characteristics of the learners and the features of the learningsetting that may affect the authenticity of the learning context. Part 2 outlines the interaction of these twocomponents in the process of authentication, which results in the individual perception of authenticity. Part 3 ofthe model includes outcomes that may be influenced by the perceived authenticity, such as the situationalinterest of students. Hence, this framework contains the assumption that the characteristics of learners and thefeatures of the learning setting affect outcomes such as the situational interest of students, but that this impact ismediated by students’ perceived authenticity. Previous research on authentic learning in OSLs demonstrated aICLS 2018 Proceedings1061© ISLSpositive association between students’ perceived authenticity and their situational interest (e.g., Pawek, 2009).Furthermore, findings from Betz (2017) showed that the location of the learning setting had an impact on thoseoutcomes, as her results illustrated that students who studied in an OSL perceived higher authenticity andsituational interest than students who studied in school. However, the question arises whether the variation ofthe authenticity level of characteristics of the learning setting other than the location, affects students’ perceivedauthenticity and interests as well. In this paper we present data from two pilot studies focusing on whether avariation of the intended authenticity level of the scientific method that learners use to solve a given task orproblem in two OSL-projects impacts students’ perceived authenticity and students’ situational interest. Toinvestigate this question, we conducted two quasi-experimental pilot studies. Both investigations took place inan OSL at a large German university. Pilot study A was conducted in a lab for educational sciences and pilotstudy B in a lab for linguistics. Both pilot studies comprised two experimental conditions: an authentic method(A+) where students had to solve a problem by applying a scientific procedure, and a less authentic method (A-)where students had to solve the same task by using a practice that does not simulate the typical habits ofscientists. Within the lab for educational sciences of study A, students in the A+ condition had to solve acomplex problem without guidance prior to instruction. This approach is called Productive Failure (PF: Kapur,2008) and is characterized as a highly authentic problem-solving method, as it simulates the professionalpractice of scientists (Cho, Caleon, & Kapur, 2015). Students in the A- condition received Direct Instruction(DI) before they applied the previously explained method to solve a problem. By receiving direct instruction,students were not asked to independently solve a complex and novel problem as scientists do. Therefore, theproblem-solving phase of DI can be described as scientifically less authentic. Within the lab for linguistics ofstudy B, students in the A+ condition had to judge the grammaticality of a linguistic phenomenon by using thethermometer method (Featherston, 2008) which is an objective and authentic linguistic method. Students in theA- condition had to judge the same data by using a less authentic linguistic method of introspective judgementsthat builds upon highly subjective feelings for language.In light of the assumptions within the authenticity model described above and previous research on theeffectiveness of OSLs, we hypothesized that students’ perceived authenticity would correlate positively withtheir situational interest (H1). Moreover, we assumed that students of the A+ conditions would report higherperceived authenticity (H2) and higher situational interest (H3) than students from the A- conditions.MethodParticipants and designIn study A, 38 10th-graders (M = 16.38, SD = 0.55; 57.9% girls) from two classes of two secondary schools inGermany participated. The two classes were randomly assigned to the A+ condition (n = 19) and the Acondition (n = 19) as a whole. In both conditions, students experienced two successive 45 min. learning phases:a problem-solving phase and an instruction phase. To simulate the practice of scientists, A+ students startedwith the problem-solving phase that asked them to independently generate solution attempts for a complex andnovel problem. Students from the A- condition started with the instruction phase before they had to apply theinstructed method to solve the same problem. In study B, 49 8th-graders (M = 14.40, SD = 0.57; 63.3% girls)from two classes of two secondary schools in Germany participated. The two classes were randomly assigned tothe A+ condition (n = 26) and the A- condition (n = 23) as a whole. At the day of the experiment, students inboth conditions took part in the same introduction about the learning topic in the beginning as well as the samereflective discussion at the end of their lab visit. Only the main learning phase differed between both groups, inwhich students solved the same task while using different grammaticality-judgement methods.ageageMeasuresIn both studies, the same instruments were used to assess students’ individual interest in the subject, theirperceived authenticity, and their situational interest. The individual interest was measured with seven items atthe beginning of the students’ OSL visit (study A) or prior to their OSL visit (study B). An example item is“The subject of (in study A: educational sciences) is one of my favorite subjects”. As in previous OSL-studies,the perceived authenticity (10 items) and the situational interest (12 items) were assessed at the end of thestudents’ OSL-visit. An example item for perceived authenticity is “I think that the tasks in this project fit wellwith the work of real scientists”, and for situational interest “The engagement with the contents of this projectwas exciting for me”. Students replied on a scale of 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree) to each item ofthe three instruments. The internal consistencies of all three measures were satisfactory (Cronbach’s α = .78 .93). Moreover, in both studies, students’ grades in three different subject areas (German language, mathematicsand in study A also educational sciences and in study B additionally English language) were assessed.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1062© ISLSResultsFor both pilot studies, MANOVAs revealed no significant differences between the A+ and the A- conditions inage, the reported grades in three subjects, nor the individual subject interest. To test our first hypothesis (H1),correlational analyses were conducted. For study A, the results showed a positive and significant correlationbetween students’ perceived authenticity and their situational interest (r = .45, p < .01). For study B, the resultsconfirmed this positive and significant association (r = .42, p < .01). Therefore, our H1 is supported. To assessdifferences in the effect of the experimental condition on participants’ perceived authenticity (H2) and reportedsituational interest (H3), we calculated a MANOVA for pilot study A and a MANCOVA for pilot study B. Instudy B, students’ individual subject interest significantly correlated with their situational interest (r = .33, p =.02) and was therefore included as a covariate. For study A, the MANOVA demonstrated a significant largesized effect of the experimental condition on perceived authenticity (F[1,36] = 11.15, p = .002, η ² = .24). Inline with our H2, students of the A+ condition who worked with the authentic method reported higher perceivedauthenticity (M = 3.58, SD = 0.43) than students of the A- condition (M = 3.02, SD = 0.59). However, againstour H3, the MANOVA revealed a non-significant small-sized effect on students’ situational interest (F[1,36] =0.77, p = .39, η ² = .02). Hence, the results of study A support H2, but not H3. For study B, the MANCOVArevealed no effect of the condition on perceived authenticity (F[1,46] = 0.06, p = .81, η ² = .00) which is againstH2, but a significant large-sized effect on students’ situational interest (F[1,46] = 14.43, p < .01, η ² = .24).However, against H3, students of the A- condition who worked with the less authentic method reported highersituational interest (M = 3.35, SD = 0.79) than their counterparts of the A+ condition who worked with the moreauthentic method (M = 2.55, SD = 0.66). Therefore, the results of study B do not support H2, nor H3.ppppDiscussion and conclusionOur results suggest that contrary to our expectations, the intended authenticity of the method that students usedto solve a task within two OSLs had different effects on students’ perceived authenticity (H2) and theirsituational interest (H3) in an OSL for educational sciences (study A) compared to an OSL for linguistics (studyB). While in study A students of the A+ condition reported significantly higher perceived authenticity than Astudents, in study B, students’ perceived authenticity did not differ between both conditions. With regard tostudents’ situational interest, the intended authenticity of the method did not have a significant effect in study A,but a significant effect in study B (as although the direction of the effect was not as assumed). Although therecent pilot studies do not offer conclusive evidence, especially due to the small sample sizes, our findings dohave interesting implications for future research, and several explanations can be offered for the findings.One possible explanation regarding the mixed effects of the intended authenticity of the method onstudents’ perceived authenticity (large effect in study A and no effect in study B) might be related to students’prior knowledge about scientific methods that are used in a certain domain. As Vanderbeke’s (2017) qualitativeanalyses of student conversations during an OSL for molecular biology demonstrated, students’ knowledgeabout scientific procedures is often non-existent or incorrect. The same could be assumed for students’knowledge of linguistic methods. Without this knowledge, it was probably not possible for participants of studyB to evaluate the authenticity of the different methods, which in turn resulted in almost equal perceptions inboth conditions. It must be noted that the assessment of students’ perceived authenticity in our studies did notaim at investigating whether students’ perceptions of the intended authenticity of the method were correct ornot. Building upon the authenticity model of Betz and colleagues (2016), our goal was to investigate whether avariation of the authenticity level of the scientific method that learners use to solve a given task in two OSLprojects had an impact on their individual feeling of authenticity and in turn on their situational interest.However, one could assume that without any prior knowledge about scientific practices, students lacksensitivity to identify given problem-solving processes as scientific methods and afterwards to evaluate theirauthenticity. As study A revealed a different finding (large effect of authenticity of the method on perceivedauthenticity), it could be assumed that students’ prior knowledge about science depends on the domain.Therefore, it seems necessary to adapt the model of Betz and colleagues (2016) to include the assumption thatthe preconditions of the learners such as their prior knowledge about science, which affect their individualfeeling of authenticity, are domain-specific (see grey area in Figure 1).Another explanation could be related to the authentic learning environment as a whole. Betz (2017)showed that the OSL as authentic learning location had a major effect on students’ perceived authenticity. It islikely that the characteristics of the learning setting each have a different impact on the (perceived) authenticityof the environment. The OSL as authentic learning location might have had a higher impact on students’perceived authenticity in study B than the method they used. As the location was the same in both conditions,their perceptions probably did not differ. Hence, future research should focus on investigations that modify theauthenticity level of characteristics of the learning setting other than the method. For instance, a current studyICLS 2018 Proceedings1063© ISLSfrom Brauch, Mierwald, and Lehmann (2017) focuses on the material that is used in an OSL for historyeducation and examines whether the variation of the intended authenticity level of the given material affectsstudents’ perceived authenticity. Building upon the argument developed before that students’ prior knowledgeabout science differs depending on the domain, it is again likely that depending on the domain, some features ofan authentic learning setting play a more important role for students’ perceived authenticity than others. Hence,it seems appropriate to mark the characteristics of the learning setting within the authenticity model of Figure 1as domain-specific. These assumptions should be investigated by future research with a larger sample size.Our results regarding the association between students’ perceived authenticity and their situationalinterest are interesting, as our analyses revealed mixed findings with respect to their relation. The correlationalanalyses confirmed a positive relation between students’ perceived authenticity and their situational interest,but, in contrast to our H2 and H3, the variance analyses revealed that students’ reported perceived authenticitydiffered from their reported situational interest (e.g., in study A, students’ perceived authenticity significantlydiffered between both conditions, but students’ situational interest did not). Therefore, future research shouldfocus on examination of this association that is assumed based on theory.In sum, our findings contribute to previous research on authentic learning in OSLs and to the furtherdevelopment of a theoretical model of authentic learning and teaching.ReferencesBetz, A. (2017). Linguistische Wissenschaft authentisch vermitteln. Eine Interventionsstudie zu Schülerlaborenam Beispiel des Ruhrdeutschen. [Authentic teaching of linguistics. An intervention study on OSLsusing the example of Ruhr-German] (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Ruhr-Universität Bochum,Bochum.Betz, A., Flake, S., Mierwald, M., & Vanderbeke, M. (2016). Modelling authenticity in teaching and learningcontexts: A contribution to theory development and empirical investigation of the construct. In C.-K.Looi, J. Polman, U. Cress, & P. Reimann (Eds.), Transforming Learning, Empowering Learners: TheInternational Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) 2016. Volume 2 (pp. 815–818). Singapore:International Society of the Learning Sciences.Brauch, N., Mierwald, M., & Lehmann, T. (2017). Writing about the past: The impact of different authenticinstructional material on students’ argument writing in history. Paper presented at the EuropeanAssociation for Research on Learning and Instruction (EARLI), 29.08.-02.09.2017, Tampere, Finland.Cho, Y. H., Caleon, I. S., & Kapur, M. (2015). Authentic problem solving and learning in the 21st century.Singapore: Springer.Featherston, S. (2008). Thermometer judgements as linguistic evidence. In: C. M. Riehl & A. Rothe (Hrsg.):Was ist linguistische Evidenz? Aachen: Shaker Verlag.Haupt, O., & Hempelmann, R. (2015). Schülerlabore in Art und Form. Eine Typensache! [Types and forms ofOSLs.]. In Lernort Labor - Bundesverband der Schülerlabore e.V. (Ed.), Schülerlabor-Atlas 2015.Schülerlabore im deutschsprachigen Raum (pp. 14–21). Stuttgart: Klett MINT.Kapur, M. (2008). Productive failure. Cognition and instruction, 26(3), 379-424.OECD (2006). Assessing scientific, reading and mathematical literacy. A framework for PISA 2006. Paris:OECD.Pauly, Y. (2012). Was sind und zu welchem Zweck brauchen wir geisteswissenschaftliche Schülerlabore?[What are OSLs related to social sciences and humanities, and for what purpose do we need them]. InHandbuch Wissenschaftskommunikation (pp. 205-210). Wiesbaden: VS Verlag fürSozialwissenschaften.Pawek, C. (2009). Schülerlabore als interessefördernde außerschulische Lernumgebungen für Schülerinnen undSchüler aus der Mittel- und Oberstufe. [OSLs as interest-promoting out-of-school learningenvironments for students of secondary schools]. (Doctoral Dissertation, Christian-AlbrechtsUniversität Kiel). Retrieved from https://macau.uni-kiel.de/receive/dissertation_diss_00003669.Vanderbeke, M. (2017). Authentisierungsprozesse und die Nutzung Fremdsprachlicher Affordances inBilingualen Schülerlaborprojekten. [Authentication processes and use of foreign language affordancesin bilingual OSLs] (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum.AcknowledgementsWe thank the members of the doctoral program “Science Education in Out-of-School Labs” of the GraduateSchool of Educational Studies (GSoES), Ruhr-Universität Bochum, for their input and feedback to the ideas thatare presented in this paper.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1064© ISLS