Exploring the Impact of Virtual Internships for Democratic andMedia EducationJeremy Stoddard, College of William & Mary, jdstod@wm.eduJason Chen, College of William & Mary, jachen@wm.eduAbstract: This paper focuses on the design and effects of our pilot study of PurpleState, aVirtual Internship simulation. PurpleState utilizes the concepts of epistemic frames andcommunities of practice as models for learning in media and democratic education.PurpleState places students in the roles of interns at a strategic communications firm who arehired to develop a media campaign on a proposed fictitious state level “fracking” ban. Resultsof the study include significant effects on participants’ knowledge of the issue, why it wascontroversial, the ability of participants to understand political media, and in their beliefsabout being able to engage in civic action.IntroductionThis paper describes the design framework used to create PurpleState Solutions, a Virtual Internship simulation,and presents findings from a pilot study of the simulation with two classes of grade nine students. ForPurpleState, we sought to provide students the opportunity to develop an understanding of the dynamic nature ofmedia in politics and help them to develop the skills and knowledge to be both more critical of the politicalmedia they engage with and more skilled and confident in using media strategies to take political action.Through the use of the concepts of epistemic frames and epistemic games from learning sciences, as well astheories from political communications and existing civic education models, we present the virtual internship asa model that is more relevant and authentic for developing today’s young citizens.Theory and design frameworkThe use of simulations in democratic education is far from new, but most are designed to be more engagingmodels for helping students learn standards-based curriculum, academic content, and skills (e.g., Parker, et al.,2011; Parker, et al., 2013). These simulations also often place students in roles of official power and at thenational level, such as a Supreme Court Justice or member of Congress. As a result, students may not fullyunderstand the dynamic nature of politics and the roles that other groups outside of the structures of electedoffice may have. The official curriculum also often lacks specific objectives related to critical media literacy inthe context of politics, or media strategies for taking political action (Raphael, Bachen, Lynn, Baldwin-Philippi& McKee, 2010; Stoddard, 2014).PurpleState was designed using the model of Virtual Internships developed by Shaffer (2006a, 2006b)that employs epistemic frames and communities of practice from professions as models of learning. The conceptof epistemic frames provides a model with the potential to help students transfer their academic experiences totheir role as citizens outside of school (Bagley & Shaffer, 2009; Shaffer, 2006a, 2006b). We use the epistemicgame model and the epistemic frame of strategic communications consultants, whose firms assist candidates,political action committees, and special interest groups to develop and implement media and campaignstrategies; this epistemic frame emphasizes expertise in the skills, knowledge, and values that can transfer toyoung peoples’ actions as citizens outside of school.MethodsHere we present findings from our third iteration of implementing PurpleState, with 43 grade nine students fromcentral Wisconsin (USA). The participants engaged in the simulation over a three-week period (10 class hours)and we worked closely with the teacher to collaborate on helping all students be successful, including the twoESL students in the class and several students with special needs. This mixed methods study focuses inparticular on measures related to the participants’ knowledge of the issue, i.e., fracking, their understanding ofwhy it is controversial, and in their ability to transfer the political media strategy to a related but differentcontext. We also focused on adapting existing measures of self-efficacy for political engagement to better fit thecurrent context of political engagement and the role of media. Data utilized here were generated as part of a prepost questionnaire and student tasks in the simulation. See Stoddard & Chen (2018), also in this volume, formore on the development of these measures.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1695© ISLSResultsWe were particularly interested in how much students would learn from engaging in the controversial issue,framed as a proposed ban on fracking. We saw significant increases in open-ended items focused onparticipants’ knowledge (Fracking Knowledge, p<.0001) of the issue and why it was controversial (FrackingControversy, p=0.0002). They also had a significant increase in their ability to explain how they would applypolitical media strategy to a different but related context – illustrating transfer of the strategy that they hadlearned (Politician Advice, p=0.0002). These items measured students’ abilities to use evidence and reasoningrelated to the issue, and for the question about why it is controversial, we were also looking to see if studentscould explain why it is controversial from both sides of the issue.We also saw significant growth in participants’ epistemic understanding of political messages and howthey are structured to persuade in a Video Analysis task. This task asked participants to apply their epistemicunderstanding of political communications to a political advertisement that was part of an “Energy Voter”campaign funded by a petroleum industry lobbyist group. We saw significant changes in participants’ abilities toidentify the intended audience for the video (p= 0.0045) and in their ability to identify the intended politicalmessage of the video (p<.0001). We did not see a significant change in their abilities to identify the specificpersuasive technique being used (e.g., bandwagon, appeal to emotion).Finally, given the intersection of political knowledge, skills, and beliefs being a predictor for futurepolitical engagement, we were also interested in the potential impact of participants’ confidence to engagepolitically. We saw a significant increase in participants’ self-efficacy for political engagement (p=0.0007),assessed using adapted instruments that have been validated in the past (alpha=0.79). Items in this scale include“Construct good arguments about political issues” and “Identify hidden political messages in advertising”. Asnoted above, more information on the adaptation and development of this scale can be found in Stoddard andChen (2018), elsewhere in this volume.Conclusion and implicationsIn this paper we describe the design and results from our pilot study of the PurpleState virtual internship. Theconceptual framework of epistemic frames developed here, when operationalized through epistemic games, hasthe potential to significantly change the nature of how we teach young people to be citizens, in addition toserving as a dynamic model for reaching academic and skills goals. PurpleState is designed to engage youngpeople in collaborative practice, a better understanding of the nature of media and its function in society andpolitics, and provide opportunities to engage in relevant contemporary controversial issues.There is evidence that epistemic games have great potential to develop student civic thinking andaction by engaging students through virtual internships in authentic contexts and problems. The significant gainsfound in our study of participants’ knowledge of the issue and why it is controversial, and in their increased selfefficacy for engaging politically and in particular using media to engage, illustrate the potential for this model. Ifour goal in civic education is having informed citizens who are confident in taking action, PurpleState illustratesone approach to working toward this goal. These games also have the potential to develop student skills inpersuasive communications and media literacy over traditional academic work and assessments.ReferencesBagley, E. and Shaffer, D.W. (2009). When people get in the way: promoting civic thinking through epistemicgameplay. International Journal of Gaming and Computer-Mediated Simulations, 1(1), 36-52.Hess, D. (2009). Controversy in the classroom: The democratic power of discussion. New York, NY:Routledge.Parker, W. C., Mosborg, S., Bransford, J. D., Vye, N. J., Wilkerson, J., & Abbott, R. (2011). Rethinkingadvanced high school coursework: Tackling the depth/breadth tension in the AP US Government andPolitics course. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 43(4), 533–559.Parker, W., Lo, J., Yeo, A. J., Valencia, S. W., Nguyen, D., Abbott, R. D., . . . Vye, N. J. (2013). Beyondbreadth-speed-test: Toward deeper knowing and engagement in an Advanced Placement course.American Educational Research Journal, 50(6), 1424–1459.Raphael, C., Bachen, C., Lynn, K. M., Baldwin-Philippi, J., & McKee, K. A. (2010). Games for civic learning:A conceptual framework and agenda for research and design. Games and Culture, 5(2), 199-235.Shaffer, D. W. (2006a). How computer games help children learn. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.Shaffer, D. W. (2006b). Epistemic frames for epistemic games. Computers & education, 46(3), 223-234.Stoddard, J. (2014). The need for media education in democratic education. Democracy & Education, 22(1).Available online: http://democracyeducationjournal.org/home/vol22/iss1/4.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1696© ISLS