Secondary Students’ Evaluation of Inappropriate Strategies ofReasoning About Evidence Under a Scientific ExplanationGuanzhong Ma, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, gzma@connect.hku.hkCarol Chan, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, ckkchan@hku.hkJan van Aalst, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, vanaalst@hku.hkJing Wang, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, xiaoyuer19921023@126.comAbstract: This study explored potential factors that could affect the development of students’strategies for evaluating scientific evidence. Thirty-six students from Grade 7 were asked toevaluate the evidence from an investigation involving force and motion. They were shownthree inappropriate responses to reasoning about that evidence. They were then asked toevaluate these responses against an informational text that conveyed the scientific explanationwith Galileo’s thought experiment. Participants’ verbal responses to reasoning about theinappropriate responses to the informational text were transcribed and analysed qualitatively.We found three factors that influenced strategy development: the students 1) kept the conflictbetween the competing claims of the domain unresolved, 2) doubted the validity of theinference from the thought experiment and 3) mistakenly assessed the plausibility of thecompeting claims. Implications for explaining the development of reasoning about scientificevidence and for instruction are discussed.IntroductionScientists’ use of evidence to evaluate knowledge claims is important in science and science learning. Kuhn(2002) suggested evaluating claims using evidence is the essence of scientific reasoning. The use of evidence isa central component the construction of explanations (Iordanou & Constantinou, 2015).The purpose of evaluating claims using evidence is to judge whether a claim is correct and how certainthis judgment is in light of the evidence. This requires two practices: (1) to examine the tenability of the claimin the face of the evidence (Zimmerman, 2007), which involves determining the extent to which the claim holdswith respect to the evidence; and (2) to evaluate the evidence in relation to the claim.Research purpose and questionsThe study focused on the latter practice, that is, evaluation of evidence from scientific investigations, aiming toexplain the development of this reasoning. Studies of the development of reasoning during evaluations of claimand evidence have found that a student’s content knowledge in a scientific domain plays a role in his or herreasoning about evidence (e.g., Hergovich et al., 2010). Studies have also found that students’ epistemic ormeta-conceptual understanding of scientific knowledge and evidence underlies the development of theirreasoning in scientific inquiry (e.g., Klaczynski, 2000; Pluta et al., 2011).However, most existing studies have focused on the practices of using evidence to evaluate knowledgeclaims, models and explanations (e.g., Iordanou & Constantinou, 2015; Pluta et al., 2011), rather than thepractice of evaluating the evidence itself. Furthermore, research has typically assessed the changes in one’sreasoning to capture the associated strategy development (e.g., Schwarz & White, 2005). Little research hasinvestigated the changes in one’s awareness of or views on the effectiveness of individual strategies duringstrategy development. Therefore, it remains unclear which factors promote or hinder these changes and thusinfluence the development of reasoning about evidence in science.To address this gap in the literature, the study aimed to explore factors that could affect the strategydevelopment of the reasoning about evidence. Specifically, it sought to identify potential factors that couldhinder changes in students’ views on inappropriate strategies in the presence of a scientific explanation. Thisaim was achieved by analysing students’ protocols when evaluating inappropriate responses under the scientificexplanation.The research question was: What are students’ reasons for not judging inappropriate strategies asinappropriate when confronted with a scientific explanation for evidence? This research question asked howstudents responded to the scientific explanation when evaluating responses that used inappropriate strategies.Specifically, this question sought to identify the reasons why students did not change their views on theinappropriate strategies, even though the scientific explanation contradicted those responses.ICLS 2018 Proceedings176© ISLSSignificanceWe contend that the practice of evaluating evidence should be a central component in science instruction thatfeatures evidence-based inquiry. The use of appropriate and sufficient evidence to support claims has beenemphasised as a key dimension of the practice of developing evidence-based explanations (Gotwals & Songer,2013). Instruction that asks students to evaluate their misconceptions of particular domains against evidencewithout evaluating that evidence may encourage “blind theory change” (Chinn & Brewer, 1993).However, as discussed, there is little understanding of which factors affect the development ofreasoning strategies, especially with respect to students’ awareness or views on more or less effective strategies.This research can contribute to this understanding by identifying factors that may prevent students fromconsidering inappropriate strategies as less adequate. Pedagogically, this study can suggest the knowledge andunderstanding that should be emphasised in instruction to promote students’ reasoning.MethodsA sample of secondary students were asked to evaluate the evidence from an investigation of force and motionand to evaluate a set of given inappropriate responses to this evaluation. Participants were then asked to evaluatethe responses against an informational text that conveyed the scientific explanation for the evidence from theinvestigation. The transcripts of students’ verbal responses when evaluating the inappropriate responses againstthe scientific explanation for that evidence were analysed to identify their reasons for not viewing theinappropriate reasoning strategies as inappropriate.Research context and participantsThe study took place in an urban private secondary school in a medium-sized city in South China. 36 Grade 7students (20 boys and 16 girls aged 12 to 13 years) participated in the study. As confirmed by their scienceteachers, these students had not received formal instruction on the relation of force and motion. The students didhave some experience of designing and implementing science experiments (e.g., investigating the factorsinfluencing plant growth) prior to the study. But their teachers suggested they had no experience in evaluatingevidence from scientific investigations.These students were selected from a total of 104 students (including 50 girls) because they made aparticular misconception prediction about an object’s movement in a conceptual question. We purposefullyselected these students to prevent one’s initial domain theories from influencing the reasoning about evidence.This question showed a scenario in which a wooden block was moving on a frictionless horizontal table. Theparticipants were told that a student was initially pushing the block in the same direction of its movement andthen released it. They were asked to predict how the block would move after release by choosing one of sixgiven options.Materials and procedureThese selected participants worked with the researcher individually in a single session consisting of three parts:a) initial reasoning about evidence sufficiency, b) evaluating inappropriate responses to this reasoning and c) reevaluating the inappropriate responses to this reasoning against the provided informational text that conveyedthe scientific explanation.All materials shown to the participants were in simplified Chinese. Audio recordings of all materialswere made to facilitate the participants’ comprehension of the materials in case some of the participants haddifficulty reading the texts by themselves. The participants read these materials while listening to the audiorecordings. The materials were translated into English by the first author.Initial reasoning about evidence sufficiencyEach individual participant completed a written reasoning task on reasoning about scientific evidence. The taskwas adapted from studies investigating people’s responses to anomalous data (Chinn & Brewer, 1998; Mason,2000). In this task, participants were presented with a scientific prediction of the object’s movement and aninvestigation to test this prediction. They were asked to evaluate the sufficiency of evidence from thisinvestigation to evaluate the scientific prediction.Scientific prediction. The participants were told that a hypothetical student answered the sameconceptual question as they did and chose Option D. Always move constantly. This option was correct accordingto Newton’s first law and was referred to as the scientific prediction.Description of an investigation to test the scientific prediction. The participants read a brief descriptionof the experiment to test the previous prediction. Several key design details of the experiment were described.First, the experiment was conducted in the same condition as the experiment in the conceptual question, that is,ICLS 2018 Proceedings177© ISLSany friction and resistance could be ignored. Second, the speeds of the block were measured in 0.1-secondintervals for a total duration of 2 seconds and that two trials were conducted. Third, the experimental equipmentand instrument were operating well during the experiment.Data obtained in the investigation. The participants read the data obtained in the experiment, as shownin Figure 1. The data were presented in a chart that showed the speeds over time. In both trials, the speed valuesremained roughly constant with a variation of around 1% over time. Taking the experimental errors intoaccount, the data from both trials suggested that the object moved at a constant speed.Figure 1. Data Presented in the Reasoning Task.The participants were asked to rate the extent to which they thought the data were sufficient forevaluating the initial prediction of the movement on a 5-point scale and to explain their ratings.Evaluating inappropriate responses of reasoning about evidenceThe participants were then presented with three responses to reasoning about the sufficiency of that evidence.These responses involved using the particular inappropriate strategies for evaluating evidence, which werereferred to as inappropriate responses. The participants were asked to rate the extent to which they agreed witheach response and to give explanations for their ratings.The inappropriate responses to reasoning about evidence were modified from those identified in aprevious study of the authors. Three hypothetical students – A, B and C – were created to deliver theseresponses to participants. Student A’s response was “I think after the student let it go, because the force keepingthe wood block moving disappeared, so the block would slow down and finally stop.” Student A mistakenlypredicted that the block would slow down after release. Student B’s response was “I think the speed woulddecrease. Two seconds is too short to see the speed decrease. We surely can see the speed decrease after the twoseconds.” Student B predicted that the block would slow down and considered that the duration for which thespeed was measured was too short to observe the block’s slowing down. Student C’s response was “I see fromthe data that the speed of the blocks moves ups and downs, it is sometimes fast, sometimes slow. This isdifferent from Tom’s choice.” Student C mistakenly interpreted the data as suggesting that the speed was alwayschanging and was thus inconsistent with the scientific prediction.Each response involved making a particular incorrect prediction of the movement. Student A andStudent B’s responses made the misconception prediction (i.e., the block would slow down). Student C’sresponse made the claim of the data misinterpretation (i.e., the speed would be always changing).Re-evaluating inappropriate responses against the scientific explanationEach participant was then presented with an informational text. The informational text conveyed the scientificexplanation for the scientific prediction with Galileo’s thought experiment. Galileo observed that objects movedfarther on smoother surfaces. The inference from this observation was that if the surface were extremely smoothand no friction was present, objects would never stop and always move at a constant speed. This informationaltext was intended to make the participants consider Student A, B and C’s responses as inappropriate in terms ofthe claim about the block’s movement.When re-evaluating these inappropriate responses, each participant was asked to orally explain whatthey thought of each inappropriate response while referring to the informational text. The participants’ verbalresponses to reasoning about the responses to the informational text were audio recorded.ICLS 2018 Proceedings178© ISLSData coding and analysisThe audio recordings of the participants’ verbal responses were transcribed verbatim. The transcripts werecoded to determine which participants considered the inappropriate responses as incorrect, or remaineduncertain whether the responses were correct. The participants’ judgments of the inappropriate responses wereeasily coded because they were explicitly asked to indicate their judgments when they were re-evaluating thoseresponses. Thus it was not necessary to determine the inter-rater reliability of the coding.We first calculated the frequencies and proportions for the participants’ judgments of eachinappropriate response. The transcripts of the participants who did not consider the inappropriate responses asinadequate were selected. These selected transcripts were further analysed qualitatively to identify the categoriesof reasons that prevented them from recognising the inappropriate response as inadequate.ResultsTable 1 shows the results of analysing participants’ transcripts when they evaluated the inappropriate responsesagainst the scientific prediction and explanation that contradicted the responses. Of all 36 participants, 15(41.67%) did not consider Student A’s response as incorrect; 11 (30.56%) did not consider Student B’s responseas incorrect; 17 (47.22%) did not consider Student C’s response as incorrect. These participants agreed with thisresponse or remained uncertain whether the response was correct.Table 1: Participants’ Judgments of the Inappropriate Responses against the Scientific ExplanationInappropriate ResponsesStudent A's responseStudent B's responseStudent C's responseJudgment of the inappropriate responsesConsider the response as incorrectNot consider the response asincorrect21 (58.33%)15 (41.67%)25 (69.44%)11 (30.56%)19 (52.78%)17 (47.22%)Total36 (100.00%)36 (100.00%)36 (100.00%)Analysis of the transcripts of these participants’ responses to the informational text found severalcategories of reasons for not considering the inappropriate response as inadequate.Keeping the conflict between claims unresolvedRecall that each inappropriate response involved making a particular incorrect prediction of the movement,which contradicted the scientific prediction in the informational text. To judge the adequacy of the inappropriateresponse, the participants had to recognise the conflict between the competing predictions in the inappropriateresponses and the informational text, and to attempt to resolve this conflict.However, analyses found that participants kept the conflict unresolved. Specifically, three reasons forwhy they failed to do were identified: the participants 1) made no attempt made to resolve the conflict, 2)attempted to use data to resolve the conflict, but misinterpret the data and not attempt to use the scientificexplanation to resolve the conflict; and 3) requested alternative sources to evidence and explanations requestedto resolve the conflict. Due to space limitations, this paper only discusses the second theme; the other themeswill be discussed at the conference.Attempt to use data to resolve the conflict, but misinterpret the data and make no attempt to use thescientific explanation to resolve the conflictThe following excerpt demonstrates that the participant recognised the conflict between the claim of datamisinterpretation and the scientific prediction and attempted to resolve this conflict by referring to the data.However, the participant ultimately did not resolve the conflict because he misinterpreted the data and did notfurther rely on the scientific explanation for that evidence to resolve the conflict. The participant was evaluatingStudent C’s response against the informational text. Recall that Student C mistakenly interpreted the data assuggesting that the speed was always changing.Researcher:What do you think of Student C’s response according to the informationaltext?Participant #12:Based on the text, Student C is definitely wrong. The text says the speed ofthe block will not change but continue to move forever, but Student C saysthe speed is sometimes fast, sometimes slow.ICLS 2018 Proceedings179© ISLSResearcher:Sometimes fast, sometimes slow.Participant #12:I think that Student C is describing the data, but what the scientist says isdifferent from what the data describe.Researcher:Oh.Participant #12:So is the scientist wrong, or are the data wrong?Researcher:You want to make a judgment?Participant #12:If I look at the data according to the scientist’s view in the text, then the datashow ups and downs, ups and downs in the two trials.Researcher:Oh.Participant #12:The text says the speed is always constant, which is different from the data.Then they are different.Researcher:Well, you think they are different.Participant #12:Yes.This participant recognised the conflict between the informational text (i.e., the scientific prediction)and the misinterpretation of the data in Student C’s response. The participant referred to the data from theinvestigation when he recognised the conflict and examined the consistency of the data with the competingpredictions of the movement. The participant correctly used the empirical data to judge the conflictingpredictions of the movement. It appeared that the participant would resolve the conflict and (mistakenly) judgeStudent C’s response as correct because he (mistakenly) considered that Student C’s response fit the data.However, the participant could not determine whether the scientist’s prediction or the data from theinvestigation were correct. Moreover, the participant did not refer to the scientific explanation for the evidenceto further consider the conflict, but rather chose to keep the conflict unresolved.Doubting the validity of the inference from the thought experimentRecall that the informational text presented the scientific prediction of the movement as the inference fromGalileo’s thought experiment. The following excerpt demonstrates that when the participant doubted the validityof the inference from the thought experiment, he did not accept the scientific prediction from the thoughtexperiment and thus could not consider the inappropriate responses, including the misconception prediction, asinadequate. The participant was evaluating Student A’s response against the informational text. Recall thatStudent A mistakenly predicted that the block would slow down after release.Researcher:According to the informational text, what do you think of Student A’s response?Participant #17:Well, according to this text, I think… Well, I still think I am not sure.Researcher:Can you say it more specifically?Participant #17:Student A says the force keeping the block moving has already disappeared, sothe speed slows down. But the scientist here says that the less the friction is, thefarther it moves, indicating that it is the friction that makes the block slow down.And then there is a collision between the two.Researcher:Oh.Participant #17:I think the scientist proves what he is saying using four experiments. But he isonly inferring from the four experiments. Something inferred could have errors.He is saying that the block is moving at a constant speed forever.Researcher:And then?Participant #17:My own thinking is that perhaps the movement gradually slows down after not 1year, not 2 years, but hundreds of years, thousands of years. I am not sure aboutwhat the scientist is saying, so I am not sure.Researcher:Well, you think he is inferring the movement?Participant #17:Yes, he is inferring the movement, but he directly says that based on theseexperiments the block moves at a constant speed, and judges its movement afterthousands of years, tens of thousands of years, billions of years. But we do notICLS 2018 Proceedings180© ISLShave real data to prove that.This participant recognised the conflict between the prediction in Student A’s response and thescientific prediction in the informational text. He discounted the validity of the inference from the thoughtexperiment and considered the inference from the thought experiment did not lead to a certain judgment aboutthe movement after a long time. The participant suggested physical experiments data (“real data” in his terms)were necessary to conclude the block’s movement for a long duration.Mistakenly assessing the plausibility of claims about the movementEvaluating the inappropriate responses of reasoning about the evidence against the informational text involvedevaluating claims about the movement, including the scientific prediction, misconception prediction and datamisinterpretation. To judge the adequacy of the responses, the participants had to judge the scientificexplanation as more plausible than the claim of the data misinterpretation and the misconception prediction.However, the analysis found that the participants mistakenly assessed the plausibility of claims aboutthe movement. Three reasons for why participants did not consider the inappropriate responses as inadequatewere identified: the students 1) considered the claim of the misinterpretation of the data as more plausible thanthe scientific prediction, 2) considered the scientific prediction as implausible and 3) rendered the claim of datamisinterpretation plausible. We discussed the third theme here.Rendering the claim of data misinterpretation as plausibleThe following excerpt demonstrates that when the students encountered anomalous data that includedunexpected variability, they invented explanations to account for the variability to render the pattern of the dataas plausible. As a result, the students agreed with the claim of the data misinterpretation and thus hindered thedevelopment of the strategy for reasoning about the evidence. The participant was evaluating Student C’sresponse against the informational text. Recall that Student C mistakenly interpreted the data as suggesting thatthe speed was always changing and was thus inconsistent with the scientific prediction.Researcher:What do you think, according to the informational text, of Student C’s response?Participant #18:Student C’s response is a bit wrong.Researcher:Oh.Participant #18:If the block were on an extremely smooth table surface, then its speed would be veryeven. A rough table surface could cause the friction to be uneven, and would lead tosome difference in the speed.Researcher:What do you mean by “uneven”?Participant #18:There are some rough places, there are some bumps that could cause the difference inthe speed.Researcher:Oh. It is said that we considered there was no friction.Participant #18:No friction, but the inertia would result in some small changes.Researcher:What do you mean by “small changes”?Participant #18:Although the block is released, its speed will have some vibration, and although thetrend is decreasing, there may be some changes in the beginning, and gradually thevibration could become larger and larger.Researcher:Oh, you think…Participant #18:The inertia is decreasing, but the decrease could be uneven.Researcher:Oh.Participant #18:The decrease could be slow at first and then fast, so perhaps Student C is correct.This excerpt demonstrates that this participant considered the data misinterpretation as plausible byproposing an explanation to account for the always-changing speed as suggested by the misinterpretation. Thisparticipant actually seemed to appeal to the data to make the claim about the movement of the block. When theparticipant saw the data misinterpretation in Student C’s response, he attempted to explain it by noting that thespeed would change from time to time.ICLS 2018 Proceedings181© ISLSDiscussionFactors influencing reasoning about evidenceThe above findings revealed three factors influencing strategy development: 1) attempt and competence toresolve conflicts between competing claims, 2) epistemic understanding of thought experiments as a source ofscientific knowledge and 3) assessment of relative plausibility of the scientific explanation to misconceptions.Attempt and competence to resolve conflicts between competing claimsWe found that some participants recognised the conflict between the predictions of the movement as indicatedin the inappropriate response and the scientific prediction, yet kept this conflict unresolved. This indicates thatthe attempt to resolve this conflict is necessary for students to judge the inappropriate responses as inadequateand thus essential for developing the strategy for this reasoning. Even when students attempt to resolve thisconflict using the empirical data, they may fail to do so because they may misinterpret the data. The competenceinvolved in interpreting data and the attempt to use available explanations as a source for evaluating competingclaims are essential for resolving conflicts and are thus important for the developing a strategy for reasoningabout evidence.In addition, students may fail to resolve that conflict when they assume the existence of alternativeknowledge sources to empirical data and explanations. Recognising the role of empirical evidence and theexplanations for that evidence and claims is important for resolving conflicts between competing claims of thedomain, and thus is important for the development of a strategy for reasoning about evidence.Epistemic understanding of thought experiments as a source of scientific knowledgeWe found that some participants doubted the validity of the inference from the thought experiment. They did notaccept the scientific prediction from the thought experiment and thus could not consider the inappropriateresponses as inadequate. This indicates that when asked to evaluate the inappropriate responses to reasoningabout evidence, students’ beliefs about thought experiments as a source of scientific knowledge may affect theirjudgment of the responses in the face of the scientific prediction based on a thought experiment, and thus mayinfluence the development of a strategy for this reasoning.This finding adds to the literature on students’ epistemic status of sources of justification forknowledge claims in science. Sandoval and Çam (2011) investigated primary students’ epistemic status ofsources of justification for knowledge claims and found that students appealed to empirical data as their firstpriority to justify a causal claim over plausible explanations. Little is understood about secondary students’epistemic status in terms of inferences from thought experiments and empirical data from physical experiments.The findings of this study suggest that secondary students appeal to empirical data as their first priority toevaluate claims of movement over thought experiments.Assessment of the relative plausibility of the scientific explanation to misconceptionsWe found some participants did not consider the inappropriate responses as inadequate due to the plausibility ofthe competing claims about the movement, including the scientific prediction, the misconception prediction andthe claim of the data misinterpretation. This indicates the plausibility of the scientific prediction to students mayaffect their judgment of inappropriate responses to reasoning about evidence and thus influence the developmentof this reasoning strategy. This finding also indicates that when students encounter anomalous data that includeunexpected variability, they may invent explanations that account for this variability to render the pattern of thedata as plausible. As a result, students agree with the data misinterpretation, which hinders the development of astrategy for reasoning about evidence.The research on conceptual change has long contended that the new scientifically accurateunderstanding needs to be judged as more plausible than the existing misconceptions for conceptual change tooccur (Lombardi, Sinatra, & Nussbaum, 2013). The findings of this study suggest that the plausibility of thescientific prediction influences the ability of scientific prediction and explanations to foster changes in students’misconceptions.Implications for instructionThe findings suggest to promote reasoning about scientific evidence, students need an enhanced epistemicunderstanding of scientific knowledge and a conceptual understanding of particular scientific domains. First,science teachers should make the scientific explanation available and plausible to students to promote theirreasoning about evidence. As students evaluate the evidence, teachers could ask them to compare the scientificprediction and explanation and their misconceptions of the domain. When students recognise the conflictsICLS 2018 Proceedings182© ISLSbetween competing claims about the particular domain, teachers should prompt them to resolve the conflicts byreferring to the evidence and to assess the plausibility of the competing claims.Second, science teachers explicitly teach the epistemic understanding of scientific knowledge. Teachersmust help students reflect on the roles of thought experiments in developing scientific knowledge and therelationship between thought experiments and empirical evidence. This could be useful for promoting students’acceptance of scientific claims that are drawn from thought experiments.Future researchFuture research could investigate whether and how these factors influence the development of reasoning aboutevidence. For example, in terms of the epistemic status of sources of justification (Sandoval & Çam, 2011),future research could investigate how students view thought experiments as a justification for knowledge claimsand the priority they place on this justification compared with other justifications such as empirical data andscientific explanations. Future research could also design an experiment to test whether an enhanced epistemicunderstanding of the role of thought experiments in developing scientific knowledge brings about positivechanges in students’ reasoning about evidence.ConclusionThis study explored potential factors that accounted for the development of reasoning during the evaluation ofevidence. Specifically, it sought to identify the factors that could hinder changes in students’ views oninappropriate strategies in the presence of a scientific explanation.The results suggest that the attempt and competence to resolve conflicts between competing claims, theplausibility of the scientific prediction and explanation and the epistemic understanding of thought experimentsas a source of scientific knowledge influenced the role of the scientific explanation in changing students’reasoning about evidence. The findings of this study thus contribute to the literature related to the developmentof reasoning about scientific evidence. We recommend that in the teaching of reasoning about evidence shouldmake scientific explanation available and plausible to students, and address the role of thought experiments indeveloping scientific knowledge.ReferencesChinn, C. A., & Brewer, W. F. (1993). The role of anomalous data in knowledge acquisition: A theoreticalframework and implications for science instruction. Review of Educational Research, 63, 1–49.Gotwals, A. W., & Songer, N. B. (2013). Validity evidence for learning progression-based assessment items thatfuse core disciplinary ideas and science practices. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 50, 597–626.Hergovich, A., Schott, R., & Burger, C. (2010). Biased evaluation of abstracts depending on topic andconclusion: Further evidence of a confirmation bias within scientific psychology. Current Psychology,29, 188–209.Iordanou, K., & Constantinou, C. P. (2015). Supporting use of evidence in argumentation through practice inargumentation and reflection in the context of SOCRATES learning environment. Science Education,99, 282–311.Klaczynski, P. A. (2000). Motivated scientific reasoning biases, epistemological beliefs, and theory polarisation:a two-process approach to adolescent cognition. Child Development, 71, 1347–1366.Kuhn, D. (2002). What is scientific thinking and how does it develop? In Blackwell handbook of childhoodcognitive development (pp. 371–393). John Wiley & Sons, 2008.Lombardi, D., Sinatra, G. M., & Nussbaum, E. M. (2013). Plausibility reappraisals and shifts in middle schoolstudents’ climate change conceptions. Learning and Instruction, 27, 50–62.Pluta, W. J., Chinn, C. A., & Duncan, R. G. (2011). Learners’ epistemic criteria for good scientific models.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 48, 486–511.Sandoval, W. A., & Çam, A. (2011). Elementary children’s judgments of the epistemic status of sources ofjustification. Science Education, 95, 383–408.Schwarz, C. V., & White, B. Y. (2005). Metamodeling knowledge: Developing students’ understanding ofscientific modelling. Cognition and Instruction, 23, 165–205.Zimmerman, C. (2007). The development of scientific thinking skills in elementary and middle school.Developmental Review, 27, 172–223.ICLS 2018 Proceedings183© ISLS