Teamwork in the Balance: Exploratory Findings of TeamworkCompetency Patterns in Effective Learning TeamsElizabeth Koh, Antonette Shibani, and Helen Hongelizabeth.koh@nie.edu.sg, antonette.x@nie.edu.sg, helen.hong@nie.edu.sgNational Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, SingaporeAbstract: Teamwork is an important life skill and competency for 21st century learners. It alsocontributes to effective learning teams. In this exploratory study, we examine the different levelsof team effectiveness and describe the varying patterns of teamwork competency dimensionsfrom students’ online problem-solving chatlogs. We employed two types of measures for aholistic understanding of team effectiveness, namely, task performance scores and learners’perception of how effective they are as a team. Teams were categorized into four levels of teameffectiveness based on the measures. A content analysis of teamwork competency dimensionswas also performed. Our findings revealed the need for balance in teamwork competencybehaviors for effective learning teams. Insights from the findings could lead to design principlesfor interventions to nurture teamwork competency in our 21st century learners.Keywords: teamwork, 21st century skills, effective learning teams, chatlog, CSCLIntroductionTeamwork is one of the important 21st century competencies for learners of this day, yet learning how to becomemore competent at it can be challenging. Amongst the difficulties is that the concept of teamwork is not easilyidentified or measured in the classroom. Nevertheless, past research has acknowledged transportable measures ofteamwork. However, these have tended to focus on learner perspectives rather than their interactions. There hasbeen limited research that identifies teamwork competency measures through the interaction and dialogue ofteams. In line with CSCL research that focuses on the interactions paradigm (Dillenbourg, Baker, Blaye et al.,1996), we examine the chatlog of learning teams for teamwork competency dimensions. Moreover, synchronouschat is considered a useful medium as it allows teams to spend more time in deep reasoning and distributesparticipation (Sins, Savelsbergh, van Joolingen et al., 2011). As part of a larger study, a six dimensional teamworkcompetency model for learning teams was developed from past literature and pilot studies (Koh, Hong, & Seah,2014) namely: coordination (COD) - organizing team activities to complete a task on time; mutual performancemonitoring (MPM) - tracking the performance of team members; team decision making (TDM) - integratinginformation, selecting the best solution, and evaluating the consequences in a team; constructive conflict (CSC) dealing with differences in interpretation between team members through discussion and clarification; teamemotional support (TES) - supporting team members emotionally and psychologically; and, team commitment(TCM) - identifying with and being involved in team goals.Teamwork is complex and research is still ongoing on the conditions and processes of effective teams(Näykki, Järvelä, Kirschner et al., 2014). Team effectiveness can be measured through performance scores andperception surveys. In this current study, we employed both types of measures for a holistic understanding of teameffectiveness, i.e., task performance scores and learners’ perception of how effective they are as a team. Teamscan be categorized into different levels of team effectiveness. Several papers have compared effective teams withineffective ones in order to characterize and identify behaviors of effective teams (Soller, 2001). Similarly, thisexploratory study will examine different levels of team effectiveness and describe the varying patterns ofteamwork competency. We ask, what are the teamwork competency patterns of various team effectiveness levels?Identifying these patterns can help teams to become more aware of their processes and subsequently adjust theirteam behaviors and learn to become more effective teams.MethodActivity and datasetAn online collaborative problem-solving activity was created as one of the programs in the Project Workcurriculum. The participants were 14 year-old, Secondary Two students in a Singapore Secondary School. Inrandomized teams of 3 or 4 in a class, students used synchronous group chat to solve the tasks. Prior to theproblem-solving task, students were given an icebreaker task to help them get to know their team members andfamiliarize them with the chat system. For the problem-solving task, students had to discuss online andcollaboratively find a solution to a dilemma scenario of a factory run by a student’s father which was pollutingthe environment and affecting the health of the elderly in a nearby hospice. Students were given about 45 minutesin class to solve the task in teams, after which they responded to a survey.ICLS 2016 Proceedings874© ISLSAll the students in the Secondary Two level who had the Project Work subject were invited to participatein the study. This resulted in 76 teams. For this analysis, we focus on 34 teams as content analysis for these teamshave been completed; the coding for remaining teams is still in progress. These 34 teams have a total of 9778 chatlines ranging from 71 to 487 lines per team and an average of 287.6 lines per team.Team effectiveness measuresTeam effectiveness was measured through task performance scores in the problem-solving task and self-reportsof team members. The last answer given by a team in the chatlog was extracted as the final answer, which wasused to measure task performance score. This final answer was marked by a teacher based on a rubric whichevaluated the solution’s understanding of the task requirement and coverage extent.For the self-report measure, three items from the team effectiveness scale (Van den Bossche, Gijselaers,Segers et al., 2006) were used. Individuals rated this on a 5-point Likert scale with 5 being strongly agree. Thiswas then aggregated at the team level, and averaged within the team.As this is an exploratory study and our data was slightly skewed, we performed a series of median-splitsto classify teams into effective and less effective teams. This resulted in four levels of team effectiveness:•Level 1: Low task performance score and low self-report team effectiveness items•Level 2: Low task performance score and high self-report team effectiveness items•Level 3: High task performance score and low self-report team effectiveness itemsLevel 4: High task performance score and high self-report team effectiveness itemsWe emphasized the performance score over the self-report as this is a slightly more objective measure.Table 1 provides the descriptive statistics of team effective measures and team effectiveness levels.•Table 1: Team effectiveness descriptive statistics and level meansTeam Effectiveness MeasuresTask performance scoreI am satisfied with the performanceof our team (EFF1 team average)I would want to work with this teamin the future (EFF2 team average)As a team, we have learned a lot(EFF3 team average)Mean(n=34)SD(n=34)Min(n=34)Max(n=34)4.005.00Level1(n=12)1.003.81Level2(n=7)1.004.50Level3(n=11)2.553.77Level4(n=4)2.004.481.594.020.820.551.002.503.680.682.255.003.524.293.234.353.760.612.504.753.564.353.404.35Teamwork competency coding schemeThe coding scheme is illustrated in Table 2 along with subcategories and examples. This coding scheme wastheoretically informed as well as surfaced from the data. Each chat line was coded for presence or absence of eachof the 6 dimensions; each line could be coded for multiple dimensions. Two researchers performed the contentanalysis; they coded 9 teams together and split up the other teams between them. Disagreements were discussedand agreed upon to create the final coding for the team. Cohen’s kappa ranged from .714 to .964 whileKrippendorff’s alpha was .713 to .964 for the last 3 teams suggesting adequate levels of intercoder reliability. Thecoded dimensions were aggregated per team then averaged by team size as teams had different numbers ofmembers. Table 3 reports the mean coded dimensions per team member.Table 2: Teamwork competency coding scheme examplesTeamwork DimensionCoordination (COD)Organize activities to complete task on timeAsk team members who is in the teamCoordinate logistics of taskMutual Performance Monitoring (MPM)Give clarifying feedback to help in the team’s performanceAsk team members to contribute to the taskSteer conversation back to taskTeam Decision Making (TDM)Give ideas related to the taskAsk any task-related questionExchange information about the task problemICLS 2016 Proceedings875Examples“faster, only 10 minutes more”“Who else?” “Jane is in this team”“Type the answer”“Check this Wikipedia link”“John, what’s your solution?”“Shut up please”“Move the factory”“Can the elders move?”“The source of the pollution...”© ISLSConstructive Conflict (CSC)Explain and give reason for disagreementAdd on to ideas (Elaborate on ideas)Propose different ideasTeam Emotional Support (TES)Greet and introduce oneselfExpress positive emotions and emoticonsAppreciate team member (Give credit)Team Commitment (TCM)Express confidence in own team’s abilityShow togetherness through ‘We’ languageHold own team in higher regard compared to other teams“Because its expensive and not easy”“Also, the fishes still die”“How about we move the elders”“Hello, How are you”“ Good ”“John’s answer is good”“We can do it”“We need one final answer”“Our team is better than Jane’s”Findings and discussionUsing descriptive statistics to examine the teamwork competency dimensions of the four team effectivenesslevels, we found some interesting patterns. Table 4 reports the averages of teams and Figure 1, the bar chart.Table 3: Coded teamwork dimensions descriptivestatisticsDimensions permember in teamCODMPMTDMCSCTESTCMMeanSDMinMax10.175.0616.2515.4911.744.315.042.8210.9710.804.443.082.25.672.502.004.00.5018.6711.0043.5043.0020.3312.75Table 4: Coded teamwork dimensions averages ofTeam Effectiveness LevelsTeam EffectivenessLevelCOD meanMPM meanTDM meanCSC meanTES meanTCM mean123410.384.9318.8617.6912.684.909.015.0212.7012.2311.563.659.924.9916.4515.9210.944.1112.255.7114.0813.3511.464.23Figure 1. Bar chart of teamwork dimensions teamaverages of the four team effectiveness levels.The level 4 category represents the most effective teams. This level had the highest MPM and CODmeans amongst the different team levels. Team chatlogs showed that team members engaged in behaviors liketime keeping and steering each other back to task. They assigned tasks to members so that everyone played a partin solving the problem. This could suggest that MPM and COD are important aspects in effective teams. Also, forCOD, TCM, CSC and TES, the amounts were quite similar per team member. This could suggest that a balancein the teamwork competency dimensions amounts characterize effective teams.Level 3 teams did well in task performance but were not perceived as well by team members.Unsurprisingly, they had low levels of TES. The TES averages were the lowest compared to the other teameffectiveness levels. An examination of the chatlogs revealed that in some teams, members had slightly differentanswers but one member of the team decided on the final answer and the other members acquiesced to the answerwithout showing strong support. COD was also relatively low and there was a wide gap between COD and TDMsuggesting that while task ideas and elaboration were contributed, the team did not do much to coordinate theanswer or want to complete the task on time.Level 2 teams had low performance scores but high self-perceptions of team effectiveness. TES was thesecond highest among the four levels. While there were good amounts of TES, this level of teams had the lowestTCM, COD, TDM and CSC. The low TDM and CSC amounts indicate thin argumentation about the task whichrelates to the low performance scores. As for low TCM, this suggests learners were not that committed to theteam’s outcome. There seems to be close TDM, CSC and TES amounts, however as compared to level 4 teams,this pattern is missing a similar amount of COD. This further suggests that it is not just a few dimensions, but thatmore (or all) of the dimensions have to be present in balanced amounts for effective learning teams.ICLS 2016 Proceedings876© ISLSLevel 1 teams were the least effective teams. Among all the levels, they had the lowest MPM amounts.MPM reduces free-riders as members check on each other. This suggests the importance of MPM to help improveteam effectiveness. This level also had the highest TDM and CSC suggesting that there were many ideas anddisagreements. Interestingly, this level had the highest TCM. The chatlogs revealed that students used “we”language in their task discussion frequently suggesting that they were committed to the task but at the same timehad disagreements with their team members. There is a very wide disparity between COD and TDM too,suggesting that they could not coordinate their final answer well. Although TES is the highest among all the teamlevels, TES is relatively less compared to TDM and CSC, suggesting more disharmony than support.These team effectiveness patterns point to the importance of the different dimensions of the teamworkcompetency measure. We argue that it is necessary for the dimensions to be present in similar amounts. In otherwords, effective teams require a balance of the different teamwork competency dimensions. This corroboratesfindings by Soller (2001) who found that the effective team had a balance of all the active learning, conversationand creative conflict skills compared to the ineffective team which was unbalanced and was missing a skillcategory. The balance of teamwork competency dimensions could also be related to socio-emotional balancefound to be important for effective learning teams (Näykki et al., 2014).ConclusionTeamwork competency is a key lifelong learning skill and this study goes towards shedding light on effectiveteamwork behaviors. We note that our analysis is mostly based on descriptive statistics. We have performed acorrelation analysis but no significant correlations were found. This is possibly because of the small sample size.Work is ongoing to content analyze more teams for further inferential analysis. Other work will also look into therelationship between the two team effectiveness measures. Nevertheless, this nascent finding of the need forbalance in teamwork competency behaviors could lead to design principles for interventions to nurture teamworkcompetency for our 21st century learners. Although teamwork is complex, we are hopeful that new efforts canhelp enhance the clarity and power of teamwork.ReferencesDillenbourg, P., Baker, M. J., Blaye, A., & O'Malley, C. (1996). The evolution of research on collaborativelearning. In E. Spada & P. Reimann (Eds.), Learning in humans and machine: Towards aninterdisciplinary learning science. (pp. 189-211). Oxford: Elsevier.Koh, E., Hong, H., & Seah, J. (2014). An analytic frame and multi-method approach to measure teamworkcompetency. Paper presented at the 14th International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies(ICALT), Athens.Näykki, P., Järvelä, S., Kirschner, P. A., & Järvenoja, H. (2014). Socio-emotional conflict in collaborativelearning—a process-oriented case study in a higher education context. International Journal ofEducational Research, 68, 1-14.Sins, P. H. M., Savelsbergh, E. R., van Joolingen, W. R., & van Hout-Wolters, B. H. A. M. (2011). Effects offace-to-face versus chat communication on performance in a collaborative inquiry modeling task.Computers & Education, 56(2), 379-387.Soller, A. (2001). Supporting social interaction in an intelligent collaborative learning system. InternationalJournal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 12, 40-62.Van den Bossche, P., Gijselaers, W. H., Segers, M., & Kirschner, P. A. (2006). Social and cognitive factors drivingteamwork in collaborative learning environments: Team learning beliefs and behaviors. Small GroupResearch, 37(5), 490-521.AcknowledgementsThis paper refers to data and analysis from the research projects OER62/12EK and OER09/15 EK, funded by theEducation Research Funding Programme, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University,Singapore. The views expressed in this paper are the authors’ and do not necessarily represent the views of NIE.ICLS 2016 Proceedings877© ISLS