Revising Biology Misconceptions Using an Online Activity WithRetrieval Practice and Explanation Prompts.Merrin C. Oliver, Mercer University, oliver_mc@mercer.eduMaggie D. Renken, Georgia State University, mrenken@gsu.eduJoseph J. Williams, National University of Singapore, williams@comp.nus.edu.cgAbstract: Conceptual change instruction is crucial in domains like science, where studentscome into the classroom with intuitive misconceptions that need to be revised. While previousconceptual change instruction has focused on classroom-based environments, this studydesigned an online activity that identified misconceptions with a retrieval-practice task andcompared the effects of subsequent self-explanation and instructional explanation prompts onknowledge revision. Results indicated that the retrieval practice activity induced cognitiveconflict in learners who had misconceptions, and learners who received subsequent prompts toexplain the correct answers had significantly higher post-test scores than students who readrefuting explanations. We suggest that self-explaining is a particularly effective revision taskfor online Biology courses, where students may not actively engage with the refutingexplanations that are used in classroom-based conceptual change instruction.Keywords: conceptual change, self-explaining, misconception, refutation text, photosynthesisIntroductionWhen learners enter classes with pre-existing misconceptions about the content, traditional instruction is notsufficient to correct those misconceptions, and learning is hindered (Chi, 2013). Specially-designed instruction isoften necessary to correct misconceptions through conceptual change, and most of this instruction continues toassess and utilize revision activities in classroom-based learning environments (Tippet, 2010).Bridging the gap between traditional conceptual change instruction and adaptive educationaltechnologies could optimize distance learning in domains like science and potentially increase the fit of adaptivemodels (Liu, Patel, & Koedinger, 2016). To begin building this bridge, we should examine the effectiveness ofrevision tasks in online environments and design ways to identify misconceptions–and thus the need for adaptationto a revision task–during normal instruction. In this study, we designed an online retrieval practice activity thatused misconception inventory items coupled with confidence ratings to identify misconceptions and comparedthe effects of two revision tasks, self-explanations and instructional explanations, on conceptual change.Theoretical frameworkConceptual changeStudents naturally interpret new information according to what they already know and bring with them knowledgefrom both informal and formal learning experiences (Chinn & Brewer, 1993). However, often learner’s priorknowledge is misconceived and inaccurate. To optimize subsequent learning, misconceptions need to be revisedthrough conceptual change; a complex type of learning that replaces the misconception with correct knowledge(Chi, 2013).While encountering new information that conflicts with prior, intuitively-based knowledge is consideredto be a fundamental aspect of learning science (Chinn & Brewer, 1993), it is notoriously difficult to get learnersto revise their misconceptions and achieve conceptual change. Conceptual change is composed of a number ofcomponent processes that need to be facilitated through instruction for revision to occur. First, instruction shouldelicit cognitive conflict, where the learner noticeably experiences a conflict between the misconception and correctinformation, by simultaneously activating the misconception and correct information in working memory (Chi,2013). After cognitive conflict is induced, instruction must encourage outdating of the incorrect knowledge andupdating of the correct knowledge into the learner’s knowledge structure (Kendeou & O’Brien, 2014).The effectiveness of conceptual change instruction is often assessed qualitatively in interviews orquantitatively using pre-post changes in misconception inventory accuracy. However, the process of conceptualchange is gradual (Kendeou & O’Brien, 2014). Learners will experience cognitive conflict for some amount oftime before revision occurs, which would not be indicated in a posttest. The effects of a single task are betterunderstood by examining relative changes in learner’s confidence. Increased confidence in the inaccuracy of amisconception (i.e., knowledge outdating), increased confidence in the accuracy of the correct answer (i.e.,ICLS 2018 Proceedings729© ISLSknowledge updating), or decreased confidence in either (i.e., cognitive conflict) would indicate that conceptualchange is underway to some degree.Revision tasksMost work on conceptual change instruction investigates the usefulness of modified instructional explanations,referred to as refutation texts, in facilitating change. Refutation texts typically include three primary components:the statement of the misconception, the refutation of that misconception–which the inaccuracy of themisconception is pointed out–and an explanation of the correct scientific understanding (Tippet, 2010). Refutationtexts are designed to promote cognitive conflict in learners, and research consistently indicates that they are moreeffective than traditional instructional texts at facilitating conceptual change in science classrooms (Tippett, 2010).Self-explaining may also be an effective revision task, because it actively engages students andencourages them to monitor their own learning (Chi, 2000). Like refutation texts, self-explaining prompts canencourage misconception revision by highlighting inconsistencies in knowledge to promote cognitive conflict.The positive effects of prompts to self-explain particular parts of content, a problem, or an answer are indicatedin numerous studies looking at knowledge building–a finding known as the self-explanation effect (Chi, 2000)–and research has more recently evidenced effectiveness for knowledge revision online (Williams, Lombrozo, Hsu,Huber, & Kim, 2016).We were interested in misconceptions found in Biology education, where students start and finish collegelevel-biology courses with intuitive, but inaccurate, understandings of how plants get energy and mass for growth(Boomer & Latham, 2001). Like most work on conceptual change, refutation texts are the most commonlyassessed method for revising misconceptions about photosynthesis and respiration (Tippet, 2010). While somestudies designed and examined computer-assisted conceptual change instruction for photosynthesismisconceptions, like digitally presented content modules or computer-based concept mapping, the activities wereincorporated into traditional face-to-face classes and facilitated by an instructor or peer group (Çepni, Taş, &Köse, 2006). Previous work provides little insight into the revision of these misconceptions in distance-learningenvironments and has not assessed whether providing revision activities to students who do not hold the targetedmisconceptions is detrimental to learning.Current StudyMultiple-choice questions with misconception lures are often used as pre-post assessments to measure the effectsof revision activities like refutation texts, but their ability to be used as a revision activity for biology-basedmisconceptions has not been assessed. We designed an activity using multiple-choice questions with knownmisconception lures to activate existing misconceptions and employed confidence ratings to identify thecomponent processes of conceptual change. Subsequently, some learners received prompts to self-explain orreceived prompts to read an instructional explanation of the correct answer. When paired with the correct answerfeedback, the instructional explanations had all the components of a refutation text. We compared the effects ofthe activity with and without specific explanation prompts on conceptual change learning. We used changes inconfidence ratings and posttest scores to answer the following research questions:1. Which type of explanation prompt, self-explanations or instructional explanations, is more effectivefor learning about commonly misconceived biology content in an online activity?2. How does retrieval practice, with and without explanation prompts, affect participant’s confidencein correct answers and misconception lures?MethodsParticipantsParticipants were 403 undergraduates in the second part of a two-sequence introductory Biology course at a largeSoutheastern university in the United States. 71% of participants were female, 28% male, and 1% preferred notto answer; 39% identified as African American, 28% Caucasian, 13% Asian/Pacific Islander, 8% Hispanic, 8%other/multiracial, and 4% preferred not to answer. Participants were randomly assigned to one of three conditions.After excluding participants who did not complete both sessions from analysis, group distributions were asfollows: self-explanation condition (n = 118), instructional explanation condition (n = 140), or no explanationcondition (n = 145). All participants passed a Biology I course that covered photosynthesis and respiration beforeparticipating in the study.ICLS 2018 Proceedings730© ISLSProcedure and materialsParticipants completed two sessions of online activities housed on Qualtrics. The first session included a briefmultiple-choice assessment of prior domain knowledge, followed by a 12-item revision activity to identifyparticipants’ misconceptions and to prompt them with an opportunity to revise them. One week later, the secondsession included a posttest to measure changes in knowledge from the revision activity. Participants’ biologyinstructors assigned the sessions as homework by sharing links to the Qualtrics-based forms.Session 1: Revision activity questionsWe adapted previous measures of photosynthesis and respiration misconceptions (AAAS 2016; Amir & Tamir,1994; Boomer & Latham, 2011) to create 12 revision activity questions. We worked with biology instructors toidentify common photosynthesis and respiration misconceptions and to confirm the appropriateness of ourrevision activity questions. Each question was multiple choice and had 4 answer choices: 1 correct, 1 targetmisconception, and 2 incorrect answer choices. We included 4 target misconceptions in the items: Misconception1 - plants get their food from the soil (AAAS, 2016), Misconception 2 - plants do not respire (Amir & Tamir,1994), Misconception 3 - plants only respire when they are not photosynthesizing (Boomer & Latham, 2011),and Misconception 4 - respiration in plants is synonymous with breathing in animals (Amir & Tamir, 1994). Wedesigned the revision activity to include both knowledge and application questions. Knowledge questionsprompted participants to correctly identify facts or basic concepts (e.g., “Which of the following about respirationis true?”). Application questions prompted participants to apply their knowledge to a scenario (e.g., “In theexperiment depicted above, what happened to the mass lost in the ‘water, no light’ treatment?”).Session 1: Confidence ratingsAfter reading a question, but before selecting an answer choice, the activity prompted participants to report howconfident they were in the accuracy of each answer option using a 5-point Likert scale. Instructions promptedparticipants to, “Please indicate how confident you are in the accuracy of each answer choice,” with 1 indicatingabsolutely confident it’s wrong and 5 indicating absolutely confident it’s right.Session 1: Explanation tasksAfter rating their confidence in each answer choice, participants saw the question again and were prompted toselect the best answer. On the following page, the question was presented with correct answer feedback (i.e.,correct answer highlighted and labeled correct). Directly below the correct answer feedback, any relevantexplanation prompts were presented, followed by a cognitive load measure. See Figure 1 for a visual depiction ofan activity procedure.For the self-explanation condition, participants were prompted to “in 3-5 sentences, please explain whyX is the correct answer to the question” and subsequently entered their explanation into a text box. Participants inthe instructional explanation condition were prompted to carefully read an instructional explanation, which wasprovided below the correct answer feedback.For the instructional explanation condition, biology instructors wrote twelve paragraph-longexplanations (~4 sentences). They explained the correct answer to each question and either indirectly refuted ordirectly refuted relevant misconceptions contained in the question. For example, in a question including themisconception respiration only takes place when photosynthesis is not in an answer choice, the instructionalexplanation for that question indirectly refuted the misconception (i.e., “respiration is taking place in plants at alltimes…”). In a different question including the misconception plants get food from the ground in an answerchoice, the instructional explanation directly refuted that misconception (i.e., “Plants do not ‘get food’ fromanywhere. Plants make their own food…”). Both direct and indirect refutations can be effective (Chi, 2013) andwere chosen based on their appropriateness for the question format. Participants in the no explanation conditionwere only provided with the correct answer feedback and did not receive any explanation prompts.Session 1: Cognitive load measureFollowing their assigned explanation prompts (or lack thereof), all participants completed a cognitive loadmeasure using a 7-point Likert scale. The scale in this study asked participants to self-report how hard it was tocomplete the activity, with 1 indicating not difficult at all and 7 indicating very, very difficult. After completingthe cognitive load measure, the activity routed learners to the next activity question. The procedure (see Figure 1)continued like this for all 12 activity questions. The order of questions was randomized.ICLS 2018 Proceedings731© ISLSFigure 1. The procedure for each of the 12 activity questions.Session 2: Posttest measureOne week later, participants completed the posttest. The posttest included 24 questions: the 12 original activityquestions and 12 new transfer questions. Transfer questions addressed the same knowledge and maintained thesame structure as activity questions; only the wording or specific examples differed. Similarly to the activity,participants were prompted to rate their confidence in the accuracy of each answer choice before selecting theiranswer to each question.FindingsPhotosynthesis misconceptionsPercentages of misconception lures selected with high confidence suggest that participants entered the activitywith persistent misconceptions about photosynthesis and respiration. High confidence ratings distinguishedbetween misconceptions and guessing; a low confidence rating of 1, 2, or 3 would indicated a guess, and ratingsof 4 or 5 indicated the participants were confident the misconception lure was correct. The four primarymisconceptions addressed in this study, the most commonly selected answer lure for each of those misconceptions,and percentages of participants that selected each overall and with high confidence are listed in Table 1.Percentages reported in Table 1 are likely underestimated; question order was randomized throughout the activity,and participant’s likelihood of selecting a misconception may have decreased through the activity as they receivedcorrect answer feedback.Table 1: Percentages of participants indicating the most common misconceptionsMisconceptionAssociated Answer Choice1) Plants get food from the ground.Absorption of organic substances fromthe soil via the roots2) Plants do not respire.SelectedHigh conf.43%23%47%37%3) Respiration only takes placewhen photosynthesis is not.It will weigh less because nophotosynthesis is occurring.20%22%4) Respiration is the same asbreathing.It is the exchange of carbon dioxide andoxygen gases…35%16%Explanation promptsTo investigate how the effects of self-explaining and instructional explanations compared to no explanations, weused an ANCOVA to compare the effects of condition after controlling for prior knowledge. There was asignificant effect of condition on overall posttest scores, F (2, 399) = 7.07, p = .015. Pairwise comparisonsindicated that the self-explanation group (M = 40.71, SD = 19.44) had significantly higher posttest scores (p = .01and p = .01, respectively) than instructional explanation group (M = 35.71, SD = 15.63) and no explanation groupICLS 2018 Proceedings732© ISLS(M = 35.98, SD = 15.74), but posttest scores for the instructional explanation group were not significantly differentthan the no explanation group (p = .99). The same results were found when separately analyzing non-transferposttest item scores, F (2, 399) = 7.56, p = .001, and transfer posttest item scores, F (2, 399) = 3.51, p = .03. Itshould be noted that for overall posttest scores and transfer posttest scores, means for the instructional explanationgroup were lower than means in the no explanation group, but not significantly. Mean comparisons of conditionscan be seen in Figure 2.Figure 2. Differences in posttest accuracy compared to the no explanation condition. Scores are presented inrelation to the no explanation condition as a baseline and are adjusted for prior knowledge scores.Time, which may generally indicate engagement, in the activity provides context for some of the effectsof condition. Participants in the self-explanation condition (M = 29.92) spent more minutes in the activity thanparticipants in the instructional (M = 24.24) or no explanation condition (M = 22.27), F(2, 400) = 19.44, p < .001.After controlling for the effects of time and prior knowledge, the main effect of self-explaining was onlymarginally significant, F(4, 397) = 2.46, p = .08.Changes in confidenceItem-level analyses on how confidence changed in relation to the neutral center of the scale–the selection of whichindicates that the learner was neither confident in the accuracy nor the inaccuracy of the answer–provides insightinto the specific processes associated with conceptual change. Movements towards the middle of the scalesuggested cognitive conflict, because learners were becoming unsure of what they were previously confident in.Movements towards the upper end of the scale suggested updating, because learners were becoming moreconfident in the accuracy of that knowledge. Movements towards the lower end of the scale suggested outdating,because learners were becoming more confident that knowledge was wrong. See Figure 3 for an illustration ofthese processes.Figure 3. Graph illustrating changes in confidence and the conceptual change processes they suggest.ICLS 2018 Proceedings733© ISLSSelected the MisconceptionDid Not Select the MisconceptionMisconceptionCorrect AnswerMisconceptionCorrect AnswerMisconception 1: Plants Get Food From the Soil - Declarative Knowledge Question*All ↓: Z = -9.71, p < .001*SE ↑: Z = -2.01, p =.05*IE ↑: Z = -1.96, p = .05Misconception 2: Plants Do Not Respire - Application Question*All ↓: Z = -8.48, p < .001*ALL ↑: Z = -4.61, p < .001*All ↓: Z = -7.66, p < .001Misconception 3: Plants Only Respire in the Dark - Application Question*SE ↓: Z = -2.97, p = .003*IE ↓: Z = -4.07, p < .001*SE ↑: Z = -3.40, p = .001*SE ↓: Z = -2.09, p = .04Misconception 4: Respiration is the Same as Breathing - Declarative Knowledge Question*IE ↓: Z = -4.07, p < .001*NoEx↓: Z = 2.44, p=.02*ALL↑: Z = -4.36, p =.04Figure 4. This array of graphs illustrates activity to posttest changes in the mean confidence for misconceptionlures and correct answers across conditions. The left side illustrates confidence for participants who selected themisconception lure. The right side illustrates confidence for participants who did not select the misconceptionlure. Statistics reported are based on Sign Test comparisons.ICLS 2018 Proceedings734© ISLSWe examined changes in confidence ratings for the four most commonly selected misconception luresand separately analyzed learners who selected the misconception (i.e., indicated a need for conceptual changeinstruction) and learners who did not (i.e., did not indicate a need for conceptual change instruction). Confidencechanges are illustrated in Figure 4. It should be noted that the activity was not a pretest; learning was occurringthroughout, and question order was randomized. Any differences in activity confidence ratings across conditionsmay indicate the effects of the conditions up to that point.Learners who selected the misconceptionConfidence changes for learners who selected the misconception indicated that conceptual change was occurring.All conditions elicited outdating of misconception 1–plants get food from the soil–which was situated in adeclarative knowledge question. All conditions elicited cognitive conflict for misconception 2–plants do notrespire–which was situated in an application question that asked learners to identify which diagram correctlyillustrated the carbon cycle. Cognitive conflict was also indicated across conditions for misconception 4–respiration in plants is the same as breathing in animals–which was situated in a declarative knowledge question.Interestingly, the self-explanation and instructional explanation conditions elicited cognitive conflict formisconception 3–plants only respire in the dark–which was situated in an application question that required ascenario-based prediction, but learners who did not receive an explanation prompt (i.e., no explanation condition)retained high confidence in the accuracy of that misconception. This interaction was also supported by a repeatedmeasures analysis, F(2, 137) = 3.15, p = .04. Concerning the correct answers, there was no evidence to suggestthat learners were updating their knowledge with the correct answers. However, confidence changes suggest thatlearners were moving towards cognitive conflict for the correct answers, indicating they were becoming lessconfident that the correct answers were wrong.Learners who did not select the misconceptionFor participants who did not select the misconception lure, we expected their confidence in the misconception toremain the same or move towards cognitive conflict. This was largely the case; participants across conditionsbecame more conflicted, or remained conflicted, about the accuracy of misconceptions 1, 2, and 4. However, formisconception 3–plants only respire in the dark–learners in the self-explaining condition moved towards updatingtheir knowledge with the misconception; whereas learners in the other two conditions appeared to remainconflicted. This interaction was also supported by a repeated measures analysis, F(2, 244) = 5.29, p < .01. Further,self-explaining the correct answer associated with misconception 3 also decreased learners’ confidence in theaccuracy of the correct answer. Learners in all conditions appeared to outdate the correct answer associated withmisconception 2–plants do not respire–and became more confident that the correct answer was wrong. Correctanswer confidence did not change significantly for misconceptions 1 and 4.Discussion and conclusionsMany of the undergraduate learners in this study indicated persistent misconceptions about photosynthesis andrespiration. Even after covering photosynthesis and respiration in their previous biology course, almost 40% ofour learners were confident that plants do not respire, and thus incorrectly believed that plants do not take in anyoxygen. Other common misconceptions were indicated as well, and our activity aimed to simultaneously identifythese misconceptions and provide an opportunity for revision.The retrieval practice activity provided all students with correct answer feedback and prompted somestudents to self-explain or read explanations of the correct answer. Students who were prompted to self-explainthe correct answers had the greatest improvements in posttest scores, and much of this effect may be because theyspent more time in the activity. Reading instructional explanations, which included all the components of arefutation text when paired with correct answer feedback, did not have any effects above and beyond that of theretrieval practice portion of the activity alone. The learners in this study completed the activity as a homeworkassignment that was graded for completion, not accuracy. Thus, their motivation to actively engage the in activitymay have been low. Self-explaining prompts appeared to require more engagement in the activity (i.e., time),which subsequently increased learning. More passive revision activities, like refutation texts, may not facilitatesufficient engagement in the conceptual change process when used in distance-learning environments.Conceptual change is a gradual, multi-component processes that we did not expect to achieve throughthe single activity designed here. Rather, we aimed to see what effects the revision tasks had on the componentprocesses of cognitive conflict, outdating, and updating. For learners who indicated a need for conceptual changeinstruction, retrieval practice alone (i.e., the no explanation condition) was sufficient to induce cognitive conflictfor 2 of the 4 misconceptions examined and was sufficient to outdate the misconception in a declarative knowledgequestion. However, for an application question that required learners to use their knowledge to make predictions,ICLS 2018 Proceedings735© ISLSexplanation prompts were necessary to make learners doubt their misconception and experience conflict; althoughthe type of explanation prompt did not seem to matter. Confidence changes did not provide any evidence thatlearners updated their knowledge with the correct answers. Although posttest scores indicated that self-explainerswere better able to identify the correct answer–they may have just memorized the correct answers withoutchanging the knowledge structure they use to solve problems. Thus, updating may be the challenge posed bypersistent misconceptions that should receive special attention in conceptual change instructional design.Two of our findings indicated that conceptual change instruction had unexpected effects on learners whodid not hold the targeted misconceptions. In one case, learners lost confidence in the correct answer and began tothink it was inaccurate. In another case, self-explaining an application question made learners more confident inthe accuracy of a misconception. These observations may illustrate that conceptual change instruction isinappropriate in the absence of misconceptions, or these observations may just be the result of learners evaluatingthe accuracy of their knowledge more stringently in light of evaluating their own confidence in misconceptionlures, other incorrect answers, and correct answers. Further research is needed to provide additional context anddistinguish between these two possibilities.Although the activity in this study was not adaptive, it illustrates the potential for adaptive technologiesto use retrieval practice activities to identify misconceptions and adapt instruction accordingly. It also indicatesthe utility of conceptual change retrieval practice activities (i.e., those with misconception lures and immediatecorrect answer feedback) in non-adaptive course management systems. We provide evidence that prompts toexplain, but not refutation texts, are an effective way to engage learners with correct answer feedback and facilitatecognitive conflict in a distance-learning environment. Our future work will aim to identify the specificcomponents of self-explanations (i.e., content, engagement, cognitive load, etc.) that predict conceptual change.ReferencesAmerican Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS; 2016). Benchmarks for Science Literacy. NewYork, Oxford University Press. Retrieved from www.AAAS.org.Amir, R., & Tamir, P. (1994). In-depth analysis of misconceptions as a basis for developing research-basedremedial instruction: The case of photosynthesis. The American Biology Teacher, 56(2), 94-100.Boomer, S. M., & Latham, K. L. (2011). Manipulatives-based laboratory for major’s biology–a hands-onapproach to understanding respiration and photosynthesis. Journal of Microbiology & BiologyEducation: JMBE, 12(2), 127.Çepni, S., Taş, E., & Köse, S. (2006). The effects of computer-assisted material on students’ cognitive levels,misconceptions and attitudes towards science. Computers & Education, 46(2), 192-205.Chi, M. T. (2000). Self-explaining expository texts: The dual processes of generating inferences and repairingmental models. Advances in Instructional Psychology, 5, 161-238.Chi, M. T. (2013). Two kinds and four sub-types of misconceived knowledge, ways to change it, and the learningoutcomes. In International Handbook of Research on Conceptual Change, 49-70.Chinn, C. A., & Brewer, W. F. (1993). The role of anomalous data in knowledge acquisition: A theoreticalframework and implications for science instruction. Review of Educational Research, 63(1), 1-4Kendeou, P., & O’Brien, E. J. (2014). The knowledge revision components (KReC) framework: Processes andmechanisms. Processing inaccurate information: Theoretical and applied perspectives from cognitivescience and the educational sciences, 353-377.Liu, R., Patel, R., & Koedinger, K. R. (2016). Modeling common misconceptions in learning process data.In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Learning Analytics & Knowledge, 369-377.Tippett, C. D. (2010). Refutation text in science education: A review of two decades of research. InternationalJournal of Science and Mathematics Education, 8(6), 951-970.Williams, J. J., Lombrozo, T., Hsu, A., Huber, B., & Kim, J. (2016, May). Revising learner misconceptionswithout feedback: Prompting for reflection on anomalies. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conferenceon Human Factors in Computing Systems, 470-474.ICLS 2018 Proceedings736© ISLS