Visual Feedback for Asynchronous Online Interaction: ExploratoryStudy on the Pattern of Other-regulationJi Young Lim, Ji Hyun Lee, and Kyu Yon Lim,jylim.edu@ewhain.net, jhlee.ewha@gmail.com, klim@ewha.ac.krEwha Womans University, Republic of KoreaAbstract: This is a descriptive study of the other-regulation pattern in the asynchronous onlinediscussion with the visual feedback. Visual feedback presented as a network diagram deliversintuitive and comprehensive information about the online interactions. Authors analyzed themessages sent and received and compared the data between more interactive and less interactivelearners in terms of the other-regulation.IntroductionA variety of group awareness tools have been suggested in order to promote interaction in CSCL (Reimann &Bannert, 2018). Enhancing the awareness of group’s learning process as well as learner’s own promotes theregulated learning in collaboration (Hadwin, Järvelä & Miller, 2018), because it allows monitoring the learningprocess that leads to feedback loop during learning. Although some studies examined the visualization of groupinteraction as a feedback tool to facilitate group awareness (Jo, 2009; Lim, Park, & Kim, 2014), more research onhow the feedback tools on the group learning process change the quality of learning is still needed (Hadwin et al.,2018). This study aims to illustrate the regulation pattern when visual feedback on group interaction is provided.Visual feedback in asynchronous online discussionData visualization, as a discovery tool, provides insight about the complex dataset. This advantage of datavisualization makes it considered as a prescription in an education. For example, Lim and her colleagues (2014)used social network analysis (SNA) diagram as feedback on the interaction in the asynchronous online discussion.They compared the level of interaction (centrality) across visual-, text- and non-feedback groups. The resultshowed that the centrality of the visual feedback group was higher than the centrality of the text feedback andnon-feedback group. The authors claimed that the visual feedback tended to provide intuitive and comprehensiveinformation about the interaction. Given that SNA diagram illustrates the structure of group interactions, it islikely to support group awareness by facilitating monitoring of interaction at a glance. This study examines SNAdiagram as visual feedback and its impact on interaction in line with the previous research. However, what isdistinguished from relevant studies is its multi-dimensional approach. Despite that the interaction is notunidirectional but bidirectional, existing research gave attention on what learners sent, not what they received.Since an individual in the collaborative group is both sender and receiver, the impact of visual feedback also needsto be examined in two aspects: Changes in the interaction that learners a) send to, and b) receive from otherlearners.Other-regulationAccording to Hadwin et al. (2018), a large variety of terminologies used in the research of regulation incollaborative learning can be grouped into three primary modes: self-regulation in collaboration (SR: individual’smetacognitive control), co-regulation (CoR: broad regulation through interpersonal interactions), and sociallyshared regulation (SSR: group-level regulation). Indeed, CoR is broadly defined so that it blurs the boundariesbetween SR and SSR (Lim, Lim, & Kim, 2017). Lim et al. (2017) suggested using the term other-regulation (OR)instead of CoR to specify the mechanism of individual’s regulation toward other peers. They explained that theterm CoR is rather a general term that covers a variety of regulation modes in collaborative learning. In this study,the term OR is employed instead of CoR following the framework suggested by Lim and her colleagues (2017)in examining the interaction. Since OR mainly concerns individual as its unit for process in describing theinterpersonal interaction, this study gives attention to OR for exploring how each learners’ behaviour change as areaction to visual feedback.Based on the review of the literature, following research questions have been examined: RQ1.Whenvisual feedback is provided, is there any difference between messages relevant to other-regulation sent fromlearners with a high versus low level of the interaction? RQ2. When visual feedback is provided, is there anydifference between messages relevant to other-regulation sent to learners with a high versus low level of theinteraction?ICLS 2018 Proceedings1347© ISLSResearch methodOnline discussion threads generated by 23 college students enrolled in media literacy course at the universitylocated in South Korea were analyzed. Participants were randomly assigned to three different groups, and thediscussion topics were changed on a weekly basis. After the weekly discussion, visual feedback based on SNAdiagram was provided for each discussion group. Specifically, the weekly visual feedback illustrated structuralrelationships among the learners by representing the learners as nodes and their relationships as links. The size ofthe node indicated the in-degree centrality, which is one of the indices of the SNA that describes the level of theattention gained which particularly reflects the prestige and popularity of each node. The direction of the linkmeans who sent the message to whom, and the thickness of the link means the intensity of the interaction.The content of the online discussion messages was analyzed in terms of the theoretical framework ofthe OR. Messages were segmented into smaller units based on its meaning, which were coded afterwardsfollowing the coding scheme suggested by Janssen et al. (2010). The coding scheme initially categorizes messagesas task-related and social activity. The task-related messages included informational activities relevant toperformance and regulation of task progress, while social messages included activities relevant to relationship,shared mental model, and regulation of collaboration. Next, more interactive (high degree of centrality: HC) andless interactive (low degree of centrality: LC) learners were identified and analyzed according to their OR behaviorpatterns. That is, the coded messages relevant to OR 1) sent by HC and LC learners, and 2) received by HC andLC learners, were counted and compared.ConclusionFor RQ1, messages sent from HC and LC learners were analyzed. Both HC and LC learners presented task-relatedmessages more frequently than social messages. As the discussion progressed, the task-related activities graduallyincreased while the social activities decreased. In the 3rd week, social messages from the LC learners were notfound. Specifically, it was inferred that more interactive learners use a variety of OR strategies than less interactivelearners. More than 90.0% of the messages from LC learners were task-related messages that is mainlyinformational. On the contrary, the HC learners sent both task-related (80.3%) and social (19.7%) messages, andthe HC learners’ task-related messages included regulation of task progress as well as informational messages.For RQ2, messages sent to HC and LC learners were analyzed. Overall interaction pattern was similar to the resultof RQ1. An interesting finding was that the HC learners received messages relevant to the relationship (11.7%)more than LC learners (3.8%) did. Also, only HC learners received messages relevant to the regulation of taskprogress (1.8%) and shared mental model (1.9%) while none of the LC learners did. This study illustrated theinteraction pattern of OR when the visual feedback was provided. As Hadwin and her colleagues (2018) pointed,a visualization tool that informs the learning process such as learner dashboard can trigger and sustain regulatedlearning. When the SNA diagram was presented, the HC learners sent and received both personal and task-relatedmessages, whereas LC learners mostly sent and received task-related messages.ReferencesHadwin, A. F., Järvelä, S., & Miller, M. (2018). Self-regulated, co-regulated, and socially shared regulation incollaborative learning environment. In D. H. Schunk & J. A. Greene. (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulationof learning and performance (pp. 83-106) (2nd Ed.). New York, NY: Routledge.Janssen, J., Erkens, G., Kirschner, P. A., & Kanselaar, G. (2010). Effects of representational guidance duringcomputer-supported collaborative learning. Instructional Science, 38(1), 59-88.Jo, I. H. (2009). The effect of social network diagrams on a virtual network of practice: a Korean case. Asia PacificEducation Review, 10, 525-534.Lim, K. Y., Park, H., & Kim, H. (2014). Effects of social network-based visual feedback on learning in onlinediscussion. Journal of Educational Technology, 30(3). 443-466.Lim, K. Y., Lim, J. Y., & Kim, H. J. (2017). Exploratory study of the self-regulation in collaborative context scalefor college students. Journal of Educational Technology, 33(3), 567-598.Reimann, P., & Bannert, M. (2018). Self-regulation of learning and performance in computer-supportedcollaborative learning environments. In D. H. Schunk & J. A. Greene. (Eds.), Handbook of selfregulation of learning and performance (pp. 285-303) (2nd Ed.). New York, NY: Routledge.AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the Ministry of Education of the Republic of Korea and the National ResearchFoundation of Korea (NRF- 2017R1A2B4002606).* Corresponding author: Kyu Yon Lim, Department of Educational Technology, Ewha Womans University.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1348© ISLS