Collective Knowledge Advancement andConceptual Understanding of Complex Scientific Conceptsin the Jigsaw InstructionJun Oshima, Shizuoka University, joshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jpAyano Ohsaki, AIIT, ohsaki-ayano@aiit.ac.jpYuki Yamada, Shizuoka University, y119y.b2.226@gmail.comRitsuko Oshima, Shizuoka University, roshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jpAbstract: We examined jigsaw instruction related to the human immune system at a high schoolfrom the perspective of knowledge creation. Collective knowledge advancement was analyzedusing socio-semantic network analysis (SSNA) and in-depth discourse analysis. Theirconceptual understanding was collected through pre- and post-testing and evaluated by usingthe structure–behavior–function framework. SSNA revealed that higher conceptualunderstanding was related to improved collective knowledge advancement. Further in-depthdiscourse analysis clarified that students who acquired higher conceptual understandingengaged in shared epistemic agency through productive regulatory processes to promote theircollective knowledge advancement. Based on the results, we discuss and propose scaffoldingsfor more students to engage in productive collaboration in jigsaw instruction.Keywords: collective knowledge advancement, shared epistemic agency, regulation of collaboration,structure–behavior–function framework, jigsaw instructionTheoretical backgroundInquiry into collective knowledge advancementIn the knowledge-creation metaphor of learning (Paavola & Hakkarainen, 2005), students are expected to beinvolved in knowledge creation practice through collaborative construction of knowledge objects (Bereiter, 2002).Regarding creating knowledge in the classroom, Scardamalia (2002) discussed collective cognitive responsibilityfor contributing ideas toward collective knowledge advancement. She defines intentional engagement in collectiveknowledge advancement as the epistemic agency and proposes this agency as a new goal for instruction in theknowledge age (Scardamalia, Bransford, Kozma, & Quellmalz, 2012). Damşa, Kirschner, Andriessen, Erkens,and Sins (2010) further propose shared epistemic agency focusing more on the group-level agency. Through indepth discourse analysis, Damşa et al. found that students in collaborative groups engage in the wholly jointepistemic actions of (1) being aware of their lack of knowledge, (2) alleviating this lack of knowledge, (3) creatingshared understanding, and (4) generative collaboration. To regulate their joint epistemic actions, students werealso found to engage in (1) projection by setting goals and creating joint plans, (2) regulation by monitoring andreflecting on their advancement, and (3) relation by transcending conflicts, redirecting critical feedback, andcreating space for others’ contributions.A new computational approach to collective knowledge advancementIn CSCL research, there have been discussions on the advantages of using social network analysis (SNA) toinvestigate collective knowledge advancement and learner engagement (e.g., Martinez et al. 2003; Reuven et al.2003). De Laat et al. (2007) outlined an approach to synthesizing and extending comprehension of CSCL teachingand learning processes to balance SNA, content analysis, and critical event recall. In this complementary approach,SNA was used to study interaction patterns within a networked learning community, and to study how learnersshare and construct knowledge. They concluded that including SNA in any multi-method approach isadvantageous, because doing so provides researchers and learners with tools for illustrating comprehension andcohesion of group activities, and because it provides researchers a method for selecting appropriate groups tostudy. Several studies have used SNA, especially in as a knowledge-creation metaphor. Over three years, Zhanget al. (2009) implemented a complementary approach that used SNA to visualize and compare classroomcollaboration among fourth-grade elementary school students in a CSCL environment designed to supportknowledge building. An analysis of online participatory patterns and knowledge advancement indicated that thislearning process effectively facilitated knowledge advancement through critical changes in organizations withinCSCL 2017 Proceedings57© ISLSthe classroom, from fixed small groups in the first year of the study to appropriate collaboration through thedynamic formation of small teams based on emergent goals.We extended the potential of SNA by describing a different type of network, socio-semantic networkanalysis (SSNA). Ordinary SNA illustrates the social patterns of learners, namely, their social network. As deLaat et al. (2007) suggested, this approach is thus informative when examining developments or changes in theparticipatory structure of a community. However, several studies argued that existing social network models areunable to examine how collective knowledge advances through learner collaboration (Oshima et al., 2007;Schaffer et al., 2009). Instead, we used a procedure similar to ordinary SNA but proposed a different type of socialnetwork, one based on the words learners use in their discourse in a CSCL environment. We compared this sociosemantic network—in which words were selected as nodes representing learners’ knowledge or ideas during adiscourse on a study topic—with a network of words from the discourse of a group of experts on the same topic.The results showed remarkable differences in the collective knowledge of elementary school students and expertsregarding the words centered on the networks. We concluded that SSNA could provide a new representation ofcommunity knowledge building, enabling researchers to adopt a new complementary assessment technique forinvestigating models of knowledge-building communities. In recent years, this SSNA approach has been adoptedin CSCL studies to analyze student roles in collaboration and to detect productive interaction patterns (e.g., Ma etal., 2016; Oshima, Oshima, & Matsuzawa, 2012).Conceptual understanding of complex scientific conceptsIn knowledge-creation practices, learners take on complex tasks and comprehension of phenomena. Complexsystems are defined as multiple levels of organizations locally interacting with one another such as financialeconomies and weather systems (Wilensky & Jacobson, 2013). Many students have difficulty mastering suchcomplex subjects, despite their importance. One reason for this is that these concepts conflict with priorexperience. Students usually have a “centralized” mindset and tend to provide explanations that assume centralcontrol and simple causality. In an interview study, Jacobson (2001) found that undergraduate students are morelikely to generate simple causality, central control, and predictability in comparison with experts, who exhibitdecentralized thinking of multiple causes as stochastic and equilibration processes.Hmelo-Silver and Pfeffer (2004) proposed the structure–behavior–function (SBF) framework forassessing student understanding of complex systems. While the SBF framework has been used to examine thedesign of physical devices, they applied it to explaining student understanding of multiple interrelations and thedynamic nature of complex systems. To assess student understanding of an aquarium as a complex system, forinstance, Hmelo-Silver and Pfeffer (2004) used the SBF framework as follows: Structures are elements of a system,and in an aquarium, there are fish, plants, and a filter. Behaviors represent how system structures achieve theirpurpose, such as filters that remove waste by trapping large particles, absorbing chemicals, and convertingammonia into harmless chemicals. Finally, functions express why an element exists within a given system, thatis, the purpose of a system element. For example, the filter removes aquarium byproducts. They studied verbalresponses and pictorial representations by middle school students, preservice teachers, and experts, and found thatnovices focused on perceptually available, static system components. Experts, on the other hand, focused moreon interrelation among structures, functions, and behaviors. The results suggested that the SBF framework couldbe a useful formalism for understanding complex systems.Research purposeThis study examined how high school students engage in collective knowledge advancement throughcollaboration in jigsaw instruction (Brown & Campione, 1996; Miyake & Kirschner, 2013) and how theircollective knowledge advancement is related to their learning outcome. Although studies have demonstrated thatjigsaw instruction is effective for facilitating conceptual understanding (e.g., Miyake & Kirschner, 2013), fewstudies have shown how learners engage in collective knowledge advancement during collaboration. Through ourdesign-based research on an immune system lesson (three class hours), we approached students’ collectiveknowledge advancement by applying a multivocality approach (Suthers et al. (Eds.), 2013). First, we conducteda socio-semantic network analysis (SSNA) for numerically and visually representing collective knowledgeadvancement and comparing group performance based on their learning outcome, as evaluated by the SBFframework (in pre- and post-testing). We also conducted in-depth discourse analysis from the perspective ofshared epistemic agency and the regulation of collaboration to examine how students interact with one another incollective knowledge advancement.CSCL 2017 Proceedings58© ISLSMethodsStudent sampleThirty-nine tenth grade students at a high school in Japan participated in this study as part of their regularcurriculum. The high school is well-known and highly ranked in its district as a college prep school. Mostgraduating students go on to university. A science teacher with a Ph.D. in biology and more than ten years ofteaching experience taught the students.Lesson unit designActivity structure of collaborative learning: Constructive Jigsaw instruction (Figure 1)We applied constructive jigsaw instruction (Miyake & Kirschner, 2013) in this study. In the jigsaw instruction,three students in a group were given a challenge such as “Can you explain how vaccinations protect us frominfections?” then provided three study documents, each of which was necessary for solving the challenge. In thefirst phase of collaborative learning, one student from each group gathered to form an expert group and workedon their allocated materials over 1.5 lesson periods (each lesson period was 50 min.). After the expert groupactivity, students returned to their original group (the jigsaw group), where students had different pieces ofknowledge. They were encouraged to share and integrate their individual knowledge to solve the challengeproblem in the jigsaw group activity. This jigsaw activity took another 1.5 lesson periods. Group composition inthe both group activities was designed by the teacher.Figure 1. Jigsaw Activity Structure in the Immune System Lesson (Left)and a Snapshot of Recorded Data (Right).Study documentsWe first identified what knowledge and principles were covered in the school textbook. Figure 2 shows the SBFframework for the immune system as described in the textbook. We then discussed with the collaborating teacherhow to separate the content into pieces of knowledge given to students in expert activities based on three keyfunctions (the three areas separated by dashed lines in Figure 2): humoral immunity, primary and secondaryresponse, and cell-mediated immunity.Study designPre- and post-testsBefore and after the lesson unit we applied pre- and post-tests to evaluate learning outcomes. Students wereindividually asked about their understanding of how the human immune system responds to vaccination. Theywere given a worksheet with a printed question, on which they could write or draw their ideas. The pre-test wasconducted during the class period right before the lesson started. The post-test was conducted right after the lessonfinished. Each test took one lesson period. Thirty-five students completed both tests and were further analyzed.Process data collectionStudent conversations during expert and jigsaw group activities were video recorded by a device with four camerasand an omnidirectional microphone placed at the center of the table (right half in Figure 1). Student conversationswere transcribed and used for SSNA. We used transcriptions of the jigsaw group activity to examine how studentsCSCL 2017 Proceedings59© ISLSexerted agency in advancing their collective knowledge with three pieces of knowledge acquired in their expertgroup activity.Figure 2. Structure–Behavior–Function Framework of the Human Immune System.Analysis procedureWe first investigated how students developed their biological understanding of the immune system as a complexsystem. To do so, we analyzed their writing and drawings on the pre- and post-test. Student SBF frameworks werecategorized into the following types: When student explanations of how the immune system works considered therelationships among structures, their behaviors, and functions as described in a specific document (A, B, or C),we evaluated that they successfully constructed their understanding of the document. We did not count fragmenteddescriptions of structures, behaviors, or functions where connections were not identified. Based on this criterion,students were categorized as having (1) no understanding, (2) single-document understanding, (3) partiallyintegrated understanding between two documents, or (4) fully integrated understanding across three documents.Referring to the SBF framework of the immune system, the first and second authors independently evaluated tenrandomly selected students’ SBF frameworks based on their explanatory discourse and pictures in each of the preand post-tests. Cohen’s Kappa coefficient for the agreement between the two raters was 0.92. Disagreements wereresolved through discussion. The first author evaluated the remaining data. Because no students demonstratedknowledge of the SBF framework of the immune system in the pre-test, we focused on their SBF frameworks inthe post-test for analysis.To analyze students’ collective knowledge advancement, we next focused on discourse in the jigsawgroup. Students on average engaged in discourse exchange 358.5 times in jigsaw groups (SD = 211.8). One reasonfor paying attention to the jigsaw activity was that students were expected to actively engage in creating new ideasby integrating their knowledge from three documents. To visualize and computationally investigate collectiveknowledge advancement, we conducted SSNA by the following procedure: We assumed that we could representthe state of collective knowledge as clusters of vocabulary that students used in their discourse. For investigatingtheir collective knowledge, we selected words used to represent structures and functions of the immune system inthe SBF. The socio-semantic network of vocabulary refers to meaningful links between words in exchanges. Whenstudents used words in their exchanges, we assumed that they were attempting to create meaningful links betweenwords. We used 23 nouns representing structures and functions in the SBF framework of the immune system. Wethen used an application called KBDeX (http://www.kbdex.net) to SSNA to calculate the transition of the totalCSCL 2017 Proceedings60© ISLSvalue of degree centralities of nodes in the network across discourse exchanges, following the method of previousresearch (Oshima et al., 2012).Our SSNA approach requires complementary discourse analysis to examine how students exerted sharedepistemic agency through regulatory processes of collaboration in their collective knowledge advancement. Wetherefore also conducted an in-depth analysis of discourse segments related to pivotal points of collectiveknowledge advancement as a drastic increase in the total value of degree centralities.Results and discussionStudent learning outcomes after the jigsaw activityWe found that ten students fully integrated SBF understanding and eleven students did so partially. Elevenstudents indicated the understanding of a single part of a learned document and three did not sufficiently learn anypiece of SBF. Chi-square analysis of student frequencies across three types of learning outcome (fully or partiallyintegrated, the single document, or no understanding) showed significance (χ2 = 13.944, df = 2, p < .05), and thatthe proportion of students having integrated SBF understanding was higher than students with no understanding.These results suggest that the jigsaw activity in practice facilitated student integration of knowledge throughcollaboration, but group differences remained in the learning outcomes.Group differences in collective knowledge advancement between high- and lowoutcome groupsBased on the SBF framework evaluation of conceptual understanding, we categorized twelve groups as high orlow learning-outcome groups. In the high learning-outcome groups, all members acquired fully or partiallyintegrated conceptual understanding of documents. Low-outcome groups were mixed in their understanding.Figure 3 shows the transitions of total values of degree centralities. The total value of degree centralities representshow dense and structured a network (of words in this case) could be. This measure has been used as a typicalindex to detect collective knowledge advancement (e.g., Oshima et al., 2012). We found that the values quicklyincreased then finally exceeded 10.0 in the high-outcome groups, whereas the values stayed low and slowlyincreased across discourse exchanges in the low-outcome groups. The results suggest that students in the highoutcome groups engaged in collective knowledge advancement more quickly and sustainably.Figure 3. Transitions of Total Values of Degree Centralities Through Discourse Exchangesby High Learning-Outcome (left) and Low Learning-Outcome (right) Groups.We further analyzed segments of student discourses for clarifying how they engaged in collectiveknowledge advancement. We first present one example of discourse segments by a high learning-outcome group(The original discourse was in Japanese and translated into English by the first author. SSNA vocabulary is inbold.).Student A (156) So, what did we say? They are trapped and broken into smaller pieces, andtheir antigenic information is transmitted to helper T cells. Next, helper Tcells emit a substance called cytokine.Student B (157) Cytokine?Student A (158) Yeah, cytokine. Oh, you [student B] put this [cytokine] down twice [on theworksheet].Student B (159) Twice?CSCL 2017 Proceedings61© ISLSStudent A (160) Oh, never mind. Just put down “cytokine.” This is emitted. Then, draw anarrow from T cell to B cell, please. [Student A told B to draw an arrow onthe worksheet.]Student B (161) T and B?Student A (162) I wonder how we can describe this... Well, T cells propagate. Would you[student B] shorten the space here [pointing at an area in the worksheet] abit?Student B (163) Propagate?Student A (164) Yeah, T cells do propagate.Student C (165) Wait a minute. How about memory T cells? Are they part of the activatedcells?Student A (166) T cells propagate. Then, how about these [B cells]? These [B cells] createantibodies.Student B (167) ... create antibodies.Student A (168) and, some will become immunological memory cells,Student B (169) Immunological?Student A (170) Immunological memory cells. Here, look [at a picture in their documents].Some of them remain as immunological memory cells. Then, we go to thesecondary response.Student B (171) The secondary response?Student A (172) Through the secondary response, when viruses come into our body...Student B (173) OK, they come into us.Student A (174) I wonder if we have to make two lines here [pointing an area in theworksheet], too. Immunological memory cells react to the viruses. T cellsalso react to them. T cells then become killer T cells. Killer T cellspropagate. On no, we need more space [in the worksheet] to write thisdown... Then, this [B cells] emits antibodies to antigens. This is calledantigen–antibody response.From the perspective of shared epistemic agency, students mostly engaged in creating sharedunderstanding of how the immune system works. Student A played a central role in externalizing sharedunderstanding through monitoring confirmation by others (B and C). Student B had the role of recording theirideas on the worksheet, and so frequently revoiced student A’s externalizations (turn #159, #161, #163, #167,#169, #171, and #173). Student A interacted with B to co-create an external knowledge object in the worksheet.In contrast, student C had the different role of going beyond just creating shared understanding to generativecollaborative actions by up-taking student A’s argument (turn #165). Student C might attempt to improve studentA’s idea based on self-understanding by asking important questions from a different perspective (e.g., “Wait aminute. How about memory T-cells?”). Within this discourse segment, students A and C were more engaged ingenerative collaborative actions, whereas student B was engaged in creating shared understanding. Students Aand C revealed fully integrated understanding in the post-test and B did partially integrated.The next example is from a low-outcome group. They were discussing how to write their ideas on theiriPad. They did not use their worksheet we introduced.Student E (63): So, what’s next? We acquire immunity systems. [looking at a picture in theirdocuments]Student D (64): We learned two immunity systems.Student E (65): Yeah, cell-mediated immunity and humoral immunity around here?[pointing an area in a picture]Student D (66): Humoral immunity.Student E (67): Humoral immunity. We have to make a sentence.Student F (68): Yeah, we should.Student E (69): So, when something like viruses comes into our body, …Student D (70): Yes.CSCL 2017 Proceedings62© ISLSStudent E (71): Macrophage and white blood cells capture and decompose the antigens likeviruses. This is the innate immunity system.Student D (72): This is the most..Student E (73): This is the most primitive and works a lot in our body. Sounds good [toothers]?Student D (74): Let’s go on.Student E (75): Uh,Student D (76): Why do not we just follow this [picture in their studied document]?Student E (77): I agree. So, we see “extinction” here. [pointing on an area in the document]Student D (78): We do not mind how to say. How about “extermination”?Student F (79): Shall we copy them? Just like them?Student D (80): Can we use arrows in writing on the Pad? [typing on an iPad]Student E (81): We can go from the left to the right. So, this should be the first.Student D (82): OK, this is the first.On the contrary to the high learning-outcome group, students in this low learning-outcome group couldnot sustain their shared epistemic agency during collaboration. In lines #63–#73, they engaged in creating sharedunderstanding. They were collaboratively constructing sentences for their explanatory discourse. Their discourse,however, was digressed from their shared epistemic agency by student D’s turn (#76 “Why do not we just followthis [picture in their studied document]?”). Student D proposed to transform the epistemic goal of theircollaboration into the performance goal, and this proposal was quickly accepted by the other students (#77 and#79). Students D and E attained single-document understanding and F did partially-integrated in the post-test.DiscussionSBF assessment revealed that our design of student collaboration was partially successful in facilitating conceptualunderstanding. Significantly, most students succeeded in acquiring integrated SBF understanding, but more thanten students did not. At the group level, we found large group differences in learning outcomes. Only three groupsrevealed integrated conceptual understanding among all group members. In the other nine groups, some acquiredintegrated understanding while others attained single-document understanding or none. These results suggestgroup differences in collective knowledge advancement and individual differences in engagement in sharedepistemic agency.SSNA clearly demonstrated group differences in the collective knowledge advancement. In the highlearning-outcome groups, students quickly engaged in advancing their knowledge and sustained it. In contrast,students in the low learning-outcome groups were slow starters. They did not discuss their ideas by linking oneanother and did not reach the high level of consolidation of ideas. Our analysis of group discourse in jigsawactivity supported the results from SSNA. For fully integrated SBF students in the high learning-outcome group,the knowledge object was a basis for generative collaborative actions by monitoring others’ ideas. Neither directlyoperated the object, but instead monitored the inscription. In contrast, for another partially integrated SBF student,the same knowledge object was a product for creating shared understanding. That student was totally responsiblefor creating the product, and so had to devote mental power toward correctly inscribing ideas through frequentrevoicing. This difference in knowledge object-oriented actions came from co-regulation and socially sharedregulation. Collaboration by two fully integrated SBF students was socially shared, whereas a partially integratedSBF student was co-regulated by another student.Through examination of student collaboration in jigsaw instruction from the knowledge-creationperspective, we found how students engaged in collective knowledge advancement when successfully acquiringdeep conceptual understanding. As the preceding research (e.g., Damşa, 2014) suggests, epistemic agency playeda key role in successful collaboration. A new finding suggested in this study is interaction between epistemicagency and multi-layered regulatory processes in collaboration mediated by knowledge objects. For every studentto engage in productive collaboration, the knowledge object should be the basis for further epistemic actions. Howto produce and share knowledge objects could be further designed from the perspective of regulatory process incollaboration for productively stimulating student epistemic agency.ReferencesBereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.CSCL 2017 Proceedings63© ISLSBrown, A. L. & Campione, J. C. (1996). Psychological theory and the design of innovative learning environments:On procedures, principles, and systems. In L. Schauble & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovations in learning: Newenvironments for education. (pp. 289–325). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Damşa, C. I. (2014). The multi-layered nature of small-group learning: Productive interactions in object-orientedcollaboration. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 9, 247–281.Damşa, C. I., Kirschner, P. A., Andriessen, J. E. B., Erkens, G., & Sins, P. H. M. (2010). Shared epistemic agency– An empirical study of an emergent construct. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(2), 143–186.de Laat, M., Lally, V., Lipponen, L., & Simons, R.-J. (2007). Investigating patterns of interaction in networkedlearning and computer-supported collaborative learning: A role for social network analysis. InternationalJournal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2(1), 87–103.Hmelo-Silver, C. & Pfeffer, M. G. (2004). Comparing expert and novice understanding of a complex system fromthe perspective of structures, behaviors, and functions. Cognitive Science, 28, 127–138.Jacobson, M. J. (2001). Problem solving, cognition, and complex systems: Differences between experts andnovices. Complexity, 6(2), 1–9.Ma, L., Matsuzawa, Y., Chen, B., & Scardamalia, M. (2016). Community Knowledge, Collective Responsibility:The Emergence of Rotating Leadership in Three Knowledge Building Communities. In C. K. Looi, J.L. Polman, U. Cress, & P. Reimann (Eds.), Transforming Learning, Empowering Learners: TheInternational Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) 2016, Volume 1. Singapore: InternationalSociety of the Learning Sciences.Martinez, A., Dimitriadis, Y., Rubia, B., Gomez, E., & de la Fuente, P. (2003). Combining qualitative evaluationand social network analysis for the study of classroom social interactions. Computers & Education, 41(4),353–368.Miyake, N. & Kirschner, P. A. (2013). The social and interactive dimensions of collaborative learning. In K.Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences, the Second Edition. (pp. 418–438).NY: Cambridge Univ. Press.Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Knowledge Forum Japan Research Group. (2007). Complex network theory approachto the assessment on collective knowledge advancement through scientific discourse in CSCL. In C.Chinn, G. Erkens, & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), Proceedings of CSCL 2007 (pp. 563–565). Mahwah, NJ:Lawrence Erlbaum.Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Matsuzawa, Y. (2012). Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer: A social networkanalysis application for knowledge building discourse. Educational Technology Research &Development, 60, 903–921.Paavola, S., & Hakkarainen, K. (2005). The knowledge creation metaphor—An emergent epistemologicalapproach to learning. Science & Education, 14, 535–557.Reuven, A., Zippy, E., Gilad, R., & Aviva, G. (2003). Network analysis of knowledge construction inasynchronous learning networks. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 7(3), 1–23.Schaffer, D. W. et al. (2009). Epistemic network analysis: a Prototype for 21st Century assessment of Learning.International Journal of Learning and Media, 1(2), 1–21.Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.),Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67–98). Chicago, IL: Open Court.Scardamalia, M., Bransford, J., Kozma, B., & Quellmalz, E. (2012). New assessments and environments forknowledge building. In P. Griffin, B. McGraw, & E. Care (Eds.), Assessment and teaching of 21st centuryskills (pp. 231–300). New York, NY: Springer Science+Business Media.Suthers, D. D., Lund, K., Rosé, C. P., Teplovs, C. & Law, N. (Eds.). (2013). Productive Multivocality in theAnalysis of Group Interactions. New York: Springer.Wilensky, U. & Jacobson, M. J. (2013). Complex systems and the learning sciences. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), TheCambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences, the Second Edition. (pp. 319–338). NY: CambridgeUniv. Press.Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., & Messina, R. (2009). Designs for collective cognitive responsibility inknowledge-building communities. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18, 7–44.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the participating teacher and students. This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number24240105.CSCL 2017 Proceedings64© ISLS