Equity-oriented STEM-rich Making Among Youth From HistoricallyMarginalized CommunitiesEdna Tan, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, e_tan@uncg.eduAngela Calabrese Barton, Michigan State University, acb@msu.eduAbstract: We investigated the ways in which youth makers from two low-income urbancommunities engaged in sustained STEM-rich, making towards making a difference in theircommunities. Drawing upon a mobilities of learning framework and four years of ethnographicdata across two making spaces (41 youth maker projects), we found that as youth engaged withcommunity across their making efforts, they foregrounded their relationality to communities intheir design work, both within activities and across timescales. We also found that engagingmaking with community opened up new and different opportunities to co-make, as the youthdrew on, and expanded their social networks. We discuss how these findings impactunderstanding of how a more equitable making culture can evolve, and its implications for howyouth imagine their social futures in and through making.IntroductionWe are concerned with understanding the possibilities for equity-oriented and STEM-rich making for youth fromhistorically marginalized communities. Given the proliferation of makerpaces across the country, including theirgrowing inclusion in school settings, we seek to contribute new knowledge and practice for transforming themaker culture in ways that are both equitable and consequential for such youth, expanding the ecology of makingand the maker movement. Our research questions are:1. How does community engagement as a part of STEM-rich making impact what, how and why youthchoose to make?2. What are the outcomes of youths’ making practices with regards to their communities, and withregards to shaping the making culture in their community making spaces?Equity and STEM-rich makingInequality and underrepresentation of youth from historically marginalized communities in STEM persist. Themaker movement has evoked interest for its potential role in breaking down these barriers to STEM learning andattainment (Martin, 2015). Despite growing interest in equity and making, few empirical studies of sustainedyouth engagement in STEM-oriented making exist. There is little empirical evidence describing how youth aresupported, over time, in working towards robust STEM-rich making projects or on the outcomes of such makingexperiences, especially among youth from historically marginalized communities.While there are powerful pockets of making and making spaces that serve families and youth fromhistorically marginalized communities (Peppler & Bender, 2013; Vossoughi, Hooper & Escudé, 2016), thestatistics of the movement require caution (Brahms & Coley, 2016). As the maker movement has becomeformalized, the knowledge and practices of communities of color or of low-income communities have not becomecentral to its discourse. Furthermore, making that youth deem consequential to their lives or how such learning ormaking is supported is not well understood. Most making resources directed towards children promote the“keychain syndrome” – making experiences that are trivial and without prolonged or sustained meaningfulengagement towards more complex projects (Blikstein & Worsley, 2016). Even when making projects supportauthentic engagement on a problem one cares about, there has been limited critical engagement with whatconstitutes consequentiality in making or for whom. We are interested in this aspect of relationality in making.Whose voices are valued and who counts as legitimate stakeholders in a community making space impacts howvarious people are welcomed, positioned and recognized for what they know and can do in a making space as apart of shaping the learning and participation that happens there.We ground our work in a mobilities of learning framework, anchored in expansive and connectedlearning principles (Engeström & Sannino, 2010). We then layer on an explicit focus on the intersectionalities ofrace, class and gender, across this framework. There are three dimensions that tie to our study in making contexts:1) Historicity – emphasizing that making always takes place in particular spaces and times influenced byinstitutional, societal and individual histories; 2) Remixing, that of resources, relationships and tools fornontraditional outcomes and forging new norms; 3) Identity work – who people are and who they can be, whenthey are making. Making is a dynamic multi-practice, involving the processes of re-authoring and re-mixingpractices from a wide range of experiences. We are interested in how the shifting nature of STEM, making, andICLS 2018 Proceedings909© ISLScommunity places are always under negotiation as individuals reproduce and resist the narratives at play, givingrise to new routines, ideas, and ways of being.MethodsThe making space programs are housed in Boys and Girls Clubs (BGC), community-based clubs serving lowincome families, focused on youth development, homework help, and sports for youth. Both clubs serve lowincome, predominantly multi-generational African American communities. Both are also located in mid-sizedcities facing some degree of economic depression. In our overlapping researcher-educator roles, we havecollaborated with BGC staff to establish these making paces and the programs within them, with the primary goalsof supporting youth in sustained engagement in STEM, while also learning about making in culturally sustainingways. Our study was carried out as a longitudinal critical ethnography over a four-year period. Criticalethnography is grounded in the idea that researchers can use the tools of ethnography to conduct empirical researchin an unjust world in ways that examine and transform inequalities from multiple perspectives (Trueba, 1999).Critical ethnography provided an approach with which to “politicize” the interaction between actors and the socialstructures through which they act, grounded in the belief that these relationships are never neutral. Data weregenerated from 2013 to 2017 from 41 youth team projects, including artifacts, weekly youth conversation groups,and video analysis capturing youth interaction with STEM and community experts at various stages in their designprocess. Data analysis involved multiple stages and levels of coding based on procedures for open coding andmethod of constant comparison (Strauss & Corbin, 1998).Findings and discussionRelationality and making towards responding to and making visible historicizedinjusticeAcross projects, youth identified problems that were linked to their community’s unique history and context andused community data to justify the urgency of projects. Many youth explored problem spaces that drew from theirhistoricized experiences growing up amidst systemic racism and poverty, and the violence (symbolic and physical)they experienced because of it. Youth noted a prominent lack of access to a wide range of resources by membersof their community, such as a lack of access to books and toys, videos made by people who look like them, orfashionable and functional clothing. All sustained maker projects (n= 41) reflected these experiences in wayswhich intersected with other lived experiences, including lack of childhood (n= 10), geography/climate (n= 9),urban infrastructure (n= 8), health/disability (n= 8), bullying (n= 7), sexism (n= 5), healthy peer representation(n= 5), education (n= 5), caregiver responsibilities (n= 4), signaling distress (n= 4), policy brutality (n= 1), andprivacy (n=1).Some youth makers addressed concerns tied to growing up poor in a place, calling attention tointersecting sociopolitical and geographical histories. Several addressed concerns about getting hurt in the darkbecause their interview and observational data showed that “where we live it gets dark really early in winter” and“lots of our streetlights don't work.” Those projects, would “keep my peers and younger children safe whenplaying football outdoors” (Samuel’s light-up football), or “help kids or our peers play with scooters outdoors inthe late afternoon or evening when it is dark” (Jennifer and Emily’s light-up scooter). Alana wanted to assuagefears, noting that beyond increasing visibility and keeping one dry, her light-up umbrella prototype might help“people in my community feel safe on the streets in the rain and at night.” Tamzin drew on her homeless shelterexperience and peer interviews to design a light-up, alarmed cautious hat that youth could wear at a shelter, witha carefully embroidered heart design to “make it more attractive. In her interviews, she discussed how homelessyouth are made fun of for “looking ghetto.” We see how she addressed the stigmatization of homeless youthalongside the concerns for physical safety. Samuel and Fall’s Little Free Library design addressed concerns aboutliving in a library desert. They observed younger children sneaking into their making club to use materials, andthey talked to 75 club-attending youth about whether they had a library card. Fall explained: “It is hard for ourparents to take us to the library. Lots of kids do not have library cards, either. If we get a book, we can’t return iton time, and then that costs money, and we can’t check out another book.”As they delved into the project over two years, Samuel and Fall began to see that the problem wentbeyond geographical access: libraries themselves were prohibitive by design. Most youth did not havetransportation to a library, or could not produce the needed documentation to acquire a card. Other peers who hadbeen to the library before could not check out books anymore because they owed late fines they could not pay.Both youth also noted that STEM books were important for both learning to read and learning STEM. That Fallhad been labeled a “struggling reader” in school further punctuates this point. These concerns were thereforeintersecting for the youth. As youth moved their projects across different spaces through community engagement,ICLS 2018 Proceedings910© ISLSthey expanded scales of criticality and connectivity in their work by engaging with the ideas of others. Thisemergent cultural knowledge and practices became platforms for seeing patterns of injustice within theircommunity systemically, and for community development.These projects challenged the youths’ mentors to re-consider their own criticality and connectivity. As onementor said, “I had not considered the multiple layers of challenges in book access. I noticed at least 6 concernsraised by the youth: the location and hours of libraries, the need for proof of residency to get a library card, thecost of overdue books, whether one feels welcomed in a library, and access to things other than books, like makerkits. The library desert is just the tip of the iceberg.”Across design processes, youth and mentors began to see problems they faced as bigger than themselves,opening up new ways to talk about and make that challenged systemic injustice. Ethnographic tools, employed aspart of the making process, such as dialogic and structured interviews with community members and memberchecking, supported youth in making sense of the problems they cared about. It assisted them in recognizing thoseproblems as part of broader, entrenched challenges that their community members had struggled with ornegotiated over time. These tools also expanded spaces for mentors to share our own experiences with theproblems youth identified, which assisted adult-youth collaboration to better understand the ways in whichproblems were entangled in systemic oppression experienced by their community.Critical community dialogue was essential, for example, in supporting one group of youth to understandproblems of homelessness with more complexity and nuance than is easily reached without such person-to-personinteraction. The Donator app group had initially approached the problem space of homelessness as a onedimensional issue. Well-intentioned, some group members had a limited understanding of actual peoples’ stories,concerns, and tensions. Interviews with a mentor who had experienced homelessness herself, and also withhousing campaign organizers and homeless shelter directors helped Donator app designers Zani and Kandydevelop a more multifaceted, tangible, and human understanding of what it means to be homeless. They began todiscuss the issue in terms of housing rights at national, state, city, and individual levels, and they explored howthey could leverage their own experiences with both housing resources and digital technologies to engineer apotential solution. They connected what they learned from interviews and research to a simulation game theyplayed on their phones, inspiring their design of an app that and would allow users to experience homelessnessthrough the lives of individuals. The girls transformed their own knowledge of their problem space and thenexpanded outward to educate and empower other community members as fellow housing rights allies.One aspect of expanding scales of criticality is in how the youth began to both see the problems theywere trying to solve as tied to different but intersecting scales of injustice. As youth moved their projects acrossspaces through their different forms of engagement with community, they began to make connections amongeconomic, racial, gender and environmental justice.Across the cases, youth viewed their design work as tackling multiple, related problems. Most youth,however, did not begin their design work with these intersecting ideas at the forefront. Their participation insurveying community members supported them in noticing which concerns were most salient, where and when,and for whom. While these connections were not made solely through these surveys, the approach created thespace for new questions to be opened and new discourses to be legitimized, among both youth and mentors.Engaging making with community: Co-making and expanding social networksEngaging in making with community centralized what we refer to as co-making, including the co-production ofdesign problems and solutions with a wide range of stakeholders across setting and time. First, engaging in ongoing dialog with community opened up avenues of collaboratively informed exploration no one could fullyanticipate. This meant that adults in these settings needed to become co-learners alongside youth to effectivelysupport them. As one mentor stated, “there were times when I just did not know how to help the youth, and wehad to seek out input together from others in the community. I think this really shifted the power as we neededeach other and the community members to figure out how to move on the project.” While STEM educators mayhold deep knowledge of some practices and ideas needed for the youths’ engineering/making designs to besuccessful, we did not always have the same level of knowledge of community or specialized applications to helpyouth solve particular problems.Engaging in ongoing dialog with community created ongoing and snowballing moments for a wide rangeof others to contribute to design. For example, the Timmy, a heated work boot, began as a concept led by twoboys but ultimately involved 12 others in its design. Maken’s emphasized their design’s polyvocality of concerns:“The Timmy is for people that can’t afford shoes, people that don’t have boots for winter . . . We will have awebsite where we sell boots for free for homeless people. Our product is useful for winter and for people thathave cold feet, or just want to look cool. ” While the project was led by Maken and Tel, daily discussions of theirwork during basketball games with friends led to six additional middle school boys offering help in various stagesICLS 2018 Proceedings911© ISLSof design. In addition, two different engineering undergraduate students assisted in the particularly challengingaspect of figuring out which heating elements could be powered with a single rechargeable battery, and is safeand robust enough to sit in a shoe. Maken and Tel also involved adults in their community by seeking input onwhat kind of boot might be most fashionable and comfortable. They described the inspiration of their design ascoming from seeing one of their teachers in an ankle cast and her concern over a cold foot in the cold/harsh winter.Our study expands how the field frames a culture of sustained making by highlighting that when youthhave opportunities to engage as community ethnographers as a part of their making work, they are compelled tobe responsive to basic questions of social justice and equity as a part of – not apart from – the technical and socialdimensions of their making work: “Who is their making project for? Whose knowledge counts? Who takes partin defining the problem, data collection, interpretation, and analysis? Who owns their making project, and to whatend? How youth makers are taught to examine and incorporate these concerns, as part of making, shapes not onlytheir development as makers, but also how their making work may potentially impact both the individual andsociety. This intersecting approach reframes making both in terms of process and outcome and supports thedeliberate departure from pre-designed making activities redolent of the “keychain” syndrome.The youth’s making culture was geared towards relationality. This is important because it requires makereducators to consider how youth sought to transform the relations among the youth makers, the content/practiceof making, and their making peers, mentors and community towards who they are and want to be and towards thepossibilities for their making work. The problems addressed were emergent of their locations and histories, ratherthan the interest of any given individual. The design approach leveraged within these two making spacesforegrounded community voices and co-ownership, offering youth opportunities to build relationality into theirmaking culture. Community engagement helped youth to see and understand their own relationality; that is, howyouth are related to the issue they are investigating, to other youth, to community members, adult mentors, andthe broader systems of power which shape their experiences in the world as young people of color growing up inlower-income communities. This view has a disruptive dimension that focuses on challenging historicizedinequalities as a part of making. By engaging with community as part of their making practices, the youth placednew attention on making as a process not just of producing new artifacts, but also of co-constructing new spacesfor imagining new social futures.ConclusionsThrough community-grounded making work, youth demanded widening of boundaries for making in dialecticalrelationships with the lived experiences of community youth makers. The landscape, population and practices ofa community makerspace are reshaped. Who youth makers are, what issues they care about, who otherstakeholders could be, what resources and approaches are sanctioned are renegotiated in ways that foster equitableand consequential making for the youth. Equity in STEM-rich making is possible when co-created in locallycentered, community makerspaces where youth can be empowered to collaboratively frame problems and designsolutions to authentically address injustices in their everyday lives.ReferencesBrahms, L. & Crowley, K. (2016). Learning to make in museums. The role of maker educators. In K. Peppler, E.Halvorsen., & Y. Kafai (Eds.) Makeology: Makerspaces as Learning Environments Vol 1., 15-29.Blikstein, P. & Worsley, 2016). Children are not hackers. Building a culture of powerful ideas, deep learning andequity in the maker movement. In K. Peppler, E. Halvorsen., & Y. Kafai (Eds.) Makeology: Makerspacesas Learning Environments Vol 1., 64-80.Engeström, Y., & Sannino, A. (2010). Studies of expansive learning: Foundations, findings, future challenges.Educational Research Review, 5, 1-24.Martin, L. (2015) "The Promise of the Maker Movement for Education," Journal of Pre-College EngineeringEducation Research (J-PEER): Vol. 5: Iss. 1, Article 4 http://dx.doi.org/10.7771/2157-9288.1099Peppler, K., & Bender, S. (2013). Maker movement spreads innovation one project at a time. Phi Delta Kappan,95(3), 22-27.Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research (2nd Ed). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Trueba, H.T. (1999). Latinos unidos: From cultural diversity to the politics of solidarity. Lanham, MD: Rowman& Littlefield.Vossoughi, S., Hooper, P. K., & Escudé, M. (2016). Making through the lens of culture and power: Towardtransformative visions for educational equity. Harvard Educational Review, 86(2), 206-232.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by the National Science Foundation.ICLS 2018 Proceedings912© ISLS