Developing Interdisciplinary Competencies for Science Teachingand Learning: A Teacher-Researcher Professional LearningCommunityDonald J. Wink, Brian D. Gane, Mon-Lin Ko, MariAnne George, Laura Zeller, Susan R. Goldman, James W.Pellegrino, and Raymond Kangdwink@uic.edu, bgane@uic.edu, mlko@uic.edu, georgema@uic.edu, lzelle2@uic.edu, sgoldman@uic.edu,pellegjw@uic.edu, rkang2@uic.eduLearning Sciences Research Institute, University of Illinois at ChicagoAbstract: We describe a research project examining teacher knowledge and practice over amulti-year professional development project centered on assessment literacy in the context ofthe U.S. Next Generation Science Standards. The project supports teacher learning throughprofessional learning community workshops (LCW) and collaborative design team (DT)meetings. Five dimensions of knowledge are posited as essential to effective implementationof the NGSS, including assessment design for formative purposes and science literaciesinherent in the practices of developing, carrying out and reporting science investigations.Learning along these dimensions is being documented through close analyses of teacher talkin the workshops, design team meetings, at their school sites, in the classroom, and in theassessments they design, implement and revise. In this poster we report on the initial year ofwork with these high school science teachers.Keywords: Assessment, collaboration, secondary, science, teacher.IntroductionWhat to teach as well as how to teach and assess it are persistent questions that confront educational systems.The digital age has catalyzed a resurgence of these questions over the past 10 years, with new and/or revisedstandards in traditional content areas (e.g., mathematics, science, the language arts, social studies) as well asexpanded emphases important to life-long learning (e.g., affective, dispositional). A clear theme across theseefforts is the call for learners to be actively involved in the ways of knowing — in the disciplinary habits ofmind and knowledge-generating inquiry and representational practices that characterize particular fields ofknowledge (e.g., Pellegrino & Hilton, 2012). For teachers to provide learners with opportunities to develop suchcompetencies, teachers themselves need opportunities to develop competencies to teach and assess thesecompetencies (Goldman et al 2016; Ford & Forman, 2006; Kelly, 2014).We report on an effort by researchers and teachers to co-create professional learning contexts thatenable high school science teachers to develop instructional and assessment competencies to effectivelyimplement one U.S. example of redefined standards, the Next Generation Science Standards (National ResearchCouncil, 2014; NGSS Lead States, 2013). The three-dimensional emphasis of these standards — disciplinarycore ideas, crosscutting concepts, and practices — demand different lenses on the work of science teaching andlearning, including making explicit the science “reading” literacies inherent in all aspects of scientificinvestigations (Goldman et al, 2016). Teachers need to shift their understanding of what science is, change theirmodes of engaging students, and implement new ways of assessing students. Drawing on multiple domains oflearning sciences research, we hypothesized 5 learning dimensions to enable teachers to shift instruction andassessment practices in NGSS-consistent directions: Participation within collaborative design teams andprofessional learning communities; Instructional practices aligned with NGSS; Assessment literacy andpractices; Assessment design practices aligned with NGSS; and Views of student roles in assessment practices.Collaborating for learningOver the 3-year project duration, we are collaborating with teachers (approximately 20 representing fourdifferent urban high schools and the typical range of science domains) to design and enact learningopportunities intended to engender growth along the 5 learning dimensions. Consistent with design-basedimplementation research (DBIR; Penuel et al., 2011), the design process includes ongoing review and reflectionon how teachers take up aspects of these dimensions in their teaching and assessment practices (Popham, 2009).Our collaborative activities occur in two settings: learning community workshops (LCW) with allteachers and researchers and design team meetings (DT) with representatives from each high school and theICLS 2018 Proceedings1521© ISLSresearchers. Both the LCWs and the DT meetings amplify teachers’ agency with respect to their own learningand that of their students, their instructional practices with the NGSS-aligned assessments they design, andwithin school collaborations. A major mechanism for promoting agency and participation in learningcommunities is through iterative cycles of design, implementation, reflection and revision at the local school siteand at the monthly LCWs (Lave & Wenger, 1991). During the LCWs, teachers’ work within school teams,across science domains, and within science domains to consider how the instructional and assessment activitiesthey design invite students into meaningful science learning. Between LCWs, teachers implement their designsand bring their experiences doing so to school site and subsequent LCW meetings. Collaborative co-design withresearchers is most strongly enacted in the DT meetings where the content and focus of subsequent LCWs arediscussed, debated, and outlined (Severance et al., 2016). DT meetings begin with each representative using“mirror material” (Engeström, 2011, p. 612) for relating discussions at their school, including what is beinglearned from classroom use of designed artifacts, and questions and concerns school teams are raising. The DTthen turns to selected video footage from the prior LCW for reflective review relative to the goals and activitiesof that workshop. These documented DT discussions guide the scope and content of the subsequent LCWs.Sources of evidence and initial findingsDiscourse and artifacts from the LCWs and DTs constitute the primary data sources for tracing movement alongthe five learning dimensions. For example, we carry out analyses of the assessment and instructional materialsteachers design, discuss, use, and revise. These, along with the discourse around them, suggest how teachersincrease their understanding of three-dimensional assessments as well as of the reading and production demandsof their current assessments. Analyses of video of DT meetings and LCWs provide indications of specificcollaborative experiences and fruitful discussions about the tensions and challenges that underlie this approachto science instruction. Other artifacts we are analyzing capture initial “locations” and movement along the fivelearning dimensions include: (1) Year-long curricular maps aligned with the NGSS disciplinary core ideas; (2)Alignments of the curricular maps with science and engineering practices, providing the basis for teachersdesign of multi-dimensional instructional activities and assessments; and (3) A checklist for validity, reliability,and fairness of assessments. In creating these products teachers engaged in unpacking NGSS practices and arein the process of examining the NGSS crosscutting concepts and developing criteria for informative rubrics.ReferencesEngeström, Y. (2011). From design experiments to formative interventions. Theory & Psychology, 21, 598-628.Ford, M. J., & Forman, E. A. (2006). Redefining disciplinary learning in classroom contexts. Review ofResearch in Education, 30, 1–32.Goldman, S. R., Britt, M. A., George, M. A., Lee, C. D., Brown, W., Cribb, G., Greenleaf, C., Shanahan, C. &Project READI (2016). Disciplinary literacies and learning to read for understanding: A conceptualframework of core processes and constructs. Educational Psychologist, 51, 219-246.Kelly, G. J. (2014). The social bases of disciplinary knowledge and practice in productive disciplinaryengagement. International Journal of Educational Research, 64(Supplement C), 211–214.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.National Research Council (2014). Developing Assessments for the Next Generation Science Standards.Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.NGSS Lead States (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Pellegrino, J. W. & Hilton, M. (2012). Education for life and work: Developing transferrable knowledge andskills in the 21st century. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Cheng, B. H. & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development at theintersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40, 331–337.Popham, W. J. (2009). Assessment literacy for teachers: Faddish or fundamental? Theory into Practice, 48, 4–11.Severance, S., Penuel, W. R., Sumner, T. & Leary, H. (2016). Organizing for teacher agency in curricular codesign. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25, 531–564.AcknowledgmentsWe acknowledge the US National Science Foundation (NSF) for support of this work. Prior work was supportedby the NSF and the US Institute of Educational Sciences.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1522© ISLS