Facilitation in Informal MakerspacesSarah Lee, David Bar-el, Kit Martin, and Marcelo Worsleyspl@u.northwestern,edu, davidbarel2021@u.northwestern.edu, kitmartin@u.northwestern.edu,marcelo.worsley@northwestern.eduNorthwestern UniversityAbstract: This paper presents data from three Makerspaces and examines the extent to whichfacilitative roles, as articulated by facilitators and their supervisors, are subsequently practicedwithin the Makerspaces. The data was coded for themes of facilitation as captured in field notesand interviews with personnel at three different levels of seniority (senior executive, managerand on-the-ground facilitator). We suggest possible institutional factors that impact theemergence and expression of facilitative roles and seek to improve Makerspace pedagogy.Introduction: Informal learning environments and facilitationMakerspaces are celebrated as innovative, student-centered learning environments. As such, much of the existingliterature on Makerspaces has focused on the learner. Additionally, studies of Makerspaces examine theimportance of informal learning settings (Halverson, E.R. & Sheridan, K., 2014) and the complex interplaybetween culture, power, and equity (Vossoughi et.al., 2016). However, facilitators play an essential role insustaining Makerspaces. While existing work highlights tools and learners (Martin, L., 2015), future work shouldelucidate how facilitative roles are defined and enacted across different types of institutions.Prior literatureWhile the preponderance of Makerspace research has focused on learners, there are a handful of studies that touchabove facilitation, albeit, in passing. For example, Petrich et al. (2013) described facilitation through roles thatserved to 1) welcome and interest participants in the studio, 2) focus participant attention on an individual project,and 3) engage in dialogue with participants about their making process. This role was primarily supportive andintervention occurred when deemed necessary (Petrich et.al, 2013; Gutwill et.al., 2015). Litts (2015) found thatfacilitators were unwilling to push participants to explore areas that the facilitators themselves had no experiencein. These findings suggest that facilitators can be instrumental to the processes and tools that participants utilizein Makerspaces. As we examine the roles that emerge within the three Makerspaces studied, we expect to see anumber of themes from prior research re-emerge, particularly through a comparison between what facilitators sayabout their role and what they actually do. Furthermore, we hope to contribute to the discussion of howinstitutional factors may impact the adoption of the different roles.MethodsSemi-structured interviews and field notes were taken at each of the three Makerspaces. Interviews wereconducted on-site, one-on-one (with either a senior executive, manager, or a facilitator), and for 20-40 minutes.They were recorded, transcribed, and coded for themes of facilitation. The coded responses from interviews werethen used to examine facilitation-in-action as observed and noted in field notes.Open coding was used on the interviews and field notes. Codes were documented in conjunction withexamples from each institution, where applicable, and then grouped under larger themes. These methods werechosen in order to ground comparisons between facilitation across the various Makerspaces.ResultsThis paper focuses on interview responses to the prompt “describe the role of facilitators”. We identified threethemes of facilitative roles: 1) following the participant’s lead while supporting them, 2) treating each participantas a unique individual, and 3) creating the Makerspace environment. Not surprisingly, many of these codes bearresemblance to, and at times mirror, prior research. For example, Pietrich et al. (2013) found that welcomingparticipants to the space is one of the roles that facilitators mention in interviews under the theme “Creating theEnvironment.” It is worth noting that these responses, and the corresponding codes, generally emphasize andsupport the learner-centered approach in Makerspaces. However, the extent to which these practices are effectiveand implemented in the field warrants a closer look at the institutions housing a Makerspace. Comparisonsbetween interview responses and actions observed through field notes highlight the extent to which institutionalframeworks guide and shape facilitation. For example, within one institution, the idea of Leading by Supportingemerged through the mantra: “wait, watch, follow”, while in other spaces, the idea of building relationshipsICLS 2018 Proceedings1759© ISLSthrough mentorship simply did not exist. Hence, a number of the facilitative approaches stem from anunderstanding of broader institutional goals and it is examining these potential institutional factors and differencesthat we hope to contribute to the improvement of Makerspace pedagogy.Figure 1. Codes that emerged from participant interviews about facilitation.ConclusionWe have provided preliminary examples of Makerspaces situated within institutional structures that havenoticeable impacts on the roles that facilitators occupy. Primary differences were observed in the level of personalrelationships that facilitators aim to foster with participants. Within the community-oriented space, relationshipswere paramount, and this was clearly articulated across levels of seniority. However, in the two museum-basedMakerspaces, we saw some disconnect between the stated roles of facilitators as communicated by seniorexecutives, and the understood roles mentioned by facilitators. Furthermore, we saw a heavier focus on elementsof safety, and providing technical assistance. In general, this work aims to promote conversation arounddifferential facilitation strategies to shape a more equitable understanding of facilitation (Peppler, 2009, 97), thusimproving Makerspace pedagogy. A closer look at the influence of institutional goals on facilitation withininformal Makerspaces improves the professional development of facilitators in such spaces. It also advances thebroader pedagogy of informal learning environments. Future work should closely examine the extent to whicharticulated roles of facilitation find real-time enactment and practice within informal learning environments.ReferencesCharmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative analysis.London:Sage Publications.Gutwill, J. P., Hido, N., & Sindorf, L. (2015). Research to practice: observing learning in tinkeringactivities.Curator: The Museum Journal, 58(2), 151-168.Halverson, E.R. & Sheridan, K. (2014) The maker movement in education. Harvard Educational Review, 84(4),495-504. doi:10.17763/haer.84.4.34j1g68140382063Kafai, Y., Peppler, K., & Chapman, R. (2009). The computer clubhouse: creativity and constructionism in youthcommunities. New York: Teachers College Press.Litts, B. K. (2014). Making learning: makerspaces as learning environments (Doctoral dissertation, University ofWisconsin-Madison).Martin, L. (2015). The promise of the maker movement for education. Journal of Pre-College EngineeringEducation Research (J-PEER), 5(1). doi: 10.7771/2157-9288.1099Noam, G. (2008). A new day for youth: creating sustainable quality in out-of-school time. Issuelab. The WallaceFoundation.Peppler, K., Chiu, G., & Moya, J. (2009). The multiple roles of mentors. In Kafai, Y.B., Peppler, K., & Chapman,R. (Eds.)Petrich, M., Wilkinson, K., & Bevan, B. (2013). It looks like fun, but are they learning. Design, make, play:Growing the next generation of STEM innovators, 50-70.Vossoughi, S., Hooper, P.K., & Escudé, M. (2016). Making through the lens of culture and power: towardtransformative visions for educational equity. Harvard Educational Review, 86(2), 206-232.doi:10.17763/0017-8055.86.2.206AcknowledgmentsThis work would not have been possible without Shoshi Shapiro who collected this data to fulfill requirementsfor an Honors thesis under Professor Marcelo Worsley in the School of Education and Social Policy atNorthwestern between 2016-2017.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1760© ISLS