Collaborative Writing in Higher Education: Investigating theImplementation of CSCL Tools and the Role of Prior IndividualExperiences and PreferencesNore De Grez, Ghent University, Nore.DeGrez@UGent.beBram De Wever, Ghent University, Bram.DeWever@UGent.beAbstract: This research project aims to contribute to the understanding of the complexprocess of collaborative writing by taking into account the different individual, collaborative,and contextual variables and the interaction between them. The use of Computer SupportedCollaborative Learning (CSCL) tools such as collaboration scripts and group awareness toolsto scaffold students during collaborative writing are investigated.VisionCollaborative writing (CW), an omnipresent activity in higher education settings, is known as a highly complexprocess. It is frequently unstructured and tends to involve multiple roles, subtasks, and activities which all can beperformed iteratively (Lowry, Curtis, & Lowry, 2004). Moreover, there are individual, collaborative, andcontextual components at work, as well as interactions between all these components and factors (VanSteendam, 2016). On the one hand, various studies have shown that the way groups tackle this complex taskdiffer and have pointed at the difficulty of developing truly CW (e.g. Lowry, Curtis, & Lowry, 2004; Onrubia &Engel, 2009). Next to this text construction process, process regulation is also indicated as an important, relatedcollaborative process during CW (Van Steendam, 2016). On the other hand, individuals may have different ideason how to write a text. First, there are different individual approaches towards writing (e.g. writing beliefs,White & Bruning, 2005) which can be related to CW processes and outcomes (e.g. Cuevas et al., 2016).Secondly, the way students act in CW activities and conceive CW differs (see e.g. Noël & Robert, 2004;Marttunen & Laurinen, 2012). Thirdly, the Script Theory of Guidance (Fisher et al., 2013) highlighted theimportant role of learners’ internal scripts to understand their actions in the collaboration.Despite this complexity, there is a lack of profound research on these CW processes and their relationwith product quality. In addition, the relation with individual factors has been underexposed and no previousstudy has investigated internal CW scripts. Therefore, this research project has two main goals. First, to unravelthe complex process of CW and the role of individual prior experiences and preferences within the scope of CWtasks. Second, to investigate the opportunities of CW technologies and the use of CSCL tools such ascollaboration scripts and group awareness tools to scaffold students during CW.ReferencesCuevas, I., Mateos, M., Martin, E., Luna, M., Martin, A., Solari, M., … Martinez, I. (2016). Collaborativewriting of argumentative syntheses from multiple sources: The role of writing beliefs and strategies inaddressing controversy. Journal of Writing Research, 8, 205–226.Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Stegmann, K., & Wecker, C. (2013). Toward a script theory of guidance in computersupported collaborative learning. Educational Psychologist, 48, 56–66.Lowry, P.B., Curtis, A., & Lowry, M.R. (2004). Building a Taxonomy and Nomenclature of CollaborativeWriting to Improve Interdisciplinary Research and Practice. International Journal of BusinessCommunication, 41, 66-99.Marttunen, M., & Laurinen, L. (2012). Participant profiles during collaborative writing. Journal of WritingResearch, 4, 53-79.Noël, S., & Robert, JM. (2004). Empirical Study on Collaborative Writing: What Do Co-authors Do, Use, andLike? Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 13, 63-89.Onrubia, J., & Engel, A. (2009). Strategies for collaborative writing and phases of knowledge construction inCSCL environments. Computers and Education, 53, 1256–1265.Van Steendam, E. (2016). Editorial Forms of Collaboration in Writing. Journal of Writing Research, 8, 183204.White, M.J., & Bruning, R. (2005). Implicit writing beliefs and their relation to writing quality. ContemporaryEducational Psychology, 30, 166-189.1885