Situating Deep Multimodal Data on Game-Based STEM LearningCraig G. Anderson, John V Binzak, Jennifer Dalsen, Jenny Saucerman, Anna Jordan-Douglass, Vishesh Kumar,Aybuke Turker, Matthew Berland, Kurt Squire, and Constance Steinkuehlercganderson4@wisc.edu, binzak@wisc.edu, jdalsen@wisc.edu, jenny.saucerman@gmail.com,annamjordan@gmail.com, vishesh.kumar@wisc.edu, aybketrker@gmail.com, mberland@wisc.edu,kurt.squire@gmail.com, constances@gmail.comUniversity of Wisconsin – MadisonAbstract: As STEM embedded games become more prevalent in classrooms, the need forteachers and researchers to understand the ways in which students learn in these complexenvironments increases. This paper describes a multimodal datastream approach tounderstanding student learning in an informal game-embedded curriculum. Through a multistream approach, we have more information on what students are using and how they areimproving, which in preliminary analyses, proves to be more complex than one might think.Importance of multiple data streams in analyzing complex learning environments and futuredirections for more complex analyses are discussed.IntroductionVideo games are gaining attention for their potential to engage learners’ interests in STEM and achieve learningoutcomes (Mayo, 2009), yet they also present an exciting opportunity to extract formative information about howlearning occurs through these digital devices. Games have the capability to amass a large body of click-streamdata representing the actions, choices, successes, and failures of the player without disrupting the engagement thatgames evoke. Games often incorporate effective learning strategies such as scaffolding, adapting challenges tolearning curves, engaging curiosity, and situating content in interactive environments with social surroundings. Inaddition, gameplay can mimic the scientific process of discovery, as players develop hypotheses and experimentwith different actions. These similarities to other educational processes have not gone unnoticed by educators,who have produced educational video games to capitalize on the inquiry-based nature of gaming (Barab, Gresalfi,& Ingram-Goble, 2010).Although players of commercial games have been known to engage in STEM practices outside of moretraditional learning contexts (e.g., Steinkuehler & Duncan, 2008; Martinez-Garza, 2015), many STEM games arejust one component of a larger learning curriculum. Incorporating STEM games into a larger learning curriculumallows players to work in groups, reflect upon their gameplay with their peers, and draw connections betweentheir gameplay and the broader scientific content. This approach also allows researchers of scientific games tocollect more targeted data regarding players’ learning.The data that researchers in this area collect is as varied as the STEM games themselves. At the veryleast, researchers may collect pre to post data on domain content knowledge in order to determine whether theirscientific games lead to learning gains (e.g., Papastergiou, 2009; Coller & Scott, 2009). Participants’ attitudesregarding the game are also frequently captured. Less frequently captured, however, is the connection betweenparticipants’ in-game behaviors and their learning gains. Even more rarely captured is the relationship betweenlearning gains, in-game behaviors, and participant discourse surrounding the game. In this paper, we explore thesemultiple data streams in order to form a more cohesive understanding of our participants’ experience with ourSTEM game.MethodsIntervention: Game-a-PaloozaTo examine how participants engage in science learning through games, we developed a spring break camp formiddle school students dubbed Game-a-Palooza (GaP). During the 5-day event, participants cycled through threeeducational video game sessions including our intervention of interest, titled Virulent. Virulent is a strategy gamefor ages nine and up designed for players to learn about viral replication and how the body’s immune systemreacts to infection. In the game, players control the ‘Raven Virus’, a fictional virus with biology-content-relevantcharacteristics. Players move through levels by infecting host cells, stealing precious resources, and fighting theimmune system with viral proteins. To further engage the participants, Virulent sessions were framed in a roleplaying activity.ICLS 2016 Proceedings974© ISLSThe activity started with a video from actors roleplaying as a mock Center for Disease Control (CDC)team asking for help to stop the Raven Virus epidemic. Participants were grouped into twelve research teams of3-4 players each. Participants were also given the opportunity to switch teams after assignment to allow friendsor siblings to participate together, as the camp was designed to be both fun and informal. Across our groupings,we collected large and diverse amounts of data including clickstream gameplay data, discourse on and around thegame, and pre- and post-assessments. On the first day, teams investigated preliminary recommendations on howto stop the Raven virus from spreading by observing the virus and the cells’ defenses in the first few levels. Thesecond day focused more on gameplay and constructing a visual model of virus and cell interactions. Teamsupdated their models and recorded presentations of their models to be sent to the mock-CDC for review on thethird day. The fourth day consisted of cohort presentations to other groups and ended with an “emergency” callfrom the CDC reporting that they too have become infected by the Raven virus. On the last day, teams werepresented three hypothetical solutions for stopping the Raven virus. These were based on articles from journals,media, and textbooks that were adapted to the content. Teams presented their findings to the cohort, debated, andvoted for which solution to use.Virulent acted as a source of click-stream data for our research by logging all game actions, their context,the use of an in-game almanac. The almanac provided a virtual directory where players could look up definitionsand corresponding pictures of every cell part and virus component found in the game, allowing players to connectbiological knowledge with game knowledge.Data collectionPre and post assessmentsBefore and after the Virulent curriculum, all participants completed identical short assessments measuring theirknowledge about cellular biology and virology. Items measuring content knowledge included 8 multiple choicequestions, 2 open response prompts, and a model with cell parts to label. Open response items were scored usinga rubric from 0 to 1 based on accuracy and completeness of response. An aggregate score of Biological knowledgewas calculated from these items for each participant. Participants were allowed to leave responses blank, as theassessment was not treated as a formal test. As such, biology knowledge scores were calculated as a proportionof correct responses out of the number of questions attempted.Talk dataWe collected a complete stream of discourse (verbal) data via a lavalier audio recorder worn by every student ontheir name badge. In addition, we video-recorded the classroom presentations of models of the virus and debateof proposed solutions for the epidemic. Lastly, we conducted daily interviews with the participant teacher.Click-stream dataFor each participant across all five 90-minute sessions, we recorded a complete stream of in-game telemetry datavia our backend data framework: the Assessment Data Aggregator for Game Environments ADAGE (Owen &Halverson, 2014). ADAGE is a tool for logging and tagging clickstream data for every event within the game,allowing for analysis of player-actions to triangulate those in-game play patterns against other external measures.HypothesesIntuitively, we expected our primary data streams to align. Increased use of the almanac to look up cell parts andvirus components should lead to increased use of biology terminology in discourse and increased biology contentknowledge post assessment scores. We would also expect that increases in group engagement (measured viaamount of general talk) would align with increases in post assessments scores, as we anticipate player engagementto track with learning outcomes.ResultsPre and post assessmentForty-three players completed a pre and post assessment. Overall, players showed limited knowledge of cellbiology and virology facts on the pretest (M = .233, SD = .207). After the intervention, players attempted a similarproportion of posttest items (M = .753, SD = .325), but their accuracy on those attempts was much higher (M =.491, SD = .213), indicating a significant increase in biology and virology knowledge over the 5 day intervention(t(42) = 5.47, p < .05).ICLS 2016 Proceedings975© ISLSFigure 1. Aggregate change in biology knowledgeDiscourse dataTo assess how discourse changed between the participants in the Virulent sessions, we began by looking at thelength of words used as a rough proxy for sophistication of talk (after Flesch, 1948), and examined how thisdiscourse changed across the five days within each research team. As seen in Figure 3(a), research teamsconversed with longer words on average during the fourth and fifth days of the intervention. Group means acrossall five days show that word length increased for all participants. Looking across the five day curriculum in Figure2(a), we see differences in how the curriculum may have prompted more discussion, though the data are skewedby one outlier group. During the penultimate day, participants used more biology vocabulary words as apercentage of their total spoken words.(a)(b)Figure 2. Overall use of biology terminology (a) and proportional use of biology words (b).ICLS 2016 Proceedings976© ISLS(a)(b)Figure 3. Average word length (a) and almanac usage (b).DiscussionThese preliminary analyses of multiple adjacent data streams in a scaffolded informal learning environment showthe importance of each data source for understanding how students construct knowledge in a complex space.Being able to contrast game play behaviors with talk audio as well as pre/post assessment provides a granularityin the data that shows a larger picture of student development and understanding. However, from these data, wefind patterns that are much more complex than expected. While we do not see the expected correlations betweendata streams, we still find that virology-specific knowledge increased 18% across participants, and participantsused more complex language towards the end of the camp. This suggests that students did learn the embeddedbiology content but this was not captured in ways we would expect. Perhaps the increase in biology terminologyin discourse and decrease in almanac usage suggest a transition away from reliance on the almanac as playersbecome more familiar with the content. The complexity of the data and the importance of the individualdifferences only became clear as a result of triangulating seemingly clear findings; this is a challenge to the field.Future researchSeveral lines of inquiry are currently being pursued to further complexify our data, including: participant interest,biology content gains, argumentation, model making, play patterns viewed through telemetry, differences informal and informal play, and motivational factors. The multiple data streams from this study allow us to mergeaudio, video, artifacts and clickstream data in ways that will provide a more complete, albeit more complicatednarrative.ReferencesBarab, S. A., Gresalfi, M., & Ingram-Goble, A. (2010). Transformational play using games to position person,content, and context. Educational Researcher, 39(7), 525-536.Coller, B. D., & Scott, M. J. (2009). Effectiveness of using a video game to teach a course in mechanicalengineering. Computers & Education, 53(3), 900-912.Martinez-Garza, M. (2015). “For!! SCIENCE!!”: Examining Epistemic Practices of the Community of Players ofDwarf Fortress. International Journal of Gaming and Computer-Mediated Simulations, 7, 46-64.Mayo, M. J. (2009). Video games: a route to large-scale STEM education?. Science, 323(5910), 79-82.Owen, V. E., Ramirez, D., Salmon, A., & Halverson, R. (2014). Capturing Learner Trajectories in EducationalGames through ADAGE (Assessment Data Aggregator for Game Environments): A Click-Stream DataFramework for Assessment of Learning in Play. In Annual Meeting of the American EducationalResearch Association, Philadelphia, April (pp. 3-7).Papastergiou, M. (2009). Digital game-based learning in high school computer science education: Impact oneducational effectiveness and student motivation. Computers & Education, 52(1), 1-12.Steinkuehler, C., & Duncan, S. (2008). Scientific habits of mind in virtual worlds. Journal of Science Educationand Technology, 17(6), 530-543.ICLS 2016 Proceedings977© ISLS