Mobilities of Criticality: Space-Making, Identity and Agency in aYouth-Centered MakerspaceAngela Calabrese Barton, Michigan State University, acb@msu.eduEdna Tan, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, e_tan@uncg.eduMyunghwan Shin, Michigan State University, shinmyu4@msu.eduAbstract: We examine in-depth cases of youth makers from non-dominant communities intwo makerspace clubs in two different mid-sized US cities. We argue that through theirmaking practice, they are involved not only in “artifact making” (the prototypically viewedoutcome of makerspace work), but also in space-making within and across the worlds ofSTEM, makerspaces, and community. The data suggest that such space-making fosters newforms of interaction among scales of activity, and supports the movement of ideas, resources,relationships and bodies in support of youths’ emerging practices and how they might berecognized for them. As the youth engage in their making practice, they inscribe newmeanings for what it means to make within the worlds they inhabit, refiguring participation inthese worlds and the possibilities for becoming within them. We used a mobilities of learningframework to guide our analysis.Keywords: Science, youth, making, mobilities of learningWhen little kids are playing outside football and it's getting too dark and they still keepplaying and somebody might get hit in the head or something cause they can't see the ballreally so I 'm going to light up the football so you can see where it's going. (Stephan, artifact,interview, May 2014)IntroductionIn this manuscript we examine the stories of youth makers from non-dominant communities, and argue thatthrough their making practice they are involved not only in “artifact making” (the prototypically viewedoutcome of makerspace work), but also in space-making within and across the worlds of STEM, makerspaces,and community. Such space-making fosters new forms of interaction among scales of activity, and supports themovement of ideas, resources, relationships and bodies in support of youths’ emerging practices and how theymight be recognized for them. As the youth engage in their making practice, they inscribe new meanings forwhat it means to make within the worlds they inhabit, refiguring participation in these worlds and thepossibilities for becoming within them.Our research questions are thus: 1) What making practice do youth from non-dominant communities,ages 11-14, take up in a afterschool community-based makerspace? 2) In what ways does their practice inscribetheir spaces of making with possibilities for doing and becoming in making for community sustainability?To answer these questions, we present two in-depth narratives of youths’ engagement in a communitybased makerspace. The first case involves Samuel’s efforts to build the light-up football when he was in the 6thgrade. The second case involves Jennifer and Emily’s efforts to prototype a heated, light-up sweatshirt in the 7thgrade. While our telling of these narratives revolve directly around the youths’ making of artifacts, we hope toshow how their practices for doing so alter the landscapes in which they work, and their opportunities to do andbecome within and across those spaces.Findings indicate that the youth in our study have engaged in making practices that led to the creationof new artifacts that mattered to people in their communities. Further, youths’ making practices wereundergirded in what we think of as “mobilities of criticality,” as they remixed and repurposed tools, practicesand relationships from various communities towards space-making. In particular, we show how the youths’making practices are rooted in community, and are reflections of their deep and critical knowledge of the needstheir communities face within and across the spaces of making. We also discuss how the youth’s in-themoment actions – a reflection of their making practices – served as critical “pivot points” in their design work(Holland, Lachiotte, Skinner, & Cain, 2001). The pivot points connected scales of activity, including STEMinquiry, making, community and action taking, in how they provided analytical foci for driving technicallyoriented design work, and opportunities for social negotiation towards new possibilities of doing and becomingin STEM, makerspaces and community.ICLS 2016 Proceedings290© ISLSConceptual frameworkWe are interested in questions of youth engagement and identity work in making as it relates to how the spacesand places of making get re-organized, disrupted, and/or expanded through the youths’ making practices. Inparticular, we are concerned with how youth’s making practices take shape across multiple scales of activitysimultaneously, but also over time – e.g., locally among peers in small group work in makerspaces as well as inthe real and imagined spaces of STEM. Thus, we draw from mobilities of learning studies and social practicetheory to frame our concerns. We are particularly interested in those studies that take a critical orientation,weaving in issues of power and positioning.A mobilities of learning framework is centrally concerned with movement – of people, ideas, tools,resources, bodies and relationships – and how such movement shapes and reshapes the spaces and places oflearning, and the social practices enacted and made possible therein (Leander et al, 2010). As individuals movethrough space and time, the sociohistorical narratives around them shift, shaping and reshaping how they inhabitor reinhabit space (Gutiérrez, 2012). For example, Kwan (2008) describes how Muslim American women’smovements within public spaces have become restricted in the US since 9/11 in response to rising politicalnarratives even though the actual physical access to these spaces remain unchanged. At the same time, sheillustrates how such limitations in physical movement sit in juxtaposition with increasing access to new digitalspaces. These arising digital spaces have become new homes for exposing oppressive narratives experienced bythe women, as well as for opening up new opportunities for relationship building practices across culturaldifference.Examining the critical literacy practices of migrant youth in Southern California, Gutiérrez (2008)describes how youth use their “complete linguistic toolkit” – toolkits made up of linguistic practices of homeand community, such as testimonio, in addition to the practices that are sanctioned in school settings – tonavigate “the paradoxes of migration, immigration, and schooling” in the US. (p. 150). These hybrid practiceshelped students to link their past and present to an imagined future, and to reorganize everyday conceptsacquired through social interaction in joint activities of school-based literacies. She suggests that these “richinteractional matrices of practice” lead to a new dialectic between the “the world as it is and the world as itcould be” opening up new spaces for learning and transformation (p. 160).In both of these studies, who individuals are and who they can be across the spaces –temporal,physical, and virtual – of their lives, and the practices they take up within and across those spaces, emerge fromand transform the meanings of those space as constructed through social activity.Mobilities of learning studies remind us that learning always takes place somewhere, both in “relationto history (time) and context (place/space)” (Bright, Manchester, Allendyke, 2013, p. 749). One thread of workthat is particularly salient to our own work is that which examines space-making as a part of more expansiveviews of learning. We use the term space-making in ways similar to that of place-making (e.g., Cresswell, 1996,2004; Massey, 2005; Lombard, 2014). An individual’s opportunities to be and to become are shaped by place.At the same time, who one is also gives meaning to place; “places do no have intrinsic meanings and essences . .. the meanings of place are created through practice” (Creswell, 1996, p. 17).However, by drawing attention to spaces over places, we acknowledge the itinerant over the fixednature of learning, where space reflects “a territory defined by practice-based learning, inhabited by a networkof people, ideas, and objects in movement” rather than a fixed geographical area (Fendler, 2014, p. 787). Wealso use “space” to suggest that the possible platforms for being and becoming are not only solely contingent onthe structural landscape of geographical places but are also tied to norms and power structures. “Space” alsoconnotes for us the plurality of spaces (platforms for being and becoming) that are connected to a singulargeographical place, e.g. youths’ residential neighborhood.Gutiérrez (2012) work on expansive learning helps to unpack the importance of movement across bothvertical and horizontal dimensions of learning. Here, movement refers to the ways in which ideas, tools andpractices are re-authored and re-mixed towards new possibilities for becoming in-practice across setting andover time (Engeström & Sannino, 2010). Through learning activity, new activity structures are produced asvertical and horizontal dimensions interact, leading to new forms of activity. Gutiérrez describes these newforms of activity as the kinds of hybridity that emerge as the tensions and contradictions that arise within andbetween activity systems. In these studies, hybridity refers to the novel combinations of different repertoires ofknowledge and practice (e.g., science and peer/family/community) as individuals who horizontally move ideasand practices. However, it also refers to the hybridity that exists at multiple levels of the learning environment,where many activity systems come together (e.g., science, student, teacher, schooling, etc.). This perspective,thus, allows us to better understand youths’ horizontal movement and hybridization toward making/engineeringdesigns that are both meaningful from a disciplinary perspective and compelling to youth committed to theircommunities.ICLS 2016 Proceedings291© ISLSMethodsOur study was carried out as a critical ethnography over a two-year period. Critical ethnography was selected asour methodology because of its explicit focus on participatory critique, transformation, empowerment, andsocial justice. Critical ethnography is grounded in the idea that researchers can use the tools of ethnography toconduct empirical research in an unjust world in ways that examine and transform inequalities from multipleperspectives (Trueba, 1999). Critical ethnography provided an approach in which to “politicize” the interactionbetween actors and the social structures through which they act, grounded in the belief that these relationshipsare never neutral. This approach was important as we attempted to make sense of how youth, who arepositioned in particular ways due to race, gender and class, engage in makerspace activities.Our study is grounded in middle school youths’ experiences in two different makerspace contexts,Michigan and North Carolina, over the course of two and one years respectively. The makerspaces in bothlocations are housed in Boys and Girls Clubs [BGCs] (community-based clubs focused on youth development,homework help, and sports) in mid-sized cities, both facing some degree of economic depression. We haveworked together with staff at the BGCs to establish these makerspaces, with the primary goals of supportingyouth in developing productive identities in STEM, while also learning about making/engineering design inculturally sustaining ways. In both locations, we sought to engage youth iteratively and generatively in makerspace activities and in community ethnography as one approach to embedding local knowledge and practice intomaking and engineering design.Student and school sampleDuring 2013-2015, 36 youth participated, of whom 11 participated for 2 years (2013-2015), and the remaining25 participated for 1 year (2014-2015). The youth were primarily from grades 5-8 (ages 10-14), and from lowerincome families. Most are African American, although a few are white or biracial (See Table 1).Table 1: Number of students in each siteYearLocationTotalParticipants2013-2014Michigan14 youthMichigan21 youthNorth Carolina15 youth2014-2015Demographics2 White10 African American2 Biracial2 White (both returning)17 African American (8returning)2 Biracial (returning)14 African American1 BiracialData were generated, 2013-2015, from artifacts, weekly youth conversation groups, and video analysiscapturing youth interaction with STEM and community experts at various stages in their design process (SeeTable 2). In addition we used mid- and end- of year course artifact interviews, researcher field notes (persession), and youth created multimedia (e.g., video blogs) showing progress on their design to communitymembers and STEM experts.Table 2: Date Types Generation StrategiesData FormSpecific Data Generation StrategyParticipantObservation• Makerspace sessions/activities: Video recordingsof twice weekly sessions and field notes in twosites• Makerspace Community EventsConversationGroupArtifact• As a way to debrief what was happening in theclub as well as to plan for future activities• Allowing youth opportunities to talk about theirICLS 2016 Proceedings29272hrs/yrNC(1yr)70hrs8hrsn/a30 hrs/yr30hrs43hrsMI (2yr)© ISLSThink AloudArtifactCollectionengineering design work in detail (mid and endof year)• Youth’s sketch up notebook, 3D GoogleSketchUp model of design, worksheets,prototype, movie, etchrs/gp/yrongoingAnalysisData analysis involved multiple stages and levels of coding based on procedures for open coding and method ofconstant comparison (Strauss & Corbin, 1998). Our first pass involved reading through artifact interviewstranscripts (conducted yearly at mid year and end of year) as well as our fieldnotes and the students’ sketch-upnotebooks kept during the course of their participation. The goal of this initial read through was to surfacepoints and open codes of a) tensions and connections among the various youths’ forms of engagement inmaking, b) critical design moments (e.g., sticking points, changes in direction, etc.), and c) generally how youthtalked about and framed what it meant to participate. For example, in trying to open code for critical designmoments, we noted times when youth made shifts in design, became deeply frustrated or disengaged, orotherwise more explicitly noted for us (e.g., artifact interviews) when they felt they were stuck or had importantturning points. Weekly conversations were held between the authors on these insights as a way to work towardsa more “expansive consensus”; that is to say that any differences in view were debated until new meaning wasgenerated as a result of our differences. A detailed list of emergent open codes were kept with analytic memosattached to them, which we then brought to bear on other data sources, such as group conversation transcriptsand various student artifacts not included in their sketch up notebook.Our second pass involved identifying important resources and practices used by youth in their making,in relationship to the previously identified critical events, tensions and connections. With the help of ourtheoretical framework (mobilities of learning), we worked to make sense of what it meant for the youth tomove, repurpose or remix the ideas, practices and resources they leveraged within these events. This axial phaseof coding was used to uncover relationships and connections between the youths’ making and the tensions thatemerged from the data. In developing these coding schemes, we paid attention to how, and where, youthengagement appears greatest and the forms such engagement took, how they move ideas and resources acrossspaces, the different forms of learning, and the identity work that take place within and across these spaces. Wetook these data points as significant markers of equity – opportunities to access and activate traditional andnontraditional resources and to be recognized for doing so, as important to the making process and outcomes.The relationships and connections identified in this second stage of coding, in turn, guided ourselective coding, and became categories and themes, from which our example cases were selected for a finalround of analysis and presentation. This final phase involved writing the narratives related to students’participation in the two makerspaces under study.FindingsFor the purposes of this proposal, we share one shortened narrative followed by a discussion of core findings.In-depth vignetteInterviewer:Samuel:Samuel, why did you decide to make a light-up football?Well, when little kids are playing outside football and it's getting too darkand they still keep playing and somebody might get hit in the head orsomething cause they can't see the ball really so I 'm going to light up thefootball so you can see where it's going.Samuel joined “M4C” a makerspace club at his local Boys and Girls Club during the fall of his 6th grade year.While he did not have friends in this club when he joined, and had never heard of “engineering” before, he saidhe wanted to join because he “kept seeing” what other kids were doing, and he wanted a chance to do“something like that” too. Samuel lived alone with his grandmother, after his mother ran into social and legalprograms, a point that plays into his design work as we will see later.Samuel designed a prototype of a “light up football” while working in the makerspace over a period offive months. His light up football has LED tube lights that wrap around the ball to provide maximum lightingwith minimal added weight, friction, or power expenditures. Because the lighting it so efficient, it would alsokeep hands from getting burnt. The lights are powered with rechargeable batteries that can be recharged at aICLS 2016 Proceedings293© ISLSsolar docking station, limiting environmental impact and saving money. The football, itself, is constructed fromnerf material to further minimize added weight and to reduce the possibility for injury if one were to be hit inthe head. The batteries are stored in a pocket at the center of the ball, accessible by a small door, to keep itweighted properly and to minimize their potential contact with rain water and sweat.The idea for a light up football grew out of Samuel’s desire to make something that would be helpful topeople in his community. As he states:[My football] say about me that I really care about people. And I could, like, do stuff in thecommunity so it could, like, do stuff together, like, peers can do stuff together, like, neighborsor school neighbors could like, go outside and do stuff together. . . Cause, like, some kidsdon't really play football, don't have no friends and stuff, so I go find people to help out alittle bit.Samuel’s idea of care is nested in an understanding of the special needs of the young people in hiscommunity. Samuel knew that lighting was a concern at night due to limited working streetlights in hisneighborhood. He also felt that the game of football was a positive peer activity that helped young people hisage make friends and stay out of trouble. He knew that most families could not afford an expensive toy, and thatinefficient designs were costly to the environmental as well.Samuel worked tirelessly on his design for five months seeking help from family, friends, andengineering and football experts alike. He was proud of his efforts. As he stated, “I was really proud ‘cause itjust made me feel good about myself so I could, like, acknowledge people what I could do. . . Like make what Idid, a light-up football. I wanna make more stuff like that.”A light up football presented Samuel with many design problems of both technical and socialconsequence as well. For example, lighting a football requires power. As Samuel noted, powering the lightscosts money. His initial solution was to use rechargeable batteries because “mine’s is rechargeable batteries sowe can see all the time but so you won't have to keep going back to the store and buying, like, batteries toreuse.” Saving both money and time by not having to return to the store to buy new batteries were bothimportant in order for Samuel to keep the lights powered.But, rechargeable batteries also addressed another design concern: environmental sustainability.Samuel was worried in particular about the problems created when non-rechargeable batteries are thrown intothe trash. As he states, “Rechargeable batteries save energy and money so you won't have to, like, keep buyingand buying batteries, so. [They] make the world greener. When you throw batteries away, those critters can getinside your trash, like the racoons, can like, take your batteries, take your trash and batteries out.”Powering the lights was, in fact, the “biggest design challenge” Samuel stated he faced. He noted thattwo batteries did not light the ball well enough, but more than two batteries, he felt, made the football too heavy,and too expensive. This insight seemed to spur Samuel to expand his design concerns to also include the weightof the football, and the location of the weight. Having his football like a “regular football” in terms of size,shape and weight, were all important, but all impacted by his desire to have a light up football.Samuel sought input on these concerns from local football experts, which included a local football star.When recounting how these different experts helped him in his design, Samuel noted that the football starhelped him to think about how to make the ball balanced, so that it would not be too heavy on one side or theother. To solve this problem, Samuel had to cut deeply into his prototype to place the batteries in the far center.As he stated, “Yeah. Yeah so I used that and so when I went back and tried to do it, I made sure that when I cutit, I made sure that it could be deep enough so it won't, like, make it so heavy. So it could be, not be so light, itcould be just right. So like a real NFL football.”There were many other design challenges that Samuel confronted as he progressed in his project. Hesought out many different kinds of experts to help him out, from his mother to his peers, to football experts, toengineers, to the internet. All of these perspectives representing different kinds of expertise and needs matteredto him.Discussion of findings grounded in vignetteYouths’ making practices are rooted in community, and are reflections of their deep and critical knowledge ofthe needs their communities face within and across the spaces of making. Youth’s in-the-moment actions – areflection of their making practices – served as critical “pivot points” in their design work. The pivot pointsconnected scales of activity, including STEM inquiry, making, community and action taking, in how theyprovided analytical foci for driving technically oriented design work, and opportunities for social negotiationtowards new possibilities of doing and becoming in STEM, makerspaces and community.ICLS 2016 Proceedings294© ISLSRooted in communityPractices as rooted in community. The youth in our study, in on-going ways, position themselves as apart of, or inside, the urban ecology, rather than outside of it. Their making practices, as rooted in a wide rangeof community spaces, draw upon expert knowledge on issues inside to these spaces, such as the funds ofknowledge one has because of where they have grown up and with whom. These practices also incorporateinsider positioning status, such as that which grants access to the social networks and contexts necessary forgaining deeper insights and access to resources when needed.The youth brought to their investigations a wide range of funds of knowledge and relationships thatplayed a role in how they defined the problem they wanted to work on, and its various dimensions. These fundsare tied to particular community spaces where youth have insider status. For example, knowledge of wherestreetlights have historically not worked, why kids at their school get bullied, fashion, how to work with one’shands to build, or the reasons and impacts of major economic concerns of the home, all reflect their insideness –their membership and experiences in the community spaces that they inhabit. How the youth drew from thesefunds across spaces reflect their attempts to author interconnecting corridors for traversing between thesecommunity spaces, and their STEM-infused youth makerspace. These different points of intersection becomemeaningful sites of negotiation.Practices as enactments of their deep and critical knowledge and care for the needs their communitiesface. There are nodes of criticality in many of the funds of knowledge deployed by the youth, and in how theysought to leverage these funds towards engaging more deeply in the technical dimensions of their work. Allcommunities face risks that result from geographical, socioeconomic, and political challenges. However, therisks are greater for young people growing up in lower-income communities of color, where environmental andsocial injustices loom large.We see such criticality enacted by these youth in their making work as tied to four domains inparticular: Economic (e.g. making their designs affordable), environmental (e.g., designs that reduce theircommunities carbon footprint and support local ecologies), social (e.g., fostering positive peer relationships,healthy well-being, community ownership, and preventing bullying and gang activity), and urban infrastructure(e.g., providing lighting and warmth on cold, dark days).For example, Samuel worried about dangerous peer friendships, such as gangs, and believed some ofthese peer-related challenges might be remedied with positive play, such as with football. Samuel persisted inrefining his football so that it met the needs of a wide range of peers. He first sought peer input on lighting –weight and design. He then pushed for input on weighting and feel. He tested his football with peers his age andpeers younger than him. He pressed them for feedback on what functionality they needed, which is why heultimately sought to make sure his ball was waterproof. Each interaction required Samuel to consider many newtechnical factors in his design that he had not previously considered, but he was deeply motivated by how andwhy his football would serve his local peer community.Pivot Points and their functionsAs youth engage in such rooted making practices over time, their in-the-moment actions served as critical “pivotpoints” in their design work. The pivot points connected scales of activity, including STEM inquiry, making,community and action taking, in how they provided analytical foci for driving technically oriented design work,and opportunities for social negotiation towards new possibilities of doing and becoming in STEM,makerspaces and community. Here we refer to Holland and colleagues (2001) use of the term pivot to refer to“mediating or symbolic devices” not just to “organize responses but also to pivot or shift into the frame of adifferent world”. When youth leveraged their funds of knowledge, for example, towards work on their projects,they etched their insideness onto their engineering design, in ways that impacted the design process andhow/where it unfolds, as well as their role in it. As pivots, these funds were not simply complementary to theyouths’ engineering design, but essential to both who they are and their design work. Pivot points include tools(e.g. sewing machine, Google Sketch Up), relationships (e.g. Samuel’s ties to his cousins and peers) and theinnovations themselves (e.g. Samuel’s light-up football), all of which are able to shift the nature of STEMengagement for the youth, and potentially transform their possibilities for becoming and being within particularspaces (e.g. Samuel’s peers and cousins engaging in safe play at night in their neighborhood).The three key functions of pivot points are 1) Using funds as navigational indicators to secure aproductive launching space to begin their making project; 2) driving technically oriented design work in dialogwith community interests, and 3) facilitating social negotiations towards novel space-making endeavors tobroaden possibilities for becoming in STEM.1) Using funds as navigational indicators to secure a productive project launching space. The youth(including Samuel) took on a making project because they belonged to the same makerspace club. They wereICLS 2016 Proceedings295© ISLSnot told what to make or how to make it. Rather they were charged with a fairly wide open task: designsomething that “uses portable energy” and that “attends to a particular community concern.” We have beenconcerned with how youth locate or author productive starting places for projects. Such initial location work canbe challenging, for it involves social negotiations of who to work with, along with considerations of whatchallenges might be worth spending time on. In both cases presented in this manuscript, the youth leveragedtheir funds as navigational indicators to author a productive project launching space.Samuel drew from a wide range of funds – M4C youth makerspace, family, peer, and residentialcommunity funds – in order to locate a productive project launching space. As Samuel noted in his interview,his light-up football was an idea he “thought, and thought and thought about” while home at his grandmother’shouse unable to find transportation to the club nor able play outside after the dark. These considerations –limited streetlights, personal safety, and friendships – made that much more salient by his move to hisgrandmother’s care became points of negotiation for how and with whom he would work. Samuel switchedgroup memberships twice, before he felt he had the space to tackle the issue he really cared about. Samuel’sinitial ideas were legitimized by his cousins and peers who also knew that he had extensive experience playingfootball with friends, and had the expertise to design a football.2) Driving technically-oriented design solutions in dialog with community interests. We also seeimprints of youth’s rootedness in how they worked across scales of activity in their systematic efforts to refinetheir design constraints and evaluate possible solutions towards optimization. New design cycles were initiatedon both technical and community terms. For example, youth-set end-point assessments required them to seekmultiple perspectives, both community-oriented and technical. As community funds initiated more complexdesign conditions, Samuel needed to deepen his knowledge of energy systems and environmental and economicimpact. Working with a mentor, Samuel figured out how to calculate power requirements of different lightingsystems. He read information on the Internet on the affordances of LED lights, when his friends told him thatbulky lights would not work on the football. He spent time figuring out how to assembles the components in acircuit with a switch. When he became concerned about the affordability of batteries as well as the impact onbattery disposal on the local ecology, he thought about rechargeable batteries. But even then he had to figure outhow to charge the rechargeable batteries in environmental friendly ways.As Samuel began working on his design, he brought to bear a set of fairly specific communityconcerns, as discussed, to a fairly vague technical challenge. However, these specific community concernshelped Samuel to functionally break down the work he needed to accomplish from a technical standpoint – e.g.,work on the lighting, the weight, and the shape of the football. Samuel’s funds of knowledge also gave himstarting points for where, within his social network, he might look for feedback.3) Facilitating social negotiation towards novel space-making: New possibilities of doing andbecoming in STEM, makerspaces and community. The youth’s making practices iteratively and incrementallybuilt on each other to expand their STEM expertise and rootedness in community. Both the merging andlayering of STEM and their funds of knowledge onto and into each other were accomplished not only in theservice of their design work, but also in the attempt to change the real worlds in which they are working andbecoming (Fendler, 2014). That some of the youth have said they want to get smarter on these topics so thatthey can return to their community – not leave it as they move on up – speaks to this point well. In short, newpossibilities in space-making operate both at the level of the making process, and the potential resultant impactof the youth-created innovation.The playing field in makerspaces (one area of space-making) literally and figuratively transformed forthe youth as they incrementally, but systematically, refined the problem and design they were working on inboth technical and social ways, expanding their connectedness to others, and thus the access they had to ideas,tools, and resources for advancing their developing expertise. As Samuel walked through the main club roomswith his ball, kids gathered around him asking to test it out, and where and when they could buy one. His picturewith the pro football star hangs on the wall, and other youth have since joined M4C to “do what Samuel did”,which included “making” things and “meeting famous people.” Becoming an expert involved a form of verticaldevelopment in his deepening scientific knowledge and practice, but it also involved interative movement andengagement of such developing expertise with his cultural repertoires of practice (Gutiérrez, 2012).What is more, the youth’s designs helped to transform the playing field in community (another area ofspace-making) for themselves and their peers. Samuel’s football will allow his peers to practice throughout theoff-season, so that they can “get better at the - for next year - for the next season they play football.”Equally as significant are the playing fields of STEM, both real and imagined (a 3rd area of spacemaking). The youth’s practices served as new tools to expand the very purposes and goals for engaging inscience. At the heart of each youth’s design is an effort to work at the intersection of science and the publicgood, as a way to transform both. Their engagement with the problem was not simply motivated by individualICLS 2016 Proceedings296© ISLSinterest. Engagement was framed, in part, through collectively formed interests as they sought out feedbackfrom a wide range of others, at the powered boundaries of race, power, care and danger. These tensions requiredgreater engagement with STEM as they demanded more complex problems to be considered. At the same time,these tensions made possible recognition within STEM worlds while also exposing the challenges youth face inseeking recognition in these same worlds.This kind of repositioning in STEM amidst these tensions is important. Dominant discourses positionthe youth as outsiders and non-experts in science and engineering. What we see is a reinhabitation of the spacesof STEM; one that deterritorializes STEM routines and practices, making as Perumal (2015) writes “physicalentry into and living in previously forbidden places” a process of taking back and reclaiming the space of STEMin ways that recognize and care for the rootedness of young people (p. 26).Conclusions and implicationsFor many of the youth with whom we work, gaining access to STEM is an uphill battle. We also see how theyouth pushed back against these low expectations through engaging in mobilities of criticality. Their makingpractices, as rooted in community, allow for the reconstruction of the spaces of STEM, making and community,in how the movement of people, ideas, and relationships interrupt practices and ways of being.The youths’ work suggests that leveraging both community insideness and scientific expertise is aboutmuch more than bridging these two worlds. While such bridging is important, it is in how this bridging makespossible new and more expansive opportunities to learn and to become in STEM, that we need to pay increasingattention to. Indeed, by engaging in mobilities of criticality, the youth speak back against the normativeaccounts that often frame their communities in deficit ways. At the same time, their enactment of their criticalitythrough their making practices call attention to the prosaic and micro-level processes involved in making spaces– STEM, maker, and community – more habitable (Lombard, 2014).ReferencesBright, N., Manchester, H., Allendyke, S. (2013). Space, Place, and Social Justice in Education: Growing aBigger Entanglement. Qualitative Inquiry 19(10) 747–755.Creswell, T. (1996). In Place/Out of Place: Geography, Ideology, and Transgression. Minneapolis, MN:University of Minnesota Press.Engeström, Y., & Sannino, A. (2010). Studies of expansive learning: Foundations, findings and futurechallenges. Educational Research Review, 5(1), 1-24.Fendler, R. (2014). Becoming-Learner: Coordinates for Mapping the Space and Subject of Nomadic Pedagogy.Qualitative Inquiry, 19(10) 786-793.Gutiérrez, K. (2008). Developing a Sociocritical Literacy in the Third Space. Reading Research Quarterly, 42,148-164.Gutiérrez, K. (2012). Re-Mediating current activity for the future. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 19, 17–21.Holland, D., Lachiotte, D., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (2001). Identity and agency in cultural worlds. Cambridge,MA: Harvard University Press.Kwan, M.-P. (2008). From oral histories to visual narratives: Re-presenting the post-September 11 experiencesof the Muslim women in the United States. Social and Cultural Geography, 9, 653–669.Leander, K., Phillips, N. & Taylor, K. (2010). The changing social spaces of learning: Mapping new mobilities.Review of Research in Education, 34, 329-394.Lombard, M. (2014). Constructing ordinary places: Place-making in urban informal settlements in Mexico.Progress in Planning, 94, 1-53.Massey, D. (2005). For Space, London: Sage.National Academy of Engineering. (2010). Engineering, Social Justice, and Sustainable CommunityDevelopment. Washington DC: National Academies Press.Perumal, J. (2015). Critical pedagogies of place: Educators' personal and professional experiences of social(in)justice. Teaching and Teacher Education, 45, 25–32.Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developinggrounded theory (2nd Ed). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.Trueba, H.T. (1999). Latinos unidos: From cultural diversity to the politics of solidarity. Lanham, MD:Rowman & Littlefield.AcknowledgmentsWe thank participating youth. This work was funded by the National Science Foundation, DRL 1421116.ICLS 2016 Proceedings297© ISLS