Learning with Multi-Representational Texts in a Second Language:An Eye-Tracking InvestigationNurjanah Mohd Jaafar, School of Education, University of Nottingham, nurjanah.mjaafar@gmail.comShaaron E. Ainsworth, School of Education, University of Nottingham, shaaron.ainsworth@nottingham.ac.uk, Walter J.B. van Heuven, School of Psychology, University of Nottingham,walter.vanheuven@nottingham.ac.ukAbstract: Integrating verbal and pictorial information is fundamental in learning multirepresentational materials and is reported to correlate with various positive outcomes oflearning. To investigate how non-native English readers engage with multi-representationaltexts, the eye movements of 32 university students were examined while they read a multirepresentational text in their second language (L2). The role of prior knowledge, L2vocabulary knowledge and L2 reading comprehension ability was also investigated. Nosignificant correlations emerged between eye-movement patterns and individual differencesbut there were significant correlations between eye-movement patterns and learning outcome.This study found partial support that greater integrations between text and pictures by nonnative English readers was associated with a better learning outcome. Text-dominantprocessing and text-guided integrative processing appear to be equally important whenreading multi-representational texts in the L2.Keywords: Multi-representational learning, integrative processing, eye-movements, reading in asecond language, learning from textIntroductionThe nature of reading multi-representational textsMost studies that involve native readers learning with multi-representational texts suggest that their reading istext-dominant. Readers predominantly attend to text and sometimes neglect to devote sufficient amount ofattention at inspecting corresponding pictures. Multimedia researchers argue that pictures should not beneglected as successful comprehension of multi-representational texts necessitates the readers to integrateinformation from both representations. Text-picture integration is fundamental as it allows readers to construct acoherent mental representation of the learning content (Mayer, 2005). Eye-movements indicative of the textpicture integration process are associated with various positive outcomes of learning. Readers who make moreand longer attempts at integrating perform better in several learning tasks than those who make less and shorterattempts. This more strategic behavior is characterized by more frequent integrative transitions between text andpicture, longer text re-reading time while re-inspecting picture and longer picture re-inspection time while rereading text (Mason, Tornatora & Pluchino, 2013, 2015).Despite the plethora of studies published, surprising little attention has been given to people readingmulti-representational texts in their second language (L2). Studies comparing first language (L1) and L2 readinghave found that reading in L1 and L2 differs. L2 reading patterns for instance are usually characterized bylonger sentence reading times, more fixations and shorter saccades (Cop, Drieghe & Duyck, 2015). This presentstudy therefore argues for the importance of studying the non-native readers since their experience with multirepresentational texts may differ from their native-reader counterparts. Their difficulty in comprehending theverbal information may lead them to ignore the pictures as they focus on the reading in a less familiar language.Alternatively, it may guide them to use the pictures as a source, allowing them to gain a deeper understanding ofthe text.We also examined individual differences that are commonly linked to the engagement with multirepresentational texts: prior knowledge and reading comprehension ability. Empirical support regarding theirrole in facilitating learning of multi-representational texts suggests positive associations with learning outcomes(Mason, et al., 2015). Additionally, prior knowledge is shown to correlate positively with text-pictureintegration (Mason, et al., 2013). Reading comprehension on the other hand is argued to facilitate text as well asimage comprehension (Scheiter, Schüler, Gerjets, Huk & Hesse, 2014). For people reading in their L2,vocabulary knowledge is known to play an important role (Droop & Verhoeven, 2003).The present studyICLS 2018 Proceedings969© ISLSTo explore the non-native English readers’ reading of a multi-representational text in English, their eyemovement behavior was examined. We specifically examined their text-picture integration since it is integral tocomprehension and learning successfully from multi-representational texts. To this end, two research questionswere addressed in this study:1. Is the eye-movement pattern of non-native English readers reading an authentic multi-representationaltext in English related to their English vocabulary knowledge, English reading comprehension abilityand their prior knowledge in the subject matter?2. Is the eye-movement pattern of non-native English readers reading an authentic multi-representationaltext in English related to their learning of the multi-representational text?MethodParticipantsFifty undergraduates and postgraduates who used English as their L2 were recruited. However, due tocalibration problems and drifts in gaze data when reading a long authentic text for an average of 4.84 minutes,only the data of 32 participants could be analyzed. Participants had not studied science since the age of 17 toensure the material they were reading was not already over-learnt, had normal or corrected-to-normal vision andwere at most ‘good’ users of English. Their English proficiency was determined by their performance in anEnglish proficiency test such as IELTS or TOEFL. In addition, the reading direction of their L1 matched that ofEnglish, i.e. left-to-right, and top-to-bottom, as this may influence how readers look at text and pictures.Reading materialThe reading material was a single two-page spread from a science textbook for Year Seven (Levesley, Johnson& Gray, 2008) that discusses the properties of solids, liquids and gases. It was chosen after piloting as itincludes a number of representation types which serves different functions and whose integration was expectedto be important for learning. The material consists of chunks of text and several types of graphic representations(photograph, diagrams). For eye movement analyses, the material was divided into 28 areas of interest (AOIs).Each is classified as either a text or a picture AOI. There are 21 text AOIs made up of paragraphs, headings andquestions. Each graphic representation is an AOI in itself, accounting for 7 picture AOIs.MeasuresVocabulary knowledge in EnglishThe English vocabulary task used was the Lexical Test for Advanced Learners of English (LexTALE) whichassesses English vocabulary knowledge. The test involves an un-speeded visual lexical decision task in whicheach participant was presented with 60 letter strings and they had to decide whether or not each letter string wasan existing English word.Reading comprehension ability in EnglishParticipants’ reading comprehension ability was assessed with the Gray Silent Reading Tests (GSRT).Prior knowledge of the topicThe participants’ pre-existing knowledge regarding the properties of solids, liquids and gases was assessed with10 multiple-choice items. Each has four options with one correct answer. All items were adapted from a list ofassessment items available on the American Association for the Advancement of Science Project 2061 ScienceAssessment website, under the topic Atoms, Molecules and States of Matter.Learning outcomesThe post-test was a paper-and-pencil task assessing the participants’ recall and comprehension of the readingmaterial. It comprised eight open-ended questions reproduced from the question section of the reading material.The last question however was slightly different from the original. In addition to describing “the movements ofthe particles in solids, liquids and gases” in just words, the participants were also asked to describe themthrough drawing(s). This additional element assessed the participants’ recall and comprehension of the pictorialinformation, in particular. Answers to all eight questions were scored according to their correctness andcompleteness to provide a maximum post-test score of 30 (of which 16 points were from the final questionwhich included drawing). The answers were independently scored by two raters.ICLS 2018 Proceedings970© ISLSEye movement measuresBecause the way in which the non-native English readers integrate verbal and pictorial information in the text isessential for this study, we collected several measures that are normally used to measure this process. Themeasures were based on the gaze shifts between text and picture AOIs. Integrative transition is a frequencymeasure indicating the number of attempts at integrating verbal and pictorial information (Mason, et al., 2015).Two temporal measures were also calculated to identify the total time spent on integrative processing during there-processing of the material. Look-from text to picture fixation time refers to the total time spent re-inspectinga picture AOI while re-reading a text AOI, whereas look-from picture to text fixation time refers to the totaltime spent re-reading a text AOI while re-inspecting a picture AOI. These second-pass reading measures wereexamined because it is assumed to reflect a more intentional and purposeful processing of the material (Mason,et al., 2015). Additionally, the total times spent making text-to-text and picture-to-picture integrations duringsecond-pass reading were also calculated. Look-from text to text fixation time refers to the total time spent on atext AOI while re-reading another text AOI, whereas look-from picture to picture fixation time refers to the totaltime spent on a picture AOI while re-inspecting another picture AOI.ApparatusEye movements were collected using the Tobii Pro TX300 eye-tracker (Tobii Technology, Stockholm, Sweden)with a 300 Hz sampling rate. The stimulus was presented on a 23-inch TFT monitor with a 1920 x 1080 pixelresolution. Data were recorded with Tobii-Studio software. The eye-tracker allows the participants freedom ofhead movement at 37 x 17 cm or 15 x 7”.ProcedureAll participants were tested individually. The study comprised three stages; pre-experimental, experimental andpost-experimental. All were carried out in a single session. The pre-experimental stage involved theadministration of GSRT and the prior knowledge test. In the experimental stage, the participants sat in front of amonitor with the built-in eye-tracking system and were asked to read the stimulus silently and carefully as theywould have to answer questions afterwards. The participants read at their own pace. Before the experimentcommenced, the system was calibrated on a nine-point grid. All participants finished reading the stimulus under10 minutes. The post-experimental stage entailed the administration of the post-test, LexTALE and abackground questionnaire. The participants completed all three stages under 1 hour and 45 minutes.Results and discussionThe descriptive values are displayed in Table 1.Table 1: Means and standard deviations for readers’ individual difference measuresEnglish vocabulary knowledge (min. = 0, max. = 100)English reading comprehension ability (min. = 0, max. = 65)Prior knowledge (min. = 0, max. = 10)Learning outcome (min. = 0, max. = 30)M73.3650.257.4717.95SD15.185.152.233.5Eye-movement behavior and individual differencesOne of the aims of the study was to examine whether non-native English readers’ eye-movement patterns arerelated to their individual characteristics such as prior knowledge or reading comprehension. A correlationanalysis however did not find significant associations between any of the individual differences and anymeasure of eye-movements (see Table 2).Table 2: Correlations between eye movement and individual difference measuresIntegrative transitionLook-from text to picture fixation timeLook-from picture to text fixation timeLook-from text to text fixation timeICLS 2018 ProceedingsEnglish vocabularyknowledgeEnglish readingcomprehension abilityPrior knowledge.219-.021-.129.108.188-.025.194.022.250.245.224.126971© ISLSLook-from picture to picture fixation time*All ps are above .05.071.189-.044This is rather surprising especially with regard to prior knowledge which has been argued to facilitate textpicture integration (Mason, et al., 2015; Scheiter, et al. 2014). The non-native readers’ English readingcomprehension ability and English vocabulary knowledge as well as what they have already known about thesubject matter therefore cannot explain how they read and processed the multi-representational material.Eye-movement behavior and learningTo investigate whether the non-native English readers’ eye-movement behavior is associated with their learningof the material, correlations were calculated between the eye movement measures and learning outcome.Learning outcome (M = 17.95, SD = 3.5) correlated positively with integrative transitions (r = .411, p = .020),look-from text to picture fixation time (r = .426, p = .015) and look-from text to text time (r = .388, p = .028).However, it did not correlate with two other measures; look-from picture to text fixation time (r = .266, p =.142) and look-from picture to picture fixation time (r = .137, p = .456). Thus, it seems that those whoperformed better in the post-test were readers who integrated verbal information for a longer time during the reprocessing of the material. They also integrated verbal and pictorial information to a greater extent during thelearning episode. However, this was only partially supported because look-from picture to text fixation time didnot correlate with learning outcome. This suggests that similar to L1 readers, the L2 readers also have textdominant processing and text-guided integrative processing (indicated by look-from text to text fixation timeand look-from text to picture fixation time) and so were just as important for learning from the multirepresentational material.ConclusionThis study aimed at extending current research on multi-representational learning by exploring readers’engagement with a multi-representational text in their L2. We examined their eye-movement behavior whenreading and processing the text and found that the individual differences examined could not explain thisbehavior. We were also particularly interested in how these readers integrated the text and pictures and foundsupport for the importance of integrating both representations to learn successfully from multi-representationaltexts. It appears that text-dominant processing and text-guided integrative processing are equally important.Because the participants were reading in their L2, they needed more time to process the text. Hence, theybenefited more from authentic multi-representational textbooks by not only integrating verbal and pictorialinformation to a greater extent but also by using text to guide this process. Thus, it seems that successful L2readers are as equally dependent as L1 readers on text-guided interpretation and integration of pictures. Howdifferent these processes are in L1 and L2 reading and how it could contribute to learning from multirepresentational texts may be of interest for future research, as the number of people studying in their L2continues to grow.ReferencesCop, U., Drieghe, D., & Duyck, W. (2015). Eye movement patterns in natural reading: A comparison ofmonolingual and bilingual reading of a novel. Plos One, 10(8), e0134008. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0134008Droop, M., & Verhoeven, L. (2003). Language proficiency and reading ability in first- and second-languagelearners. Reading Research Quarterly, 38(1), 78-103. doi:10.1598/RRQ.38.1.4Levesley, M., Johnson, P., & Gray, S. (2008). Exploring Science: How Science Works Year 7. Essex: PearsonEducation.Mason, L., Tornatora, M., & Pluchino, P. (2015). Integrative processing of verbal and graphical informationduring re-reading predicts learning from illustrated text: an eye-movement study. Reading and Writing,28(6), 851-872. doi:10.1007/s11145-015-9552-5Mason, L., Tornatora, M. C., & Pluchino, P. (2013). Do fourth graders integrate text and picture in processingand learning from an illustrated science text? Evidence from eye-movement patterns. Computers &Education, 60(1), 95-109. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2012.07.011Mayer, R. E. (2005). Cognitive theory of multimedia learning. In R. E. Mayer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbookof Multimedia Learning (pp. 31-48). New York: Cambridge University Press.Scheiter, K., Schüler, A., Gerjets, P., Huk, T., & Hesse, F. W. (2014). Extending multimedia research: How doprerequisite knowledge and reading comprehension affect learning from text and pictures. Computersin Human Behavior, 31, 73-84. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2013.09.022ICLS 2018 Proceedings972© ISLS