The Effect of Concrete Materials on Children’s SubsequentNumerical Explanations: Metaphorical PrimingAndrew Manches, University of Edinburgh Moray House School of Education, a.manches@ed.ac.ukMihaela Dragomir, University of Edinburgh School of Informatics, m.dragomir@sms.ed.ac.ukAbstract: This paper contributes evidence for the claim that gestures used to support numericalthinking can simulate prior concrete experiences. 114 children aged 6-9 years explained anumerical relationship (additive composition) three times consecutively. All children explainedwithout materials for the 1st and 3rd explanation. For the 2nd explanation, children were randomlyassigned to one of three conditions to use: physical objects; a number line; or no materials(control condition) to explain their thinking. Findings showed how using physical objectssignificantly influenced the particular types of gestures (e.g. splitting), hand morphology (e.g.pinching), and words (e.g. “take”, “big”) that children used in subsequent explanations withoutmaterials. Similar (although less pronounced) priming effects were found for the number linecondition. The study provides support for conceptual metaphor theory (used to categorizegestures and language), and the potential for gesture research to address long-standing questionsconcerning the role of concrete materials in learning.IntroductionAs well as the importance of informing everyday pedagogy, substantial research has examined if and howchildren’s interaction with physical materials supports learning in order to evaluate new digital forms ofinteraction and also to better understand the relationship between action and cognition. Gesture research hasoffered a unique window into this research area by suggesting that some gestures, which are used to explainparticular concepts, simulate prior interactions with physical materials. The contribution of this paper is to supportthis claim by demonstrating how asking children to explain a particular numerical relationship with physicalmaterials significantly influences the types of gestures and language children subsequently use to explain theirthinking without materials. By providing evidence of this internationalization of action experience, the workreported provides empirical support for claims surrounding the embodied nature of cognition.The role of physical materials in learningFrom plastic blocks to a counting abacus, physical learning materials are pervasive in early learning classrooms,and have been designed and advocated by many educational pioneers, from Frobel to Dienes. Such use hasattracted a wealth of research attempting to understand how, and if, they support children’s learning, particularlyin domains such as mathematics. Unfortunately, although a relatively recent meta-analysis suggests a slightpositive effect (Carbonneau, Marley, & Selig, 2012), there remains a lack of consensus over their benefits (McNeil& Jarvin, 2007), and research remains limited in its capacity to inform everyday practice.It is not simply their pedagogical value however that has attracted research into physical learningmaterials. These objects encapsulate fundamental questions concerning the relationship between action andcognition. In this regard, the last two decades has witnessed increasing interest in this field, owing to two mainreasons. The first is that new technologies are changing children’s interaction with the world, raising pertinentquestions about the subsequent impact on conceptual development. As well as addressing concerns that devices(e.g. mouse/touchscreen) limit accessibility, researchers have investigated the potential for more interactivedevices (e.g. tangible technology/gesture recognition devices) to leverage body based learning mechanisms(Manches, O’Malley, & Benford, 2010).The second reason for renewed interest in physical learning materials concerns theoretical developmentsin cognitive science over the last twenty years regarding the relationship between body-based experience andcognition. Embodied Cognition is an umbrella term capturing various claims that cognitive processes are bestunderstood when perceived as grounded in our body’s interaction with the world. One of the more controversialclaims of Embodied Cognition is that our ‘offline’ thinking (thinking in the absence of relevant stimuli) is bodybased (Wilson, 2002).Whilst the importance of action experiences is a core feature of prominent cognitive developmentaltheories, Embodied Cognition differs in its proposition that that these experiences are not simply precursors tomore abstract thinking, but are encoded as an integral part of developing concepts in the form of sensor-motoricrepresentations. One interpretation of this proposal is to emphasize the importance of particular action experiencesin learning, thereby providing a novel rationale for the benefits of physical materials (Pouw, van Gog, & Paas,ICLS 2016 Proceedings378© ISLS2014) , as well as new forms of digital designs that can elicit and dynamically represent particular physical actions(Abrahamson, 2009).Action experiences and conceptual developmentAn important question raised by embodiment theories therefore concerns which types of actions might be morebeneficial for developing particular concepts. Should we encourage children to move their hands together whenlearning the concept of addition for example? After all, most forms of interaction in learning tasks, from pens tocomputer mice, generate some form of action. This has led researchers to refer to the extent to which particularactions are ‘congruent’ with the concept at hand (Segal, 2011). According to Bakker, Antle and Van Den Hoven(2012), the relationship between particular actions and concepts depends upon the embodied metaphorsunderlying the concept. Metaphor in this context refers to the mapping of bodily originating schemata onto aconceptual domain (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980) (e.g. mapping body experience of balance with the ‘abstract’concept of justice). Bakker et al. suggest that such metaphors might be identified from existing theoreticalliterature or investigated through empirical work examining the way individuals move their bodies whenarticulating their thinking about particular concepts.Gesture researchThe most prominent way we move our bodies when thinking is through our hands, and in support of embodiedclaims, research has demonstrated that the main function of gesture is to support the speaker’s thinking rather thanjust the listener’s comprehension (Tellier, 2009). The last two decades has seen increasing work investigating theway children and adults gesture when explaining their mathematical thinking (e.g. Alibali & Nathan, 2011;Goldin-Meadow, Kim, & Singer, 1999). Edwards (2009) for example, examined student teachers’ explanationsof fraction concepts. Of the 251 gestures generated by the 12 participants, 32% referred to fractions. Of these 81were categorized as primarily metaphoric, where the pictorial content presents an abstract idea rather than aconcrete object or event, and 35% as primarily iconic, that “bear a close formal relationship to the semantic contentof speech” (McNeill, 1992, p.14), interpreted here as visually resembling their concrete referents.Whilst many researchers view the categories of iconic and metaphoric gestures as both constituting abroader category of representational gestures (where the hands depict aspects of meaning in speech literally ormetaphorically - Alibali & Nathan, 2011), Edwards’ work provides great insight into the types of concreteexperiences that may have influenced participants’ thinking. From her data, Edwards categorized two types oficonic gestures: iconic-concrete, that refer to concrete objects or processes “often related to tangible materialsutilized in early instruction about fractions” (Figure 1), and iconic-symbolic, that refer to gestures that “re-enactedthe physical process of writing out a mathematical procedure, or referred to visual locations and elements ofmathematical symbols”. These categories highlight the potential to examine gestures in order to understand howprior perceptual and action experiences may have shaped thinking. What is not clear is whether gestures simulateparticular experiences with materials, or whether there exists any underlying embodied metaphors for the rangeof gestures generated.Figure 1. Iconic-concrete gestures (Edwards, 2009).Embodied metaphors of numberIn their seminal book, “Where mathematics comes from”, Núñez and Lakoff (2000) propose that there are twofundamental body-based metaphors underpinning concepts of number. The first is Arithmetic is object collection(OC) which is a mapping from experiences with physical objects to the domain of numbers. The second isArithmetic is motion along a path (MP), which is a mapping from experience moving along point locations in alinear direction to the domain of numbers (e.g. steps when walking). In the OC metaphor, numbers are “collectionsof objects of the same size” and in the MP metaphor numbers are “point locations on a path”. According to theauthors, these metaphors draw upon early body experiences such as manipulating groups of objects or walking indiscrete steps.ICLS 2016 Proceedings379© ISLSIt is possible to re-examine the gesture categories identified in Edwards’ research in light of theconceptual metaphors proposed by Núñez and Lakoff. As suggested in Edwards’ definition of iconic-concretegestures, many gestures seemed to portray simulated action with physical objects such as fraction pieces. Suchgestures therefore appear relevant to the Object Collection metaphor – individuals conceptualizing numbers as ifthey were physical collections of objects. It is possible, although more difficult, to relate other iconic-concretegestures described by Edwards to Lakoff and Núñez’ MP metaphor. For example, describing fractions as a linebeing split at different points. Perhaps more difficult is to relate either conceptual metaphor to those categorizedby Edwards as iconic-symbolic, where participants’ gestures simulated interaction with mathematical proceduresor symbols. Whilst it remains possible that individuals’ concepts of these procedures or symbols pertain toparticular metaphors (e.g. “+” symbol being conceptualized as the bringing together of object collections, ormovement along a pathway), this cannot be as readily deduced from these types of gestures.Other authors have proposed different categorizations for gestures explaining different number concepts(e.g. Arzarello, Robutti, & Bazzini, 2005). In this work, it is often possible to relate different gestures to the OCand MP metaphors, although perhaps more difficult for complex concepts which involve increasing levels ofsymbolization. This would suggest therefore that it might be easier to examine the role of the OC and MPconceptual metaphors in the development of more basic number concepts.Examining metaphorical gestures in early number conceptsWhilst the notion that all number concepts can be reduced to underlying conceptual metaphors has been called toquestion (see Kövecses, 2008), the proposal can be scrutinized empirically. More recently, Marghetis (in Núñez,Marghetis, Cohen-Kadosh, & Dowker, 2014) examined the language and gestures of adults asked to explain thenumerical concept of ‘odd and even’ – a relatively early number concept. In this study, adults were first primedaccording to the two metaphors. In the ‘path’ condition, participants were asked to imagine a bead moving alonga string; in the ‘object’ condition, participants were asked to imagine combining different collections. Insubsequent explanations of odd and even, participants deployed two main types of gestures: those simulatingmanipulation of objects (hand moving inward shaped as if grasping, pinching or holding), and those simulatingmovement along a line (pointing handshape, tracing motion along a horizontal axis). Moreover, as predicted, thepriming mental imagery was reported to have had a significant effect on conceptualization.Marghetis’ metaphorical priming study design demonstrates the potential for investigating the role of theOC and MP metaphors in early numerical concepts, which therefore provides a window into the types ofinteraction experiences that might influence the development of these concepts. However, the reported studyfocused on a single concept and with adults, where the influence of priming may be quite different to childrenwho are still developing their numerical thinking. More importantly, detail is missing about the range andprevalence of gestures generated that is required to evaluate the extent to which individuals’ numerical thinkingcan be captured by the two embodied metaphors proposed by Núñez and Lakoff. The study reported in this paperwas designed to address this important gap in the literature.Study aimsThe overarching aim of the authors’ work is to understand the role of physical interaction in early numericaldevelopment; this paper addresses this aim by examining the role of the OC and MP metaphors in young children’snumerical concepts. The paper reports a study that examined the effect of metaphorical priming on children’sexplanations of a specific numerical relationship: additive composition. Analysis initially focused on the effecton children’s gestures during their explanations; however, this was then extended to examine the effect onmetaphorical language. Although Núñez et al. (2014) refer to words that pertain to the OC and MP metaphors(see section 2.5.3), the summary of Marghetis’ study does not indicate whether changes in the use of particularwords were analyzed. We are not aware of existing work that has quantitatively analyzed changes in metaphoricallanguage in this domain (although notable work has detailed more microgenetic changes, e.g. Roth, 2002).The study design therefore echoes that reported in Núñez et al. (2014), with several key differences.Firstly, the study was carried out with children (aged 6-9 years old) not adults. Secondly a larger sample wasinvolved (n=114). Thirdly, the study captured participants’ pre-priming explanations, therefore providing morerobust analysis of the effect of priming. Fourthly, this paper reports greater detail on how particular gestures andlanguage were categorized according to the two metaphors. Fifthly, this study reports the effect on metaphoricallanguage. Finally, the materials used for metaphorical priming were familiar classroom materials, therebyproviding greater ecological validity in terms of educational implications.The main research question for the study reported was: What is the effect of metaphorical priming onyoung children’s numerical explanations?ICLS 2016 Proceedings380© ISLSMethodThe study adopted an embodied cognitive theoretical paradigm, whereby cognitive processes are considered asgrounded in the body’s interaction with the world. The study methodology employed metaphorical analysis ofconcept explanations, interpreting gestures (and accompanying speech) in terms of metaphors within the conceptdomain.Numerical concept explanation task: Additive composition of numberAdditive composition is the concept that a number is composed of other smaller numbers, for example, that 8 canbe decomposed into 2 and 6, or 1 and 7. Additive composition is core to numerical development (Martins-Mourao& Cowan, 1998), an overarching concept that connects numerous topics and applications, and is thought to forma conceptual base for the development of children’s elementary arithmetic as well as their understanding of thedecade numeration system (i.e. understanding that 12 is comprised of 10 and 2) (Nunes et al., 2007). This conceptis also evident in the use of flexible addition strategies, for example, decomposing 6+7 into 6+6+1 in order toexploit knowledge of double facts (i.e. 6+6+12).As young children cannot be asked to simply explain their understanding of the concept term, a questionwas designed to elicit children’s understanding of additive composition. The question draws upon the authors’prior work (Manches & O'Malley, 2016) that required children to explain the logical relationship between twoaddition parts. The problems were presented verbally (to minimize the effect of external stimuli) but could berepresented symbolically as: a + b = (a+1) + (b-1), e.g. 6 + 1 = 2 + 5.DesignEach child was asked to explain three additive composition questions consecutively, hence referred to as the 1st,2nd, 3rd explanation, in a single session. For the 1st and 3rd explanation, children were given no relevant stimuli(e.g. materials or displays). For the 2nd explanation, children were randomly assigned (alphabetically) to one ofthree independent conditions: No Materials (control), Object Collection (OC), and Motion along Pathway (MP).The No Materials condition acted as a control, asking children to explain without materials (similarly to 1st and3rd explanation for all children). In the OC condition children were given a collection of small yellow plasticUnifix® blocks. In the MP condition, children were given an ‘empty number line’. The empty number line is acommon numerical representation (Murphy, 2011) consisting of a horizontal line on paper marked with smallvertical lines along its length. Children in this study were familiar with materials in both the OC and MPconditions, reflecting the attempts to ensure ecological validity in the study.ParticipantsThe study included 114 children aged from 6-9 years old (77-112 months), with parent and child consent. Threechildren were not included in the data as they were unable to answer the pre-explanation number questions, leaving111 participants (M=94.75mths; SD: 10.05). Children were from 9 classes across three year-groups within a nondenominational primary school in Edinburgh serving children from age 3-12 years.ProcedureChildren were interviewed in 1:1 sessions with the first author who is also a qualified Primary teacher in a quietbut visible location in the school. Each child was given three explanation questions, unless they were unable toanswer the initial addition questions. Three children were not able (they were given other questions they couldsucceed at), leaving a total sample of 111 children.The format for the 1st, 2nd and 3rd explanation question was the same; they only differed by the sum total:7, 8 and 9 always in that order. Whilst learning effects were expected, the study focused on between conditiondifferences. An interaction effect between materials and addition total amount was not expected. The format foreach explanation was as follows. First, children were asked to count out to the total (e.g. “Can you count to n?”),where n was 7, 8 then 9 for consecutive explanations. They were then asked the total of the addition sum of 1+(n-1) e.g. “What is 1 add 6?”). Children were subsequently asked the total of the addition sum 2 + (n-2) (e.g.“What is 2 add 5?). Finally, for the explanation question, the interviewer reminded children of these two additionproblems (e.g. “So, 1 add 6 makes 7, and 2 add 5 makes 7, they both make 7. Can you explain to me why 1 add 6makes the same as 2 add 5?”). The presentation of this explanation task was developed from pilot work and wasdesigned explicitly to draw out children’s thinking about the additive relationship (rather than re-state that thesums shared the same result). The choice of language was developed from advice from the class teacher; however,the methodological issue of possible conceptual priming in the question presentation is discussed later.The 2nd explanation total was always 8. For children in the No Materials condition, the questionpresentation was the same as the 1st and 3rd. For children in the materials (OC and MP) conditions, the interviewerICLS 2016 Proceedings381© ISLSechoed the No Materials format, but adapted for the materials. In the OC condition, children were presented with8 blocks and told to count how many there were. All children were able. The interviewer would then partition thematerials into two spatial groups (1 and 7, then 2 and 6) whilst asking the corresponding addition problems. Blockswere recollected after each question to avoid modelling the actions for the explanation task. Finally, theinterviewer would ask children to use the blocks to explain the numerical relationship. In the MP condition, theinterviewer provided an A4 piece of paper (portrait) with 4 empty number lines in rows. Each would have 9 pointlocations (i.e. number line to 8 as first point represents zero). Children were first given a pencil and asked to mark8 on the number line (the last point on the right of line). If children made the error of counting the first pointlocation (a common and interesting error in light of metaphors), they were corrected (several children did). Theinterviewer would then use the materials to represent amounts (drawing two arcs on the number line, e.g. from 0to 1st point then 1st to 8th point) whilst asking the addition problems. Finally, for the explanation question, childrenwere asked to use the number line and pencil to explain the numerical relationship.There are clear challenges of balancing the presentation and usability of two different representations;however, the following points should be highlighted. First, all children were familiar with materials. Secondly,all children had been shown how to use the materials by the time of the explanation question. Thirdly, the studywas not looking at performance with materials, but rather how materials primed particular forms of visual andmotor imagery that would evident in their gestures and language in a subsequent explanation without materials.AnalysisOut of 111 children, 97 children provided a verbal explanation of some form. Of these children, 59 (61.5%) usedat least one representational gesture (iconic/metaphoric). The language and gestures employed by the youngparticipants varied substantially, where this paper focuses on three forms of coded data that is proposed to capturechildren’s metaphorical thinking. These are illustrated in Figure 2 and discussed subsequently.Figure 2: Metaphoric coding.Metaphorical gesture: OC and MPThe 59 children who gestured generated a wide range of iconic gestures. Many gestures echoed Edwards’ iconicconcrete categorization. Within these, it was possible to distinguish between those that seemed to simulatemanipulation of objects. These were coded as OC gestures and included simulated splitting a collection of objectswith two hands (Figure 3a) or collecting objects (Figure 3b) or others such as sweeping with a curved arm towardthe body. The most prominent gesture, simulating collecting objects with two hands (Figure 3b), reflects thatdescribed by Núñez at al. (2014) for the OC metaphor. Our previous work (Manches & Dragomir, 2015) alsoreports a number of gestures appearing to simulate interaction with an imaginary linear pathway. Gesturesincluding pointing up or down (Figure 3c), tracing multiple arcs (Figure 3d), or gesturing movement toward aspace to the far right of the child. We coded these as MP gestures. The pointing up or down gesture seems to relatemost closely to Núñez at al.’s (2014) description for the MP metaphor. Each explanation received a score for thenumber of OC and MP gestures used.Figure 3a-d: OC and MP coded gestures: Splitting, Collecting, Pointing upwards, Arc Tracing.Metaphorical hand morphology: OCICLS 2016 Proceedings382© ISLSAs illustrated by the work of both Edwards (2005) and Núñez et al. (2014), many children pinched or graspedwhen enacting an OC gesture; although some did not (e.g. flat hands). Moreover, many children created this handmorphology when not generating an identifiable OC gesture, for example, as part of a simpler deictic (pointing)gesture. It is possible that many children used a pinch or grasp to simulate manipulation of symbols, or materialssuch as a pencil. However, closer inspection of their language, coupled with the younger age group, suggestedthat this form of hand morphology simulated grasping physical objects. Therefore, children’s explanations werecoded according to the presence of at least one pinch or grasp during explanation.Figure 4a-b: Pinch and Grab hand morphology.Metaphorical words: OC and MPWhilst metaphorical language typically refers to collections of words, Núñez et al. (2014) refer to how particularwords tend to suggest the OC metaphor (e.g. “big”, “take”) or MP metaphor (e.g. “up”, “far”). In this paper, wereport an initial examination of the frequency of words used in explanations that suggested the OC or MPmetaphor.The following procedure was used to code words used in explanations. Firstly, all videoed explanationswere transcribed. The authors then coded a list of unique words independently on a five-point scale: ConfidentOC, Possible OC, Neither/Either, Possible MP, and Confident MP. A word was then coded as OC or MP if bothauthors independently rated the word as ‘Confident’ or ‘Possible’ OC or MP. In summary, from an initial list of247 words (having removed non-words, e.g. fillers such as uhm), a list of 37 OC metaphor and 46 MP metaphorwords were identified. This list corroborated and significantly extended words suggested in Núñez et al. (2014).Whilst there are clear limitations to the de-contextualized process of coding individual words, the focus of analysisfor this paper was on the change in coded words between explanations according to condition.FindingsThe distribution of group data for three dependent measures (metaphorical gestures, hand morphology, language)was tested (Kolmogorov-Smirnov) and revealed significant departures from normality, therefore non-parametricanalyses are reported. Analyses were also carried out on differences in measures between conditions for the 1stexplanation. As expected from the random allocation of children to conditions, there were no significantdifferences found between groups for the 1st explanation.Metaphorical gesturesIn total, there were 13 OC gestures used by 13 children in the 1st explanation, and 49 used by 18 children in the3rd explanation. A non-parametric between subjects analysis (Kruskal-Wallis) was carried and revealed asignificant difference in the change of OC gestures between conditions (χ2(2)=12.263, p=.002). Mann-Whitneytests showed that a positive increase in OC gestures was significantly greater in the OC condition and the NoMaterials condition than the MP condition (U=455, p=.002, r=.36; U=544, p=.011, r=.30). There were nodifferences found between the OC and Control condition (U=605, p=.159, r=.16).For MP gestures, 21 children used 24 gestures in the 1st explanation, and 17 children used 35 in the 3rdexplanation. A non-parametric between subjects analysis (Kruskal-Wallis) was carried and revealed no significantdifferences in the change of MP gestures between conditions (χ2(2)=3.166, p=.205).Pinch grasp morphologyOf the 59 children who gestured, just under half (25) used a pinch or grasp hand morphology in the 1st explanation,while 24 children did in the 3rd explanation. Each child was given a score of -1 if they used at least one pinch/grabin the 1st explanation but not in the 3rd, a score of 1 if they used at least one pinch/grab in the 3rd but not in the 1stexplanation and a score of 0 if there was no change. A non-parametric between subjects analysis (Kruskal-Wallis)was carried and revealed a significant difference in the change of children using pinch/grab between conditions(χ2(2)=7.17, p=.028). Mann-Whitney showed that a positive increase in pinch/grab was significantly greater inthe OC condition than the MP condition (U=507, p=.012, r=.29). Although the change in in pinch/grab was greaterICLS 2016 Proceedings383© ISLSin the OC condition than the No Materials condition, this difference was not significant (U=569, p=0.057, r=.22).There was no difference between No Materials and MP conditions (U=650, p=0.446, r=.09). Therefore, there wasa tentative priming effect: children who used physical blocks in the 2nd explanation increased the number ofpinch/hand morphology in their explanations afterwards significantly more than children who used the numberline, and more than the control although not significantly.Metaphorical wordsEach child was given a score for OC and MP word change by subtracting the number of metaphorical words usedin Explanation 1 from number of words used in Explanation 3. A non-parametric between subjects analysis(Kruskal-Wallis) was carried and revealed a significant difference in the change of OC words between conditions(χ2(2)=7.43, p=.024). Mann-Whitney showed that positive increase in OC words was significantly greater in theOC condition than both the No Materials (U=482, p=.015, r=.28) and MP (U=485, p=.024, r=.26) conditions.There was no difference between No Materials and MP conditions (U=679, p=.79, r=.03) In other words, therewas a priming effect: children who used physical blocks in the 2nd explanation then increased the number of OCwords they used without materials in the 3rd explanation.A non-parametric between subjects analysis (Kruskal-Wallis) was carried and revealed a significantdifference in the change of MP words between conditions (χ2(2)=6.73, p=.035). Mann-Whitney showed that apositive increase in MP words was significantly greater in the MP condition than the OC condition (U=473,p=.012, r=.29). Although the change in MP words was greater in the MP condition than the No Materialscondition, this difference was not significant (U=559, p=.081, r=.20). There was no difference between NoMaterials and OC conditions (U=630, p=.391, r=.10), Therefore, there was a tentative priming effect: childrenwho used the number line in the 2nd explanation increased the number of MP words they used relative to childrenwho had used blocks, but not significantly more than children who used no materials.DiscussionMuch research has attempted to understand and evaluate the role of concrete materials in children’s thinking andlearning. In this regard, Embodied Cognition has offered a valuable framework to consider how children’s sensoryand motor experiences may shape cognition, and gesture research has provided a methodological tool with whichto examine how prior concrete experiences may be simulated when articulating thinking. Although previous workhas demonstrated the transition from action experiences to gesture (Roth, 2002), there is limited empirical workillustrating how particular action experiences significantly affect the types of words and gestures children producewhen subsequently explaining their numerical thinking. The study reported in this paper addressed this gap bybuilding upon the priming study design used by Marghetis (as cited in Núñez et al., 2014).The current study examined the effect of action experiences on the language and gestures of youngchildren explaining the numerical concept of additive composition. By drawing upon Núñez and Lakoff’s (2000)conceptual metaphor theory, it was possible to codify and quantify three measures of metaphorical thinking:children’s gestures, hand morphology, and spoken words. By randomly allocating children to one of threeconditions, the study examined how particular experiences shaped children’s subsequent thinking. As predicted,the use of physical objects in the second explanation significantly influenced (although effect sizes were generallysmall) the words and gestures children subsequently used in comparison to using a number line, and often morethan the control condition. The finding that the effect was stronger in comparison to the number line conditionthan control is in itself interesting as it suggests that the actions in the number line group may have interfered withparticular metaphorical thinking.LimitationsThere are a number of limitations in the study reported, many of which are discussed. These include the specificityof the task, context, materials, as well as the potential for interpretation in the methods used to quantify children’sgestures and words. It is also important to emphasize the immediacy of the post-materials (3rd) explanation, afterwhich the priming effect may soon have been lost. One interesting methodological issue was the format of theproblem question. Although the study had been refined in various ways from pilot work (e.g. decision not toprovide a the numerical problem visually, ensuring the interviewer did not gesture), the words used in the problemquestion (“add”, “make”) are arguably metaphoric (OC). This might explain the salience of the OC priming effect.However, this seems unlikely to fully explain the findings, particularly the effects found for the number linecondition on MP metaphorical thinking. It is interesting to reflect on how these methodological issues have beenaddressed in other work, in particular the possibility of using metaphorical language or stimuli (e.g. numbersymbols are presented using particular spatial conventions).ICLS 2016 Proceedings384© ISLSConclusionThe study reported in this paper indicates the potential to analyze the language and gestures children use toinvestigate how concrete experiences have influenced their thinking. The study contributes to previous work inproviding support for the embodied nature of cognition, and the value of gesture research in examining theinternalization of action experiences. The study is limited in evaluating whether such experiences have supportedlearning, yet provides a window into how this approach may address such a goal, thereby informing classroompractice or the design of new materials.ReferencesAbrahamson, D. (2009). Embodied design: constructing means for constructing meaning. Educational studies inmathematics, 70(1), 27-47.Alibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. J. (2011). Embodiment in mathematics teaching and learning: evidence fromlearners' and teachers' gestures. Journal of the learning sciences, 21(2), 247-286.Arzarello, F., Robutti, O., & Bazzini, L. (2005). Acting Is Learning: Focus on the Construction of MathematicalConcepts. Cambridge Journal of Education, 35(1), 55-67.Bakker, S., Antle, A. N., & Van Den Hoven, E. (2012). Embodied metaphors in tangible interaction design.Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 16(4), 433-449.Carbonneau, K. J., Marley, S. C., & Selig, J. P. (2012). A meta-analysis of the efficacy of teaching mathematicswith concrete manipulatives. Journal of Educational Psychology, 105(2), 380-400.Edwards, L. D. (2009). Gestures and conceptual integration in mathematical talk. Educational studies inmathematics.Goldin-Meadow, S., Kim, S., & Singer, M. (1999). What the teacher's hands tell the student's mind about math.Journal of Educational Psychology, 91(4), 720.Kövecses, Z. (2008). Conceptual metaphor theory Some criticisms and alternative proposals. Annual review ofcognitive linguistics, 6(1), 168-184.Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by (Vol. 111): Chicago London.Manches, A., & Dragomir, M. (2015). Gesture as a means to examine the role of physical interaction in earlynumerical development. Paper presented at the 2015 annual meeting of the AERA, Chicago, US.Manches, A., & O'Malley, C. (2016). The Effects of Physical Manipulatives on Children’s Numerical Strategies.Cognition and Instruction, 34(1), 27-50.Martins-Mourao, A., & Cowan, R. (1998). The Emergence of Additive Composition of Number. EducationalPsychology, 18(4), 377-389.McNeil, N. M., & Jarvin, L. (2007). When theories don't add up: disentangling the manipulatives debate. Theoryinto Practice, 46(4), 309-316.McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind: what gestures reveal about thought. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Murphy, C. (2011). Comparing the use of the empty number line in England and the Netherlands. BritishEducational Research Journal, 37(1), 147-161.Nunes, T., Bryant, P., Evans, D., Bell, D., Gardner, S., Gardner, A., & Carraher, J. (2007). The contribution oflogical reasoning to the learning of mathematics in primary school. British Journal of DevelopmentalPsychology, 25, 147-166.Núñez, R., & Lakoff, G. (2000). Where mathematics comes from. New York: Basic books.Núñez, R., Marghetis, T., Cohen-Kadosh, R., & Dowker, K. (2014). Cognitive Linguistics and the Concept (s) ofNumber: Oxford Handbook of Numerical Cognition. Oxford University Press.Pouw, W. T., van Gog, T., & Paas, F. (2014). An embedded and embodied cognition review of instructionalmanipulatives. Educational Psychology Review, 26(1), 51-72.Roth, W.-M. (2002). From action to discourse: The bridging function of gestures. Cognitive Systems Research,3(3), 535-554.Segal, A. (2011). Do gestural interfaces promote thinking? Embodied interaction: Congruent gestures and directtouch promote performance in math. (Doctoral Thesis), Columbia University.Tellier, M. (2009). The development of gesture. In K. de Bot & R. Schrauf (Eds.), Language development overthe lifespan (pp. 191-216): Routledge.Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(4), 625-636.AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank the Economic Social Research Council for funding this work (ES/K001531/1), thereviewers, and all the children who took part and made this research so rewarding.ICLS 2016 Proceedings385© ISLS