Bringing Practices of Co-Design and Making to Basic EducationSini Riikonen, University of Helsinki, sini.riikonen@helsinki.fiPirita Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, University of Helsinki, pirita.seitamaa-hakkarainen@helsinki.fiKai Hakkarainen, University of Helsinki, kai.hakkarainen@helsinki.fiAbstract: The purpose of this study was to analyze five student teams’ (Grade 7) co-designprocesses that involved using traditional and digital fabrication technologies for inventing,designing, and making complex artifacts. A methodological framework for analyzing makercentered learning, by relying on ethnographic video data and participant observations, wasdeveloped. The study examined the extent to which young students are able to productivelyparticipate in creative design and making activities. The results indicated that four of the fivestudent teams successfully engaged in the co-invention processes. The importance of a sharedepistemic object of co-design was prominent on every team. Some teams experiencedchallenges in organizing collaborative processes and the team size appeared to have a significanteffect in this regard. The successful teams were able to take on complex and multifacetedepistemic and fabrication-related challenges.Keywords: co-design, knowledge-creation, maker culture, epistemic objects, teamwork, co-inventionIntroductionThe purpose of the present study was to analyze five Grade 7 student teams’ co-design processes that involvedusing traditional and digital fabrication technologies for inventing and making complex artifacts. The studyinvolved developing a methodological framework for analyzing maker-centered learning as well as examining thenature of the student teams’ co-design processes. Productive participation in the emerging innovation-drivenknowledge-creation society appears to require cultivation of sophisticated innovation competencies by all citizens,starting from an early age. Concurrent educational practices do not, however, sufficiently foster young peoples’creative competencies, because of the strong focus on the transmission of pre-given content knowledge and routineprocedures to students. To overcome such limitations and make school learning a more inspiring experience, ourLaboratory of Co-Inquiry, Co-Design, Co-Teaching and Co-Regulation (Co4-Lab) project aims to bringingelements of the maker culture (see Anderson, 2012) to Finnish schools. To that end, students are engaged incollaborative efforts to invent complex artifacts, sparking intellectual, technical and aesthetic challenges. In thispaper, the term “co-invention” is used to characterize artifacts created in students’ knowledge-creation projects,consisting of intertwined co-design and making processes. Exceptional Finnish craft education, technologyeducation, and science-lab infrastructure provide a solid foundation for integrating such maker practices with corecurricular activity. We are creating high-end makerspaces in Finnish schools by expanding crafts classrooms withinstruments of digital fabrication, such as 3D CAD, robotics, electronic circuits, and wearable computing (etextiles), with which one may create multi-faceted complex artifacts (cf. Blikstein, 2013). This study examinedthe co-design processes of small teams of students aged 13 to 14, who participated in the Co4-Lab co-inventionproject at Aurinkolahti basic school, located in Helsinki, Finland. In this article, we analyze and describe to whatextent and how the student teams participated in the co-design processes. In the following paragraphs, we willfirst present the theoretical framework of our investigations. Then we will go through the research setting andmethods of data collection and analysis. Finally, we will present our results and discuss the significance of thefindings.Creating knowledge through artifact-mediated co-design processesThe present investigation relies on our longstanding effort to cultivate knowledge-creating learning that, beyondknowledge acquisition and social participation, involves systematic collaborative efforts in creating and advancingshared epistemic objects by means of externalizing ideas and constructing various types of intangible and tangibleartifacts. Learning by making entails, in accordance with Papert’s (1980) constructionism, that learners are notonly building conceptual knowledge but also using digital instruments to design and make materially embodiedartifacts and cultivating new ways of thinking and acting during the process. Maker-centered learning involvesstudents externalizing their ideas through conceptual (spoken or written ideas), visual (drawing, graphs) ormaterial (3D prototypes and models) artifacts, creating an opportunity for themselves and their peers to build onthese ideas, discuss and elaborate on them and embody ideas in progressively more advanced artifacts. Usingsophisticated digital fabrication instruments for creating artifacts may be interpreted as providing material agencyICLS 2018 Proceedings248© ISLSfor pursuing more complex and challenging inquiries than the participants would otherwise be able to accomplish.We consider knowledge creation as a practical communal activity that, to a significant extent, relies on operationalmethods, creative processes, and practices (“knowledge practices”) that a learning community can appropriateand cultivate with adequate facilitation, guidance, and real-time support. Artifact-mediated knowledge creation isan emergent and nonlinear process whereby the actual goals, objects, stages, digital instruments or end results canneither be pre-determined nor the flow of creative activity be rigidly scripted (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014b).Collaborative design is an essential aspect of the invention and making processes. In accordance with theLearning through Collaborative Designing (LCD) model (Seitamaa-Hakkarainen & Hakkarainen, 2001), weexamine co-design as communal efforts of creating artifacts by solving complex and ill-defined problems throughiterative processes in which design ideas are elaborated and refined through analysis, evaluation, deliberation,sketching, prototyping, and making. Previous studies of knowledge creation processes suggest that advancedcollaboration requires group members to focus on a shared object that they jointly construct during the designprocess (Barron, 2003; Hennessy & Murphy, 1999; Kangas, Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, & Hakkarainen, 2013;Paavola & Hakkarainen, 2014; Seitamaa-Hakkarainen et al., 2001). The knowledge-creation process may be seento be guided and directed by envisioned “epistemic objects” that are incomplete, being constantly further definedand instantiated in a series of successively more refined visualizations, prototypes, and design artifacts (Ewenstein& Whyte, 2009; Knorr-Cetina, 2001). Inventions can be designed only through repeated iterative efforts of solvingcomplex problems, overcoming obstacles and repeated failures with practical experimenting, obtaining peer andexpert feedback, trying again, and ending up with outcomes that may not have been anticipated in the beginning.The important aspects of craft making are “designerly” ways of thinking and the manipulation of materials andtools (see Cross, 2006). The importance of participating in embodied design activities, and working with concreteartifacts, in learning has been emphasized by many researchers (e.g. Blikstein, 2013; Kafai, 1996; Kangas et al.,2013; Kolodner, 2002). Making is a very effective way of engaging students in a design mode (Bereiter &Scardamalia, 2003) that guides them to focus on the usefulness and adequacy of ideas and, moreover, invest effortsin the continuous improvement of design ideas.The basic tenet of our investigation is that every student could be an inventor, regardless of gender,school achievements, ethnicity, or other characteristics. The co-invention projects are intended to provide diversestudents a strong sense of contribution, that is, they experience that they are doing something worthwhile together,each student’s unique efforts and accomplishments matter, and that the whole team is jointly reaching somethingthat no one could have done on his or her own. The success of collaborative creation of knowledge is criticallydependent on students who actively engage in and take responsibility for the process (Paavola & Hakkarainen,2014; Sawyer, 2006; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014a). Focused creative pursuit requires students to actively worktoward a joint epistemic object, to listen, understand and help each other, and to engage in shared efforts of testingand constructing artifacts being developed (see e.g. Barron, 2003). The present type of technology-enhancedmaking processes has not been formerly implemented in basic education. Co-invention projects may beexperienced as very challenging by students and their teams because of working with unfamiliar digital fabricationtechnologies, encountering unanticipated construction problems, and carrying out design inquiries leading tounforeseen directions (see Zhang, Scardamalia, Reeve, & Messina, 2009). These processes may overwhelm thestudents, if they are not supported adequately (e.g. Linn, 2006). It is essential to understand, how studentsparticipate and collaborate in a small group setting when participating in open-ended co-design and makingprocesses, if we want to design successful pedagogical approaches and practices that advance knowledge-creatinglearning. Collaboration in small teams of students has been investigated quite rigorously, especially from theperspectives of collaborative talk and actions (see e.g. Ching & Kafai, 2008; Hennessy & Murphy, 1999; Kangaset al., 2007, 2013; Linn, 2006). However, how open-ended co-design and co-invention processes, aimed at thecreation of new complex artifacts, truly unfold through student teams actually organizing and working from phaseto phase throughout the process calls for further investigation (cf. Hennessy & Murphy, 1999). This present studyseeks to contribute especially to this area of research.Research setting: Co-invention project in Aurinkolahti basic schoolThe present investigators organized a co-invention project with the Aurinkolahti basic school in spring 2017. Allof the Grade 7 classes, 70 students in total, aged 13 to 14, participated in the project. Finnish curriculum for basiceducation involves compulsory weekly craft lessons until Grade 7. Integrated design and making activities, whichare characteristic of Finnish craft education, provide ample opportunities for bringing together STEAM subjects.This enabled us to implement learning-by-making projects as a part of regular curricular activity. For assistance,teachers relied on collegial (co-teaching) resources to negotiate emerging challenges: we engaged two craft subjectteachers with three other subject teachers (science, ICT, and visual arts) to orchestrate the project. Moreover, weengaged Grade 8 students to function as “digital technology” tutors to provide additional support in guiding theICLS 2018 Proceedings249© ISLSstudent participants. The Innokas network (innokas.fi/en) offered support regarding digital instruments, materials,and coding initially to the tutor students and when necessary also to the inventor teams. The teachers werefamiliarized with the technologies used as well as given pedagogical support.The co-invention challenge, co-configured between teachers and researchers, was open-ended: “Inventa smart product or a smart garment by relying on traditional and digital fabrication technologies, such as GoGoBoard, other programmable devices or 3D CAD”. Before the project, the Grade 8 tutor students arranged a GoGoBoard workshop for every participating class, so as to familiarize the students with the possibilities andinfrastructure of the GoGo Board and to promote the emergence of ideas on how programmable devices could beutilized in the inventions (cf. Ching & Kafai, 2008). GoGo Board is an open-source hardware device, developedat the MIT Media Lab, for prototyping, educational robotics, scientific experiments, and environmental sensing(Sipitakiat, Blikstein, & Cavallo, 2004). The actual co-invention project was initiated in February, with a twohour ideation session, arranged in collaboration with the Finnish Association of Design Learning. During thissession, the students self-organized into teams and constructed the preliminary ideas of their inventions. Theproject involved eight to nine weekly co-design sessions (two to three hours per session) during March, April andMay 2017. The teams also presented their co-inventions in two Co4-Lab events, held at the University of Helsinki.Research aims and methodsBy relying on ethnographic video data and participant observations of the student teams’ co-invention processes,the present investigation focuses on examining the student teams’ participation in co-design and makingprocesses. The specific research questions guiding our investigations were as follows: 1) What was the nature ofthe co-design processes of the student teams? 2) How did the student teams organize and collaborate during theco-design processes? 3) What kind of co-design-related differences occurred between the teams? 4) How did theco-design approaches and the nature of collaboration relate to the success of the co-invention processes?For video recording and intensive follow-up by the first author, we randomly selected two whole classesthat consisted of seven students’ co-invention teams. The recordings were carried out separately for each team,using an individual GoPro action camcorder, placed on a floor-standing tripod, and a separate wireless lavaliermicrophone for each team. The camera was positioned at a high side angle to capture a team’s actions as fully aspossible. The first author was also present during every co-design session and made observations and field notesto support in-depth analysis of the data. Five of the seven videoed teams were selected for the detailed analysis.One team was discarded due to fragmented data, caused by technical difficulties during the recording process.The other team was discarded because of ethical issues within the team. Diverse invention projects and digitaltools and fabrication methods employed provided us with very rich data (see Table 1).Table 1: Analyzed teams, video data in hh:mm, inventions and technologies used in the inventionsName Members DataBike3 boys14:07MGG 4 boys13:15Moon 6 girls13:09UrPo6 boys12:34Plant7 girls12:21Basic ideas of the inventionsA three-wheel bike that contains smart technologies, such as anenvironment responsive, rechargeable LED lighting systemMGG (Mobile Gaming Grip), a pair of handles that improves theergonomic of a mobile phone while playing gamesA smart outfit for sports, including for example. an environmentresponsive lighting system to improve safetyA smart outsole for sport shoes, including for example anautomatic warming system for winter sportsAn automatic plant care system, that incorporates decorativeelements.Digital technologies usedGoGo Board3D CAD modeling, 3DprintingAdafruit Flora and Gemma,light sensors, RGB LEDsAdafruit Flora and Gemma,temperature sensorsGoGo BoardA theory-driven coding template was constructed for characterizing the co-design and making processes. Thecoding template and codes, relevant to this research, are presented in Appendix A. Codes for verbal and embodieddesign actions were based on design research literature and the Learning by Collaborative Design (LCD) model(e.g. Goel, 1995; Seitamaa-Hakkarainen et al., 2001; Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, Viilo, & Hakkarainen, 2010), as wellas on our earlier experiences of investigating maker-centered learning (e.g. Kangas et al., 2013; Lahti et al., 2016).The data analysis was based on systematic observation and coding of the videos. The videos were coded in 3minute segments using the ELAN multimedia annotator (4.9.4 and 5.0.0-beta). For every segment, primary designactions were determined for the whole team and possible subgroups of students. Instances of design processengagement were emphasized over non-task-related actions and speech. For instance, if a team discussed nontask-related issues while being actively making a prototype, the segment was coded as model making rather thannon-task-related action. The present analysis aimed at providing an overview of the co-design processes; inICLS 2018 Proceedings250© ISLSsubsequent studies, we will zoom into more detailed microlevel analyses of the data. Four investigators took partin coding the data. After the coding process, all segments containing no action were removed from the video data.To avoid distortion of the data, the data was further adjusted by removing intervals of process organizing or nontask-related actions, such as when a team had to wait and was therefore unable to continue the design processfurther (e.g. waiting for a teacher to arrive to give obligatory instructions for the safe use of tools, or waiting forcomputers to open or update). The final, adjusted video data, consisted of 65 hours, 27 minutes of coded teamsession videos in total, 12 to 14 hours per team (Table 1).To make the massive amount of complex data from the teams’ and individual students’ processesanalyzable, we developed a new method for visual analysis of the data. Based on verbal and embodied designactions of the teams and individual students, systematic process visualizations, striped process rugs, in the formof color-coded, layered diagrams, were built. The striped process rugs, presented in Figure 1, represent the teams’design processes as design actions in 3-minute stripes. Every design session of a team is separated with a blankhorizontal stripe, with the first session being on top. Blank areas in participants’ individual design processessignify that the participant was absent. In stripes where both verbal and embodied design actions occursimultaneously, verbal design action is presented on the left side of the segment and the embodied design actionon the right. The construction of the striped process rugs not only provided us with insight into the overall designprocesses of the teams and activities of individual team members, but also preserved plenty of information aboutcollaboration within the teams. When necessary, results drawn from the process rugs were compared to theethnographic observations, which were made by the first author, or to the corresponding sections of the raw videodata to further verify the findings or to gain further information.Nature of the student teams’ co-design processesIn terms of the process outcomes, four teams (Bike, MGG, Moon and UrPo) achieved a successful co-designprocess. They developed well-articulated design ideas, produced visualizations and prototypes, and tested andrefined their design ideas. On the other hand, the Plant team failed almost completely on all the above outcomes.They produced only a few separate objects that did not have any functionality. The process rugs indicate clearlythat the co-design processes varied significantly between the successful teams and the Plant team. The successfulprocesses were iterative, yet still progressing, in nature. The successful teams spent most of the working timedeeply engaged in the design-related activities, especially model making and digital experimenting. The processrugs indicated that the periods of design actions appear to be longer and more coherent for the smaller teams (i.e.Bike and MGG) than for the larger teams. Furthermore, the successful teams, especially the smaller ones, spentvery little time on non-task-related activities, whereas the Plant team spent most of their working time on nontask-related actions, to an extent that some sessions were spent almost entirely doing non-task-related things. Inaddition, the Plant team’s co-design process was very scattered in nature. The lack of design actions, especiallymodel making, compared with the successful teams was remarkable. The design actions varied between the teamsalso due to the differences between the inventions and fabrication methods. In the following paragraphs, we willdescribe each teams’ co-design projects.The invention of the Bike team was a three-wheel bike that contains an environment-responsive,rechargeable LED lighting system, utilizing the GoGo Board. During the first project sessions, they mademechanical experiments for possible structures of their bike. Based on their experiments and the knowledge theysought from the Internet, they refined their ideas intensively, especially during the second working session. Theirco-design process was clearly iterative in nature in terms of stages of making the actual model and further refiningthe design idea alternating. Towards the end of the project, they crystalized their idea and concentrated mostly onthe model making. They used several advanced fabrication methods that were all new to them, such as weldingand metal lathe turning. Simultaneously, they had to learn the new methods of fabrication, consider the finalproduct and its mechanics, deliberate on materials and structures, as well as, organize their process.The MGG team invented a mobile gaming grip, a pair of handles that improve the ergonomics of mobilephones in gaming contexts. They had a two-stages process, in the sense that they first built a concrete prototypefrom basic materials (wood, rubber and masking tape), and then, from session six onwards, created 3D CADmodels based on the first prototype. When building the first prototype, they worked very iteratively, ideating,testing their ideas, evaluating and refining the ideas further. They paid particular attention to the ergonomics andusability of the handles and on how to make the handles suitable for as many smart phones as possible. Theirprocess highlights the importance of embodied and concrete model making, although the final fabrication methodwas a 3D CAD model, and later a 3D-printed model. The second phase, the 3D CAD model making began witha session during which they tried to create the 3D-model with SketchUp. However, that turned out to be toocomplex for the team. Therefore, they decided to spend the next session experimenting with three different 3Dmodelling software options (Blender, SketcUp and Tinkercad). Based on the experimenting session, they choseICLS 2018 Proceedings251© ISLSto use Tinkercad and SketchUp together for the modelling, and at the end, they were able to produce a printerready 3D model of the handles.PBike1 2 3P1MGG2 3Moon4AnalysisDiscussion about manufacturingIdeationMechanical experimentingProcess organizingP123456P12DescribingDrawing/sketchingMaking presentation materialModel makingRefining ideaUrPo3 456P12Plant3 4 567Digital experimentingEvaluationMaterial experimentationNon-task-relatedSeeking informationFigure 1. Striped process rugs. P = teams’ primary design actions, 1…n = actions of individual team members.The Moon team stepped into the world of e-textiles in their design process and invented an environmentresponsive outfit for sports (cf. Litts et al., 2017). During the first sessions, the team concentrated on crystalizingtheir idea and on pattern making for the clothes. Towards the end of the process, the team engaged in three separatebut partially interlinked activities: sewing the actual clothes, programming and assembling the electronics, andmaking presentation material for their product. During their process, they designed and made the actual clothesfrom elastic materials, designed the electronic circuits, sewed the conductive threads and programmed theelectronics for the clothes – all actions that they had never done before. They used Adafruit Flora, a wearableelectronic platform, lighting sensors, and programmable NeoPixel LEDs as their electronic components.The UrPo team invented a smart outsole for sports shoes that can also be regarded as an e-textile (cf.Litts et al., 2017). They used Adafruit Flora and Gemma as the electronic platforms to produce the functionalitiesICLS 2018 Proceedings252© ISLSof the insole. Additional challenge emerged from the temperature sensor-controlled warming system that theydesigned for the insole; they had to design this functionality from scratch, using resistance wire. Their designprocess became a truly iterative one, where the refining of ideas occurred even during the second-to-last session.The team produced several concrete prototypes and sketches of different and alternative structures of the insole,especially elaborating on the placement of the Adafruit Gemma board on the insole.The Plant group intended to build a plant care system that also served as a decor element. However, theirprocess was very scattered in nature and did not lead to any actual prototypes. They only produced a few sketchesand simple objects that could have been used to build a prototype. Sketching, which mostly meant producingcolourful drawings without any new contribution to the idea, was their most prominent design practice. They wereguided to make tests with the GoGo Board and later with possible power supply and connection of a pump system,but they did not fully engage in these activities and mostly left the work to the Grade 8 peer tutor students.Collaboration and process organizing in the co-design processesFrom the process rugs, the differences between the collaboration of the teams emerge clearly. The two smallerteams, Bike and MGG, worked through the whole process in intensive, jointly organized collaboration. The Moonand UrPo teams often worked together, but divided tasks among the team members more often than the twosmaller teams. Especially in the larger teams, some students were more active and orchestrated the process morethan the other team members. Nevertheless, they did not dictate the processes at any level. In the Bike and MGGteams, all participants were highly engaged in the processes and participated. Even when some of the students didnon-task-related things, their engagement with the process did not deteriorate. For example, during MGG teams’fourth session, student number 2 modified the fine details of the first prototype. During the modifications, theother students did non-task-related things around the table, but every time a modification was made, the wholegroup rapidly gathered to evaluate the modifications and to decide upon, how the handles should be furtherimproved.In the Moon and UrPo teams, the slight scattering of the collaboration demonstrated itself during periodsof ideation, evaluation and refining of ideas – the most important phases of decision-making. Although the teams,in most cases, gathered together to make decisions, periods of divided attention occurred more often than in theBike and MGG teams, during the decision-making activities. Further scattering also occurred, from time to time,in the larger teams, due to some students drifting to non-task-related activities, although they could have engagedin the co-design process and collaboration. The Plant team’s inability to collaborate may be because the dominantfigures within the team, students 2 and 3, were also the ones who concentrated mostly to non-task-relatedactivities. The team tried to organize from time to time to start working on the task, but often this did not lead toany actual productive design actions. The relatively long time spent on process organizing is striking on theprocess rugs. In addition, it must be noted that the actions related to the design process, during the last foursessions, mostly occurred when the teacher or one of the tutor students was present in the group. None of thegroup members took responsibility for the process. In contrast with the Plant team, the process rugs indicate thatthe process organizing in the successful teams often led to distinct design actions. The organizing occurredtypically at the beginning and end of the sessions and when students or the whole team moved from one designactivity to another. The process rugs highlight how the larger teams, although successful, required more time toorganize compared with the smaller ones. Furthermore, the larger teams needed more guidance on how to organizetheir processes than the Bike and MGG teams did.Both the success and collaboration within teams appeared to relate to the team sharing the same epistemictarget object. It was very clear from the videos and the observations made that the Bike and MGG teams sharedthe same epistemic object throughout the whole process that they actively sought to develop. Also, the Moonteam, although their collaboration scattered every now and then, seemed to share the same epistemic object acrossthe design process. The UrPo team, however, seemed to concentrate on different epistemic target objects,especially during sessions three and four, although they regrouped around one object towards the end of theproject. In contrast with the successful teams, the Plant team did not have a shared epistemic target object at all.They had a shared idea at the beginning, but it did not evolve or crystalize in any way.Conclusions and discussionThe purpose of the present investigation was to analyze five student teams’ co-design processes that involvedusing traditional and digital fabrication technologies for inventing and making complex artifacts. The systematiccoding procedure and visualization of the group processes, based on that coding, proved to be very effectivemethods to analyze the large and complex group session video data. The striped process rugs provide deep insightinto the processes of the co-invention teams and the individual students. The amount of information that suchvisualizations can convey, at a glance, would be very difficult, if not impossible, to produce using other analyticICLS 2018 Proceedings253© ISLSmethods. When supported with the observations made during the co-design sessions by the researcher, and theability to return to the raw video data, the results can be, both, confirmed and deepened. The 3-minutes analysissegment size is, however, likely to have reduced the occurrence of certain activities in the analysis results. Forexample, short moments of reflection or ideation may have been overridden by more prominent, longer lastingactions. However, we managed to disclose the iterative nature of the successful co-design processes, using the 3minutes analysis segment. The process rugs not only provided us with the results of this research, but also offerus information on those parts of the data that could be interesting grounds for further analysis from otherperspectives, such as more detailed micro-level analyses on how conceptual and materially embodied aspects ofknowledge-creation inter-related during the processes.A very promising finding of this research is that most of the teams were able to participate successfullyin the co-invention project, although coming up with successful solutions required overcoming both epistemicand technological challenges. The four successful teams were able to design and invent complex, targeted artifacts.The importance of a shared epistemic object of the design process and collaboration was prominent on every team.Our findings further confirm the results of previous studies made about the importance of such objects for codesign and knowledge-creation processes (Paavola & Hakkarainen, 2014; Seitamaa-Hakkarainen & Hakkarainen,2001). We also suggest, in agreement with previous research, that the importance of concrete making cannot beover-emphasized in these types of co-invention processes (cf. Kafai, 1996; Kangas et al., 2007, 2013; Kolodner,2002). We argue that without designing and making the concrete prototypes, the processes of every team wouldhave lacked key opportunities for improving the students’ ideas, which is a critical aspect of knowledge creation.In addition, we must commend the importance of the crafts subject teachers and the Grade 8 tutor students for thesuccessful completion of the project; their guidance enabled student participation in the advanced design processesand concrete prototyping. Teacher expertise regarding design, fabrication methods, mechanics and materials, aswell as on the pedagogics of invention and making appear to be crucial when conducting these types ofknowledge-creating projects. The present results indicate further that team size has a significant effect on thenature of the team collaboration. While the two smaller teams (Bike and MGG) worked throughout the wholeprocess in very intensive and close collaboration, the larger teams (Moon, UrPo and Plant) scattered, at least tosome extent. The collaboration in the small teams was also more democratic and balanced than in the larger teams.However, to confirm these findings, more research into similar co-design processes is needed. When continuingthese design experiments, we will limit the team size.The present investigation reveals that significant aspects of the maker culture can be integrated with theregular curricular activity of Finnish schools. By relying on traditional and digital fabrication technologies andpractices, young students can be engaged in co-designing, co-inventing, and joint making of complex artifacts,sparking intellectual, technical and aesthetic challenges. Students who have completed successful co-inventionsprojects, such as those of the Bike, MGG and Moon teams, will be engaged as peer tutors for the new cohort ofstudent inventors regarding programmable devices, 3D CAD-modeling and 3D-printing. Rigorous research aswell as collaboration with teachers, students, and other players in the field of education is needed for expandingmaker-centered learning at school.ReferencesAnderson, C. (2012). Makers: The New Industrial Revolution. New York: Crown Business.Barron, B. (2003). When Smart Groups Fail. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307–359.Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (2003). Learning to work creatively with knowledge. In E. de Corte, L.Verschaffel, N. Entwistle, & J. Van Merriënboer (Eds.), Powerful learning environments: Unravelling basiccomponents and dimensions (pp. 55–68). Oxford, England: Pergamon/Elsevier Science.Blikstein, P. (2013). Digital Fabrication and “Making” in Education – The Democratization of Invention. In C.Büching & J. Walter-Herrmann (Eds.), FabLab : Of Machines, Makers and Inventors (pp. 203–222).Bielefeld: Transcript.Ching, C. C., & Kafai, Y. (2008). Peer pedagogy: Student collaboration and reflection in a learning-throughdesign project. The Teachers College Record, 110(12), 2601–2632.Cross, N. (2006). Designerly ways of knowing. Springer London.Ewenstein, B., & Whyte, J. (2009). Knowledge Practices in Design: The Role of Visual Representations as`Epistemic Objects’. Organization Studies, 30(1), 07–30.Goel, V. (1995). Sketches of thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Hennessy, S., & Murphy, P. (1999). The Potential for Collaborative Problem Solving in Design and Technology.International Journal of Technology and Design Education, 9(1), 1–36.Kafai, Y. (1996). Learning through artifacts - Communities of practice in classrooms. AI & Society, 10(1), 89–100.ICLS 2018 Proceedings254© ISLSKangas, K., Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P., & Hakkarainen, K. (2007). The artifact project—History, science, anddesign inquiry in technology enhanced learning at elementary level. Special Issue of Research and Practicein Technology Enhanced Learning, 2, 213–237.Kangas, K., Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P., & Hakkarainen, K. (2013). Figuring the world of designing: Expertparticipation in elementary classroom. International Journal of Technology and Design Education, 23(2),425–442.Knorr-Cetina, K. (2001). Objectual Practice. In K. K. Cetina, T. R. Schatzki, & E. Von Savigny (Eds.), ThePractice Turn in Contemporary Theory (pp. 175–188). London: Routledge.Kolodner, J. L. (2002). Facilitating the Learning of Design Practices: Lessons Learned from an Inquiry intoScience Education. Journal of Industrial Teacher Education, 39(3).Lahti, H., Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P., Härkki, T., Kangas, K., & Hakkarainen, K. (2016). Textile teacher students’collaborative design processes in a design studio setting. Art, Design & Communication in HigherEducation, 15(1), 35–54.Linn, M. C. (2006). The knowledge integration perspective on learning and instruction. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.),The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 243–264). New York: Cambridge University Press.Litts, B. K., Kafai, Y. B., Lui, D. A., Walker, J. T., & Widman, S. A. (2017). Stitching Codeable Circuits: HighSchool Students’ Learning About Circuitry and Coding with Electronic Textiles. Journal of ScienceEducation and Technology, 26(5), 494–507.Paavola, S., & Hakkarainen, K. (2014). Trialogical Approach for Knowledge Creation. In S. Tan, H. So, & J. Yeo(Eds.), Knowledge Creation in Education (pp. 53–73). Singapore: Springer.Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas. New York: Basic Books.Sawyer, R. K. (2006). Educating for innovation. Thinking Skills and Creativity, 1(1), 41–48.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014a). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, andtechnology. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (2nd ed., pp. 397–417).New York: Cambridge University Press.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014b). Smart technology for self-organizing processes. Smart LearningEnvironments, 1(1), 1–13.Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P., & Hakkarainen, K. (2001). Composition and construction in experts’ and novices’weaving design. Design Studies, 22(1), 47–66.Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P., Raunio, A. M., Raami, A., Muukkonen, H., & Hakkarainen, K. (2001). Computersupport for collaborative designing. International Journal of Technology and Design Education, 11(2), 181–202.Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P., Viilo, M., & Hakkarainen, K. (2010). Learning by collaborative designing:Technology-enhanced knowledge practices. International Journal of Technology and Design Education,20(2), 109–136.Sipitakiat, A., Blikstein, P., & Cavallo, D. P. (2004). GoGo Board: Augmenting Programmable Bricks forEconomically Challenged Audiences. Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on the LearningSciences, (617), 481–488.Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., & Messina, R. (2009). Designs for collective cognitive responsibility inknowledge-building communities. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(1), 7–44.AcknowledgmentsAcademy of Finland grant 286837 (Co4-Lab) and Strategic Research Council grant 312527 (Growing Mind).Appendix A: Structure of the coding template and code descriptionsDescription and notes (written description of what the group was doing and notes for later analysis)Primary verbal design action: (“Non-task-related action” code was used only if there was no applicable primaryembodied action.) Codes: seeking information, process organizing, analysis, ideation, evaluation, refining idea,describing, discussion about manufacturing, non-task-related action, no actionPrimary embodied design action Codes: drawing/sketching, material experimentation, mechanicalexperimenting, digital experimenting, making presentation material, model makingPupil 1…n: (Left empty if the pupil is absent.) Codes: active, passiveGroup work: Codes: all together, divided. For divided group work three additional codes were applied:subgroup 1…n (including student numbers divided by comma, e.g. Subgroup 1: 1,3 and Subgroup 2: 2), subgroup1…n verbal design action (See primary verbal design action for codes, applied individually for every subgroup.),subgroup 1…n embodied design action (See primary embodied design action for codes.)ICLS 2018 Proceedings255© ISLS