Exploring How Students Learn Estimation Using a Modelling-basedLearning EnvironmentAditi Kothiyal, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, aditi.kothiyal@iitb.ac.inSahana Murthy, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, sahanamurthy@iitb.ac.inAbstract: Estimation is an important class of problems that engineering undergraduates mustlearn to solve. However, teaching-learning of estimation is under emphasized in the currentengineering curriculum and in learning sciences research. In this work, we report on theevaluation of the first cycle of a design-based research (DBR) project to design a technologyenhanced learning environment (TELE) for estimation. The TELE includes a progressivehigher order modelling-based structuring of the estimation process, a problem systemsimulator and metacognitive scaffolds. From a lab study we identified the role of thesepedagogical features for doing and learning estimation and changes needed to the design.IntroductionEngineers routinely make estimates of physical quantities such as power before they begin designing or making(Linder, 1999). In order to estimate a quantity, say power, a solver needs to make a simplified model, i.e., anequation relating power to parameters that significantly impact its value in the given real-world system (Linder,1999). This is challenging for students because they must apply conceptual knowledge to a real-world system,identify the parameters that will dominate power requirements, make assumptions, quantify inefficiences andmake judgements regarding numerical values (Linder, 1999). Thus estimation is an ill-structured problem, verydifferent from the well-structured problems which remain the emphasis of engineering curricula (Linder, 1999).Research has found a marked difference between the estimation performance of expert engineers and graduatingengineering students (Linder, 1999). Thus, there is a need to explicitly train engineering students in estimationproblem solving. While several researchers (Mahajan, 2014; Linder, 1999) have offered guidelines for learningestimation, these guidelines have not been empirically validated for their effectiveness for learning estimation.This is the motivation for our DBR project to design a TELE for estimation.Design of the learning environmentThe main goal of our TELE is to provide learners a structured approach to reduce the complexities of a realworld problem system and create an equation. It has been found that causal model progression (Sun, 2013),serves as a scaffold to learners in creating quantitative models (equations). So we employed a progressivelyhigher order modelling-based structure (Resier, 2004) to scaffold learners estimation process and get them tobuild models using appropriate affordances and scaffolds at each stage (Sun, 2013), such as simulations forqualitative modelling (Lindgren & Schwartz, 2009). Research shows that learners must be scaffolded in order toarticulate and reflect on their problem solving (Kim & Hannafin, 2011), and question prompts (Ge & Land,2004) are one way to do so. So we incorporated several question prompts to trigger learners' metacognitiveprocesses. Our TELE is called Modelling-based Estimation Learning Environment (MEttLE) and learners solvean estimation problem by doing five tasks in a non-prescribed sequence (Figure 1): three stages of modelling(functional, qualitative and quantitative), at the end of which they have a simplified equation connecting thequantity to be estimated to the parameters that significantly impact it. There are affordances (such as a problemsystem simulator) and prompts available for learners to create these simplified models. Then they choose valuesfor parameters, calculate and evaluate the estimate. At each stage, learners are prompted to evaluate and revisetheir developing models and plan the rest of the estimation. Finally, they reflect on their estimation process. Thedetails of the pedagogical features of MEttLE are described in another paper (Kothiyal & Murthy, 2017).Figure 1. Workflow of MEttLE.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1543© ISLSMethodsBroadly, we use DBR to design, evaluate and refine our TELE. Our research goal for the evaluation of the firstcycle was to investigate how the pedagogical design of MEttLE supported learners doing of estimation. Weperformed a lab study and participants were six second year mechanical engineering students selected byconvenience sampling. We collected qualitative, multimodal data and applied interaction analysis (Jordan &Henderson, 1995). We used their screen captures and video recordings to create detailed transcripts withannotations of the on and off screen actions done by learners during estimation, along with their explanations oftheir actions given during the interview. From this transcript, we identified the interaction patterns of learners inMEttLE and then the roles of various features in MEttLE on learners’ estimation process.Findings and discussionThe results showed that learners were able to apply the structured, progressively higher-order modelling-basedprocess in MEttLE and use the modelling affordances and question prompts in order to create and refinemodels, and obtain estimates correct to the order-of-magnitude. Even though we had no post-test, learnersreported during the post-interview that the three-phased modelling-based process was useful and applicable toother similar problems. Further we found that MEttLE supported a diverse set of productive actions whichhelped learners create models and solve the estimation problem. Finally, we found that the simulator served as agood tool for visualization and qualitative understanding of the problem system (Lindgren & Schwartz, 2009)which scaffolded learners when they lacked conceptual knowledge to build the qualitative models.We found that the manner in which we structured the estimation process into a set of five tasks, eachwith two or three sub-tasks, each with a specific goal mentioned in the focus question, scaffolded learners indoing estimation and helped them abstract out the estimation process. As S3 reported, “I didn't do it before, butyou should know the concept what you are actually doing, you should know that before you actually solve theproblem, and you should first analyse it qualitatively, like the relationships and all, that's actually one of themost important things to do and if we just look at it as a problem and just go through the quantitative part, thatway I don't think it'll be as beneficial as it was today.” Learners followed the path of functional modelling,qualitative modelling, quantitative modelling, calculation and evaluation. If they made errors during modelling,they iterated between the sub-tasks and tasks until they obtained a reasonable estimate. This helped themrecognized the utility of the progressively higher-order modelling-based process. Further, since there were fivetasks only, all of them to be done in some order, this was a productive constraint that helped learners recognizethe sequence that would be useful in solving the problem. This structure (Sun, 2013; Reiser, 2004), along withthe reflection, gave learners an estimation process which they perceive to be useful to apply in future problems.A significant gap that we observed in learners estimation after working in MEttLE was that they wereunable to do estimation practices such as identifying dominant parameters, quantifying inefficiencies, makingassumptions and reasoning about numerical values. While these practices take time to develop (Linder, 1999;Mahajan, 2014), learners’ responses to the question prompts suggest that they need further scaffolds for thesepractices. Specifically, learners need to understand how to use conceptual knowledge in real-world conditions tomake decisions. For this we will introduce guidance regarding expert practice at appropriate points in thepedagogy. This formative evaluation of MEttLE highlights the ways in which the pedagogical features lead tothe doing and learning of estimation and what changes are needed to the design to further improve learning.ReferencesGe, X., & Land, S. M. (2004). A Conceptual Framework for Scaffolding Ill-Structured Problem-SolvingProcesses Using Question Prompts and Peer Interactions. Edu. Tech. Res. Devt., 52(2), 5–22.Kim, M. C., & Hannafin, M. J. (2011). Scaffolding problem solving in technology-enhanced learningenvironments (TELEs): Bridging research and theory with practice. Comp. & Edu, 56(2), 403-417.Kothiyal, A., & Murthy, S. (2015). Examining Student Learning of Engineering Estimation from METTLE.In Proceedings of the 25th Int. Conf. Comp. Edu. (ICCE 2017), Christchurch, New Zealand.Linder, B. M. (1999). Understanding Estimation and its Relation to Engineering Education. MIT.Lindgren, R., & Schwartz, D. L. (2009). Spatial Learning and Computer Simulations in Science. InternationalJournal of Science Education, 31(3), 419–438.Mahajan, S. (2014). The art of insight in science and engineering: Mastering complexity. The MIT Press.Reiser, B. J. (2004). Scaffolding Complex Learning: The Mechanisms of Structuring and ProblematizingStudent Work. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 273–304.Sun, D., & Looi, C. K. (2013). Designing a Web-Based Science Learning Environment for Model-BasedCollaborative Inquiry. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 22(1), 73–89.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1544© ISLS