Self-Organizing Collaborations as Blueprints for CSCL DesignUzi Zevik Brami, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, bramiu@post.bgu.ac.ilIris Tabak, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, itabak@bgu.ac.ilAbstract: We propose that ethnographic studies that precede, but inform, design, can be aproductive addition to CSCL design practices. We anchor our claims in a case example of anethnography of an undergraduate history course. We describe how the ways in which learnersself-organized and created practices for producing, sharing and reproducing knowledge in thecourse can serve as a blueprint for CSCL design. Such learners’ counterculture practices maynot readily emerge in participatory design discussions. This approach identifies points of contactbetween pre-existing collaborative practices and pedagogical considerations. Designers canthen infuse pedagogical innovations into the activities that participants already value andperform, achieving benefits akin to participatory design.IntroductionConsiderable research in CSCL analyzes the ways in which designed technological supports enable groups oflearners to develop knowledge and skills through joint activity (Dillenbourg, Järvelä, & Fischer, 2009).Increasingly, it also includes designing ways in which the tools can be integrated within the structures of localsettings (Cress, Stahl, Ludvigsen, & Law, 2015; Roschelle, Dimitriadis, & Hoppe, 2013). In this paper, we takethe local setting as our starting point, and investigate how naturalistically occurring collaborations can serve as ablueprint for CSCL design. Specifically, we report on a cognitive ethnography of an introductory undergraduatehistory course. We describe how the ways in which learners self-organized and created practices for producing,sharing and reproducing knowledge in the course inform our design. We propose that basing designs on findingsfrom ethnographic studies can, just like participatory design (Könings, Seidel, Jeroen, & van Merriënboer, 2014),mitigate some of the challenges associated with the introduction of externally designed tools.The need to incorporate local voices into CSCL designResearch in the learning sciences, and in CSCL specifically, often envisions new forms of learning that cancultivate more robust knowledge and skills (Barab, 2014; Design Based Research Collective, 2003; Dillenbourget al., 2009). Turning these visions into a reality has to do with embodying the vision in a design (Sandoval, 2013),but even more so, it is dependent on whether and how the design in taken up by local participants (Dillenbourg etal., 2011; Radinsky, Loh, & Lukasik, 2008; Suchman, Blomberg, Orr, & Trigg, 1999).CSCL tools may support learners in the sense-making process, but learners may not have social structuresin place that enable them to make effective use of these features (Fischer et al., 2013). Determining what mediumcan best support a process may be a function of the interplay between the qualities of the medium and of thesetting. For example, some information may be adequately represented in either digital or paper form, but papermight work better in some settings (Dillenbourg et al., 2011; Smith & Reiser, 1998). A large sheet of paper laidout on the floor can enable a group of children to cluster around the sheet, mark it up; pick it up and lay it next toanother group’s sheet; argue about similarities and differences while motioning or covering parts of the drawingwith their hands or body; then, pin-up their drawing and proceed to create a new version that will be pinned upnext to the first drawing. In this example, the collective interaction with and around the drawing was bettersupported by the paper, aligning with routinized practices in the classroom, and enabling learners to pin-up aseries of drawings as a “thinking trail” (Johnson, 1997). As in this example, local participants may have preexisting practices that fulfill some of the same learning goals as the proposed designs, or may have pre-existingpractices that can augment and strengthen the designed supports (Tabak, 2004).These examples point to the need to understand how participants might perceive particular tools, howlocal settings are configured, what needs are particular to the setting, and what are the existing material and socialpractices that sustain intellectual work. These insights should inform the design. As a result, there are increasingefforts to incorporate local voices in various design processes, including CSCL design. Incorporating local voicesin the design process takes on different forms, such as, design-based research (e.g., Barab, 2014; Roschelle et al.,2013), teachers as designers (e.g., Kali, McKenney, & Sagy, 2015), participatory design (e.g., Könings et al.,2014), change laboratory (Engeström, 2007), and ethnographic study (e.g., Suchman et al., 1999).Ethnographic study that precedes any design or intervention, is less common in the CSCL community.In this paper, we want to make a call for increased attention to this approach. We suggest that it holds particularvalue for educational contexts in its potential to strengthen learners’ voices in the design, and in facilitating designsCSCL 2017 Proceedings553© ISLSfor third space (Gutiérrez, Baquedano‐López, & Tejeda, 1999). Suchman, Blomberg, Orr and Trigg (1999), intheir retrospective of 20 years of research, note that in the absence of ethnographic study some aspects of practicemay remain outside the purview of the design process, because participants may not raise in discussion aspects ofpractice that are so ingrained that they seem “unremarkable.” Based on our own ethnographic findings, which wediscuss further below, we proffer that power relationships and the social construction of various practices as“worthy,” “unworthy,” “script,” or “counterscript” (Gutiérrez et al., 1999) might further stand in the way ofparticipants voicing certain practices in design discussions. Consequently, practices that could contribute to thedesign and to its productive take up by participants might remain outside of the design process.An example of an ethnography informing CSCL designWe conducted a cognitive ethnography (Hutchins, 2014) of an introductory undergraduate history course in anIsraeli university. The study included weekly observations of class and recitation sessions, as well as in-depthinterviews with the course instructor, teaching assistant, and a sample of students. The ethnographic study (Brami,2015) revealed qualities of the formal and of the unofficial social spaces of the course. Following Gutierrez andcolleagues (e.g., 1999), these are referred to, respectively, as the script and the counterscript. The counterscriptenabled many of the students, even those who were mostly disengaged from the formal script, to pass the course.More significant from our perspective was that some of these counterscript practices could potentially beleveraged for the purposeful design of a third space (Gutiérrez et al., 1999) in which the script—infused withsupports for disciplinary epistemic socialization (Tabak & Reiser, 2008; Tabak & Weinstock, 2011)—couldproductively coalesce with the counterscript.Self-organizing collaborationsThe script in this course was similar to many large undergraduate introductory courses, where the centralconduits for knowledge are the course lectures and course readings. There were students who did not attend thelectures, did not read the required readings, or attended lecture but were not necessarily attentive. On the surface,it might seem that these students were disconnected from the intellectual life of the course, destined, perhaps tofail. Yet, uncovering the counterscript, revealed that the students in this course had established a parallelintellectual life that engaged in conversation with ideas from the script. In this counterscript, the main conduitsfor knowledge were shared course notes, and an archive of past exam questions and model answers. It is throughthis counterscript that the majority of students engaged with the intellectual content of the script, and this enabledthem to contend with the final exam. We focus here on the note taking practices.Students organized and sustained a collaborative system for shared notes. The shared note takingenterprise took on various forms with different students fulfilling different roles. One form of collaborative notetaking was a more insular collaboration among a group of students. The notes produced by this group were sharedwithin the group but not with the entire course. In this group, some students were note takers, tasked withsummarizing the main points from class, while others in the group were responsible for reading and summarizingthe assigned reading. The more prevalent collaboration was the voluntary posting of class notes that were madeavailable to any student in the course. A few students in the class took notes at their own initiative, and chose topost their notes to the course Facebook group or Dropbox folder. The majority of students in the course wereconsumers rather than producers of these notes.This “consumption” of notes was strategic: some note takers had a reputation for consistently producingaccurate extensive notes, and their notes were more highly consumed. These reputations sometimes transcendedcourses, because the voluntary posting of class notes to a shared cloud was a common practice in many courses.Students held the shared notes in high regard, considering them essential to their learning and their ability tosucceed in the course (which essentially meant to perform well on the final exam). In fact, the “master note taker”in the class we observed was highly valued, and one student said that her friend recommended his notes, statingthat he was “her angel, her savior,” and that he had already “saved” her on two exams (courses).Blueprints for CSCL designOur research program focuses on designing material, technological and social supports to cultivate disciplinarypractices. We had a number of design features in mind based on published literature and our prior research.However, the cognitive ethnography of our target setting, undergraduate history education, pointed us inadditional directions that we had not considered previously. We saw students’ pre-existing practices as anopportunity to infuse disciplinary considerations into a set of practices that students valued, and in which theywere already immersed. Thus, one main facet of our (in progress) design is a collaborative note taking tool, thatincludes prompts and other structuring features derived from a task model of expert historical reasoning. In whatfollows we discuss two main points of contact between our pedagogical aims and students’ counterscript practices.CSCL 2017 Proceedings554© ISLSCapitalizing on pre-existing collaborative structuresOne of the challenges in reaping the pedagogical benefits of CSCL innovations is that students are not alwaysattuned to productive collaborative processes, creating a need to support the process of collaboration as well asthe domain processes that the tools were designed to support (Fischer et al., 2013). In this case, the cognitiveethnography revealed pre-existing collaborative processes. Rather than introduce an innovation that calls for anew social organization that will require its own set of supports, we are infusing supports into these existingcollaborative structures. Similarly, the pedagogical supports will be embedded in artifacts and practices that arealready valued by the students, and that are part of their conception of productive course participation.Bolstering nascent spontaneous disciplinary practicesThe students’ note taking enterprise offers a promising opportunity to cultivate core disciplinary practices, becausethe “master notes” already, spontaneously, reflect such practices. In our analysis of the content of the “masternotes” we found that the master note taker would annotate the notes with comments that pointed out connectionsbetween prior notes and current notes, between the course readings and the notes, or pointed out how particularelements in the notes explicate a key idea in the lecture/historical work.In many ways, the master note taker’s annotations express reflective processes and historical reasoning(e.g., Wineburg, Martin, & Monte-Sano, 2014), as well as a recognition of the, sometimes subtle, messages thatthe instructor conveys about history and historical work. One example comes from a set of notes related to alecture on a critique of the decline thesis approach to Ottoman historiography. The lecturer raises a rhetoricalquestion asking learners to consider what underlies the moniker “Suleiman the Magnificent” noting that theOttomans referred to Suleiman as “the legislator.” The master note taker rewrites this rhetorical question as astatement in an annotation to the notes, writing that “Suleiman the Magnificent” is a moniker that was given withthe decline thesis, the Ottomans called him “the Legislator” (translated from Hebrew, emphasis added, sic). Wetake this annotation to reflect the note taker’s recognition that the use of the term “magnificent” is a form ofpositional writing, it is part of a particular way of portraying events as a rise and fall. It further connotes thathistorical accounts can be evaluated against evidence, such as the existence of the moniker “the Legislator.”These notes are more than a testament to one learner’s prowess, they are indicative of broaderunderstanding. Many students held these notes in high regard due to their added layer of annotations beyond thelecture summary. This means that a larger group of students have enough insight into what counts as history, orwhat is important in historical work, to recognize the value of these annotations, even if they do not have theability or inclination to generate them themselves. From a design perspective, this suggests that students are likelyto gravitate to notes that include a more elaborate and refined version of such annotations.ConclusionThere are a number of approaches for shaping designs according to participants’ knowledge and practices(Engeström, 2007; Könings et al., 2014; Suchman et al., 1999). Preceding the design process with an ethnographicstudy can reveal practices that might not arise through design discussions. Particularly in instructional settings, itcan reveal practices that reside in the social space occupied by learners. Learners participate in this space willinglyand centrally. This space, the counterspace, may include practices that align with formal educational aims.Infusing these existing counterscript practices with pedagogical innovations can create a third space in whichlearners engage in practices that they value and are accustomed to, while being better supported in achievingformal educational aims. Thus, this approach can strengthen the students’ perspective in the design. Theseethnographies complement rather than obviate participatory design processes, especially those that includelearners in the process (e.g., Könings et al., 2014; Luckin et al., 2006), by extending opportunities for counterscriptpractices to be part of the participatory design process. Despite its productive potential, infusing pedagogicalinnovations into counterscript practices also carries a measure of risk. It is highly relevant that the notion of thirdspace originates in scholarship on the tensions that arise from having a new culture imposed on one’s own(Bhabha, 1994). This tension can lead to alienation and dissent or to the formation and adoption of new hybridpractices. The efficacy of the design, and its ability to make stronger strides in fostering disciplinary practicesthan in unproductively disrupting student life will need to be put to empirical test.ReferencesBarab, S. (2014). Design-based research: A methodological toolkit for engineering change. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.),The cambridge handbook of the learning sciences: Second edition (pp. 151-170). New York, NY:Cambridge University Press.Bhabha, H. K. (1994). The location of culture. London: Routledge.CSCL 2017 Proceedings555© ISLSBrami, U. (2015). A case study of personal epistemology in the context of an introductory course in history forfirst year b.A students. (M.A.), Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel.Cress, U., Stahl, G., Ludvigsen, S., & Law, N. (2015). The core features of cscl: Social situation, collaborativeknowledge processes and their design. International Journal of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning, 10(2), 109-116.Design Based Research Collective. (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educationalinquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5-9.Dillenbourg, P., Järvelä, S., & Fischer, F. (2009). The evolution of research on computer-supported collaborativelearning. In S. L. N. Balacheff, T. de Jong, A. Lazonder, S. Barnes (Ed.), Technology-enhanced learning:Principles and products (pp. 3-19): Springer.Dillenbourg, P., Zufferey, G., Alavi, H., Jermann, P., Do-Lenh, S., Bonnard, Q., . . . Kaplan, F. (2011). Classroomorchestration: The third circle of usability In H. Spada, G. Stahl, N. Miyake, & N. Law (Eds.),Proceedings of cscl2011 (pp. 510-517). Hong Kong: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Engeström, Y. (2007). Enriching the theory of expansive learning: Lessons from journeys toward coconfiguration.Mind, Culture, and Activity, 14(1-2), 23-39.Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K., Wecker, C., & Zottmann, J. (2013). Collaboration scripts incomputer-supported collaborative learning. The international handbook of collaborative learning, 403419.Gutiérrez, K. D., Baquedano‐López, P., & Tejeda, C. (1999). Rethinking diversity: Hybridity and hybrid languagepractices in the third space. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 6(4), 286-303.Hutchins, E. (2014). The cultural ecosystem of human cognition. Philosophical Psychology, 27(1), 34-49.Johnson, S. (1997). Interface culture: How new technology transforms the way we create and communicate: BasicBooks New York.Kali, Y., McKenney, S., & Sagy, O. (2015). Teachers as designers of technology enhanced learning. InstructionalScience, 43(2), 173-179.Könings, K. D., Seidel, T., Jeroen, J., & van Merriënboer, G. (2014). Participatory design of learningenvironments: Integrating perspectives of students, teachers, and designers. Instructional Science, 42(1),1-9.Luckin, R., Underwood, J., Du Boulay, B., Holmberg, J., Kerawalla, L., O'Connor, J., . . . Tunley, H. (2006).Designing educational systems fit for use: A case study in the application of human centred design forAIED. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 16(4), 353-380.Radinsky, J., Loh, B., & Lukasik, J. (2008). GIS tools for historical inquiry: Issues for classroom-centered design.Journal of the Association for History and Computing, 11(2).Roschelle, J., Dimitriadis, Y., & Hoppe, U. (2013). Classroom orchestration: Synthesis. Computers & Education,69, 523-526.Sandoval, W. (2013). Conjecture mapping: An approach to systematic educational design research. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 23(1), 18-36.Smith, B. K., & Reiser, B. J. (1998). National geographic unplugged: Classroom-centered design of interactivenature films. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors inComputing Systems, Los Angeles, California, USA.Suchman, L., Blomberg, J., Orr, J. E., & Trigg, R. (1999). Reconstructing technologies as social practice.American Behavioral Scientist, 43(3), 392-408.Tabak, I. (2004). Reconstructing context: Negotiating the tension between exogenous and endogenous educationaldesign. Educational Psychologist, 39(4), 225-233.Tabak, I., & Reiser, B. J. (2008). Software-realized inquiry support for cultivating a disciplinary stance.Pragmatics & Cognition, 16(2), 307-355.Tabak, I., & Weinstock, M. (2011). If there is no one right answer? The epistemological implications of classroominteractions. In J. Brownlee, G. Schraw, & D. Berthelsen (Eds.), Personal epistemology and teachereducation (pp. 180-194). New York: Routledge.Wineburg, S., Martin, D., & Monte-Sano, C. (2014). Reading like a historian: Teachers College Press.AcknowledgmentsThis research was supported, in part, by the I-CORE Program of the Planning and Budgeting Committee and TheIsrael Science Foundation (1716/12) through the Learning in a Networked Society (LINKS) center.CSCL 2017 Proceedings556© ISLS