Solder and Wire or Needle and Thread: Examining the Effects ofElectronic Textile Construction Kits on Girls' Attitudes TowardsComputing and ArtsRichard Lee Davis, Stanford University, rldavis@stanford.eduChris Proctor, Stanford University, cproctor@stanford.eduMichelle Friend, University of Nebraska Omaha, mefriend@unomaha.eduPaulo Blikstein, Stanford University, paulob@stanford.eduAbstract: The gender gap in computing has persisted—and grown—over the past 40 years.Prior work has identified a number of contributing factors for the persistence of the divide,including environmental cues, software themes, and course content. More recently, the designof software and hardware tools have been investigated as potentially contributing to thegender gap, and a new class of tools designed with gender in mind have risen to prominence.This study compared one such tool—the Adafruit Flora, an electronic textiles platform—to acomparable platform that was not designed with gender in mind—the Arduino Leonardo.While there were some shifts in self-identification, the most notable result was that theparticipants’ views of computing and arts became less stereotyped. However, there was nomeaningful difference between workshops in this regard. Our results indicate that therelationship between e-textiles and gender may be more complicated than previously thought.Introduction and backgroundAccording to the latest statistics released by the US Department of Education, 55,000 students received a degreein computer science in 2014. Of those students, only 10,000 were women. An article in Newsweek describes thesituation: “The gender gap is real and takes many forms… Despite great strides by women in other formerlymale fields, such as law and medicine, women are turning away from the computer industry. Men earningcomputer-science degrees outnumber women 3 to 1 and the gap is growing” (Kantrowitz, 1994).There are two things that are alarming about this quote. First, the quote is from 1994. This means thatthe gender gap in computer science has been a problem recognized by popular media for over 20 years. But,even more worrying is the fact that the gender gap in computer science stood at 3 to 1 in 1994, but in 2014 itstood at 4.5 to 1. This means that not only has the gender gap in computing persisted for over 20 years, but ithas gotten wider.Although some argue that concern about the gender gap is blown out of proportion (Cummins, 2015),we are committed to the view that closing the gender gap is of highest priority. Prior research has demonstratedthat the gender gap is not the result of girls simply choosing not to study computing, but rather is the result ofsystematic biases built into the learning environment that suppress women’s participation (e.g., Alvarado &Dodds, 2010). For example, when software contains historically masculine themes like battle and war, girls’performance relative to boys drops. When the software is modified to be more gender-neutral, the genderdifference disappears (J. Cooper, 2006; Joel Cooper, Hall, & Huff, 1990).If themes are important to consider when designing educational software, it makes sense to considerthem when designing other educational toolkits as well. The literature around hardware/electronics constructionkits is not nearly as mature as the literature around software, but work in this area seems to indicate that theaffordances and design features of construction kits can have similar impacts on youths’ attitudes and behavior.For example, Buchholz et al. found that when using the Lilypad Arduino, a hardware construction kit designedfor creating electronic textiles, girls in mixed-gender dyads spent more time engaged in key practices, and hadmore opportunities to take on leadership roles (Buchholz, Shively, Peppler, & Wohlwend, 2014). The authorsargue that the affordances of the Lilypad Arduino are those that “have historically been valued in femininecommunities of practice”, and that these cultural affordances “expanded the ways [for girls] into complexelectronics and computing content” (p. 18). There is a growing body of literature that both grounds the Lilypaddesign in theory (Buechley & Eisenberg, 2008; Kafai & Burke, 2014) and explores its impact on children inlearning environments (Buchholz et al., 2014; Kafai et al., 2013; Peppler & Glosson, 2013; Qiu, Buechley,Baafi, & Dubow, 2013). This body of research is nearly unanimous in its declaration that the Lilypad opens up anew pathway for girls to become interested and engaged with computing and engineering.The body of work that has arisen around the Lilypad Arduino provides evidence that providingaffordances grounded in feminine communities of practice might be an effective way of increasing girls’ interestin computing. However, most of the studies in this arena to date have been observational, and the underlyingICLS 2018 Proceedings800© ISLSmechanism responsible for the shift in attitudes is unclear. What is still missing is a direct comparison of howkits with similar functionality but different affordances affect girls’ attitudes. This study made such acomparison. We used an experimental design with two experimental groups—one using an e-textiles kit, and theother using the original Arduino interface of pins and wires—and a control group to better tease out the effectsof the design of the construction kit on attitudes.MethodsParticipantsN=49 6th and 8th grade girls were recruited from an all-girls middle school in Silicon Valley (N=46 6th graders,N=3 8th graders). The school is notable in that computer science is one of the core subjects, so all of the studentshad some prior programming experience with Scratch.DesignThe study took place in a Silicon Valley all-girls middle school during a week-long intersession. During thisintersession all classes were suspended and the 6th and 8th grade girls chose from a number of different weeklong workshop opportunities. We offered two different workshops during the intersession. In the first workshop,called Electric Fashion, we introduced the students to programming microcontrollers with electronic textiles.The students in this workshop worked exclusively with the Adafruit Flora—a sewable Arduinomicrocontroller—and a variety of sewable LEDs and sensors. This group of girls is referred to as the SEWgroup (Sewing and Electronics Workshop) in this paper. The second workshop, called Light Up Your Life,covered the same conceptual content as the first workshop, but used a different programmable microcontroller.Instead of a microcontroller designed for e-textiles, this group used a microcontroller called the ArduinoLeonardo. And instead of using conductive thread to connect the sensors and LEDs, the students in Light UpYour Life used wires, solder, and breadboards. This group of girls is referred to as the WIRE group (WorkshopInvolving leonaRdo and Electronics) in this paper. The third group—the control group—was composed of girlswho took part in other workshops offered by the school (Table 1). Choices included workshops in stopanimation, outdoor survival, learning about and drinking tea, set design, quilting, sailing, and others. Ours werethe only workshops where students worked with electronics and computer programming.Table 1: Full study designParticipantsSEW Group (N=10)Pre-Surveys (30 min)Implicit and Explicit AttitudesWIRE Group (N=10)Implicit and Explicit AttitudesControl Group (N=29)Implicit and Explicit AttitudesTreatmentElectric Fashion: create fashionprojects with electronic textilesLight Up Your Life: Make everydayobjects interactiveNonePost-Surveys (30 min)Implicit and Explicit AttitudesImplicit and Explicit AttitudesImplicit and Explicit AttitudesOut of the 49 students who took part in our study, N=20 were selected by the school administration totake part in our workshops and N=29 were selected to be in the control group. The administration stated that theassignments were random, however we were not part of the randomization or selection process. Students in thecontrol group took part in a variety of different workshops unrelated to electronics and programming, but stilltook the pre- and post-surveys. N=10 (9 6th graders) students were assigned to the Electric Fashion workshop,and the other N=10 (8 6th graders) were assigned to the Light Up Your Life workshop.The girls in the SEW and WIRE groups used the same software to program their projects and weretaught using the same materials (with slight changes to account for the differences in the hardware). The girls inboth workshops had access to the same crafting and construction materials, and we did not make suggestionsabout the kinds of projects they might choose to make. Every attempt was made to control the software andinstructional content between the two workshops so that the effects of the hardware design on the girls’ attitudescould be isolated. The surveys were administered once at the start of the week and once at the end of the week.Hardware and softwareStudents in the SEW group learned to program the Adafruit Flora, a microcontroller that can be sewn into fabricand other soft materials (Figure 1, left). The Flora is compatible with a number of sewable sensors (e.g., a lightsensor, a motion sensor) and actuators (e.g., sewable LEDs). These components can be connected by sewingthem together using stainless steel conductive thread to complete a complete, responsive, programmable system.ICLS 2018 Proceedings801© ISLSStudents in the WIRE group learned to program the Arduino Leonardo (Figure 1, right). Both the Flora andMicro use the same microcontroller, the ATmega 32u4. This means that a program written for the Flora can bedownloaded to the Micro and the functionality will be identical. However, the Arduino Leonardo is notdesigned to be sewn into soft materials using conductive thread. Instead, the Leonardo is the latest in a long lineof hobbyist microcontrollers (stretching back to the BASIC Stamp, released in 1992) to use wire, breadboards,and soldering as the primary connection method. The full list of sensors and actuators provided for each group isreported in Table 2 below.Figure 1. On the left are materials that were used in the SEW group, and on the right are materials that wereused in the WIRE group.Table 2: Comparison of microcontrollers and electronics used in each workshopSEW GroupWIRE GroupMicrocontrollerSensors (Inputs)Adafruit FloraColor Sensor, Accelerometer, Compass,Light SensorArduino LeonardoAccelerometer, Compass, Light Sensor,Pressure Sensor, Temperature SensorActuators (Outputs)Miscellaneous ItemsSewable LEDs, LED StripConductive Fabric, Conductive Thread,Alligator ClipsLED StripBreadboard, Wires, Solder and Soldering Iron,Wire StrippersWhile the Arduino programming environment does simplify many of the difficult parts of physicalcomputing, it may not be the ideal environment for middle-school students’ first exposure to physicalcomputing (Sadler, Shluzas, & Blikstein, 2016). Because the participants were all learning the Scratchprogramming language (Resnick et al., 2009) as part of their core curriculum, a member of our research team(Proctor) created a set of tools that allowed the girls to use the Scratch programming language to program theirmicrocontrollers. Using a Scratch extension and a connected helper application, we created a hardwaresimulator that provided a way to light up virtual LEDs, read input from virtual sensors, and connect the virtualsensors and virtual LEDs using block-based code. Both workshops used the same simulator, whose graphicinterface consisted of a row of circles to represent LEDs and several bars to represent sensor values. The helperapplication translated participants' code to the Arduino language and logged versions of participants' programs.More details on the software and an analysis of this code will be published in future work.InstrumentsIn order to understand the girls’ changes in self-identification and their shifts in gender perception a set ofinstruments was administered before and after the workshop. We analyzed these data to understand the girls’attitudes before the workshops and to measure how their attitudes changed as a result of being in either theSEW, WIRE, or control groups. We included instruments to measure both explicit and implicit attitudes.We were interested in the following attitudes: personal identification with computer science, personalidentification with arts, gender perceptions of computer science, and gender perceptions of arts. Our hope was togain a more nuanced understanding of how gender perceptions and personal identity were related, and howgender perceptions and personal identity might change as a result of being in the different workshops.Traditionally, self-report measures have been used to assess students’ attitudes towards computing andgender. However, explicit responses can be influenced by social or personal pressure (self-presentation)(Greenwald & Breckler, 1986). For this reason, implicit measures of attitudes were included in the study. Theimplicit tests measured the subset of explicit attitudes that were most vulnerable to self-presentation bias: genderperceptions and self-identification with computing and arts.ICLS 2018 Proceedings802© ISLSExplicit attitudes: Identity and gender semantic differentialsWe designed two 36-item, 11-point semantic differentials (Osgood, 1952), one for measuring identity and theother for measuring gender perceptions of computer science and the arts. The surveys were created on theQualtrics platform and administered online. The Gender Semantic Differential was designed to measure thegirls’ explicit gender perceptions on computing and arts, while the Identity Semantic Differential Scale wasdesigned to measure the girls’ explicit self-identification on those same categories. In a semantic differentialscale, participants are presented with a set of attitude objects and asked to rate each of them along a bipolaradjective scale. On the Gender Semantic Differential Scale, participants rated words from 0 (masculine) to 10(feminine) (Figure 2). On the Identity Semantic Differential Scale, they rated the same words from 0 (Not MyKind of Thing) to 10 (My Kind of Thing or Could Be My Kind of Thing). The same 36 items were presented inboth scales. The order of the questions was randomized at the participant level.Figure 2. Two example items from the semantic differential measure of explicit attitudes.We originally designed each scale to measure the following categories: computing, electronics, arts,crafts, and stereotypically feminine. We evaluated each of the categories using Cronbach’s alpha and found thatthey were not consistent. To remedy this, we broke the original categories into sub-categories (a priori) andrecomputed Cronbach’s alpha for each new category. These new groupings proved to be more consistent (alpha> 0.7). The final list of categories, along with the individual items in each category and Cronbach’s alpha, canbe found in Table 3.Table 3: Categories and corresponding individual items for the explicit attitudes semantic differentialCategoryIndividual ItemsCS ActionsDebugging a broken program, Programming robots,Computer hacking, Computer programming, Makingprojects with computers, Writing code, Solving problemswith softwareTroubleshooting electronics, Building electronics projectsDrawing, Sketching, Painting, Making art, Art classMe, Makeup, Nail polish, Fashion, Working on fashionprojects, SewingElectronics ActionsArtsStereotypically FeminineCronbach’s(Gender)0.850.840.890.80AlphaCronbach’s alpha(Identity)0.920.740.920.88In addition to analyzing these categories, we also hand-picked a subset of questions to analyzeindividually. These items were chosen because of their theoretical importance to answering our researchquestions. We chose these items before analysis to reduce the risk of Type 1 error. The following items werechosen for individual analysis: Conductive thread, Arduino, Troubleshooting electronics, Building electronicsprojects, Scratch, Working on crafts projects, Me, Sewing, Working on fashion projects, Soldering, andComputer programming.Implicit attitudes: Identity and Gender Go/No-Go Association tasksThe Go/No-Go Association Test (GNAT) assesses the strength of an association between a target category (e.g.,computing) and two poles of an attribute dimension (e.g., male-female) (Nosek & Banaji, 2001). During theGNAT procedure, stimuli from the target category and from one pole of the attribute dimension are the signal orgo items, while stimuli that do not match the target category or the target pole of the attribute dimension serveas noise or no-go items. A correct response on a go trial requires pressing the space bar on a computer keyboardto correctly identify the stimulus as belonging to the target attribute or attribute dimension.For example, a participant might be asked to correctly identify stimuli that are either related tocomputing (the target category) or feminine (the attribute dimension). On the first trial, the word “Internet”appears on the screen and the participant hits the space button—a correct response—and sees a green circle. Onthe next trial, the word “Boy” appears on the screen and the participant hits the space bar—an incorrectICLS 2018 Proceedings803© ISLSresponse—and sees a red check mark. Finally, the word “Sewing” appears on the screen and the participant doesnot hit the space bar. After 833 milliseconds, a green check mark appears on the screen (see Figure 3 for anexample trial).Figure 3. Example GNAT. On the top-left is the target concept (Arts) and on the top-right is the target attribute(masculine). When stimuli that match either of these signal categories are presented, a correct response is to hitthe spacebar before the deadline.We designed two GNATs to measure the strengths of eight different associations. The Gender GNAT measuredthe associations between female and computing, male and computing, female and arts, and male and arts (Table4). The Identity GNAT measured the associations between self and computing, other and computing, self andarts, and other and arts (Table 4). Both GNATs were created on the Inquisit Millisecond platform andadministered online using the Inquisit Millisecond Web Player (Draine, 1998). As recommended by the creatorsof the GNAT, d-prime was used as a measure of the strength of the participants’ association between the twotarget concepts (Nosek & Banaji, 2001). The higher the d-prime, the easier it was for the participant to associatethe target concept and attribute. d-prime values of zero indicate that the participant was unable to identify thesignal at all. d-prime values below zero indicate that the participant was better at selecting the noise than thesignal in that trial and most likely confused. In accordance with the advice of the GNAT designers, all values ofd-prime below zero were removed before analysis. Due to low test-retest reliability, we were not able tocompare pre-workshop scores to post-workshop scores. However, we were able to combine and analyze all ofthe pre-workshop data from the students to compare explicit and implicit attitudes.Table 4: Gender GNAT targets, attributes, and stimuliTarget ACategoryComputingFemaleGender StimuliArtificial intelligence, programming, computers,robotics,coding,Arduino,algorithms,debugging, electronics, ScratchPottery, sewing, drawing, sketching, arts, stencils,quilting, painting, crafts, knitting, jewelryFemale, feminine, girl, woman, her, she, hersIdentity StimuliArtificial intelligence, programming, computers,robotics, coding, Arduino, algorithms, debugging,electronics, ScratchPottery, sewing, drawing, sketching, arts, stencils,quilting, painting, crafts, knitting, jewelryMyself, me, mine, I, self, myTarget BArtsAttribute AAttribute BMaleMale, masculine, boy, man, him, he, hisSomeone else, them, other, not me, theyResultsTwo distinct types of analysis were performed in the study. The first analysis is a comparison of implicit andexplicit attitudes measured before the workshops, and the second is an analysis of changes in identity andgender perceptions as a result of taking part in the workshops. The first analysis was performed on the pooledpre-survey data collected from all of the experimental groups (N= 49). The two goals of this analysis were togain a better understanding of the girls’ attitudes before the intervention and to compare their implicit andexplicit attitudes. The second analysis was performed to better understand how taking part in either the SEW,WIRE, or control group changed the participants’ identities and gender perceptions.A comparison of implicit and explicit attitudesAn analysis of the pooled data from the pre-survey responses on the Gender GNAT (Figure 4, left), the girlswere more likely to associate computing with male (mean= 1.41, sd= 0.88) than with female (mean = 1.08,ICLS 2018 Proceedings804© ISLSsd= 0.86); t(42) = 2.28, p < 0.03. The girls were also more likely to associate arts with female (mean= 1.49,sd= 0.82) than with male (mean= 0.78, sd= 0.70); t(43) = -6.15, p < 10-6. In other words, the girls’ automaticassociations were in line with common stereotypes about computing, arts, and gender.An analysis of the Identity GNAT (Figure 4, right) showed that the girls were more likely to associatearts with self (mean=1.00, sd=0.97) than with other (mean=0.73, sd=0.77); t(43) = 2.26, p < 0.03. However, nosignificant difference was detected between the mean d-prime values for self and computing (mean= 0.86,sd=0.76) and other and computing (mean=0.86, sd=0.76); t(43) = 0.98, p < 0.34.Figure 4. Implicit attitudes of the entire sample (N=49) before the workshop. Higher d-prime values indicate astronger association between the two items. Error bars show standard error.In order to compare the girls’ explicit attitudes to their implicit attitudes, we matched items from theSemantic Differential to items presented in the GNAT and created two categories: Computing and Arts. On thegender semantic differential, a paired t-test showed that the girls were more likely to rate the computing items asmore masculine (mean=6.23, sd=1.06) than the arts items (mean=4.79, sd=0.46); t(31)=-6.434, p < 10-5. On theidentity semantic differential, a paired t-test showed that the girls were more likely to rate the arts questions asmore “My Kind of Thing” (mean=7.06, sd=1.80) than the computing questions (mean=5.97, sd=1.99); t(21)=2.53, p < 0.02.Figure 5. Explicit attitudes for the entire sample (N=49) before the workshop. Error bars show standard error.In summary, the girls’ implicit and explicit attitudes were in agreement. Both implicitly and explicitly,they held stereotypical views of computing and arts: they were more likely to view computing as masculine andarts as feminine. In addition, the girls identified with arts both implicitly and explicitly, but were moreindifferent towards computing.Changes in identity and gender perceptionsWe used a regression analysis to measure the changes in attitudes for participants in each workshop. Wecompared the SEW group to the control group, the WIRE group to the control group, and the SEW group to theWIRE group. In this analysis, the independent variable, workshop, involved three levels: SEW, WIRE, orICLS 2018 Proceedings805© ISLSControl. The dependent variable was the mean of all the post-workshop questions in the category or item ofinterest, and the covariate was the mean of the pre-workshop questions from the same category or question. Inother words, this analysis allowed us to compare post-workshop scores for participants in each workshop whilecontrolling for pre-workshop scores.Changes in identityThe participants' attitudes shifted in two out of four categories on the self-identification semantic differential:Electronics Actions and Arts. There was a significant positive shift in self-identification with ElectronicsActions for the SEW group (p= 0.03), and there was a marginal difference between the experimental groups(p=0.11) with the SEW group showing a more positive change than the WIRE group. In addition, there was amarginally significant negative shift in self-identification with Arts for the SEW group (p=0.10) when comparedto control. On this category, there was no significant difference between the experimental groups.On the individual items, there were two significant changes. First, there was a significant shift in selfidentification with Arduino for each experimental group when compared to control (p=0.009 for WIRE, p=0.04for SEW). There was no difference between the experimental groups. Second, there was a significant increase inself-identification with troubleshooting electronics for the SEW group when compared to control (p= 0.03).There was a marginally significant difference between experimental groups (p= 0.10), with the SEW groupshowing a more positive change than the WIRE group.Changes in gender perceptionsThe participants’ attitudes did not shift in any of the four categories on the gender semantic differential.However, there were a number of notable shifts on individual items. There were significant or marginallysignificant increases in the perceived femininity of the following items: Conductive Thread (p=0.08 for SEW,p=0.11 for WIRE), Arduino (p=0.10 for SEW, p=0.01 for WIRE), and Scratch (p=0.07 for WIRE). There weresignificant increases in the perceived masculinity of the following items: Working on Crafts Projects (p=0.08for WIRE, p=0.10 for SEW), and Working on Fashion Projects (p=0.09 for SEW). There were no significantdifferences between the SEW and WIRE groups for any of these items.DiscussionIn this paper we dug deeper into the claim that e-textiles may appeal to girls because of the alignment betweenthe affordances of the kit (e.g., sewing) and historically feminine practices. Operating under this assumption, weexpected to see differences between the two workshops. In particular, we expected that the SEW group wouldshow more positive changes in self-identification with computing practices and a stronger reduction in genderstereotypes about computing when compared to both the WIRE group and the control group.However, instead of seeing larger changes for the SEW group when compared to the WIRE group, wefound that in nearly all cases, the two groups moved together. The girls in both groups experienced strongpositive shifts in their self-identification with the Arduino. Their gender perceptions of a number of itemsbecame less stereotyped as well. Working with the traditional electronics kit appeared to be as effective atshifting girls’ gender perceptions and identity as working with the e-textiles kit.We see two possible ways of reconciling our findings with prior work. First, no prior work that we areaware of has directly compared an e-textiles kit like the Adafruit Flora to a functionally identical, but moretraditional kit like the Arduino. The results of the present study indicate that in some cases, the results reportedin those studies might have also been obtained with a more traditional Arduino. Second, it is possible that theeffects previously reported only emerge in mixed-gender environments. If this is the case, then the explanationfor why we did not see any differences could be that the participants’ identities as girls were never activated, orthat barriers to girls’ participation are more likely to emerge in mixed-gender learning environments.ConclusionThere is still much left to learn about how the design and affordances of the tools we use interact with ourperceptions of gender, our attitudes, and our identities. Future work would include repeating this study withmixed-gender dyads and looking for activation of gender identities and corresponding changes in attitudes,replicating earlier work with a comparison group using an Arduino Leonardo to see if the same effects can beachieved with the more traditional platform, and exploring how historically-gendered tools might give rise to ordisarm stereotype threat. Although our study shows that the picture is less simple than we thought, we hope ourwork has identified promising future pathways that may lead to closing the gender gap for good.ICLS 2018 Proceedings806© ISLSReferencesAlvarado, C., & Dodds, Z. (2010). Women in CS: an evaluation of three promising practices. In Proceedings ofthe 41st ACM technical symposium on Computer science education (pp. 57–61). ACM.Buchholz, B., Shively, K., Peppler, K., & Wohlwend, K. (2014). Hands On, Hands Off: Gendered Access inCrafting and Electronics Practices. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 21(4), 278–297.https://doi.org/10.1080/10749039.2014.939762Buechley, L., & Eisenberg, M. (2008). The LilyPad Arduino: Toward Wearable Engineering for Everyone.IEEE Pervasive Computing, 7(2), 12–15. https://doi.org/10.1109/MPRV.2008.38Cooper, J. (2006). The digital divide: the special case of gender. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 22(5),320–334. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2729.2006.00185.xCooper, J., Hall, J., & Huff, C. (1990). Situational stress as a consequence of sex-stereotyped software.Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 16(3), 419–429.Cummins, D. (2015). Why the STEM gender gap is overblown. Retrieved April 11, 2016, fromhttp://www.pbs.org/newshour/making-sense/truth-women-stem-careers/Draine, S. (1998). Inquisit [Computer software]. Seattle, WA: Millisecond Software.Greenwald, A. G., & Breckler, S. J. (1986). Motivational facets of the self. Handbook of Motivation andCognition: Foundations of Social Behavior, 145–164.Kafai, Y. B., & Burke, Q. (2014). Beyond Game Design for Broadening Participation: Building NewClubhouses of Computing for Girls. In Proceedings of Gender and IT Appropriation. Science andPractice on Dialogue - Forum for Interdisciplinary Exchange (p. 21:21–21:28). Siegen, Germany,Germany: European Society for Socially Embedded Technologies. Retrieved fromhttp://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2670296.2670301Kafai, Y. B., Searle, K., Kaplan, E., Fields, D., Lee, E., & Lui, D. (2013). Cupcake Cushions, Scooby DooShirts, and Soft Boomboxes: E-Textiles in High School to Promote Computational Concepts, Practices,and Perceptions. In Proceeding of the 44th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer ScienceEducation (pp. 311–316). New York, NY, USA: ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/2445196.2445291Kantrowitz, B. (1994, May 15). Men, Women, & Computers. Retrieved April 13, 2016, fromhttp://www.newsweek.com/men-women-computers-188544Littleton, K., Light, P., Joiner, R., Messer, D., & Barnes, P. (1998). Gender, task scenarios and children’scomputer-based problem solving. Educational Psychology, 18(3), 327–340.Nosek, B. A., & Banaji, M. R. (2001). The go/no-go association task. Social Cognition, 19(6), 625–666.Osgood, C. E. (1952). The nature and measurement of meaning. Psychological Bulletin, 49(3), 197.Peppler, K., & Glosson, D. (2013). Stitching Circuits: Learning About Circuitry Through E-textile Materials.Journal of Science Education and Technology, 22(5), 751–763. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10956-0129428-2Qiu, K., Buechley, L., Baafi, E., & Dubow, W. (2013). A Curriculum for Teaching Computer Science ThroughComputational Textiles. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Designand Children (pp. 20–27). New York, NY, USA: ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/2485760.2485787Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Hernández, A. M., Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., Brennan, K., … Kafai, Y. (2009).Scratch: Programming for Everyone. Communications of the ACM, 52(11), 60–67.Sadler, J., Shluzas, L., & Blikstein, P. (2016). Building blocks in creative computing: modularity increases theprobability of prototyping novel ideas. International Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation, 1–17.AcknowledgementsWe would like to thank the Lopatin family for their generous support of this project.ICLS 2018 Proceedings807© ISLS