Teaching and Learning Using Virtual Reality: Identifying andExamining Two Design Principles of Effective InstructionBritte Haugan Cheng, SRI International, Center for Technology and Learning, britte.cheng@gmail.comCynthia D’Angelo, SRI International, Center for Technology and Learning, cynthia.dangelo@sri.comSarah Zaner, SRI International, Center for Technology and Learning, sarah.zaner@sri.comMatthew Kam, Google, mattkam@google.comRhonya A. Hamada, Google, rhonya@gmail.comAbstract: Virtual Reality (VR) is perceived to have potential for improving student learning.This project examined two instructional design principles, based on the unique affordances ofVR, that informed the creation of lessons tested in classrooms. All groups of studentsexperienced learning gains. In only one of the lessons did VR students outperform the studentsin the non-VR conditions. These initial findings support the potential learning benefits of VRand the need for further research.Introduction and backgroundVirtual reality (VR) is gaining traction as a commercially viable and exciting genre of games and entertainment.Anecdotally, using VR in classroom settings has the potential to foster student learning in new and innovativeways (Dede, 2009), although this assertion has been largely unexamined empirically. In this research affordancesare defined as the properties of a technology that can be leveraged by designers, educators and other end-users tosupport learning process (Norman, 1999), building from the notion of offered by Gibson (1954) that affordancesare characteristics of an environment that indicate possibilities for action. It is important to consider, for example,in what ways can the affordances of Virtual Reality, across the different types and extent of immersiveness, alignwell with teaching and learning goals in order to improve student outcomes? The study focused on 8th gradescience lessons, given the abundance of prior research on science teaching and learning that could inform thisproject, and the availability of science content in the Expeditions library.This exploratory project examined two design principles of instruction (which we call InstructionalDesign Principles; or IDPs) that were identified and further developed based on an analysis of the uniqueaffordances of the virtual reality technology used in this study (namely its immersiveness and ability to showscale) and were then used to create two lessons, each implemented in the classroom with multiple VR-relatedconditions to investigate these principles. The two Instructional Design Principles tested in the classroom studypresented here are: 1) Develop Narrative: immerse students in VR stories to engender learning, interest, andempathy; and 2) Create Scale: pair VR with real life experiences to support students’ understanding of scale andproportion. The study examines the impacts of lessons designed based on these principles, using an off-the-shelfsolution, Google Expeditions, that is widely available. The two lessons used in the study were Spirit: Life of aRobot (abbreviated hereafter as Spirit) and Ocean Acidification (abbreviated hereafter as OA).Study design and methodsThe study used quasi-experimental design, involving three conditions: 1) a VR condition (where studentsparticipated in an Expeditions lesson using the full Expeditions kit (phones and Cardboard VR viewers), 2) aphone-only condition (where student viewed the same Expedition content on only smartphones without theaccompanying VR viewers i.e. using Expeditions in Magic Window mode, and 3) a panorama condition (wherestudents participated in an Expeditions lesson with no technology, using paper printouts of the same photospheresor panoramas from the corresponding Expeditions virtual field trips). These conditions were selected in order tokeep the content of the lessons as constant as possible across the conditions while isolating the affordances of onetype of technology over another. Students took a pre-test and the same post-test to measure learning gains. Testitems and coding schemes were designed using an Evidence-Centered Design (Mislevy & Haertel, 2006) approachto ensure their appropriateness. Each lesson took two 45-minute class periods or one longer 90-minute blockperiod to complete.The study participants included eight 8th grade teachers at six public middle schools in the San FranciscoBay Area. These eight teachers chose three of their classes to include in the study. Each of the three classes wasassigned to one of the three study conditions so that each teacher taught one session of each of the three studyconditions. A total of 24 classes (623 students) were involved in the study. Schools and teachers were recruitedto enable matching teachers across lessons, to ensure there were as few differences among teachers of each lessonICLS 2018 Proceedings1687© ISLSas possible and to represent a set of classrooms that typically have fewer opportunities to integrate technologyinto their lessons (thus avoiding a typical research challenge of over-recruiting affluent schools) but includedteachers with sufficient teaching expertise and personal comfort with technology so that these variables would notnegatively impact implementation of lessons. Teachers were surveyed before and after and interviewed after thestudy to ascertain their attitudes and understandings about the use of VR in classrooms.FindingsAfter teaching the Expeditions-based lessons (using the lesson plans developed for this study), most teachersreported that they envisioned a wider range of possible activities they could teach using VR. These impacts weresimilar for teachers independent of which lesson they taught. For example, before teaching the lesson, when askedhow useful VR might be for various classroom activities, teachers most frequently identified activities wherestudents argue a point of view, design their own problems to solve, link hands-on activities to concepts, and workindividually in class. After the lesson, teachers most frequently identified activities where students argue a pointof view, design their own problems to solve, make a product, and work in small groups in class.Students’ STEM content learning significantly increased during both lessons, across all conditions, asmeasured by pre and post tests scores and t-test comparisons (Spirit: n = 285, p < 0.001; OA: n = 294, p < 0.0001).In the Spirit lesson, students in the VR condition outperformed students in both the phone and panoramaconditions on the post-test, as determined by an ANOVA (p = 0.02). In the OA lesson, learning gains wereequivalent across all three conditions.DiscussionWhile the field of education research is just beginning to understand how best to leverage VR for learning, ourstudy’s findings point to the potential of VR to transform classroom activities, impacting both teacher and studentoutcomes. Study teachers were positively impacted in their views and understanding of VR for the classroom afterteaching only one Expeditions lesson. This is a significant finding, given the preponderance of research (e.g.,Lawless & Pellegrino, 2007) that indicates that teachers often require significant professional development whenimplementing new technologies in their lessons. Additional analyses not reported here eliminated the possibilitythat teacher effects, time-in-VR, and differences among students at the beginning of the study explain thedifference we see in students’ learning in the Spirit lesson by condition. Although the effect of VR on learning inSpirit is small, the finding points to the importance of future systematic research studies to determine the waysthat VR experiences can be designed and leveraged in instruction to maximize the impact of VR on learning. Thedocumented difference in learning by condition after only one 90 minute lesson lends credence to the idea thatVR could potentially have larger effects on student learning outcomes. Most importantly, this study provides anexample of theoretically-informed investigation of affordances of VR technology, via the use of IDPs, to supportclassroom learning while demonstrating the need for future study.Other important factors to examine in future studies must include the types of classroom activitiesincluded in the lesson to support learning, as well as the scope of the STEM content presented in the Expeditionstour. The efficacy of classroom activities accompanying VR and the scope and quality of content presented tostudents within the VR experience will need to be closely monitored in future studies of learning.ReferencesDede, C. (2009). Immersive interfaces for engagement and learning. Science, 323(5910), 66-69.Gibson, J. J. (1954). The visual perception of objective motion and subjective movement. Psychological Review,61, 304-314.Lawless, K. A., & Pellegrino, J. W. (2007). Professional development in integrating technology into teaching andlearning: Knowns, unknowns, and ways to pursue better questions and answers. Review of EducationalResearch, 77(4), 575-614.Mislevy, R. J., & Haertel, G. D. (2006). Implications of evidence‐centered design for educational testing.Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice, 25(4), 6-20.Norman, D.A. (1999). Affordance, conventions, and design. Interactions, 6(3), 38-42.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by Google. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions orrecommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views ofGoogle.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1688© ISLS