Designing for Rightful Presence in 6th Grade Science: CommunityEthnography as PedagogyAngela Calabrese Barton, Michigan State University, acb@msu.eduEdna Tan, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, e_tan@uncg.eduAbstract: To take up equity concerns seriously in teaching and learning STEM, the ways inwhich teaching and learning are historicized and relational activities need to be considered. Theconstruct of rightful presence – and the co-constructed “making present” practices which giverise to moments of rightful presence – is one way to consider more systemically how to makesense of the historicized and relational nature of teaching and learning. Our study shows howintegrating the equity-oriented design approach, community ethnography as pedagogy, as a partof teaching and learning STEM, supports the emergences of making present practices: modelingethnographic data, re-performing injustices towards understanding and solidarity, and makingchange dynamic and visible in classroom work. These practices and their implications aredescribed using ethnographic data from 6 urban middle school classrooms in two states duringa STEM unit focused on engineering for sustainable communities.IntroductionWe built the Occupied because kids were getting walked in on in the bathroom. It’s terrible. It’s a bigproblem. . . Our project solves it because it shows everyone when the bathroom “is occupied” (uses hisfingers to put the words in quotes). Now you can’t just walk in and pretend you didn't know. . . I thinkthis is a good problem to solve. I think it will help our community. Especially boys. The girls usuallyhave someone watch the door, but a lot of us don’t. Mateo, 6th graderIn this quote, Mateo, a 6th grader, describes an engineering design solution, “The Occupied,” he and two peersprototyped over the course of a six-week unit focused on engineering for sustainable communities. The Occupiedis a lighting system that allows classroom members to know when the bathroom is occupied. In his school, eachclassroom has its own individual bathroom located in the corner of the room, but the bathroom does not lock. TheOccupied has 3 gumdrop 10mm LED lights in parallel circuit affixed to the wall outside the bathroom door. Ituses the bathroom light as a switch to activate the solar panel, which powers the LEDs, connected by 12 metersof copper tape. Getting to the point of a working prototype was not straightforward for the group. They needed tofigure out how to make the design work from a science and engineering standpoint. They needed to garner supportfrom their teacher, Mrs. J., who admitted to being unaware of the bathroom bullying problem, and was skepticalof the students’ abilities to succeed with a complex project.How did the three students, their peers and teacher work towards new understandings and relationshipswhich made the Occupied possible, and which shifted how the youth were positioned and valued within theclassroom and school community? In this study, we build an argument for the importance of framing teachingand learning and its outcomes through a critical justice view of “rightful presence” – or legitimate membership ina classroom community because of who one is (not because of who one should be), where the practices of thatcommunity work towards and support re-structuring power dynamics towards more just ends through makingboth scales of injustice and social change visible.Our two guiding questions are: 1) In what ways does community ethnography as pedagogy support newrelationalities among students and teachers in the science classroom? 2) How do these relationalities challengetraditional knowledge and power structures in learning, working towards a rightful presence in science class foryouth from non-dominant communities?Theoretical framing: Critical justice and rightful presenceWe ground our work in a dynamic view of learning, concerning ourselves with how people, ideas, tools, resources,bodies and relationships move as people engage in social practice towards new futures (Gutierrez, 2012). Focusedon more than vertical movement (e.g., such as novice to expert), this dynamic view illuminates the hybridizationand transformation of practice as people move horizontally, from place to place, widening what counts asexpertise. This dynamic view, importantly, draws attention to equity-related concerns because it foregrounds theways in which individual experiences of injustice intersect with systemic injustice through sanctioned powerhierarchies and practices (Squire & Darling, 2013). Learning involves the process of re-authoring and re-mixingpractices from a wide range of experiences, located in the home, community, and school among other places,towards re-orienting social relations and knowledge hierarchies.ICLS 2018 Proceedings80© ISLSThe long-standing education debt (Ladson Billings, 2006) has produced patterns of participation inscience classrooms that are oppressive for youth from non-dominant communities (e.g., Who has power inclassroom settings, how and why). Current reforms in science education are grounded in the belief that if allstudents have access to high quality expectations and instruction, then educational equity will be achieved. Whilesupportive of good teaching, such reforms do not go far enough in addressing seemingly intractable equitychallenges across the intersections of racial and class inequality as outlined in Ladson-Billings’ education debt.Until these concerns are addressed as a part of teaching, then equity may not be achieved.New approaches to teaching and learning that are equitable and consequential are needed. We use bothterms, equitable and consequential, because we seek to purposefully call attention to the importance of recognizingteaching and learning STEM as an historicized and relational practice (DiGiacomo & Gutiérrez, 2016).Expanding upon patterns of participation, and who and what is recognized within classrooms are necessary todisrupt participation boundaries and knowledge hierarchies (Gutiérrez, & Jurow, 2016). Questions around who isteaching or learning, what is taught and why, are located in sociohistorical context (Engeström & Sannino, 2010)and central to interrogating normative practices and power dynamics in classrooms.To make sense of how to design towards equitably consequential teaching and learning, the construct ofa “rightful presence” is helpful to consider as a part of teaching all students in science class to engage in STEM.“Rightful Presence” emerges from critical justice studies of guest-host relationships in sanctuary cities, troublingassumptions of what it means to be inclusive in-the-present, and not in some abstract future (Squire, 2009). Wecan think of a rightful presence in education as legitimate membership in a classroom community because of whoone is (not because of who one should be), where the practices of that community work towards and support restructuring power dynamics towards more just ends through making both scales of injustice and social changevisible.One way to think about the on-going enactment of rightful presence is through the practices of makingpresent which support it. Making present practices are always a reflection of struggle and foreground relationality,linking places and time. The connections of places and time in practice is central to authoring a rightful presencebecause it helps to reconstruct place through the enactment of new practice, borne out of minor politics. Suchbelonging breaks down the binaries between outsider/insider and novice/expert, “not by pursuing inclusion intoan already established order; rather, it seeks to assert a new measure of justice even if that means undoing theorder we currently exist in and benefit from” (Vrasti & Dayal, 2016). A critical justice view of rightful presenceis a powerful frame for understanding equity-oriented teaching efforts in school science. Power dynamics arealways at play in classrooms, acknowledged or not. Students are guests in their classrooms, expected to followmajority routines with the threat of disciplinary sanctions for noncompliance. Youth historically marginalized inboth science and schooling, even if positioned as a welcomed guest, are expected to reconfigure themselvestowards the majority culture. Their participation is always marked as guest, subject to an uneven power dynamic.This is an equity concern for youth from non-dominant communities whose cultural knowledge and practice hashistorically been marginal to school and to STEM.Methods and contextWe have been working with teachers in schools that serve non-dominant communities on integrated science andengineering towards the goals of rightful presence. We sought to integrate community ethnography as pedagogytowards increasing the possibilities for enacting making present practices as a part of teaching and learning STEM.This work occurred during an integrated science and engineering unit on “how can I make my classroom moresustainable?” Students were engaged in learning about the disciplinary core ideas of energy transformations,sources and systems, while also exploring the practices of engineering design. As a culminating project, studentswere given the design challenge to use what they had been learning to develop a design project in support ofclassroom sustainability. The design challenge was bounded with the following criteria: Students had to innovatesomething in the classroom in a way that would address a classroom sustainability concern. They were requiredto use a renewable energy source, such as solar panels or handcrank generators, 10mm gumdrop LED lights,copper tape, and any materials readily available in their classroom.Teachers integrated community ethnography as pedagogy in two ways. First, teachers incorporatedcommunity dialog throughout the design process, including observations, surveys and informal conversations.Second, teachers incorporated multiple feedback cycles with different community constituents, and coordinatedthese feedback sessions with different points in their design cycle.We used critical ethnography with participatory research and design approaches (Cammarota, & Fine,2010) towards collaboratively working towards new social futures (Gutierrez & Jurow, 2016). We seek tounderstand how students engaged in “equitably consequential” learning in the context of middle schoolengineering and what tools and practices might support teachers in enacting equitably-consequential teaching.ICLS 2018 Proceedings81© ISLSCritical ethnography is rooted in the belief that exposing, critiquing, and transforming inequalities associated withsocial structures and labeling devices (i.e., gender, race, and class) are consequential and fundamental dimensionsof research and analysis.We co-designed our materials with youth and teachers using participatory methods, as an approach to“social change making” (Gutiérrez, 2012). Our research team developed the unit and then co-revised it with youthand teachers first in afterschool settings and then in a summer camp prior to classroom implementations.Our data sources include: 1) video recordings of a subset of class sessions, 2) conversation groups thatoccurred at the end of the implementation phase, 3) field notes, 4) artifact interviews with subset of youth abouttheir engineering design, 5) conversation groups with teachers before and after implementation, plus dailyinformal conversations, 6) the youths’ work, and 7) field notes. Data was analyzed in the grounded theorytradition, using a constant comparative approach (Strauss, & Corbin, 1998). The first phase of analysis involvedopen coding by thoroughly perusing all generated data to surface a) critical episodes of engagement in theengineering design work; b) the knowledge and practices that youth drew upon during critical episodes; and c)how they iteratively defined the problems they were seeking to solve. With the help of our theoretical framework(rightful presence), we then worked to make sense of teacher and student interactions especially aroundcommunity ethnography and community knowledge; why youth took the actions that they did; and the meaningsthe artifacts youth produced had for them, individually and collectively. This axial phase of coding was used touncover relationships and connections between the youths’ science and community knowledge and practice, andtheir efforts to solve problems with their knowledge/practice for themselves and their community.Teachers and schoolsMrs. J has been teaching for 33 years, but only the last three at Wilkenson Road School. She cared for her studentsbut viewed their struggles as something that worked against her academic and social goals. The students love her.As one student says, “she is an awesome teacher.” Wilkenson Road School is one of the most diverse schools inthe city, with 32% white, 28% Latinx, 8% Asian, 22% Black, 9% two or more races, and 1% Native American. Itwas converted to a “STEM” school 4 years ago in an effort to stanch the flow of students from the district into thelocal charter system and other districts allowed by state policies. By District accountability policies, the schooldoes not have a strong reputation for academic success, with only 11% annually meeting passing levels on stateexams (compared with state average of 33%). However, the school community rallies around supporting andwelcoming all of their students, such as hallway displays celebrating the diversity of its student body, strategicpartnering of students, hosting culture nights, and teachers encouraging students to “help each other” often.Ms. D has taught for 12 years at the same middle school in a midsized city in the South, Sage MiddleSchool. She teaches 6th grade Science and Social Studies. and is beloved by her students. One student describedMs. D as, “da bomb dot com!” Sage Middle School serves a diverse population of students with 43% Black, 38%White, 11% Hispanic, 5% Biracial, 3% Asian, and less than 1% each Native American and Native Hawaiian. 58%of the students come from low-income families. The school also serves 21% of students with a range ofdisabilities. Led by a dynamic school Principal in his second year, Sage won the “Most Improved Middle School”award in the district a for most improved test scores. While the school displays overt signs of friendship for all,incidences of bullying regularly occur. The school also reported a disproportionate data of disciplining AfricanAmerican boys over all students.Findings and discussionCommunity ethnography supporting Making Present practicesWe draw from two case studies to present our claims: The Occupied (described in the introduction) and the HappyBox. The Happy Box, designed by three girls at Sage MS during the course of their integrated science andengineering unit, is a light up messaging system that reminded all students that they were welcomed and valuedin their classroom, and that social issues that concern students (beyond test scores and traditionally-valuedachievements) are relevant. It is powered by two solar panels that lights up a design on the cover of the box with5 LED lights. The design is of children around a globe, including a transgender child. The Happy Box functionsas a classroom mailbox with individualized envelopes for each of the 28 students in the classroom. Teachers andstudents can use the Happy Box to write encouraging notes. The Happy Box is checked right after morningannouncements by the Principal, which typically follows the script detailing upcoming exams, test scores, andschool achievements.We selected these two cases because they reflect different ways of thinking about and responding toclassroom sustainability, and come from two different classrooms in two different states. We describe three formsof making present practices that emerged as community ethnography as pedagogy was interwoven into theICLS 2018 Proceedings82© ISLSteaching of integrated science and engineering: 1) Modeling ethnographic data, 2) Re-forming injustices towardsunderstanding and solidarity, and 3) Making social change dynamic and visible. We describe how these practicesemerged, and show how they worked towards moments that allowed for new relationalities to emerge –restructuring positional and knowledge hierarchies among community, students, teacher and science – conditions,we later argue, necessary for moments of rightful presence to emerge.Modeling ethnographic dataCommunity ethnography was used throughout the design challenge in numerous ways. As youth sought todetermine what problems to solve, they conducted surveys and interviews with school peers and staff andcommunity members focused on the sustainability concerns community members faced, and what those concernsmeant to them and why. These data became important resources the youth drew upon to organize their experiencesin their classrooms and community. They graphed survey results and conducted content analysis of commentsmade by the people they surveyed and interviewed. Modeling their ethnographic data in these ways served as apowerful making present practice for these representations made visible both the classroom or school norms androutines which the students found oppressive and they helped to illustrate scales at which they occurred. Theserepresentations also positioned the students’ experiences as valuable scientific data.With the Happy Box, the youth used graphical analysis of ethnographic data to make present concernsabout bullying and lack of fun as current and salient issues to be tackled in science class projects. As Kristenexplained: “From the survey we found that 55% of the community members felt that school was too stressful andnot fun. 45% also said that we do not celebrate and encourage the community enough, we only celebrate grades.We decided to make a Happy Box where encouraging messages and cards can be left for classmates . . . and knowthat people care.” The power of the numbers, and their visibility in graphed data, legitimized their experiencesfeeling marginalized by this testing-oriented culture. The girls also surveyed schoolmates whom they did nottypically come into contact with. Learning that they shared stark similarities with their own concerns about theirschool further affirmed their wish to address this concern.Kristen’s transformation as a result of the community survey was significant. Ms. D was “amazed” athow Kristen became “totally into the project after the survey.” She said: “She made me sit with her during lunchand showed me what she and her group are going to design. The Happy Box. She ran it. She was the leader.” Ms.D agreed with Kristen’s group that “it is really hard for kids to transition from whatever turmoil they just enduredin their home lives or out of school…and you wouldn’t believe what some of these kids have to face each day…and to come to school and be expected to immediately switch-on and be focused.With the Occupied, the youth conducted content analysis of open-ended survey items and interviewswith community members. These detailed comments offered youth the language to describe their experiences inways that illustrated how the problems the community faced were much bigger than themselves. When Trynereported that one of their survey participants indicated that “people were worried about people just barging in ourclassroom” the group had a way to frame their own experiences with the bathroom.In both examples, the data provided the language, the visual representation, and the evidence to allowthe students to name and push back against the dominant narrative that there were no real injustices that weresolvable in the classroom. They also provided a way for the youth to connect problems within classrooms tobroader problems within the school and community. Ms. D and Mrs. J were surprised at the social issues revealedby these surveys that they were not aware of and supporting students in survey content analysis helped give thestudents the words to name those problems to solve in science class.Re-performing injustices towards understanding and solidarityAs students imagined projects that might solve some of the problems they identified, they used their ethnographicdata to re-perform the injustice documented. We see this idea of re-performing injustices towards understandingand solidarity as a second making present practice. This practice was particularly powerful in how it involvedboth teachers and students using hybrid discourses to justify engineering design considerations, such oraltestimonies and narratives of personal experience.As the Occupied group sought to explain how bathroom bullying worked so that they could attend totechnical design features, they re-enacted narratives of their experiences of being barged-in upon. In one reenactment, Sophia walked into the bathroom while Mateo knocked and put his ear to the door. As he did this henarrated: “See, the rule is that we have to knock on the door, and put our ear to the door to hear if anyone is inthere. If we don't hear anything its clear to go in. But, some kids pretend they don't hear nothing, and they walkin.” He then walked in on Sophia, who re-enacted the humiliation of being walked in upon.These re-enactments served to connect their projects to the broader group of students in the class as theygarnered attention with their dramatics. Such re-performances appeared to crystalize moments of refusal to beICLS 2018 Proceedings83© ISLSvictimized. The Occupied had produced a sketch-up of their design, which described the main technicalspecifications: a 3v solar panel that connected to a single white LED light, connected by 12m of copper tape witha layer of protective electrical tape to guard against wear and tear. The solar panel would be activated by turningon the light in the bathroom. The sketch-up also included one main social specification: To make the light so thatpeople would see that the bathroom was occupied. When sharing their sketch-up with community members tosolicit feedback, each youth, offered corroborating testimony about how the bigger (and hidden) problem ofbathroom bullying were the rumors that bathroom bullies start in school hallways about what they purported towitness. These rumors, Mateo reported, were what “really hurt” because they were not true. While the Occupiedin some ways is humorous, it is also serious. For Mateo, being "walked in on" while using the bathroomrepresented a safety issue that he and his friends had experienced. This experience had spread out with students'rumors outside the classroom making students to "never [go] to the bathroom during the day anymore."As the students were encouraged to solicit community ideas as homework, Mateo started bringing inelectrician supplies from home, further building on the connections to cultural knowledge and practice that theethnographic activities opened up. He started role-playing the master electrician, wearing his uncle’s electricianshirt, he brought in electrical tape, and began to tell stories of learning to build circuits from the age of 3, withgummy worms as he went on the job with his uncle. His peers enjoyed his stories and they commented on howcool his shirt was. These re-performances, which took the form of dramatic re-enactments, role playing, andtestimony, legitimized students’ experiences of systemic oppressions as a part of engineering design, connectingthe power of their experience with what it meant to engage in STEM.With the Happy Box, such re-performances took shape through the illustrations the girls included in theirBox. In their initial sketch-up design, the girls intended to construct two simple circuits, each lighting one LEDlight, to decorate the front side of the box. They thought that coin-cell batteries might power one LED light for afairly long period of time before they would have to replace the batteries. However, when choosing a box to workfrom out of all the recycled boxes available, the girls chose a children’s shoe box which had a whimsical designon the box cover. Kristen and Elsa really liked the design and proclaimed it “Happy!” They were particularlydrawn to the globe image with children surrounding it in a circle.Here, the girls sought to re-enact their desire to be happy, and to help others to be happy, by situating itwithin a playful design. As the design included children around the globe, they sought to further connect theirdesires to be happy with children globally, signally a concern much bigger than their classroom. They liked thatthe “children around the earth means everyone is important.” Later, the girls spent time decorating the front of theHappy Box by choosing which of the patterns to color in and highlight, to draw attention to specific features. Elsapointed out: “See these children around the globe? There are 11 of them. We colored 5 pink for the girls, and 5blue for the boys, and the one right on top is half pink and half blue, for transgender kids, because you gottainclude everybody. Everyone is important. We want to light up the kids, maybe a few of the boys and girls butdefinitely the transgender kid.”As this quote indicates, re-performances made visible the struggle of young people to belong in theirclassroom schools and community. They not only linked places, such as classrooms, with local and state politics,they put in productive tension the oppressions the students sought to flee and their refusal to be victimized. Withthe Happy Box, the girls specifically gave witness to emotional needs of transgender children. Given that theirhome state of NC had been embroiled in a bathroom controversy regarding transgender children and bathroomuse, this is not a trivial concern. With the Occupied, re-enactments and testimonials allowed the silent bullying tobe made problematic – to be laughed at as it lost its power over the youth.Making social change dynamic and visible through engineeringOn-going dialogue among students and community members supported critical considerations on whether andhow emerging designs addressed the concerns that students cared about. These on-going dialogues gave rise to athird making present practice: Making social change dynamic and visible through engineering/making. This wasan on-going and iterative practice that not only opened opportunities for the youths’ experiences of historicizedinjustice to be challenged in the classroom, but it also worked to position the youth as highly capable and creativewith their STEM/Making knowledge.When community members visited to provide feedback to the construction of designs, the Occupiedlearned that some were concerned that the one LED light would not be visible enough to alert classroom membersthat the bathroom was occupied. The group decided to add 2 additional lights (forcing a move from a simple to aparallel circuit) and black construction paper as a background. This required the group to test multiple solar panelstyles to find one that generated enough voltage for 3 LEDs, and that would not melt when placed so close to theincandescent lightbulb in the bathroom.ICLS 2018 Proceedings84© ISLSMrs. J fretted that the Occupied would not get their project to work given the new layers of complexity.She admitted to not quite knowing herself, from examining their technical sketch-up and design, whether it couldwork or how to help them fix it. But Mateo overheard and challenged her, as Mrs. J describes: “I truly did notthink they could pull that off. Never saw them frustrated. They just went right back to work. In fact [Mateo] afterhe heard me say that said to me, Be honest, did you really think we could not do this? I said in all honesty…Ididn’t think you could pull it off. I am impressed. He just smiled. He can be difficult but he handled this with asmile almost the whole time. And confidence.” This appeared to be an important moment when Mrs. J eventuallyrecognized what the group could accomplish and what they cared about. She told them that the project would“help the class so much.”The youth explored and experimented with different technical options so as to not dilute their socialmessage: Three brightly lit LED bulbs would literally send a bright message about the fact that the bathroom isin use, and no one should barge in. Leveraging on complex engineering practices to send a strong social messagewas also evident in the Happy Box case.The Happy Box group wanted to send a message that all students matter so they made sure that girls,boys and transgender students on their Box were lit up. This required them to experiment with different circuittypes so that they could light five LEDs with one hand-crank generator. However, through community dialogue,the girls decided the lights needed to stay lit when messages were present to remind people “everyone matters inour class all the time” and to not disrupt classroom routines, when a student needed to stand up to crank thegenerator to power the LED lights. The girls had to change their power source to solar because a handcrankgenerator, without a capacitor, would not keep lights lit. This presented the further problem of needing to split thelights into two parallel circuits due to the power demands of 5 lights and smaller solar panels.They had to rethink their circuitry and energy source, because they “are not going to use five batteriesand keep replacing them, it’s expensive.” Julia tried out three different versions of parallel circuits in a circularform. After building three differently shaped parallel circuits because of the positioning of the lights (which hadto light up the ‘heads’ of the figures), the group managed to get 3 of the five lights to light up with a hand-crank.Julia was determined to get all 5 lights to light up and continued to mull over the circuitry with Edna’s suggestions.5 LED lights, with the transgender child’s LED in the center, was critical to the girls. The group decided that theLED lights had to be lit continually to show that “everyone matters in our class all the time.” The class had accessto small solar panels, and one would not be enough to power 5 LED lights. After more collaborative work, theysettled on the two parallel circuits, one powering 3 lights, the other with the remaining two, and each connectedto a flexible solar panel that is taped on the outside of the box.This practice directly linked engaging in dialogue with community members with opportunities to deepenSTEM expertise and to be recognized for it. The process of constructing and reconstructing designs as a result ofnew insights from community dialogue became physical manifestations of historicized injustice and a refusal ofvictimization, while also reflecting strong connections between classroom, school, and community. These are notminor changes for sixth grade students, but the girls worked through the complexities so that their design attendedstrongly to the problems they identified.How did these practices support a rightful presence in science class?Making present practices challenged the normative culture of learning and participation in their scienceclassrooms, creating conditions that made moments of rightful presence possible. They also helped to make visiblethe ways in which intersecting scales of injustice play out in science classrooms, denying students a rightfulpresent there. We believe that as making present practices were continually re-enacted and re-created through arange of localized activities and informal encounters, rightful presence emerged, at least in moments. The datasuggest that are two intersecting ways in which to think about rightful presence.First, making present practices restructured positional and knowledge hierarchies allowing moments ofrightful presence for individual students, previously marginalized, to emerge. We are concerned with how, andby whom, youth were recognized and valued for their expertise, reifying rightful presence. For example, themaking present practices enacted as part of constructing the Occupied provided opportunities for students likeMateo to build upon and share the knowledge and practices he brought from home. But, Mateo, like many of hispeers of color, has been positioned as an outsider to school science – a young boy whose expertise from homeand success in his project surprised his teacher. And yet, Mrs. J. cared about Mateo as she cared for many of herstudents. She worried about his home situation, where he was being raised primarily by his uncle while his fatherwas incarcerated. She often let “his mind wander” because she did not know “what to do with him.” She oftencalled him out to stay in his seat, when he roamed around the classroom during instructional time.During the construction process and as the groups sought to iteratively refine their projects in responseto community feedback, Mateo and his groupmates had to walk repeatedly from their desks on the far side of theICLS 2018 Proceedings85© ISLSroom to the bathroom to work on their project. As Mateo moved about, Mrs. J. noticed that some of the studentsbegan to ask Mateo for help when their circuits were not working. She began to position him as an expert,especially when she got stuck, “It’s wonderful for kids too. I can say, ‘I don't get this. Mateo could you look atthis.” Sometimes you can find student experts.” Mateo was recognized for his expertise, and his freedom ofmovement opened up in the classroom. This is not minor. He is a student whom Mrs. J initially described as atroublemaker with a “sad” background. Mateo’s emerging identity as an expert in circuits gained a rightfulpresence in the classroom, overshadowing his “sad student” identity that Mrs. J has thus far held as Mateo’s soleidentifier. Moving as an engineer across the classroom to work on his “site” (bathroom) further solidified Mateo’srightful presence as a classroom electrical engineer.Likewise, engaging in the community ethnography provided Kristen, Elsa and Julia to establish a rightfulpresence in middle school engineering, where their concerns about the school’s punitive culture that studentssuffer from became the impetus to engineer. We see how the girls further establish their rightful presence withtheir Happy Box innovation. Thus, making present practices help students bring to bear issues salient to both theireveryday lives at school and their science learning, issues that may not be immediately deemed relevant, or evenknown to exist, by their science teachers.Second, making present practices made legitimate in classroom culture particular relationalitiespreviously unsanctioned, while creating tangible symbols of rightful presence. Both projects became a part ofclassroom practice. Each time the bathroom was used in Mrs. J’s classroom, the Occupied lit up, a visible reminderof Mateo and his groups’ innovation and expertise, and the class had the opportunity to collectively monitor thebullying situation. About a month after the unit was completed, one of us stopped in the classroom to talk withthe teacher and stayed to help some students with their work. A student had gone to use the bathroom. Anotherstudent tried to barge in on her, at which point, several students hollered in unison “the lights are on!” at thebarging student. When 5th grade graders visited Mrs. J’s classroom, both visiting teachers and students pointed tothe design as important and something they needed for their own bathroom problems. Soon, many teachers wererequesting the same system be installed in their classroom. Here we see how these making present practiceslegitimizing “change” as an important outcome of STEM learning.DiscussionWe have argued that to seriously take up equity concerns in teaching and learning STEM and STEM-rich making,we need to consider the ways in which teaching is both an historicized and relational activity. The construct ofrightful presence is one way to consider more systemically how to make sense of the historicized and relationalnature of teaching. Whether and how students are recognized and valued for what they bring to learning as wellas how they are supported in more expansive outcomes of learning all are shaped by – and shape – the extent towhich one has a rightful presence in science classrooms.Our study shows how designing for community ethnography as a part of engaging in STEM-rich makingin the classroom support the emergences of three making present practices. These practices opened up new modesof previously unsanctioned relationality among students, teachers, community and disciplinary knowledge andpractice. Students had new opportunities and structures for being recognized for their experience and legitimizedspaces for doing so. Students were not welcomed as fuller members of the science classroom simply because theirscience/engineering expertise grew. Other forms of expertise also became important levers in locally importantways. Having multiple forms of expertise and ways to enact it towards solving injustices were the process andproduct of science learning, a vastly different scenario than in most science classrooms.Using a rightful presence perspective to lens our work in the classroom settings also revealed distinctdifferences from its previous conceptualization. First, the making practices identified in the borderland andrefugee/immigrant literature are public and shared by those willing to take them up. What we see as powerful inour study is that the making present practices enacted by youth were done so directionally; that is, in part, insolidarity with their teacher, a specific point of power in their classroom, and a potentially important ally whomay be able to enact more equitable practices, at least at the classroom level.Second, absent in the former literature in making is attention to the multiple scales of activity upon whichguest/host relations take shape. The previous literature calls attention to relationality in terms of time and place.Attending to scales of activity across time and place mattered in the youths’ efforts, too. However, the youthexplicitly called attention to intersecting scales of injustices in their work, in terms of school, class and science,at both the local and sociohistorical level (Cole, Kaptelinin, Nardi, & Vadeboncoeur, 2016). The Happy Box hadrippling scales of impact, from the immediate (individual students who writes and receives notes) to Ms. D’sclassroom culture, to the school culture, similarly with Occupied. Further, projects like the Occupied made visiblethe immediate problem of bullying in the classroom, and attention to its sociohistorical location as it primarilyaffected and further marginalized boys of color. One aspect is that the relationality sought for by students reflectICLS 2018 Proceedings86© ISLSthe institution of public schooling with oppressive structures, manifested in practices that value and normalizeideologies of test scores, strict discipline, racialized and gendered experiences.Third, making present practices expanded social networks, increasing more opportunities to broker forrightful presence. Youth and teachers strategically brought new and diverse people into the design conversation,such as their friends, parents/grandparents, teachers, engineers, and also little kids, incorporating the technical andsocial concerns discussed into their designs. This allowed the youth to advance the technical quality of theirinnovations while deeply ensconcing themselves as an integral part of their design. While refugees physically fleeplaces of oppression in hope of safety and acceptance in foreign sanctuary cites, the students here are bound,literally and figuratively, to reinhabit their physical school spaces through struggling for rightful presence, throughmoment-to-moment efforts (Gutierrez, 2016).Making present practices, while potentially empowering, however, are fraught with risk. For manystudents, especially students of color and students in poverty, a rightful presence in the science classroom is notguaranteed. The current structures of schooling and science actively work against it. The design tools ofcommunity ethnography supported the production of making present practices in ways that open up moments ofrightful presence. These moments are often transient. Perhaps, optimistically, we can argue that such visibilityopens up moments of rightful presence, which can and must be built upon. The emergence of making presentpractices support the youth up-ending standard expectations of what it meant to make, to produce an engineeringdesign and/or a school artifact. As the histories and geographies of the youth shaped the ways in which theydefined the problems and the solutions they developed, the youth disrupt the historically established notion ofwhat counts as STEM in school settings and whose knowledge or practices matter in STEM.ConclusionThe dominant equity narrative in STEM education is problematic because it does not align with the goals ofjustice. It positions youth from non-dominant communities as inferior and in need of remediation if or when they“lack” how the field has framed what counts as STEM. The youth in these classrooms, through enacting makingpresent practices, pushed back against normative structures in the science classroom. They engaged in designwork that leveraged what they learned in their class, bent towards justice but also unpredictable ends, but endsthat also opened dialogue around the problems they faced and their capabilities in responding to them.ReferencesBarnett, C. (2005). Ways of Relating: Hospitality and the Acknowledgement of Otherness. Progress in HumanGeography 29(1):5–21Cammarota, J., & Fine, M. (Eds.). (2010). Revolutionizing education: Youth participatory action research inmotion. RoutledgeCole, M., Kaptelinin, V., Nardi, B., & Vadeboncoeur, J. A. (2016). Scale, Agency, and Relationships: The Workof Cultural-Historical and Activity Theoretical Research. Mind, culture and activity, 23(2), 93-94DiGiacomo, D. K., & Gutiérrez, K. D. (2016). Relational equity as a design tool within making and tinkeringactivities. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 23(2), 141-153.Engeström, Y., & Sannino, A. (2010). Studies of expansive learning: Foundations, findings and future challenges.Educational Research Review, 5(1), 1-24.Gutiérrez, K. (2012). Re-Mediating current activity for the future. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 19, 17–21.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Jurow, A. S. (2016). Social design experiments: Toward equity by design. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 25(4), 565-598.Ladson-Billings, G. (2006). From the achievement gap to the education debt: Understanding achievement in USschools. Educational researcher, 35(7), 3-12Squire, V., & Darling, J. (2013). The “minor” politics of rightful presence: Justice and relationality in City ofSanctuary. International Political Sociology, 7(1), 59-74.Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developinggrounded theory. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Vrasti, W., & Dayal, S. (2016). Cityzenship: rightful presence and the urban commons. Citizenship Studies, 20(8),994-1011AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the National Science Foundation DRL #1502755.ICLS 2018 Proceedings87© ISLS