The Difference That Counts: Guiding Knowledge Exchange byVisualizing Levels of Co-Learners’ KnowledgeMelanie Erkens, Malin Kimberley Schneitzer, and Daniel Bodemer,melanie.erkens@uni-due.de, malin.schneitzer@uni-due.de, bodemer@uni-due.deUniversity of Duisburg-EssenAbstract: Many studies have shown that the complementarity of co-learners’ knowledge has apositive effect on knowledge exchange in collaborative learning. It has also been proven thatvisualizing given levels of knowledge guide co-learners’ questions and answers during theexchange. However, the question remains unanswered as to what extent visualized relative andabsolute levels of knowledge have an influence on behavior. To find an answer to this question,which could also be used for optimizing complementarity-based group formations, we havesystematically varied learners’ knowledge levels relative to learning partners’ levels(continuous distance) and absolute levels of knowledge (three levels) in 33 visualizations toinvestigate associated question and explanation intentions. The results confirm a stronginfluence of distances on intentions, moderated by absolute knowledge levels. In addition, wereport from which distance learners decide to ask questions or provide explanations.Theoretical backgroundKnowledge exchange is a core activity of collaborative learning, which can be triggered in learning groups bydistributing learners’ characteristics in specific ways (Dillenbourg & Jermann, 2007). Common approaches togroup formation target to group learners with complementary knowledge by either forming groups of learnerswith given characteristics, or by providing teammates with complementary information, both aiming at promotinga mutual exchange of knowledge that enables learners to solve tasks for which their own knowledge is notsufficient (Dillenbourg & Jermann, 2007). Either way, providing co-learners additionally with the information,on which the group formation is based on, might further improve knowledge exchange. Cognitive groupawareness tools visualize such knowledge-related information in order to improve the awareness of learningpartners’ knowledge and to suggest specific behaviors (Bodemer, Janssen, & Schnaubert, in press). Research inthis area has revealed that group awareness improves co-learners adaptation of communication in terms ofapplying better strategies when asking questions on a learning topic and of providing more elaborated explanationsto less knowledgeable learning partners (Dehler Zufferey, Bodemer, Buder, & Hesse, 2011; Erkens, Bodemer, &Hoppe, 2016). It can be assumed that these effects depend on the levels of knowledge relative to a learning partnerand the absolute levels of knowledge. Since this has not yet been investigated, the present study aims to identifyguidance principles that can be triggered by visualizing knowledge-related information and to use them for theimprovement of group formation. For this reason, we investigate the research question of what influence thevisualization of relative and absolute knowledge levels has on the exchange of knowledge. We assume that theintention to ask increases with an increasingly negative distance between own and partner knowledge (H1a)moderated by the level of knowledge (H1b) and the intention to explain increases with an increasingly positivedistance (H2a) moderated by the level of knowledge (H2b). In addition, we investigate exploratively thresholdsof knowledge distance from which learners start asking questions or giving explanations on a learning topic.MethodWe investigated the effect of visualized levels of knowledge in an online study with 126 participants (46 men; 80women; age: M = 27.63, SD = 11.88). To test our hypotheses, we have varied the continuous predictor relativelevel of knowledge (distance values between the visualized bar of the participant and the bar of a learning partnerranging from -5 to +5) and the categorical moderator absolute level of knowledge (no knowledge, little knowledge,medium knowledge) in 33 systematically created visualizations (see Figure 1). For the purpose of capturing thedependent variables, we asked the participants to report for each of the visualizations their intention to ask aquestion and to give an explanation on a six-point scale (from (1) ‘strongly disagree’ to (6) ‘strongly agree’). Inaddition, we have calculated thresholds for each participant based on binary logistic regressions. Resulting valuesx 1 (x 1 = -β 0 / β 1 ) describe the knowledge distance at the turning point of the logistic function meaning thevisualized distance from which learners start asking or explaining.ResultsIn order to answer our first research question, we investigated the impact of visualized levels of knowledge onknowledge exchange. For this purpose, we have used a moderation analysis with the distance values as predictor,ICLS 2018 Proceedings1555© ISLS‘no knowledge’myselfmy partner‘little knowledge’distance: +5myselfmy partnermyselfmy partnerdistance: 0myselfmy partnerdistance: -5‘medium knowledge’distance: +5myselfmy partnerdistance: +5myselfmy partnerdistance: 0myselfmy partnerdistance: 0myselfmy partnerdistance: -5myselfmy partnerdistance: -5Figure 1. Extract of visualizations used. The 9 examples show the visualizations of the highest (+5), lowest(-5) and not given (0) distance between co-learners for all absolute levels of knowledge (no, little, medium).absolute level of knowledge as moderator and the intention to ask or to explain as dependent variable. We dummycoded the absolute level of knowledge and used Helmert contrasts. Regarding hypothesis 1, results indicated thatthe intention to ask increases with decreasing distance, especially when the absolute level is ‘no knowledge’. Theinteraction explained a significant increase in variance regarding the intention to ask, ΔR2 = .06, F(2, 27) = 6.57,p < .01. Regarding hypothesis 2, results indicated that the intention to explain decreases with decreasing distance,especially when the absolute level is ‘no knowledge’. The interaction explained a significant increase in variancein the intention to explain, ΔR2 = .05, F(2, 27) = 5.64, p < .01. To answer our second research question, we havecalculated thresholds at which learners begin to ask or to explain. We identified three groups: (1) learners with anintention to ask questions or give explanations, depending on the given knowledge distance, (2) learners whowould always ask and explain, and (3) learners who would never ask or explain. As far as group (1) is concerned,we found that most of the learners (23 out of 79) were already starting to ask questions from a distance of 1(indicating that learners know a little bit more) and 29 out of 80 learners would start giving explanations from adistance of -1 (indicating that they know a little bit less).DiscussionThe results indicate that the visualized knowledge differences of co-learners who have a similarly high overallknowledge on a topic should be as large as possible for each sub-area of the topic. Furthermore, the absolute levelof knowledge seems to be relevant for knowledge exchange. While the high intention to ask questions is similaracross absolute levels of knowledge when the visualization shows that a learning partner knows more than alearner, the intention to ask is especially low when the visualization shows a more knowledgeable learner incombination with a learning partner with no knowledge. Similarly, learners demonstrate a high intention to explainbeyond the absolute levels of knowledge, if they are made aware that they know more than the learning partnerdoes. Furthermore, they offer the learning partner little explanation, especially if the visualization shows a moreknowledgeable learning partner in combination with no learner’s knowledge. Taken together, this suggests thatwe should take into account for group formation that one co-learner should alternately have no knowledge.Regarding the question of a necessary minimum distance between co-learners, we have found that learners oftenstart asking questions, although the visualization shows that they know a little more than their partner (withincreasing intention, the more a learning partner knows compared to a learner). Further, they start givingexplanations, although the visualization shows that they know something less than their partner (with increasingintention, the less a learning partner knows compared to a learner). Thus, there seem to be minimum differencesfrom which learners start showing a specific behavior, but they lie outside our expected range, and a minimum atfirst glance does not seem to be a relevant for grouping. However, this could be different under real conditions,so levels of knowledge and thresholds should be further explored in the field based on these first promising results.ReferencesBodemer, D., Janssen, J., & Schnaubert, L. (in press). Group awareness tools for computer-supportedcollaborative learning. In F. Fischer, C. E. Hmelo-Silver, S. R. Goldman, & P. Reimann (Eds.).International handbook of the learning sciences. NY, USA: Routledge / Taylor & Francis.Dehler Zufferey, J. D., Bodemer, D., Buder, J., & Hesse, F. W. (2011). Partner knowledge awareness inknowledge communication: Learning by adapting to the partner. The Journal of Experimental Education,79(1), 102–125. doi: 10.1080/00220970903292991Dillenbourg, P., & Jermann, P. (2007). Designing integrative scripts. In F. Fischer, I. Kollar, H. Mandl, & J. M.Haake (Eds.), Scripting computer-supported collaborative learning (pp. 275–301). NY, USA: Springer.Erkens, M., Bodemer, D., & Hoppe, H. U. (2016). Improving collaborative learning in the classroom: text miningbased grouping and representing. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning,11(4), 387–415. doi: 10.1007/s11412-016-9243-5ICLS 2018 Proceedings1556© ISLS