Moving Forward: In Search of Synergy Across Diverse Views onthe Role of Physical Movement in Design for STEM EducationDor Abrahamson (Chair), University of California Berkeley, dor@berkeley.eduAlejandro Andrade (Organizer), Indiana University Bloomington, laandrad@indiana.eduArthur Bakker, Utrecht University, The Netherlands, a.bakker4@uu.nlMitchell J. Nathan, University of Wisconsin–Madison, MNathan@wisc.eduCandace Walkington, Southern Methodist University, CWalkington@smu.eduRobb Lindgren, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, robblind@illinois.eduDavid E. Brown, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, debrown@illinois.eduAsnat R. Zohar, University of Haifa, Israel, asnat3@gmail.comSharona T. Levy, University of Haifa, Israel, stlevy@edu.haifa.ac.ilJoshua A. Danish, Indiana University, jdanish@indiana.eduAdam V. Maltese, Indiana University, amaltese@indiana.eduNoel Enyedy, U. of California Los Angeles, enyedy@gseis.ucla.eduMegan Humburg, Indiana University, mahumbur@indiana.eduAsmalina Saleh, Indiana University, asmsaleh@indiana.eduMaggie Dahn, U. of California Los Angeles, maggiedahn@gmail.comChristine Lee, U. of California Los Angeles, clee@labschool.ucla.eduXintian Tu, Indiana University, tuxi@iu.eduBria Davis, Indiana University, davis217@umail.iu.eduChris Georgen, Indiana University, cgeorgen@umail.iu.eduOskar Lindwall (Discussant), University of Gothenburg, Sweden, oskar.lindwall@ped.gu.seAbstract: Inspired by the current embodiment turn in the cognitive sciences, researchers ofSTEM teaching and learning have been evaluating implications of this turn for educationaltheory and practice. But whereas design researchers have been developing domain-specifictheories that implicate the role of physical movement in conceptual learning, the field has yetto agree on a conceptually coherent and empirically validated framework for leveraging andshaping students’ capacity for physical movement as a socio–cognitive educational resource.This symposium thus convenes to ask, “What is movement in relation to concepts such that wecan design for learning?” To stimulate discussion, we highlight an emerging tension across aset of innovative technological designs with respect to the framing question of whether studentsshould discover an activity’s targeted movement forms themselves or that these forms shouldbe cued directly. Our content domains span mathematics (proportions, geometry), physics,chemistry, and ecological system dynamics (predator–prey, bees).IntroductionInspired by the current embodiment paradigm turn in cognitive science (Barsalou, 2008; Wilson, 2002),researchers of STEM teaching and learning are seeking to understand implications for educational theory andpractice. In particular, design researchers are developing domain-specific theories that implicate the role ofphysical movement in conceptual learning (Abrahamson & Lindgren, 2014). These scholars conjecture thatlearning disciplinary content is contingent on enacting particular situated movement routines for participatingeffectively in the performance of socially constructed tasks in material–virtual settings. And yet two decades sincethe pioneering movement-based design studies (Nemirovsky, Tierney, & Wright, 1998), our community has stillto agree on the specific role of movement in STEM learning (Hall & Nemirovsky, 2012; Lee, 2015). In particular,although embodiment theories hold sensorimotor activity as constitutive of learning, knowing, and reasoning, thefield has yet to agree on a conceptually coherent and empirically validated design framework to leverage andshape this resource in education (Abrahamson & Sánchez–García, 2016; Kelton & Ma, 2018). Thus, as theembodiment dust begins to settle on the fertile design-research meadows of the learning sciences, this symposiumconvenes to ask, “What is movement in relation to concepts such that we can design for learning?”We all seek a cohesive theoretical framework for conceptualizing the fundamental role of physicalmovement in content learning. Also, we all believe that fine-grained ethnographic accounts as well as highresolution data-mining analyses are necessary for providing empirical evidence for the validity of argumentsgrounded in embodiment theory. Collectively, we furnish diverse evidence supporting an implication of physicalactions as critical catalysts in the emergence of new forms of reasoning. Where our designs differ, however, is inICLS 2018 Proceedings1243© ISLStheir study rationale and procedure with respect to why, when, and how students should enact these movements.Our most striking dimension of variability pertains to students’ agency in determining the movements. Some ofthe designs espouse a “bottom up” view, where students freely explore the space of movement possibilities todiscover the activity’s targeted dynamical forms, whereas other designs espouse the antipodal “top down” view,in which students are cued to perform certain forms. It is intriguing that these mutually exclusive positions canco-exist. But what if these views are complementary? That would point to potential synergy in theory and design,moving forward. Moreover, the transparency of physical movements, as compared to covert reasoning intraditional sedentary activities, may enable us to revisit enduring problems of pedagogy with respect to the valueof guided discovery learning (Abrahamson & Kapur, 2018; Klahr, 2010).The session will open with introductory words. Six paper contributions then follow, spanning contentdomains of mathematics (proportions, geometry), physics, chemistry, and ecological systems (predator–prey,bees). Our Discussant, Dr. Oskar Lindwall, will then draw on ethnomethodology principles to interrogate implicittheoretical assumptions underlying the contributing researchers’ respective design architectures and data-analysismethods. Regardless of specific techniques for fostering new movement, each activity appears to breach familiarinteraction practices. Much of what we call skill learning could in fact be characterized as teachers and studentsnegotiating new discursive routines and establishing what is learnable within the respective contexts. Illuminatingthis “dark matter” of STEM education could enhance the quality of design.An ecological dynamics view on movement-based mathematics learning: Onthe emergence of sensorimotor schemes in sociocultural settingsDor Abrahamson and Arthur BakkerA multiyear research collaboration between UC Berkeley and Utrecht University is pursuing the multimodalembodied roots of mathematical concepts. Complementing clinical data with action logs and eye-tracking input,we have been able to implicate subtle micro-processes in the emergence of new sensorimotor schemes anticipatingeffective problem solving of tablet-based manipulation tasks. In particular, we have demonstrated studentconstruction of attentional anchors (Hutto & Sánchez-García, 2015), information-invariant constellations ofenvironmental features facilitating the situated enactment of complex, dynamical physical actions. Our empiricalwork has been centered on better understanding the role of attentional anchors in conceptual development. Beingdesign researchers, we are conducting this investigation via further developing and evaluating an educationalartifact, the Mathematics Imagery Trainer (Abrahamson & Trninic, 2015).Figure 1. A student invents and uses an emergent attentional anchor to guide the enactment of proportionalbimanual movement: He focuses on an imaginary line between the fingertips of his left- and right-hand indexes,keeping this imagined line at a constant angle to the x-axis while moving the line to the right.Figure 1 shows a sequence of stills from a video of a low-tracked middle-school mathematics studentworking on a bimanual control activity. In this activity, Orthogonal Plusses, the left hand moves a cursor up anddown along a vertical axis while the right hand moves another cursor right and left along a horizontal axis. Theactivity’s task objective is to make the screen green. Unknown to the child, the screen will be green only whenthe cursors’ respective vertical and horizontal displacements from the bottom-left corner (the “origin”) relateaccording to a ratio, here 1:2. The orange spots on the screen are post-intervention overlays of the child’s eyegaze foveal locations. This student is looking not at the fingertips of his left or right hands that are manipulatingthe cursors but rather at screen locations that bear no stimuli or contours at all. This dynamical pattern, hisidiosyncratic and extemporized attentional anchor, is serving the student as a means of managing an otherwiseoverwhelming motor coordination task. The student explained that he is imagining a diagonal line connecting hisfingertips (top-left to bottom-right); that he is sliding this projected percept along to the right, maintaining itsangle constant relative to the screen base. In turn, note how operating this attentional anchor sends his fovealspotlight along a diagonal trajectory from the origin and up to the right along what amounts to a linear functioncorresponding to the ratio, y=x/2. This spontaneous invention of a new perceptual category, the imagined line,thus mobilized the child to construct new mathematical notions relevant to the curricular targets.Our findings have thus empirically corroborated central theoretical constructs from Piaget’s philosophyICLS 2018 Proceedings1244© ISLSof genetic epistemology, such as reflecting abstraction, that is, an argument for the pivotal role of newsensorimotor schemes in conceptual development (Abrahamson, Shayan, Bakker, & Van der Schaaf, 2016). In sodoing, we have also supported tenets from enactivist theory regarding the emergence of conceptual structuresfrom spontaneous solutions to pragmatic problems of environmental adaptation: “(1) perception consists inperceptually guided action; and (2) cognitive structures emerge from the recurrent sensorimotor patterns thatenable action to be perceptually guided” (Varela, Thompson, & Rosch, 1991, p. 173).Drawing on complexity-science research in sports performance (e.g., Chow, Davids, Button, & Renshaw,2016), we have imported the theory of ecological dynamics to the learning sciences. From this view, we modelmathematical ontogenesis systemically as emerging from complementary contributions of embodied andsociocultural forces. Students develop proto-conceptual sensorimotor schemes by using available instruments toachieve contextual objectives specified in the social enactment of cultural practices, such as designed educationaltasks. We are particularly interested in the pervasiveness of empirical cases where students themselves createthese instruments ad hoc in a struggle to complete task objectives within fields of promoted action (Abrahamson& Sánchez-García, 2016). Given suitable design, students do not need movement direction.Insight out: Embodied game play improves mathematical insight and proofMitchell J. Nathan and Candace WalkingtonGrounded and embodied cognition (Barsalou, 2008; Shapiro 2014) frames intellectual behavior as grounded insituated action, mental simulation, and bodily states. Evidence is mounting that mathematical reasoning draws onthe coordination of motor and language systems (Abrahamson & Trninic, 2015; Alibali & Nathan, 2012; Hall &Nemirovsky, 2012). Our theory of Grounded and Embodied Mathematical Cognition (GEMC) hypothesizes thatcognition–action interactions can run forward (thoughts drive actions) and backwards (actions induce cognitivestates) through a process of action–cognition transduction (Nathan, 2017). We investigated the empiricalimplications of GEMC for mathematical reasoning and proof performance in pre-college geometry. Justificationand proof are fundamental to secondary and post-secondary mathematics education (e.g., Stylianides, 2007), butstudents struggle to develop effective proof practices (Knuth et al., 2009).GEMC posits that body-based (nonverbal) forms of reasoning, as exhibited by gestures that show dynamicmathematical reasoning, can allow for key mathematical insights when reasoning about geometric relationships.When motor system activation is coupled with language system activation, in the form of dialog, selfexplanations, or pedagogical cues, GEMC predicts that both insight and the formulation of valid proofs will beenhanced. We explored the implications for theory and learning environment design. Specifically, GEMC-baseddesign principles led us to make The Hidden Village, a videogame where players must copy actions of tribalvillage members that sometimes model relevant geometric relationships in body-based form. Shape properties arethen explicitly explored when players test and justify in-game geometry conjectures (Figure 2).Figure 2. The Hidden Village; (a) Scene with full village map; (b) & (c) Directed actions turn green whenplayers’ actions match using Kinect™; (d) Conjecture multiple choice; (e) Tribal elder and earned shape.We analyzed middle and high school players’ (n=35) speech and gestures from 6 geometry conjecturespresented in random order in The Hidden Village. Directed actions (2 factors: math relevant vs. irrelevant armmovements) and pedagogical cues (2 factors: explicit in-game links relating relevant actions and conjectures vs.none) were varied within subjects. Our scoring rubric for valid proofs looked for 3 defining criteria, from Hareland Sowder (1998): proofs exhibit operational reasoning about mathematical entities, a logical chain of inference,and generality. Insight scores reflected partial proofs addressing key relations.Results support theory-based predictions about the processes linking action and cognition. Players’dynamic gesture productio predicts: (1) mathematical insight (Odds=8.1, d=1.2, p<.001); and (2) proofperformance (Odds=11.5, d=1.3, p<.001). Predictions for the efficacy of our game-based intervention showedmixed support: (3) in-game relevant directed actions without pedagogical cues does not predict insightperformance; however, (4) directed actions coupled with explicit pedagogical cues linking players’ in-gameactions to the math conjectures predicts players’ production of dynamic gestures while justifying their proofsICLS 2018 Proceedings1245© ISLS(Odds=4.0, d=0.8, p=.001); (5) insight performance (Odds=3.1, d= 0.6, p<.001); and (6) proof performance(Odds=4.7, d=0.9, p<.001). Most players reported no conscious awareness of the connection between the directedactions and the conjectures that were posed when receiving no pedagogical cues.Our theory-based videogame design reveals the potential of GEMC to improve mathematical reasoningthrough action-based interactions elicited through game play. More broadly, embodied theories invite assessmentof nonverbal behaviors such as gesture production, and interventions aimed at new forms of learning experiencesthrough movement (Lee, 2015). Finally, we conclude that a design approach that cues explicit reflection ondirected physical movements seems to be the most beneficial for learning of mathematical proofs.Embodied explanatory control: simulations that prompt users to enact causalmechanismsRobb Lindgren and David E. BrownCommon across theories of embodied cognition is the notion that thinking has “deep roots in sensorimotorprocessing” (Wilson, 2002, p. 625). Barsalou (2008) argues that cognition is grounded in simulations of perceptualand motoric experiences, and recent empirical work has shown that seeding learning interventions with designedphysical activity (e.g., experiencing angular momentum by holding a spinning bicycle wheel) can lead toconceptual gains (Kontra, Lyons, Fischer, & Beilock, 2015). Indeed, much recent work in embodied learning hasfocused on ways to solicit meaningful bodily action in designed environments, especially technology-enhancedenvironments (Lee, 2015). There is significant diversity in this work, particularly in how the technology solicitsbody-action and what makes the activity meaningful. We argue that those decisions can be guided by theories thatpertain to the particular kinds of learning and skills that an intervention seeks to cultivate. In our work, we arefocusing on students’ causal explanations of scientific phenomena (e.g., molecular interactions). We brieflydescribe how notions of explanatory reasoning have guided our design of an embodied simulation interface.Clement (2008) describes explanatory models as a type of scientific model that is created by scientists to explainthe hidden structures and the unobservable mechanisms behind observable phenomena. We define students’explanatory models as imagistic models in which a student can visualize the interactions of unobservable elementssuch as molecules to explain why observable phenomena happen (Brown, 1993). Dynamic visualizations, such ascomputer simulations, allow a student to “see the unseeable,” and with physically interactive simulations studentshave the opportunity to build metaphors that connect abstract mechanisms (such as molecular collisions) withsensorimotor experiences (feeling real-world objects colliding).Figure 3. From left: The GRASP gas pressure simulation; Jada showing gas molecules hitting a wall; A “ghosthand” guiding the learner to make a fist and become the molecules.With our GRASP Project (GestuRe Augmented Simulations for supporting exPlanations) we have beenfaced with the challenges of how to build those metaphorical connections between student movement andcomputer simulations of science phenomena such as gas pressure. Previous “embodied” simulations have givenstudents control of macroscopic elements, such as using gestures to move a virtual wall that changes the volumeof a container holding a gas, which are often visualized as balls bouncing around inside the container. We referto this type of control as embodied phenomena control (EPC). With EPC, the learner is able to either represent ormanipulate some observable aspect of a physical system. But because our work is targeting the construction ofexplanatory models described above, we have focused instead on gestures that control the interactions of themolecules themselves (Figure 3, left). With embodied explanatory control (EEC) students use gesture to affectpressure by tapping their palm (representing the movable wall) with their fist (representing the molecules). Quicktapping leads to high pressure and slow tapping leads to lower pressure. This particular gesture emerged frompreliminary interviews with students like Jada (Figure 3, center) who, when productively reasoning about gaspressure, started tapping her fingers at different rates against the palm of her hand. Leveraging these productivecases, we cued students to represent the causal mechanisms with similar gestures by employing interactiveinterface techniques such as “ghost hands” (Figure 3, right) and “fading” to facilitate the connection between thebody and the visualization (e.g., the hand becomes the molecules). It is important to note that even at the molecularlevel it would be possible to give learners control by having them directly manipulate elements of the simulationICLS 2018 Proceedings1246© ISLS(e.g., grabbing molecules and tossing them), but embodiment theories suggest that gestures more naturally connectwith knowledge when they are enacting processes and simulating actions (Hostetter & Alibali, 2008). Thus, welet students’ hands represent simulation elements rather than manipulate them. In our design-based research studyover 30 students to-date have used the GRASP gas pressure simulations, and initial findings (Brown, Mathayas,& Lindgren, 2017) have demonstrated powerful effects of EEC in focusing student attention on the molecularmechanism for gas pressure. Simultaneous studies of other gesture-controlled simulations such as the causes ofseasons are helping us to understand how EEC control can be used for other unobservable mechanisms such asthe distribution of light rays on the Earth’s surface.The ELI-Chem Simulation: Grasping Chemical Bonding by the HandsAsnat R. Zohar and Sharona T. LevyThis design-research project seeks to solve a fundamental problem in learning about matter: understanding thechemical bond as dynamic equilibrium between attraction and repulsion forces. Molecular phenomena cannot beexperienced directly, so students learn about them in the absence of intuitions derived from their experience ofthe world (Taber & Coll, 2002). Therefore, the concept of chemical bonding is difficult to grasp precisely becausethere is no analogous physical experience of simultaneous attraction and repulsion. Moreover, mainstreamcurricula often mislead students by: presenting chemical bonds as different categories (e.g., ionic, covalent)without relating them on the basis of shared principles; and explaining chemical stability of molecular structuresusing the octet-rule heuristic (i.e. with eight electrons in the outer shells) rather than the more fundamental balancebetween electrostatic attractions and repulsions (Nahum et. al, 2007; Taber & Coll, 2002).Students understand STEM concepts by grounding them in their intuitions (Clement, Brown, & Zietsman1989; diSessa, 1993; Núñez, Edwards, & Matos, 1999). Drawing on embodied cognition theory, we conceptualizethis grounding as resulting from purposeful actions (Dourish, 2004; Kirsh, 2013; Wilson 2002). Applied toeducation, embodiment theory implicates concepts as emerging from situated bodily interaction via reflection,discourse, and modeling (Abrahamson & Sánchez–García, 2016). The embodied design framework specifies howto create opportunities for students to develop new sensorimotor schemes and then shift into scientificreconceptualizations (Abrahamson, 2014), such as universal electrostatic interactions underlying chemicalphenomena.(a)(b)(c)(d)Figure 4. ELI-Chem degrees of embodiment. (a) No motion (video), (b) mouse interaction, (c) Joy-stickinteraction and (d) Haptic device.We designed and developed the ELI-Chem environment (Embodied Learning Interactive simulationbased environment, Zohar & Levy, 2015). The base of the learning environment is a chemical bonding computersimulation displaying the attractive and repulsive forces between two atoms and the resulted potential-energydiagram. Using a mouse, students interact as an atom with another atom, exploring changes of forces and energy.By connecting a joy-stick and a haptic device to the simulation, the ELI-Chem system offers sensory-motorexperiences of the attractive and repulsive forces at four increasing degrees of embodiment (Figure 4). The studyis framed as an experimental pretest-intervention-posttest design with four treatment conditions: animations,mouse-, joy-stick- and haptic-based participation in the model. The participants are forty-eight (n=48) 12th gradechemistry students, randomly assigned to one of the four conditions (12 in each). The independent variable is theembodiment level; the dependent variable is conceptual change, tested with a pre- and post-test questionnaire andusing the activities' worksheets of 40-minutes work with ELI-Chem. Main concepts addressed were repulsive andattractive forces, chemical stability and potential energy diagram.Our findings show that there is an increase in students' conceptual understanding in all four levels ofembodiment, with significant higher learning gain in the haptic condition. From explanations based on the 'octetrule' depicting the atoms as static "touching" balls, students turn to consider the dynamic balance betweenattraction and repulsion forces. In the qualitative results we have seen four important differences between theforms of interaction: the modes of perception used to access information which become more varied as the levelICLS 2018 Proceedings1247© ISLSembodiment rises: from seeing, through active manipulation to feeling the forces. As these modes increase innumber, the resolution of the information accessed and described increases as different parts of the parameterspace become distinct. Since the new component introduced to the students’ conceptual model involved repulsiveforces, we can see how more scientific descriptions are provided at the higher levels of embodiment. Finally,multiple perspectives of the phenomenon are adopted by students who experienced higher levels of embodiment.Complexity Learning via Elicited Movements: MMLA of Embodied DesignAlejandro Andrade, Joshua A. Danish, and Adam V. MalteseA wealth of empirical findings suggest physical movement is considerably involved in all thinking and knowing(Barsalou, 2008; Wilson, 2002). Educational researchers have been investigating how physical movement couldbe harnessed in the service of content learning. Indeed, design researchers have demonstrated instructionalinterventions that foster student development of targeted movement repertoires, which in turn enable thegrounding of STEM concepts (Abrahamson & Sánchez-García, 2016; Lindgren, 2015). Evaluating theseinterventions requires new research paradigms along with appropriate data collection tools. Specifically,multimodal learning analytics (MMLA, Blikstein & Worsley, 2016) research methods utilizing sensingtechnologies to capture, integrate, and interpret student perceptions and actions, can elucidate implicit processesof embodied learning. We report on results from implementing an action-based embodied design for complexityreasoning. These results were obtained by applying MMLA to explore patterns in fine-grained physicalmovements students performed as they engaged in a technology-facilitated activity. The patterns were inferredfrom low-level computer logs and then statistically analyzed through latent states and motion-sequence models.We chose the challenging subject matter of dynamically stable predator–prey ecosystems (Hmelo-Silver, Marathe,& Liu, 2007).Figure 5. From left: Barchart dynamically shows predator and prey population count; a student remote-shadowsthe moving bars; then explains; automatically generated motion-logs show movement analytics.Fifteen 3rd/4th graders (ages 8-10) were asked to observe and follow two moving population barsdepicting predator and prey counts in a running simulation (Figure 5). Due to feedback loops in animalinteractions, the two bars present an off-phased sinusoidal motion pattern, in which population counts do notalways move in opposite directions. Students’ hand movements are sensed by motion detectors and inscribed overtime, through software translation, in the form of two corresponding line graphs. Thus, the line graphs show us,both in real time and as an electronic trace for subsequent reflection and analysis, not what the bars depict butwhat the students perceive and enact the bars to be depicting. Following each task, we asked students either toreflect on relations between their hand motions and the simulation content or to predict hand motions undervarious scenarios. These questions prompted the students to consider that at any given moment in the predator–prey ecosystem there are two forces acting simultaneously (i.e., negative and positive feedback loops). Thisactivity abides both with embodiment theories that assign complementary roles to language and sensorimotoractivity in conceptual growth (Alibali & Nathan, 2012) and exemplary embodied designs that often steer studentsto articulate the situated physical actions they have learnt to perform (Abrahamson & Lindgren, 2014).Comparison of student performance on pre-/post-assessments after this short tutorial shows increase incontent understanding of the double feedback loops as well as notable increase in spontaneous gestures thatresemble the elicited gestures. These co-speech gestures appeared to support students in ad hoc reasoning, notonly in expressing ready-made inferences. They thus mark salient moments where students’ understanding wasdeveloping. MMLA of student–computer interaction reveal five distinct movement patterns during the simulationactivities, and these patterns correlate with different learning gains: (a) frequently pausing after each movementstroke predicted high learning gains; (b) enacting fluid movements predicted ceiling scores; and (c) lack of syncwith the sinusoidal motion pattern predicted lower scores. Consequently, students’ movement patterns, as theyengage with visualizations of quantitative models, can predict the quality of their content learning (Gerofsky,2011). We have thus validated both a learning design and a MMLA method. We also concluded that studentsbenefit from elicited movement, provided they reflect on situated meanings of these movements.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1248© ISLSSTEP-bees and the role of collective embodiment in supporting learning withina systemJoshua A. Danish, Noel Enyedy, Megan Humburg, Asmalina Saleh, Maggie Dahn, Christine Lee, Xintian Tu,Bria Davis, and Chris GeorgenIn our work, we have developed a sociocultural framework for embodied cognition (Danish et al., in preparation).Our goal in doing so is to build upon prior findings about how the body supports individual cognition (Lindgren& Johnson-Glenberg, 2013) and extend these with a theoretical framework—activity theory (Engeström, 1987)—which explicitly addresses both the sociocultural nature of individual learning and the unique characteristics ofcollective group activity into a combined framework that provides more robust insight into how we can designfor and analyze embodied activity in rich sociocultural contexts. In doing so, we take a view of embodiment asactivity that explicitly relies upon the use and movement of the body. We then explore embodiment (e.g., gesturingand moving within the space) simultaneously from the perspective of how it impacts the individual learner, howit impacts the collective activity in which a group of students are interacting, and how the two are interrelated.For example, in the current project we build upon the notion of play, which Vygotsky (1978) defined as consistingof both an imaginary situation and a set of rules. Engagement with the imaginary situation in play frees learnersto explicitly explore and negotiate the rules of their social world (Elbers, 1994). Within STEP-Bees (see Figure6), students take on these new roles through a combination of play-acting and movement through the physical andsimulated space, a process through which they are able to articulate and revisit their ideas about the concepts theyare embodying.Figure 6. Students within the STEP-Bees classroom pretending to be bees (left) as they see the beesmaneuvering through the virtual environment (right).The design of the STEP-Bees environment leverages embodied activity as a tool for learning by allowingmultiple students to coordinate their movements within the context of a mixed-reality participatory simulation.Two groups of 2nd grade students (N=16, ages 7-8) participated in seven days of activities, with each group ledby one of their classroom teachers. The students each took on the role of a honeybee, physically moving throughthe space as a bee would, foraging for nectar and communicating flower locations with their peers via a waggledance, and their movements were tracked using computer vision and translated into an on-screen simulation whichwas projected in the front of the room. The overall goal of the sequence of activities was to help students explorethe patterns and connections within the complex system of a beehive through coordinating their physicalmovements with feedback. Classroom interactions were videotaped to examine how students coordinate theiractions within activities; individual pre-post interviews measured their learning gains.Students exhibited significant pre–post learning gains for all four learning targets: Communication (t(15)= -12.199, p < .001), Cycle (t(15) = -3.159, p = .006), Complex Systems (t(15) = -5.217, p < .001), and Pollination(t(15) = -7.904, p < .001). Analysis of classroom video reveals that students’ embodiment provided opportunitiesfor coordination with various sources of feedback (peers, simulation, teacher). As individual honeybees, studentshad to attend to their peers’ waggle dances (represented by their body movements) to find flowers with goodnectar, and peers, in turn, had to adjust their waggle dances in response to feedback that their communication wasunclear. This coordinated cycle of communicating via physical movements and adjusting movement in responseto peer feedback encouraged students to reflect on the interconnected nature of a beehive. Students’ explorationof this complex system was further supported via a need to coordinate with the simulation, which providedadditional feedback on how students should move through the space. Receiving nectar at a flower would drawother students towards that point in space, whereas the presence of a predator would steer students’ movementsaway from that location. Our analyses reveal how the embodiment provided a powerful resource for individualstudents to think with, as did the ongoing feedback that they received from their peers and the simulation itself.Thus, the combination of individual embodiment, peer feedback, and feedback from the simulation provide astronger set of resources for learning than any one component alone.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1249© ISLSReferencesAbrahamson, D. (2014). Building educational activities for understanding: An elaboration on the embodieddesign framework and its epistemic grounds. Int. J. of Child-Computer Inter., 2(1), 1-16.Abrahamson, D., & Kapur, M. (Eds.). (2018). Practicing discovery-based learning. Instuct. Science, 46(1).Abrahamson, D., & Lindgren, R. (2014). Embodiment and embodied design. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridgehandbook of the learning sciences (2nd ed., pp. 358-376). Cambridge, UK: CUP.Abrahamson, D., & Sánchez-García, R. (2016). Learning is moving in new ways. JLS, 25(2), 203-239.Abrahamson, D., Shayan, S., Bakker, A., & Van der Schaaf, M. F. (2016). Eye-tracking Piaget: Capturing the emergenceof attentional anchors in the coordination of proportional motor action. Human Development, 58(4-5), 218-244.Abrahamson, D., & Trninic, D. (2015). Bringing forth mathematical concepts. ZDM, 47(2), 295-306.Alibali, M. W. & Nathan, M. J. (2012). Embodiment in mathematics teaching and learning. JLS, 21(2), 247-286.Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 617-645.Blikstein, P., & Worsley, M. (2016). Multimodal learning analytics and education data mining. JLA, 3(2), 220-238.Brown, D. E. (1993). Refocusing core intuitions. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 30(10), 1273-1290.Brown, D. E., Mathayas, N., & Lindgren, R. (submitted). Exploring the conceptual affordances of embodiedexplanatory control of a gas pressure simulation. Paper submitted to the NARST, San Antonio, TX.Chow, J. Y., Davids, K., Button, C., & Renshaw, I. (2016). Nonlinear pedagogy in skill acquisition. NYC: Routledge.Clement, J. (2008). Creative model construction in scientists and students. Dordrecht: Springer.Clement, J., Brown, D. E., & Zietsman, A. (1989). Not all preconceptions are misconceptions: Finding “anchoringconceptions” for grounding instruction on students’ intuitions. IJSE, 11(5), 554–565.diSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an epistemology of physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10(2/3), 105–225.Dourish, P. (2004). Where the action is: The foundations of embodied interaction. Cambridge: MIT Press.Elbers, E. (1994). Sociogenesis and children's pretend play: A variation on Vygotskian themes. In W. d. Graaf &R. Maier (Eds.), Sociogenesis re-examined (pp. 219-241). New York: Springer–Verlag.Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity–theoretical approach to dev. Res.. Helsinki: OK.Gerofsky, S. (2011). Seeing the graph vs. being the graph: Gesture, engagement and awareness in schoolmathematics. In G. Stam & M. Ishino (Eds.), Integrating gestures (pp. 245-256). Amsterdam: JB.Hall, R., & Nemirovsky, R. (Eds.) (2012). Modalities of body engagement [Special issue]. JLS, 21(2), 207-215.Harel, G., & Sowder, L. (1998). Students’ proof schemes. In E. Dubinsky, A. Schoenfeld, & J. Kaput (Eds.),Research on collegiate mathematics education (Vol. III, pp. 234–283). Providence, RI: AMS.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Marathe, S., & Liu, L. (2007). Fish swim, rocks sit, and lungs breathe. JLS, 16(3), 307-331.Hostetter, A. B., & Alibali, M. W. (2008). Visible embodiment. Psych. Bulletin & Review, 15(3), 495-514.Hutto, D., & Sánchez-García, R. (2015). Choking RECtified, Phen. and the Cognitive Sciences, 14(2), 309-331.Kelton, M. L., & Ma, J. Y. (2018). Reconfiguring mathematical settings and activity through multi-party, wholebody collaboration. Educational Studies in Mathematics. doi:10.1007/s10649-018-9805-8Kirsh, D. (2013). Embodied cognition and the magical future of interaction design. Trans. on CHI, 20(1), 1–30.Klahr, D. (2010). Coming up for air: but is it oxygen or phlogiston? Educational Review, 13(13), 1-6.Knuth, E., Choppin, J., & Bieda, K. (2009). Middle school students’ production of math justifications. In D.Stylianou et al. (Eds.), Teaching and learning proof across the grades (pp. 153–170). NYC: Routledge.Kontra, C. et al. (2015). Physical experience enhances science learning. Psych. Science, 26(6), 737-749.Lee, V. R. (2015). Learning technologies and the body. New York: Routledge.Lindgren, R. (2015). Getting into the cue. In V. R. Lee (Ed.), Learning tech. and the body (pp. 39-54). NYC: Routledge.Lindgren, R., & Johnson-Glenberg, M. (2013). Emboldened by embodiment. Educ. Res., 42(8), 445-452.Nahum, T. L., Mamlok-Naaman, R., Hofstein, A., & Krajcik, J. (2007). Developing a new teaching approach forthe chemical bonding concept. Science Education, 91(4), 579–603.Nathan, M. J. (2017). One function of gesture is to make new ideas. In R. B. Church, M. W. Alibali & S. D. Kelly,(Eds.) Why gesture? Amsterdam: John Benjamins.Nemirovsky, R., Tierney, C., & Wright, T. (1998). Body motion and graphing. Cog. & Instr., 16(2), 119-172.Núñez, R. E., Edwards, L. D., & Matos, J. F. (1999). Embodied cognition. Ed. Studies in Math., 39(1), 45–65.Shapiro, L. (2014). The Routledge handbook of embodied cognition. New York, NY: Routledge.Stylianides, A. J. (2007). Proof and proving in school mathematics. J. for Res. in Math. Ed., 38(3), 289–321.Taber, K. S., & Coll, R. K. (2002). Bonding. In J. K. Gilbert et al. (Eds.) Chem. Ed. (pp. 213-234). Dordrecht: Springer.Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied mind. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo. http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/. CCL, Northwestern U., Evanston, IL.Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(4), 625-636.Zohar, A., & Levy, S.T. (2015). ELI-Chem: Learning through interacting with atoms. SLDL. U. of Haifa.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1250© ISLS