Biohacking Food: A Case Study of Science Inquiry and DesignReflections About a Synthetic Biology High School WorkshopJustice T. Walker, Mia S. Shaw, Yasmin B. Kafai, and Debora Luijusticew@upenn.edu, mshaw12@gse.upenn.edu, kafai@upenn.edu, dlui@upenn.eduUniversity of PennsylvaniaAbstract: In synthetic biology scientists genetically modify—or biohack—cells in order torepurpose their function or products. While synthetic biology is gaining societal relevance, fewopportunities exist for K-12 students to have actual biodesign or biohacking experiences. Wedeveloped and implemented a workshop in which high school students genetically modified andrepurposed yeast to produce and deliver vitamin A. Analyzing workshop observations andinterviews of focus groups, we addressed the following research questions: (1) How didbiodesign activities reflect science practices as characterized in national science standards? and(2) What did students have to say about their experiences with bio-design activities? We alsodiscuss what we learned about facilitating and improving biodesign in K-12 classrooms.IntroductionThe last decade has seen growth in synthetic biology, where organisms are genetically modified for growth intoreal-world applications (e.g., Cheng & Lu, 2012). This technology has made it possible to develop numerousproducts like: : Vanillin™, a synthetic alternative to vanilla grown using yeast by Evolva and Biosteel™, a fullybiodegradable high-performance fiber used in Adidas sneakers. Given that synthetic biology has moved out ofresearch labs and into our day-to-day lives, there is an urgent need to introduce the field and its associated issuesinto K-12 education (NRC 201). Most existing research in K-12 life science education has concentrated onstudents’ understanding of and attitudes toward biotechnology (Dawson, 2007). However, hands-on experienceswith synthetic biology are lacking in these K-12 settings, even though they are widely available in communitybiolabs and universities laboratories (Loparev et al., 2016). In this study, we designed and implemented a syntheticbiology-based workshop called BioCakes. We identified which science practices (as described in Next GenerationScience Standards, or NGSS, 2012) were realized (or not) in order to explore synthetic biology’s potential forlearning in contemporary science curriculum frameworks and also investigated students reflections on theirexperiences. The goal of our research is to develop a better understanding of how design in biology may contributeto science inquiry (and vice versa).Context and methodsOur BioCakes workshop took place at a science center in a northeastern U.S. city, with nine students from apartnering high school (6 White, 2 Asian, 1 Black; 5 Females, 3 Males, and 1 They). The workshop spanned seventwo-hour sessions and activities were divided into three phases: fabrication, application, and imagination. Thefabrication and application phase involved wet lab procedures needed to genetically modify yeast cells to producevitamin A and bake an enriched cake. Teams of 2-3 students used a prototype of the biomakerlab, a low cost andportable wetlab machine (Kafai et al., 2017). The imagination phase involved developing an hypotheticalapplication of synthetic biology in a real-world context and required research on existing methods for deliveringa medicine, vaccine or vitamin. Students were then asked to create a 2-4 minute video ‘pitch’ of their idea.We examined video data from two case study groups and two debriefing focus groups. We developedcodes based on the existing NGSS framework applied by two coders in order to establish 100% consensus. Codeswere applied only in instances when science practice behaviors were unprompted. In the focus groups, we askedstudents about their perspectives and experiences of synthetic biology,struggles during the workshop, andprocesses they used to develop their final pitches. We analyzed transcriptions of student responses for instanceswhen there was consensus around particular ideas (i.e., perspectives about participating in this BioCakesworkshop).FindingsWe identified four of eight NGSS practices at work during through the workshop including: (1) asking questionsand defining problems (41%); (2) analyzing and interpreting data (18%) and (3) engaging in arguments fromevidence (18%); and (4) obtaining, evaluating and communicating information (23%). Here, we describe oneexample of engaging in argument from evidence practice because, by nature, it requires engagement with the otherthree practices. When developing their video pitches, students Mel engaged in a discussion about whether aICLS 2018 Proceedings1559© ISLSsynthetic-biology based vaccine could be delivered through skin pores using a facial mask. Another participant,Daniel, critiqued Mel’s idea using his prior scientific knowledge as he asserted:Daniel: The reason that a shot works so well is that it's injecting right into your bloodstream.Mel:You're literally trying to replace a vaccination with a vaccination.Daniel: No no, I'm not trying to. I'm just saying that's why the vaccination works. The problemwith the pores, it's a good idea, but the problem with the pores is that the pores don'tlead into the bloodstream. So it would be harder...for that vaccination to get around thebody as quickly.By comparing a facial mask to a shot, students demonstrated how they could evaluate competing design solutionsbased on existing knowledge and limitations (NRC, 2012). Iteration of design ideas therefore emerged as studentsconstructed explanations for rationales when developing their imaginary synthetic biology-based deliverysystems.Focus group responses provided insights into student experiences. They described their efforts comingup with iterations of their imaginative designs. Jesse explained his reaction to being assigned the vitamindeficiency as the issue to address with an imagined genetically-modified organism (GMO): “I thought that the[assignment] would limit the possibilities for us but [we] came up with a lot of ideas I feel.” In fact, members ofJesse’s group went through four iterations before finally deciding on using a yogurt to deliver vaccines, whichwas completely different than their original focus (i.e., vitamins delivered by lozenges). While the proceduralhands-on portion of the activity did not yield opportunity to iterate upon ideas, students’ responses illustrated howthe imagination activity not only supported personal expression but also iteration and revision—hallmarks ofmaking and inquiry-driven learning.DiscussionOur project took a first stab at illustrating what biodesign activities could look like in a class-like K-12 STEMsetting and how students engaged with various science practices in the process. While students do engage withsome of the science and engineering practices articulated in the NGSS science standards when participating inbiodesign, they were also many other practices that we did not see in our analysis of workshop interactions. Thesuccess of the imagination activity was an unexpected outcome, since this was where we observed many sciencepractices. Future research should consider how biodesign activities could enhance student design competencies,which have been shown to be an instrumental part of learning and making.ReferencesCheng A. A. & Lu, T. K. (2012). Synthetic Biology: An Emerging Engineering Discipline. Annual Review ofBiomedical Engineering, 16(14), 158-178.Dawson, V. (2007). An Exploration of High School (12–17 Year Old) Students' Understandings of, and AttitudesTowards Biotechnology Processes. Research in Science Education, 37(1), 59-73.Kafai, Y., Telhan, O., Hogan, K., Lui, D., Anderson, E., Walker, J. T., & Hanna, S. (2017, June). Growing Designswith biomakerlab in High School Classrooms. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on InteractionDesign and Children (pp. 503-508). New York, NY: ACM.Loparev, A., Westendorf, L., Flemings, M., Cho, J., Littrell, R., Scholze, A., & Shaer, O. (2017). BacPack:Exploring the Role of Tangibles in a Museum Exhibit for Bio-Design. In Proceedings of the EleventhInternational Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction TEI’17 (pp. 111-120).Yokohama, Japan.National Research Council. (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, Crosscutting Concepts,and Core Ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Palmer, M., Kuldell, N., & Sittenfeld, D. (2016, May). Building with Biology. O'Reilly BioCoder, 41. Retrievedfrom: https://www.oreilly.com/ideas/building-with-biologyAcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by a grant (#1623018) from the National Science Foundation to Yasmin Kafai and OrkanTelhan. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this paper are those of theauthors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation or the University ofPennsylvania. The authors wish to thank Karen M. Hogan, Aurora MacRae-Crerar and Keith Lewy for their helpwith developing and supporting workshop activities.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1560© ISLS