Encouraging Revision of Scientific Ideas with Critique in an OnlineGenetics UnitEmily J. Harrison, Libby Gerard, and Marcia C. Linnemilyharrison@berkeley.edu, libby.gerard@gmail.com, mclinn@berkeley.eduUniversity of California, BerkeleyAbstract: Encouraging students to revise their scientific ideas after encountering newevidence is essential to science learning, but has proven challenging. We investigated themerit of critique in promoting revision. 315 students participated in an online genetics unitwhere we investigated how critique affects the nature and frequency of revisions made tostudent essays. Students in the critique condition explain what is wrong or missing fromseveral common non-normative student ideas regarding difficult topics in genetics. Wecompare this to a method used in the past to encourage students to add new ideas to theiressays; students in the revisit condition are directed back to relevant information andinteractive models rather than practicing critique. Students in the critique condition were morelikely to revise their essays at all, especially students with low prior knowledge. Students thatpracticed critique were also significantly more likely to add new ideas to their revisions.Keywords: science, genetics, critique, revision, technology, knowledge integrationIntroductionThis research investigates how two types of guidance influence student revision of their scientific explanations.Revision of scientific explanations and arguments is an essential practice in learning and communicatingscience (Brownell et al., 2013). Revision is also stressed prominently by the NGSS. The NGSS were developedaround the idea that students continually build on and revise their knowledge (NGSS, 2013). The NGSS sciencepractices constructing explanations, engaging in argument from evidence, and obtaining, evaluating, andcommunicating information describe an iterative process of incorporating new ideas and evidence intocontinually constructed scientific knowledge. Although revision is a necessary skill for gaining the integratedunderstanding called for by the NGSS, there are limited opportunities for students to revise in a typical scienceclassroom (Berland & Reiser, 2011). Furthermore, students are challenged by NGSS to make productiverevisions. Bridwell (1980) analyzed 12th grade students’ English essay revisions for changes in surface features,words, phrases, clauses, sentences, multiple sentences, and text. All students revised, but most revisionsoccurred at the word (31.2%) or surface level (24.8%). Students revised primarily by improving word choiceand by correcting mechanical errors. Crawford et al. (2008) reported similar findings for 5th and 8th gradestudents, who focused on revising words and punctuation.Previous studies suggest that encouraging revision is indispensable to student learning, and promotingrevision in any form can be beneficial for students. For example, Tansomboon et al. (2017) revealed thatstudents who attempted to revise their science explanations made significantly greater gains from pre to posttestthan those who made no revisions at all, even if the revisions made were incorrect. In addition, students thatmade relevant revisions gained a more integrated understanding of the science material (Gerard et al., 2015;Linn et al., 2014). Previously, in an online unit on plate tectonics, we developed a rubric to categorize the typesof revisions that students made on embedded essays. We found that students who made integrated revisionsdemonstrated greater gains on a posttest essay item, as compared to students that did not revise at all or simplyadded disconnected ideas.This study investigates how engaging students in critique can promote productive revision of studentwritten explanations. We conducted the study in the context of a Web-based Inquiry Science Environment(WISE) unit on the topic of genetics and simple inheritance at the middle school level. We compare critiqueactivities to having students revisit relevant material and interactive models to gain new ideas. Both strategiespromote knowledge integration by encouraging students to look for concepts that are missing from theirexplanations and incorporate them into their existing ideas. This unit was designed according to the KnowledgeIntegration (KI) framework, which encourages making valid and coherent connections between scientificconcepts as well as using evidence and reasoning (Linn and Eylon, 2011). This framework elicits students’ priorknowledge in order to build on their ideas, and promotes adding and distinguishing ideas, and finally reflectingon newly constructed knowledge (Linn and Eylon, 2006). These steps make this framework ideal for supportingICLS 2018 Proceedings816© ISLSstudents in revising their scientific ideas. Supporting students through challenging practices, such as critique andrevision, can be difficult in the context of new and demanding disciplinary content (Scheuer et al. 2009);technology in the WISE platform is ideal for supporting these two tasks simultaneously.Based upon the NGSS practices and a review of the literature, we decided to test the benefit of critiquefor encouraging students to make productive revisions to their explanations and arguments for several reasons.Critique in this context is a detailed analysis and assessment of a claim or theory; it is necessary for the processof evaluating scientific information and evidence, as well as constructing and revising explanations. Argumentbased interventions have become popular, given its propensity to foster scientific literacy (Cavagnetto, 2010).However, Henderson et al. (2015) purports that argumentation without critique limits opportunities for studentsto engage in authentic scientific reasoning in the classroom. The construction of knowledge involves acontinuous cycle of construction and critique (Ford and Forman, 2006). Critique is not simply an exercise, it isfundamental for epistemic vigilance and critical thinking (Henderson et al., 2015). Written arguments andexplanations depend heavily on content knowledge, but explicitly supporting students in skills such as critiquehas been shown to increase the complexity of written explanations despite new and challenging content material(Berland and McNeill, 2010). This has been demonstrated repeatedly in the context of genetics (JimenezAleixandre and Duschl, 1999; Zohar and Nemet, 2001), making our WISE Genetics unit an ideal context forthis study. This unit covers content contained in the science standards, while also delving into aspects ofgenetics pertinent to general scientific literacy. Due to the growing presence of genetics in media and the publicinterest, developing and continually refining and evaluating one’s knowledge of genetics and the mechanism ofinheritance is of increasing importance.We designed two randomly assigned conditions that student groups participated in to assess the valueof critique versus revisiting. The revisit condition reintroduced a relevant interactive model and prompted themto answer new sets of questions designed to elicit new ideas that may not have initially been ascertained fromthe model. The goal of this condition was to allow students to directly test their explanations after writing them,and was modeled after past guidance used in WISE units that direct students back to relevant material to gainnew insights (Donnelly et al., 2015). The critique condition prompted students to explain what was incorrect ormissing from several non-normative statements rather than revisiting the interactive model. These nonnormative statements were developed from ideas that students generally found to be the most challenging. Thegoal of this activity was to encourage students to consider flaws in their own reasoning, explicate them, and thenincorporate these newly distinguished ideas into their own revisions. The activity was designed to help studentsunpack the complexity of constructing and revising scientific ideas by focusing explicitly on the practice ofcritique. Throughout the two-week-long unit, students encountered their assigned activity, critique or revisit(see Table 1 for outline of conditions), while the rest of the unit was identical for all students.Table 1: Outline of a sample sequence of critique and revisit conditionsCritiqueRevisit/ ExperimentEssay Prompt: Explain how you would use a Punnett square to figure out the probability of getting a certaingenotype.CritiqueExample Critique:Student 1: "Their 4th child will haveattached earlobes."Explain how this statement is incorrect ortoo vague, and how to make it moreaccurate.RevisitUse the Punnett square model again to answer the questionsbelow. (Model is embedded on the next page, along with thequestions)Example Question:When both parents have the genotype EE, what is the probabilityof having a child with attached earlobes? Explain.Revise: Now that you've learned a bit more about Punnett squares and probability, take some time to revise orimprove your answer to this question from earlier.What is a method you would use to calculate probability of getting a certain genotype using a Punnett square?(Students’ original responses are imported automatically)ICLS 2018 Proceedings817© ISLSMethodsParticipants and proceduresThree teachers from two middle schools participated in this study, with a total of 13 classes of 8th grade students(372 students, 198 student workgroups). Teacher 1 taught 4 classes (120 students) at the first school (49% nonwhite, 32% free/reduced lunch, 7% ELL). Teachers 2 and 3 taught at the second school (62% non-white, 22%free/reduced lunch, 12% ELL). Teacher 2 taught 4 classes (111 students), and Teacher 3 taught 5 classes (141students). Students completed the 8 day Genetics WISE unit during 50 minute class periods. Students worked incollaborative workgroups assigned by their teachers, mostly pairs with a few students working individually or ingroups of 3. Students completed the pretest one day before beginning the unit, and the posttest one day aftercompleting the unit. Both pre and posttest were completed individually. Of the total students, 315 completedboth the pre and posttest, as well as (most of) the Genetics unit. Workgroups were randomly assigned to one ofthe two conditions (critique or revisit) by the computer based on their WISE Workgroup ID.Curricular materialsThis study builds on a Web-based Inquiry Science Environment (WISE) unit on genetics and simpleinheritance. The unit features “critique” and “revisit” activities. It is framed around 4 essential questions relatedto genetics: (a) Why do we look the way we do? (b) How can we predict disease? (c) How do mutations affectDNA? (d) How do we control our world with genetics? To address these essential questions, it is important tounderstand both the mechanism of simple inheritance and that inheritance is rarely simple. This unit does this byemploying manipulatable computer models and various interactive question types to help students understandthe complexity of genetics while simplifying situations into solvable problems. Throughout the unit, learninggoals include independent assortment of alleles, dominance and recessivity, probability of inheriting certaintraits depending on parental genotypes, tracking of alleles through several generations using a pedigree, therelationship of DNA to phenotypic expression, and how the environment and human influence leads to changein genetic expression and inheritance. The WISE platform is able to track and save student work from variousassessments embedded throughout the unit.The unit features an interactive punnett square model to help students see the effects of allelecombinations on specific phenotypes (Figure 1). It also includes drag and drop questions to help students sortevidence and receive immediate feedback, and interactive graphing tools to allow students to constructvisualizations of data illustrating connections between different genotype crosses. Activities were added thatfocus on genetic modification, both through artificial selection and engineering, as well as common mutationsand their effects.Figure 1. Screenshots of the interactive Punnett Square model; students drag different alleles topopulate the boxes and test different combinations.AssessmentsThe pretest and posttest were used as measures of student knowledge integration, looking at students’ priorknowledge and relative improvement. Items generally asked students for a written explanation that requiredICLS 2018 Proceedings818© ISLSsynthesis of several genetics concepts. For example, one pretest question (SiblingsPrePost) prompted: “Siblingslook similar, but not exactly the same unless they are identical twins. If they inherited their DNA from the sameparents, why don't siblings look exactly the same? Explain.” A critique question was also included on the preand posttest; Students were given a completed punnett square showing two parents heterozygous for brown/blueeyes and were asked to predict the probability of having a child with blue eyes. The follow up critique question(CritPrePost) prompted: “Another student said: ‘From the Punnett square, you can tell that the couple's 4thchild will have blue eyes.’ Do you agree or disagree with this statement? Explain.”We scored students’ initial and revised explanations using KI rubrics to measure the value of critiqueversus revisit guidance. Specifically, we looked at the types of revisions students made on two embedded KIsynthesis essay questions. The first question was identical to the first pre/post question regarding the mechanismof inheritance: Why do siblings from the same parents look similar but not exactly the same? (Siblings). Thesecond question focused on the use of a punnett square to determine the probability of getting a certain genotypein various cases (PunnettSquare): “What is a method you would use to calculate probability of getting a certaingenotype using a Punnett square?”Analysis approachStudent essay responses on the pre and posttest, as well as embedded essay items, were scored using a 5-pointKnowledge Integration (KI) scale (See Table 2 for sample rubric). KI scoring is designed to reward students formaking connections between ideas, thereby integrating new information with their prior knowledge (Linn &Eylon, 2011; Liu et al, 2008). The rubric for the Siblings question demonstrates how links are scored (Table 2).Table 2: KI Rubric Example: Why do siblings from the same parents look similar but not exactly the same?KIScoreDescriptionExamples1No Answer“I don’t know”2Non-normative/irrelevant: Tokenmechanism only ("skips a generation") withno elaboration.Incorrect ideas: “you get different amountsof DNA from each parent”Because you and your sibling have close genes but they arenot the same genes.Partial link (one correct statement, but notconnected to other scientific ideas, orstudent does not elaborate)They get different parts of dna from their parents.4One full link between normative scientificideasBecause you get half of your parents DNA but it does notspecify which half you will inherit from them. This meansthat the half that you might get will not be the same thatyour sibling will get.5At least two full linksSiblings do not look exactly the same because they haveslightly different alleles. Each child has a chance ofreceiving a different allele from its parents than its siblingbecause of probability.3You inherit similar amounts of the same traits from thesame parents at slightly different amounts. Because it's notexactly the same, you look a little different.You get a different set of genes then your sibling.Qualitative revision codes were also given to the embedded essay revisions based on how a studentrevised. A code was given for whether students made connected (C) or disconnected (D) revisions. Anothercode was given for whether students added new (N) ideas in their revision or expanded existing (E) ideas thatwere already present in their initial response (see Table 3 for examples of each code combination).Table 3: Rubric and examples for embedded essay revisions (Student revisions underlined)ICLS 2018 Proceedings819© ISLSInitial ResponseRevisionScore (C/D) (N/E)You would use the method of countingby 25's. Each square is a 25% chance.You would use the method of counting byquarters. The two letters from each parentwould represent a quarter of the genotypeand all the quarters combined would showwhat phenotype would be dominant over theother.CNA method I would use is that I wouldchoose the number of squares thathave a certain genotype and find outwhat percent of the squares have thatgenotype.A method I would use to calculate theprobability of getting a certain genotype isthat I would choose the number of squaresthat have a certain genotype and find outwhat percent of the squares have thatgenotype.CEYou would put the alleles of eachparent on the outside of the square andthe possible alleles for their childrenwould be in the square.You can find the dominant and recessivetraits to calculate the probability out of four.DNThe figure shows how many possiblegenotypes that children can have.The figure shows how many possiblegenotypes that children can have. D meansdimples and d means no dimples.DEResultsAll teachers implemented the unit as planned, during 50 minute class periods over the course of two weeks.Teachers intermittently reminded students of guidelines for productive collaboration with their partnersthroughout the project.Pre/posttest analysisLearning gainsStudents began the unit with moderately low genetics knowledge, with an average pretest KI score of 2.47(SE= 0.04). Students in the critique and revisit conditions were at similar levels at the beginning of the unit[Critique: Pre: M=2.50 SE=0.05; Revisit: Pre: M=2.44, SE=0.07].All students achieved learning gains in genetics by the posttest (SiblingsPrePost and CritPrePost)[Post: M=3.19, SE=0.05]. These items were chosen for analysis because they require the synthesis of variousgenetics concepts. The item SiblingPrePost involves independent assortment of alleles, leading to offspringfrom the same parents receiving different combinations of alleles, and different genotypes resulting in differentphenotypes. The item CritPrePost asks students to explain how the probability of a certain trait can be predictedusing a punnett square, and involves a critique component. There was no difference in gain between conditionsfrom pre to posttest on these items [Critique: t(148)= 8.42, Post: M= 3.13 SE= 0.07, p<0.001; Revisit:t(119)=9.80, Post: M=3.28, SE=0.08, p<0.001].Interactions with prior knowledgeA regression analysis revealed an interaction between condition and prior knowledge on pre/post gain. Weseparated students into high or low prior knowledge groups based on their pretest score on each of the twoitems; those that scored a 1-2 were considered low, and those that scored 3-5 were considered high priorknowledge. We chose this cutoff because students must include at least one normative scientific idea to achievea score of 3. Our analysis revealed that students with low prior knowledge scored an estimated average of 0.36points lower in posttest gain in the critique condition (p<0.05) compared to students with high prior knowledge.ICLS 2018 Proceedings820© ISLSThis suggests that high prior knowledge students are more likely to benefit from critique activities in terms ofpre/post gains. This may be because success at critique depends on understanding the content material.Revision on embedded assessmentsNature of student revisions and learning gainsOverall we found that critique motivated adding more new ideas to essay revisions than did revisiting relevantmaterial.For revisions on the Siblings embedded essay question, students in the critique condition added newideas an estimated 1.84 times as often as students in the revisit condition, on average [z(198)=2.05, p<0.05].Condition had no effect on KI score gain from initial to revised response for this item. However, students thatdid revise on this item scored, on average, 0.41 points higher on their revised essay than students who kept theiroriginal answer (did not revise) [t(196)=3.40, p<0.001]. This suggests that students that revised made productivechanges to their essays on this item.For the PunnettSquare embedded essay, students in the critique condition were 2.74 times as likely, onaverage, to add new ideas to their revisions compared to students in the revisit condition [z(198)=2.72, p<0.01].In addition, students in the critique condition scored an estimated 0.20 points higher on this item than studentsin the revisit condition from initial to revised response [t(196)=2.54, p<0.05]. This is likely due to the additionof new relevant science ideas in their revisions.For both embedded essay questions, we found no effect of condition on students making connectedrevisions.Frequency of revisionCritique condition students were overall more likely to revise their essays, compared to students in the revisitcondition. Students in the critique condition were 2.75 times as likely to revise at least one of the two embeddedessays as compared to students in the revisit condition [ z(198)=3.25, p<0.001].Prior knowledge was a significant factor in deciding to revise as well; students with high priorknowledge were 2.28 times as likely to revise at least one of the two embedded essays compared to studentswith low prior knowledge [z(195)=2.13, p<0.05]. In order to examine the effect of prior knowledge further, weseparated students again into high and low prior knowledge groups. High prior knowledge students in thecritique condition were 2.22 times as likely to revise at least one of the essays compared to high priorknowledge students in the revisit condition [z(159)= 2.26, p<0.05]. Students with low prior knowledge in thecritique condition were 5.2 times as likely to revise compared to low prior knowledge students in the revisitcondition [z(36)=2.27, p<0.05]. Therefore, not only did the critique condition promote revision more often, itespecially encouraged students with low prior knowledge (an initial essay score of 1 or 2) to revise more often.Qualitative critique analysisThese results suggest that both conditions were effective in promoting student understanding of genetics andsimple inheritance from pre to posttest. While low prior knowledge students in the critique condition gainedslightly less than high prior knowledge students, the critique activities still encouraged them to revise theirresponses more often than the revisit condition. For revisions, critique was helpful for adding new scientificideas, but these ideas were not necessarily connected to their previous responses. We present examples ofrevisions that students in the critique condition made in order to see how ideas were being added (see Table 4).Table 4: Revisions from students in the critique condition (revisions in bold)Initial ResponseRevision after CritiqueHis grandparents passed it to his parents, butthe disease skipped a generationHis grandparents passed down one recessive and onedominant gene to his parents and then they both gave himtheir recessive genes so he would have cystic fibrosis.Eric inherited cystic fibrosis because hisgrandparent had it and it could very possiblyskip a generation. Eric's mother most likelyrecieved the dominant gene which was notEric inherited cystic fibrosis because his grandparent had itand [ ] it skipped their generation. Eric's mother most likelyrecieved the dominant gene from her mother and arecessive gene from her father which was hidden andICLS 2018 Proceedings821© ISLSgetting cystic fibrosis.allowed her not to get cystic fibrosis.Eric might have inherited cystic fibrosis by hisgrandpa's genes skipping over his parents andgoing straight to him.Eric might have inherited cystic fibrosis by his grandpa'sgenes skipping over his parents and going straight to him. Hisparents could have a heterozygous genotype which wouldgive Eric a 25% chance of developing the disease.We think that siblings look similar to eachother but not exactly the same because thetraits of the parents are different and each childgets different traits from each parent.We think that siblings look similar to each other but notexactly the same because they have different combinationsof alleles from their parents.These examples illustrate how students in the critique condition distinguished their ideas. Rather thankeeping their vague answers (ex. “each child gets different traits”), they revised to include more specificscientific vocabulary and more nuanced definitions of phenomena (such as “a heterozygous genotype whichcould give Eric a 25% chance”). Distinguishing vague ideas to give more detailed scientific explanations is animportant part of the KI framework. In this study, the critique condition showed promise in helping studentsachieve this difficult task.Conclusions and implicationsRevising ideas after encountering new information is an essential scientific literacy skill. This study shows thebenefit of critique activities in promoting revision of scientific ideas.Both conditions in our study were effective in helping all students achieve learning goals in geneticsand simple inheritance. Further analysis revealed advantages for critique regarding motivating revision morefrequently. This is likely because these students were exposed to flaws in their own thinking by analyzingcommon incorrect ideas, motivating them to rethink and clarify their original responses. Students in the critiquecondition also regularly added more new ideas to their essay revisions. This is likely because students had toconsider their logic more carefully while critiquing, encouraging them to distinguish between ideas, whereas themodels revisited in the other condition did not explicitly encourage students to think about the mechanisms ofinheritance, such as that of allele movement. While we hope to create guidance and activities that encouragestudents to make more integrated revisions, studies have found that even attempts at revision have been shownto result in greater learning gains (Tansomboon et al., 2017). Our critique activity was successful at motivatingstudents to at least attempt to revise their ideas more often, especially those students with low prior knowledgein the content area.Overall, revisions that students made in this unit were highly relevant, and attempted to add value totheir responses in the form of new or better-clarified ideas. This is in distinct contrast to studies, includingBridwell (1980) and Crawford et al. (2008), that found most student revisions were occurring at the word orsurface level. This again promotes the practice of critique in encouraging students to revise their scientific ideasrather than just their grammar.Future studies will look into ways to refine our critique activity to further support students with lowprior knowledge in making greater gains. Improvement of our interactive models can also be made to moreclearly depict the mechanism of inheritance. We will also investigate further the mechanism for critiquemotivating students to revise more often, and ways to encourage students to make more connected, integratedrevisions of their scientific ideas.ReferencesBerland, L. K., & McNeill, K. L. (2010). A learning progression for scientific argumentation: Understandingstudent work and designing supportive instructional contexts. Science Education, 94(5), 765–793.http://doi.org/10.1002/sce.20402Berland, L. K., & Reiser, B. J. (2011). Classroom communities' adaptations of the practice of scientificargumentation. Science Education, 95(2), 191-216.Bransford, J. D., Brown, A., & Cocking, R. (1999). How people learn: Mind, brain, experience, and school.Washington, DC: National Research Council.Bridwell, L. (1980). Revising strategies in twelfth grade students’ transactional writing. Research in theTeaching of English, 14, 197–222.Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. The MIT Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings822© ISLSBrownell, S. E., Price, J. V., & Steinman, L. (2013). Science Communication to the General Public: Why WeNeed to Teach Undergraduate and Graduate Students this Skill as Part of Their Formal ScientificTraining. Journal of Undergraduate Neuroscience Education, 12(1), E6–E10.Cavagnetto, A. R. (2010). Argument to Foster Scientific Literacy: A Review of Argument Interventions in K-12ScienceContexts.ReviewofEducationalResearch,80(3),336–371.http://doi.org/10.3102/0034654310376953Crawford, L., Lloyd, S., Knoth, K.: (2008) Analysis of student revisions on a state writing test. Assessment forEffective Intervention, 33, 108–119.Donnelly, D. F., Vitale, J. M., & Linn, M. C. (2015). Automated Guidance for Thermodynamics Essays:Critiquing Versus Revisiting. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 24(6), 861–874.doi:10.1007/s10956-015-9569-1.Ford, M., & Forman, E. A. (2006). Redefining disciplinary learning in classroom contexts. Review of Researchin Education, 30, 1-32.Gerard, L. F., Ryoo, K., McElhaney, K., Liu, L., Rafferty, A. N., & Linn, M. C. (2015). Automated Guidancefor Student Inquiry. Journal of Educational Psychology, 108(1). doi:10.1037/edu0000052Henderson, J. B., MacPherson, A., Osborne, J., & Wild, A. (2015). Beyond Construction: Five arguments forthe role and value of critique in learning science. International Journal of Science Education, 37(10),1668–1697. http://doi.org/10.1080/09500693.2015.1043598Jiménez Aleixandre, M. P., Bugallo Rodríguez, A., & Duschl, R. A. (2000). “Doing the lesson” or ‘doingscience’: Argument in high school genetics. Science Education, 84(6), 757–792.http://doi.org/10.1002/1098-237X(200011)84:6<757::AID-SCE5>3.0.CO;2-FLinn, M. C., & Eylon, B.-S. (2011). Science learning and instruction: Taking advantage of technology topromote knowledge integration. New York: Routledge.Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B.-S. (2006). Science education: Integrating views of learning and instruction. In P. A.Alexander, & P. H. Winne (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology (2nd Ed., pp. 511-544).Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Linn, M. C., Gerard, L., Ryoo, K., McElhaney, K., Liu, O. L., & Rafferty, A. N. (2014). Computer-guidedinquiry to improve science learning. Science, 344(6180), 155-156.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Tansomboon, C. (2017). Design of Automated Guidance to Support Effortful Revisions and KnowledgeIntegration in Science Learning (Doctoral dissertation, University of California, Berkeley).Zohar, A., & Nemet, F. (2001). Fostering students' knowledge and argumentation skills through dilemmas inhumangenetics.JournalofResearchinScienceTeaching,39(1),35–62.http://doi.org/10.1002/tea.10008ICLS 2018 Proceedings823© ISLS