“Things Are Made to Fail”: Constructive Failures in a Middle SchoolRobotics CurriculumAndrea Gomoll, Erin Tolar Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver, and Selma Šabanović,agomoll@iu.edu, etolar@iu.edu, chmelosi@indiana.edu, selmas@indiana.eduIndiana UniversityAbstract: Framing failure as constructive can help students engage in design practices. Thiscase study examines the role of failure in a middle school human-centered robotics curriculum.Constructive failures are scaffolded failures that build a base for solving engineering designproblems. This research explores constructive failure as an asset for learning through iterativedesign and considers the role of the facilitator in providing space for and supporting constructivefailure experiences.Keywords: STEM learning, human-centered robotics, problem-based learningTwenty-first century collaborative problem-solving skills, which include negotiating ideas, organizing theproblem-solving process, and maintaining communication, are essential in the everyday work of engineering(Dym et al., 2005). Here, we explore how framing failure as constructive within an engineering design unitsupported the development of these skills. This work builds on conceptualizations of productive failure andproductive success (Kapur, 2016), providing examples of one instructor’s framing and scaffolding of failure tofurther theorize about the role of failure experiences in problem-based learning.Constructive failures are those in which students experienced frustration and uncertainty, receivedsupport as they worked through this frustration, and were able to move forward in a collaborative design process.These supports enabled productive success, the achievement of viable solutions to complex problems (Kapur,2016). Constructive failure is a scaffolded dimension of productive success, supporting student efforts by framingiterative trial and error as necessary. Supporting failures throughout a learning experience can help students byencouraging them to articulate their challenges and providing opportunities for learning in problem-based activity(Blumenfeld et al., 1991).This research presents a problem-based human-centered robotics (HCR) unit as a context to sparklearners’ interest in STEM by connecting to the social aspect of engineering design (Hamner et al., 2008). HCRcenters on the design of robots that serve human needs (Schaal, 2007). This work explores how students solvingan HCR problem engaged in collaborative design through the positioning and negotiation of failure experiencesas they worked collaboratively to design a robot that served a need in their local environment. The curriculumengages students in engineering design cycles that involve asking questions, brainstorming solutions, collectinginformation, developing and testing solutions, and improving designs (Resnick, 2007). In earlier iterations of thisunit, learners struggled to harness their frustration and move forward (Gomoll et al., 2016). The unit wasiteratively refined to provide opportunities to navigate inevitable failures with facilitator support. We considerfailures during the problem-solving process as a positive norm for learning through design (Kolodner et al., 2003).This case study examines how framing failure supported students’ work imagining, designing, andbuilding robots to be used in their classroom. We conjecture that by re-positioning failure as a norm, studentswere able to publicly test their designs and learn from their mistakes—leveraging failure as constructive.MethodsParticipants included sixteen students (ages 12-14) taking an Applied Science class in a rural U.S. public middleschool. The HCR unit took place over approximately 25 class sessions with 35-50 minute sessions daily. Allwritten artifacts were collected, each group was audio recorded, and video footage capturing the full class andseveral student groups was collected each day.To understand the role of failure, we focused on two groups that navigated failures that went beyondsocial dynamics and progressed furthest with their designs despite early frustration. Group 1 was composed ofone eighth grade female, one eighth grade male, and two seventh grade males. Group 2 was composed of twoeighth grade males, one eighth grade female, and one seventh grade female. The activity of both groups was tracedusing Jordan and Henderson’s (1995) guidelines for interaction analysis. Across collaborative data analysissessions, definitions of failure were refined, and themes related to the role of failure were highlighted.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1563© ISLSResults and discussionAcross four episodes, we show how the instructor introduced and scaffolded failure as a constructive learningopportunity. Her consistent framing of failure as a norm helped students to feel supported as they failed early andoften, leveraging failure as constructive in the learning process. In studying the groups’ failures and how theymoved forward, we better understand how failure within a PBL cycle and design experience can provide anauthentic context to help learners orient to failure as a norm in collaborative engineering design. Throughout theseepisodes, iterative failure contributed to groups' successes as is typical in engineering design.In our first episode, we highlight the instructor’s use of metacognitive modeling early in the unit todemonstrate how students could talk themselves through inevitable challenges. Within this episode, the instructorlegitimized emotional reactions to failure and presented failure as a norm in the design process. This framinghelped students to become aware of and manage failure in situ. Our second episode highlights early frustrationexperienced by a student group as they engaged in an embodied programming experience. Here, studentsstruggled to agree on a set of directions and did not reach a consensus. The instructor recognized this challengeand asked students why they were frustrated—validating their emotional response and helping them to moveforward. At this point, the instructor noted that in the process of design, it is not expected that students can (orshould) get things right the first time. This support helped the group to own and articulate future instances ofconstructive failure. In episode three, this same group discussed their prototype. One student stated: “It’s aprototype, things are made to fail.” This response appropriated the teacher’s guidance on the role of failure indesign. The student who made this statement used failure constructively to move his group forward and to carryout initial phases of user testing. Finally, episode four centers on a second group engaged in troubleshooting asthey tested code they had written for their robot. Recognizing that the robot’s wheels weren’t calibrated correctly,the group used trial and error to see what programmed instruction would result in the 90-degree angle they neededto move their robot to a specific location. As the group bounced between numbers, they displayed their ability tonegotiate disagreements and come to a consensus. This group demonstrated agency as they leveraged a failureexperience. They did not ask for help immediately, and they embraced an iterative design cycle.Throughout these episodes, failure functioned as a formative assessment by allowing students to testtheir design ideas and receive feedback—ultimately leading to productive success. For many students, particularlythose who have been trained to avoid failure, early failure without support may trigger disengagement. As 21stcentury STEM careers require practitioners to solve problems collaboratively, manage uncertainty, and engage indesign thinking, we argue that curricula and facilitation that explicitly incorporate failure experiences will betterprepare students for future STEM engagement and careers. This work is a starting point for future research thatexplores the cultivation of collaborative problem solving and design thinking skills through formative experiencesof failure.ReferencesBlumenfeld, P. C., Soloway, E., Marx, R. W., Krajcik, J. S., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar, A. (1991). Motivatingproject-based learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning. Educational Psychologist, 26(34), 369-398.Dym, C. L., Agogino, A. M., Eris, O., Frey, D. D., & Leifer, L. J. (2005). Engineering design thinking, teaching,and learning. Journal of Engineering Education, 94(1), 103-120.Gomoll, A., Hmelo-Silver, C. E., S, Šabanović, S., & Francisco, M. (2016). Dragons, ladybugs, and softballs:Girls’ STEM engagement with human-centered robotics. Journal of Science Education and Technology,25(6), 899-914.Hamner, E., Lauwers, T., Bernstein, D., Nourbakhsh, I. R., & DiSalvo, C. F. (2008, March). Robot Diaries:Broadening Participation in the Computer Science Pipeline through Social Technical Exploration. InAAAI spring symposium: using AI to motivate greater participation in computer science (pp. 38-43).Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39–103.Kapur, M. (2016). Examining productive failure, productive success, unproductive failure, and unproductivesuccess in learning. Educational Psychologist, 51(2), 289–299.Kolodner, J. L., Camp, P. J., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., ... & Ryan, M. (2003). Problembased learning meets case-based reasoning in the middle-school science classroom: Putting learning bydesign (tm) into practice. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(4), 495-547.Resnick, M. (2007, June). All I really need to know (about creative thinking) I learned (by studying how childrenlearn) in kindergarten. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI conference on Creativity & cognition(pp. 1-6). ACM.Schaal, S. (2007). The new robotics—towards human-centered machines. HFSP journal, 1(2), 115-126.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1564© ISLS