Discovery Versus Direct Instruction: Learning Outcomesof Two Pedagogical Models Using Tangible InterfacesBertrand Schneider, Stanford University, schneibe@stanford.eduEngin Bumbacher, Stanford University, buben@stanford.eduPaulo Blikstein, Stanford University, paulob@stanford.eduAbstract: We investigate the effect of using a tangible user interface (TUI) for discoverybased learning. For this purpose, we built EarExplorer, an interactive tangible system wherestudents can manipulate and connect parts of the auditory system to rebuild a functionalstructure. An augmented reality layer displays sound waves and shows how they aretransformed at various stages of the process. Our previous work suggests that TUIs areparticularly good at preparing students for future learning; that is, students learn more whenthey can explore a novel domain with a TUI before compared to after receiving a traditional(e.g. lecture or text based) instruction. In this study, we isolated the impact of structuredguidance versus no guidance during a hands-on TUI activity on learning. In one condition,students rebuilt the hearing system by self-driven discovery; in another condition they rebuiltit by following the step-by-step instructions of a video-teacher. We found that the first group(“discover”) significantly outperformed the second group (“listen”) by ~27% on the finallearning test. To explain those results, we analyzed the TUI logs and explored how this effectunfolded with participants of different ability (i.e., low versus high GPA students).Keywords: tangible user interface; collaborative learning; tabletopIntroductionThe recent decades have seen the development of a wide range of pedagogies based on constructivist learningtheories that are often pitted against more traditional pedagogies (Piaget, 1998; Papert, 1980). They range fromexperiential and project-based learning methods to inquiry- and discovery-based approaches (Jong & Joolingen,1998). However, there is an ongoing debate about the effectiveness and value of these approaches, compared tomore structured and guided instructional methods (Kirschner, Sweller and Clark, 2006). In this paper, we arguethat the effectiveness of the various learning methods strongly depends on the context in which they are used; inparticular, we believe that certain technologically-enhanced learning environments are particularly well suitedfor constructivist-based approaches compared to more traditional instruction. In line with this belief, researchershave been advocating for new computational technologies as means for constructivist-based learning activities:when properly designed, new materials such as robotics, physical computing and tangible user interfaces(Papert, 1980; Blikstein, 2013) can be powerful building blocks in enriching such activities and facilitating theirimplementation in classrooms. Specifically, we are interested in exploring the potential of technologicallyenhanced hands-on activities for discovery learning. We build our work on the assumption that Tangible UserInterfaces (TUIs) provide an ideal framework for using discovery-based learning activities as introduction forlearners to a wide range of concepts: they form a highly controllable design space for interaction designers whileproviding all tools necessary for the creation of microworlds that enable intuitive interactions, physicalmanipulations and at the same time encompass rich information layers through augmented-reality techniques.The main contribution of this work is to propose that augmented-reality-based TUIs are effectiveenvironments for discovery learning activities. In our study, participants engaged in a learning activity about thehuman hearing system on a newly designed TUI. One group used a discovery-based approach with minimalguidance, while the other group received video-based guidance throughout the activity. Our findings suggestthat the discovery group seemed to gain more from the learning activity than their counterpart.Theoretical framework: Preparing for future learning (PFL)One of the main claims of constructivist approaches to learning is that students should explore or discover agiven phenomenon before being told the normative explanation (Piaget, 1998; Bransford & Schwartz, 1999).The constructionist movement further stresses the importance of building, interacting with, and sharingconstructed artifacts (Papert, 1980), as this provides opportunities for debugging one’s own understanding byconfronting in-progress theories with real-world feedback. The idea is to empower students by making them theagents of their learning process: their task is to actively construct knowledge by using their intuition and priorknowledge, build artifacts, and refine their micro-theories as they observe the performance of these artifacts inCSCL 2015 Proceedings364© ISLSthe world. As such, students need to generate hypotheses, test them by gathering data, and construct a theorybased on their observations. This process, as argued, could deepen students’ conceptual understanding of aphenomenon (Bransford & Schwartz, 1999), as opposed to rote memorization of terminologies and procedures.However, constructivist learning methods such as discovery learning are difficult to develop andimplement in real-world classrooms. deJong and van Joolingen (1998) highlight three problems that studentsencounter in discovery learning: first, novices usually find it difficult to formulate a testable hypothesis with thedata at hand; they tend to stick to their first hypothesis despite conflicting evidence. Second, designing a cleanexperiment to confirm or disconfirm a hypothesis is a difficult task, even for experts; this process becomesharder when the hypothesis is not clearly formulated. Third, finding patterns in the data beyond simplerelationships is a skill that most novice students do not have. Combined with the lack of adequate teacherpreparation, good assessment rubrics, and support materials, discovery learning is rarely used in classrooms in asustainable way. Oftentimes, in the process of adapting discovery- or inquiry-based learning activities for theclassroom, even progressive teachers fall back to more structured, less “authentic” approaches that overlysimplify the activities (Chinn & Malhotra, 2002).One theory that tackles those issues is the “Preparing for Future Learning” (PFL) framework(Bransford & Schwartz, 1999). This framework postulates that students do not necessarily have to discover theprinciples at hand during the discovery task. What matters is that they develop experiences and refinedperceptions of the deep features of a phenomenon and develop their own corresponding theory. In their work,Bransford & Schwarz (1999) have students engage in activities on comparing contrasting cases (i.e. cases whosedifference highlight core aspects of a phenomenon at hand); they then compare their own micro-theories withthe accepted view of a concept. In our work, instead of constructing contrasting cases, we propose a welldesigned discovery activity that serves the purpose of preparing students for future learning. More specifically,we are interested in using TUIs that incorporate physical and realistic items as interaction objects to introducestudents to a new domain; additionally, we want to show that students will learn more from a lecture followingthe activity than a group that is guided through the task on the tangible interface.Previous work and rationale of the current studyFor the scope of this paper, we are interested in pursuing work started with another TUI developed in our lababout the role of TUIs as media that foster PFL. BrainExplorer (Fig. 1; Schneider, Wallace, Blikstein & Pea,2013) is an interactive tabletop where users can explore the way the human brain processes visual information.Students take apart a physical replica of a brain while an augmented reality system displays visual pathwaysbetween brain regions. Users can then use an infrared pen to create lesions and observe the impact of theiractions on the visual field of the subject. In a controlled experiment, we showed that students who first usedBrainExplorer and then read a textbook chapter outperformed students who completed the same activities but inthe reverse order (Fig. 1, right side). Our conclusions were that TUIs support students' elaboration of their ownmicro-theories and create an engaging point of entry for exploring a domain (Schneider, Jermann, Zufferey &Dillenbourg, 2011).It is possible that starting with a hands-on activity in general is the one thing that caused higherlearning gains in the previous study: as students were complete novices in the domain of the task, engaging withthe TUI first gave students the opportunity to gain some initial experiences on which they could build on whenreceiving the formal instruction. However, we believe that the nature of the hands-on task itself had an impacton students’ conceptual learning. For the current study, we manipulated the level of guidance students receivedin an explorative task on a similar TUI. The goal was to isolate the effect of self-driven discovery versus guidedexploration on learning. The TUI was about the functioning of the human hearing system, a topic that was novelto the participants. Two groups started out with the TUI before receiving a text instruction on the topic; onegroup watched a video of a teacher explaining the function of each organ and how to connect them in the TUI.The other group rebuilt the hearing system without guidance. It is crucial to note the role of the activity designin the TUI: The activity was designed in such way that it provided the required range of various actions to allowfor self-driven exploration, yet it was constraint enough to prevent participants to be overwhelmed with thebreadth of possible actions or get off-track and focus on irrelevant aspects of the system. For instance, studentsonly had to deal with eight tangibles, which allowed them to focus on the core mechanisms of the humanhearing system; furthermore, additional information was only available on-demand through the information box.This is important as research shows that very loosely structured tasks that provide too many possibilities ofmanipulations are detrimental for novice students and can actually hamper their learning as they do not knowwhat aspects to focus on, and how to make sense of the task at hand (Kirschner, Sweller and Clark, 2006).Within such a context, we hypothesize that the discovery group will be better prepared to learn from the textcompared to the group that received a highly-scaffolded guidance during the hands-on task.CSCL 2015 Proceedings365© ISLSLearning(Gain(15"14"13"12"11"10"9"8"7"6"5"4"3"2"1"0"Table/Text"Text/Table"Pre/test"Mid/test"Post/test"Figure 1. The BrainExplorer system. A user cut Mayer's loop and is reflecting on the effect of this lesion on theperceived visual field (on the bottom right corner)EarExplorerDesign requirementsWhen designing EarExplorer, we started with the constraint of teaching a phenomenon that entails complexabstract concepts, yet is embedded in a highly spatial domain where one could take advantage of the “3Dness”of physical objects. These requirements are met by the human auditory system: it represents a system thattransforms auditory information across various stages through a set of interconnected organs. Pilot interviews ofnovices who read a text about the hearing system revealed that students had trouble visualizing the differenttransductions happening in the ear (i.e. sound waves vibrate the ear drum with various sound pressures; the eardrum then moves the maleus to pass information as a mechanical movement; the ear bones then move the liquidcontained in the cochlea and activate particular segments of the basilar membrane rolled in the cochlea).Novices also struggled with the spatial mapping of different sound frequencies on the basilar membrane. Highfrequencies carry more energy and vibrate thicker segments at the beginning of the membrane, while lowfrequency sounds traverse the membrane until it finds a segment thin enough to be activated. This mapping iscounter-intuitive for novices, because we usually represent sounds on a number line from low (left) to high(right) frequency. Thus, the design of our first prototype focused on those two aspects: the propagation andtransduction of sounds through the hearing system, and the spatial mapping of sound frequencies on the basilarmembrane.Design of the systemEarExplorer consists of a tabletop interface with 3D-printed tangibles tagged with fiducial markers. A projectordisplays an augmented reality layer by reflecting its image on a mirror held above the tabletop. A camera isattached to the mirror and detects the location of the fiducials on the tangibles (Figure 2). The starting screendisplays three elements: the outer ear, which is the starting point of the activity (top left corner, Fig. 2); theauditory cortex, which is the end point of the activity (bottom right corner, Fig. 2); and an information box(bottom left corner, Fig. 2). Eight tangibles are arranged around the projected area. Students are asked toconnect the tangibles between the starting point and the ending point to let sound waves reach the auditorycortex. Each tangible can be positioned in the information box at any time of the activity to display additionalinformation about each organ. Users can use those hints to infer the correct sequence of tangibles and learn morefacts about the function of each organ. The 8 tangibles (in bold below) serve the following functions:1. The speaker generates sound waves at four different frequencies (low, medium, high, very high).Those four frequencies are displayed on top of the speaker with a specific color coding (from low tohigh frequency: blue, green, yellow, red). By flipping the speaker, users can generate a series of soundwaves to test their system.2. The ear canal then needs to be linked to the starting point of the activity (the outer ear) and carriessound waves to the eardrum. There are two feedbacks showing that the tangibles are successfullyconnected: first, students see the sound waves follow the ear canal; second, they also see the eardrummove back and forth in the augmented reality view as the sound waves reach the end of the ear canal.3. The ear bones need to be connected to the ear canal. As the eardrum vibrates back and forth, the earbones will provide a similar feedback: the augmented reality view will project the shape of the earCSCL 2015 Proceedings366© ISLSbones on the tangible and animate them back and forth as the sound waves are reaching this part of theauditory circuit.5678Figure 2. The EarExplorer Interface, after the users have connected all the tangibles in the correct sequence.They use the infobox (1) to learn about the different organs and connect them together; they then generatesounds at different frequencies with a speaker (2); sound waves travel from the emitter through the earcanal to the ear bones (3); finally, the sound reaches the basilar membrane inside the cochlea, activates aspecific neuron and replays the sound if the configuration is correct (4).4.The snail-shaped part of the cochlea contains the basilar membrane, which react to different soundsfrequencies: the base is thicker and reacts to high-energy (high frequency) sounds; the apex (i.e. tail) isthinner and react to low-energy (low frequency) sounds. When students connect the cochlea to the earbones, they see the basilar membrane being unrolled bellow the tangible. To stress this transition, ashort video pops up in which a teacher reiterates that the membrane is unrolled to facilitate their task.5-8. In this step, four neurons need to be correctly sequenced bellow the cochlea to rebuild the basilarmembrane. Each neuron is associated with a particular thickness of the membrane, and a particularsound frequency. Each neuron is color-coded according to the coding scheme displayed on top of thespeaker (from low to high frequencies: blue, green, yellow, red). We simplified the behavior of thesystem to provide an intuitive feedback when a sound wave reaches the basilar membrane: if the orderis correct, users will see the part of the membrane associated with this neuron vibrate, followed byelectrical potentials travelling through the neuron (Fig.2, bottom right corner, blue neuron), and theaudio sound being replayed. If the order is incorrect, the membrane does not vibrate, the electricalpotential does not reach the brain and no sound is played.MethodParticipants38 college-level students took part in this study (average age 22.5, SD = 6.2; 26 females, 12 males). Participantscompleted the experiment as a requirement of a psychology class. The pre-requisite for registering was to nothave any prior knowledge of the human hearing system. This population of students hence was very likely to benovice learners when it comes to the human hearing system.CSCL 2015 Proceedings367© ISLSMaterialsThe first activity involved rebuilding the human hearing system using EarExplorer. Students had 7 objects thatthey needed to connect between the outer ear and the brain: an ear canal, several ear bones, the cochlea and 4neurons, as outlined previously. In the “listen” condition, students followed a step-by-step recorded guidance ofa professional instructional designer. The instructional designer was not aware of our research hypotheses andwas asked to make the learning material as engaging as possible. In a second activity, participants were asked toread a two-page summary describing the human hearing system. We retrieved the text from an educationalwebsite, whose goal is to simplify complex concepts to make them more accessible to a wider audience. Theoriginal text was four pages long; we removed paragraphs where the level of details was beyond the learninggoal of this activity.Finally, the learning test asked students to: 1) label the organs of the earing system; 2) describe varioussound waves and asked which parts of the basilar membrane would vibrate at those frequencies; 3) compare theeffect of various kinds of lesion (e.g. do broken ossicles have the same effect as piercing the eardrum?); 4)describe which part of the basilar membrane should be numbed to lose sensitivity to certain frequencies; 5) mapthe frequency range of various animals (bats, dogs, mice) inside their cochlea; 6) describe how sound ispropagated from one organ to the other. Each learning test (pre, mid, post) had small variations in the questions.DesignWe used a between-subject experimental design (Fig. 3): in the control group, students followed the instructionsof a teacher demonstrating how to build the human hearing system on a video (“listen”). In the treatment group,students built the hearing system without guidance (“discover”). The teacher used EarExplorer in the video, anddescribed each piece of the TUI as well as each of the steps necessary to complete the task.Middle-testDiscoverReadTextListen~ 20 min~ 15 min~ 10 minPost-testDebireﬁngIntroductionPre-test~ 10 min~ 10 minFigure 3. The two experimental conditions of our experiment (left: “listen”, with the video of a teacher guidingthe students through the activity; middle: “discover”, where students rebuild the earing system by trial anderrors. Right side: the experimental design of the activity.ProcedureWe ran the study in 4 consecutive days, over ~20 hours with 38 participants, doing the study in pairs. Each pairwas formed randomly. Each pair had an hour to complete the study. Upon students' arrival, an experimenterexplained that they would be working on a collaborative task and described the structure of the study (i.e. pretest, hands-on activity, middle-test, second activity, post-test). Students then took the pre-test, which allparticipants finished in less than 15 minutes. Participants then completed the first activity. In the “listen”condition, they were asked to rebuild the human hearing system by following the instructions of a presenter.Participants in the “discover” condition were asked to build the human hearing system by free exploration andby using the information box. Both conditions watched the same two-minute video describing the problem andthe system: “John is deaf because his entire auditory system is missing. As you can see, there is nothing betweenhis ear and his brain. Your goal is to help John hear again by rebuilding his auditory system! [...] At the bottomleft corner of the table, there is an information box. By putting objects in this circle, you will be given moreinformation about each piece of the auditory system”. Students had 15 minutes to complete this task. They thentook the mid-test for the next 10-15 minutes. During the second activity, students read a text describing thehuman hearing system and completed an activity where they analyzed different shapes of the basilar membraneand predicted the effect on the auditory range of the subject. They then recreated the shape with EarExplorer andcompared their prediction with the output of the system. Finally, students were asked to take the post-test andwere debriefed; we also informally asked them their opinion on the educational value of our system.CSCL 2015 Proceedings368© ISLSCodingThe learning test was coded in a binary fashion (correct / incorrect). Since the last question was open-ended,students received 1 point for a correct answer, 0.5 point for a partially correct answer, and zero points for awrong answer. Log files were collected during the two activities involving EarExplorer. We logged informationwhen a fiducial was added and removed from the table, when a new connection was created, when sound waveswere generated, and how many times the info-box was accessed. Additionally, we categorized each participantin a binary manner as being either the “leader” or the “follower” in the activity. This distinction is motivated bythe work of Shaer, et al. (2011), who noticed that pairs of participants tended to assign “roles” to their members;for instance, in collaborative tasks there tends to be a “driver”, who is physically active and controls theinterface, and a “passenger”, who is physically inactive and merely proposes verbal suggestions. Those profilesof collaboration allowed us to further analyze the collaborative dynamics of a group.ResultsThe results supported the hypothesis that subjects in the “discover” condition learned more than subjects in the“listen” condition (Fig. 4). We subtracted the pre-test from the middle and post-test to compute learning gains,since students in both groups scored very low on the pre-tests and avoided a ceiling effect. A multivariateANOVA showed that participants in the “discover” learnt significantly more after the first activity: F(1,35) =22.11, p < 0.001 and after the second activity: (F(1,35) = 16.15, p < 0.001. There was no significant differenceon the pre-test: F(1,35) < 1.129ScoresConditionDiscover6Listen3Pre−testMiddle−Test Post−Testresults on the learning tests with regard to the two experimental conditions. Right side:Figure 4. Left side: Testlearning gains by types of group (e.g., “driver high, passenger high” means that both the leader and follower inthe group were above the median split computed on the students’ GPA).We analyzed the log files at the dyad level, since the system cannot differentiate between users. Assuch, we only have 20 data points and thus we will also report results where the p-value is below 0.1. Amultivariate ANOVA revealed that participants in the “discover” condition did more manipulation with thetangibles during the two learning activities with EarExplorer: F(1,14) = 4.03, p = 0.064 (number of actions forthe “discover” condition, mean=162.56, SD=52.53; for the “listen” condition, mean=132.89, SD=25.55). Theyalso consulted the info-box more often: F(1,14) = 3.40, p = 0.087 (for the “discover” condition, mean=14.22,SD=16.71; for the “listen” condition, mean=3.33, SD=1.22). Interestingly, the number of times that participantsaccessed the “infobox” was positively correlated with higher learning gains on the middle-test: r(18) = .55, p =0.018. This suggests that that part of the learning, as measured with the middle-test, happened in the interactionwith the information box, and that students in the “discover” condition were more likely to consult it.Effect on students’ school proficiency (GPA)As a post-hoc analysis, we wanted to see if the effect would hold for students of different abilities. To this end,we categorized participants as being below or above a median split computed on their GPA. While there was nosignificiant difference between groups in terms of students’ GPA across the experimental groups, there weredifferences between pairs when classifying each student as being the “driver” or the “passenger” of theinteraction (Shaer & al., 2011). The driver is the student who decides what the group does next, manages turntaking and tends to be more physically active. The “passenger” takes less important decisions, tends to be moreCSCL 2015 Proceedings369© ISLSpassive and often merely proposes suggestions that need to be approved by others. There was not differencebetween drivers and passengers in terms of their learning gains. However, when this factor was crossed with abinary variable representing students’ GPA (0 = below the median, 1 = above the median split) we found thefollowing effect (Fig. 4, right side): As expected, groups with two proficient (i.e. both have a GPA above themedian) students (first boxplot) had the highest learning gains and groups with two less proficient (i.e. both havea GPA below the median) students (fourth boxplot) had the lowest learning gains. What is interesting, though, isthat being in a group with a low-GPA driver will make students more likely to learn: F(1,37) = 5.26, p < 0.05compared to groups with a low-GPA passenger. Descriptive statistics suggest that this is more likely to be thecase in the “listen” condition (mean = 9.00 for low GPA passengers versus 5.50 for high GPA passengers)compared to the “discover” condition (mean = 9.04 versus 8.83 for high / low GPA passengers). We did not testfor significance for those results due to the low sample size of each group.Users’ comments on EarExplorerStudents’ response was overwhelmingly positive. One participant said that she “would love to use a system likethat in the classroom”. Another mentioned, “It was nice to be able to build your own thing”. The novelty of theinterface sometimes had a negative effect on some students: some students stopped working on the task tounderstand where the projection was coming from and how the system could locate the tangibles. One even said“at the beginning I was more interested in understanding how the system worked than working on the task”.DiscussionIn this paper we described the design of an educational TUI that supports students’ discovery of the humanhearing system. Our design was strongly influenced by interviews with students, as well as brainstormingsessions with experts in neuroscience. Even if our first prototype is in the early stage of its development, usersresponded positively to its design.Our main contribution is an empirical study extending previous results found in our lab that that anexploration task on a TUI prior to reading a text instruction leads to higher learning gains than the other wayaround. The current study manipulated the level of guidance (close guidance vs self-driven discovery): we foundthat students who built the human hearing system with EarExplorer without guidance improved their learninggain from pre to post test by ~25% compared to students who followed the step-by-step instructions given by ateacher. Additionally, we found that students in this condition were more likely to take advantage of additionalresources that provide relevant information to the task. We also qualitatively observed that minimally guidedinstruction facilitated students’ exploration by having them produce incorrect systems, while students whofollowed the instruction of a teacher always immediately produced a perfect solution. This tendency to explorethe problem space is supported by research showing that students need to make mistakes when learning aboutnew concepts (Kapur, 2008). Thus, our findings suggest that a well-designed TUI activity for self-drivendiscovery might prepare them to better learn from a text-based instruction compared to students following stepby-step instructions. In order for such a TUI to be considered well-designed, the system does not only have toallow students to make mistakes, which could be achieved simply by increasing the complexity of the activity.Importantly, the system has to enable students to act on these mistakes such that the action advances theirunderstanding of the phenomenon under investigation. This can be achieved by designing implicit scaffolds intothe TUI. In EarExplorer, the scaffolds consist of the restricted number of tangibles, their shapes, and theanimation upon correct connections. Without these implicit scaffolds, we believe that the self-driven discoveryactivity would be too unstructured for the students to learn from their actions and mistakes.Finally, we found an interesting interaction effect between students’ school proficiency (as measuredby their GPA) and the group dynamics (i.e., who is driving the interaction): Groups with a low-GPA driver andhigh-GPA passenger scored higher on the test compared to groups with a high-GPA driver and a less proficientfollower. Followers who are less competent than their peers were less likely to involve themselves in theactivity, because it might seem that they did not believe that they could make a significant contribution, orbecause they were put in a clearly passive observer role. When they took more responsibility (i.e. by being adriver), in combination with a proficient peer engaging in the activity with them, we saw those students performas well as high-GPA participants. It is important to point out that the students did not know anything about eachothers’ GPA scores. Hence, this result suggests that group activities are more beneficial for dyads when the lessproficient (in terms of GPA) student is in control of the TUI. Being put into the passive observer role, the lessproficient students were least likely to gain anything from the task. As such, this provides some insights on howto socially engineer group activities, as we believe that mixed-proficiency groups have advantages that bothbenefit the less proficient and the more proficient students.CSCL 2015 Proceedings370© ISLSConclusionTUIs possess an untapped potential for introducing students to new concepts. Previous research on interactivetabletops mostly focused on tangibles as interaction devices (e.g., Shaer & al., 2011). Few researchers have triedto fully exploit the representational effect TUIs for discovery-based learning. Our contribution is to providepreliminary design principles and empirical results to this new domain.Taken together, our results suggest that educational TUIs better support learning when novice studentshave the possibility to explore the activity without explicit guidance compared to following step-by-stepinstructions. In order to build their intuition, students need the freedom of trying things, making mistakes andrevising initial ideas to build their own micro-theories of a phenomenon. Just physically going through each stepof the activity was not enough to build that prior intuition. An important feature of TUIs designed for discoverylearning activities is that they allow designers to construct a rich space that enables a big variation ofinteractions, and keeps the activity complex and realistic, while at the same time cutting out unnecessary noise,and restricting the space of possibilities to prevent students from getting overwhelmed. By offloading explicitguidance to implicit design features, TUIs seem to be well-suited for novice students engaged in discoverybased activities. As such, TUIs have the potential to open the door for authentic learning activities into theclassrooms in an effective way. If we find out more about how to use TUIs for this goal, we might concretelycontribute to enriching students’ experiences in schools in a sustainable way.ReferencesBlikstein, P. Gears of our childhood: constructionist toolkits, robotics, and physical computing, past and future.Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children, ACM (2013),173–182.Blikstein, P. (in press). Bifocal Modeling: Comparing Physical and Computational Models Linked in Real Time.In Nijholt, A. (Ed.), Playful Learning Interfaces. Netherlands: Springer.Chinn, C. A., & Malhotra, B. A. (2002). Epistemologically authentic inquiry in schools: A theoreticalframework for evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86(2), 175-218.Bonawitz, E., Shafto, P., Gweon, H., Goodman, N.D., Spelke, E., and Schulz, L. The double-edged sword ofpedagogy: Instruction limits spontaneous exploration and discovery. Cognition 120, 3 (2011), 322–330.Bransford, J. and Schwartz, D. Rethinking Transfer: A Simple Proposal with Multiple Implications. Review ofResearch in Education 24, (1999).Crouch, C.H., Fagen, A.P., Callan, J.P., and Mazur, E. Classroom demonstrations: Learning tools orentertainment? American Journal of Physics 72, 6 (2004), 835–838.Dillenbourg, P., & Evans, M. (2011). Interactive tabletops in education. Int.l Journal of Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning, 6(4), 491-514.Jong, T.D. and Joolingen, W.R.V. Scientific Discovery Learning with Computer Simulations of ConceptualDomains. Review of Educational Research 68, 2 (1998), 179–201.Kapur, M. Productive failure. Cognition and Instruction, 26 (2008), 379-424.Kirschner, P. A., Sweller, J., & Clark, R. E. (2006). Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work:An analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-basedteaching.Educational psychologist, 41(2), 75-86.Papert, S. Mindstorms: children, computers, and powerful ideas. Basic Books, Inc., New York, NY, USA, 1980.Piaget, J. The language and thought of the child. Psychology Press, 1998.Schneider, B., Jermann, P., Zufferey, G., and Dillenbourg, P. Benefits of a Tangible Interface for CollaborativeLearning and Interaction. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies (2011), 1–1.Schneider B., Wallace J., Pea, R. & Blikstein P. (2013). Preparing for Future Learning with a Tangible UserInterface: the Case of Neuroscience. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 6(2), 117-129.Shaer, O., Strait, M., Valdes, C., Feng, T., Lintz, M., & Wang, H. (2011). Enhancing genomic learning throughtabletop interaction. In Proc. of CHI’2011 (pp. 2817-2826). ACM.Smith, J.P., diSessa, A.A., and Roschelle, J. Misconceptions Reconceived: A Constructivist Analysis ofKnowledge in Transition. Journal of the Learning Sciences 3, 2 (1994), 115.AcknowledgmentsThe authors gratefully acknowledge grant support from the National Science Foundation (NSF) for this workfrom the Bifocal Modeling CAREER Award (NSF #1055130), as well as the Stanford’s Lemann Center forEducational Entrepreneurship and Innovation in Brazil.CSCL 2015 Proceedings371© ISLS