Uncovering Teachers’ Pedagogical Reasoning in ScienceDiscussionsSherice Clarke, University of Pittsburgh, sclarke@pitt.eduDavid Gerritsen, Carnegie Mellon University, dgerrits@cs.cmu.eduRebecca, Grainger, University of Pittsburgh, grainger@pitt.eduAmy Ogan, Carnegie Mellon University, aeo@cs.cmu.eduAbstract: We report on research in progress that examines how teachers reason about and makepedagogical decisions in the context of science discussions. We developed and administered ahigh-fidelity multimedia survey instrument populated with segments of class discussionsand open-ended questions to expose 1) teachers’ reasoning about student thinking in sciencediscussions and 2) what pedagogical moves they would make in light of their reasoning toadvance the discussion. The findings show distinct qualitative differences in the way noviceand more experienced teachers see dialogic and conceptual processes in science discussions.They help to identify places where teachers may need support in developing their pedagogicalreasoning in science discussion.Keywords: pedagogical reasoning, science education, classroom discourseIntroductionGrowing evidence shows that when teachers lead students in argumentation (i.e., collaborative problem-solvingdiscussions that externalize student thinking and reasoning), students benefit with steep increases in learning (c.f.,Resnick et al., 2015). However, it is rare to find teachers using discursive pedagogy in K-12 science education,despite growing value placed on the role of argumentation for science learning from both research and governmentinitiatives such as the Next Generation Science Standards (McNeill & Pimentel, 2010; NGSS, 2013). Severalteacher development interventions on dialogic pedagogy in science have shown that it can take several yearsbefore it is possible to see significant changes in the ways teachers use talk to foster conceptual learning in science(Clarke et al., 2013; Osborne et al., 2013). This raises a critical question: why is it challenging for teachers toappropriate dialogic pedagogy to support students’ science learning?In this paper we report on the first phase of a design study to examine teachers’ pedagogical reasoningin whole-class science discussions, with the goal of developing targeted support to bridge the gap betweenteachers’ cognition and classroom practice.Theoretical frameworkRecognizing the critical role that teachers play in orchestrating science discussions and the difficulty in doing so,there has been growing interest in teacher professional development as a means by which to make argumentationin science widespread practice (Osborne, 2015). Several studies have focused teacher training on how to elicitspecific features of argumentation (e.g., claims, warrants, probing for evidence) to make student reasoning publicin order to develop students’ conceptual understanding and skills in argumentation (Clarke et al., 2013; Osborneet al., 2013). These studies show that teachers can gain a theoretical understanding of scientific argumentation and‘talk moves’ through training, but the uptake of these moves in classroom instruction has been modest. Severalstudies have found that science teachers have difficulty analyzing written and oral representations of studentreasoning and knowing how to respond to them in productive ways, even within the context of professionaldevelopment (McNeill & Knight, 2013; Levine et al., 2009). In subsequent work, McNeill and colleaguesrigorously developed and tested an instrument to assess teachers’ pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) ofscience argumentation (teachers’ knowledge of student thinking in science and knowledge of instructionalstrategies in science argumentation). After piloting and refining their instrument with 103 middle school scienceteachers, they concluded that teachers’ PCK of science argumentation consists of two core abilities - the ability toevaluate and support students in justifying their claims, and the ability to evaluate and support students’ transactivereasoning in argumentation (McNeill et al., 2015).Building on this work, we argue that in order to develop approaches that narrow the gap between a)teachers’ theoretical knowledge about facilitating science argumentation and b) their practical action in theclassroom, there is a need to understand how teachers reason about what happens in science discussions, andprecisely how their decision making in facilitating discussions is tethered to that reasoning.ICLS 2016 Proceedings994© ISLSIn this paper we report on the first phase of a design study on pedagogical reasoning and action in wholeclass science discussions in complex social settings. By pedagogical reasoning, we refer to the sense-makingprocesses that teachers are constantly engaged in while facilitating argumentation in class, such as reasoning aboutstudent ideas, enacting instructional goals, calling to task their pedagogical repertoire to make instructionaldecisions in light of their sense-making, and finally, taking action. Following Shulman, (1987), we conceptualizepedagogical reasoning as a facet of the larger construct of teacher cognition, PCK. In this study we focus onunderstanding the nature of pedagogical reasoning in science discussions to inform the development of aneducational technology designed to support teachers in learning how to productively facilitate scienceargumentation.The goal of this study was to examine teachers’ pedagogical reasoning and decision making (hereafterreferred to as action) in biology classroom discussions. The questions guiding this study were: 1) what is thenature of teachers’ pedagogical reasoning about science discussions? and, 2) what is the relationship betweenteachers’ reasoning about discussions and (intended) actions? Building on McNeill and colleagues (2015), wedeveloped, piloted, refined, and administered an instrument designed to elicit teachers’ tacit reasoning in classdiscussions by focusing specifically on moments in biology discussion that require a pedagogical action on thepart of the teacher. However, in contrast to previous work, a core design principle for our instrument was topreserve the rich, often messy complexity of real classroom interaction data in our instrument. Since teachers havecompeting demands on their attention during teaching (Levine et al., 2009), our interest was in understanding thenature of teachers’ reasoning when the complexity of those interactions were preserved.MethodsOur instrument consists of hi-fidelity multimedia scenarios constructed from whole-class discussions previouslycollected as part of a large-scale longitudinal study on Accountable Talk® biology discussions (Clarke et al., 2013;2015). Since teaching science through scientific argumentation means situating opportunities for argumentationwithin particular scientific problems (Brown et al., 1989), our scenarios were constructed with segments ofdiscussion bounded within a single lesson in the BSCS biology curriculum – Punnett Squares. To select discussionsegments, we reduced the dataset to lessons on Punnett Squares, then used theoretical sampling to reduce thedataset further to segments where students disagreed on the content. We predicted that these sections of lessonswould be a hotbed for academically productive talk, as previous research has shown that disagreement yields otherproductive dialogic interaction (e.g., explanations, elaboration and transactive reasoning) (Howe, 2010). Weselected seven such moments as they presented opportunities for teachers’ pedagogical reasoning and action, suchas: sequences of disagreement between students, expressions of misconceptions, and moments where challengeswere issued by the instructor or fellow students.We developed seven video scenarios to embed in the instrument using the audio recordings from theoriginal dataset and enhanced them with a scenario framing that situates the activities within the flow of thediscussions, real-time transcription of the audio during playback (for speaker management), and boardrepresentations of the Punnett Squares being discussed (for deictic management). We then developed a set ofopen-ended questions for each scenario to expose 1) teachers’ reasoning about the scenario in terms of students’thinking and its emergence in discussion, 2) evidence teachers could identify to support their interpretation ofstudent thinking, and 3) what they would do next to advance the discussion; e.g., “What do you think is Aamir'scurrent level of understanding? What is your evidence?”. To further situate teachers reasoning about thesescenarios, we imposed a set of instructional goals that fit the lesson for teachers to operate on in their explanationsof their reasoning about student thinking and what actions they would take in light of that reasoning. Goal 1 wasfor students to reason probabilistically about genetic inheritance using Punnett Squares as a tool to calculateprobability, and Goal 2 was for students to provide evidence of their reasoning. In this we sought to betterunderstand how teachers were making sense of action in science discussions in terms of proximal and distal goals(proximal = managing moment-to-moment dialogic processes; distal = leveraging dialogic processes towardsachieving a conceptual end). All speakers had pseudonyms and we elided any names present in the audio. Audiowas not otherwise modified.We then conducted two design and evaluation cycles of the instrument, and we report on the findingsfrom iteration 2 in the rest of this paper. Teachers were recruited via an email flyer distributed through teacherleaders in two urban high schools that serve diverse populations of students in the United States, and received$40. Six science teachers responded to the survey (two first year teachers (novices), two 3rd year teachers (midlevel), and two teachers with greater than five years (experienced). We instrumented several qualitative analysesin order to address our research questions. First, we developed a 5-point scoring rubric to score responses in termsof the extent to which responses diagnosed an opportunity for pedagogical action, and the rationale for the actionthey proposed (e.g., identifies a misconception vs. identifies which student has a misconception and what thatICLS 2016 Proceedings995© ISLSmisconception is). Responses were scored by two raters, with a “very good” interrater reliability score (kappa=.88)calculated on the first two segments. Any disagreements were then discussed. We then used these codes to explorethe data with respect to teachers’ level of expertise to examine qualitatively how their reasoning was elaboratedon. We report findings below.FindingsOur analyses produced several key findings. First, with respect to diagnosing decision-points in discussion,experienced teachers were able to successfully diagnose points where a pedagogical decision was required despitethe purposely preserved “noise” of the scenarios, scoring a median of 3 (on a scale of 0-4) across scenarios andnever below a 2. In addition, although our scenario questions were purposefully open-ended, both experiencedteachers identified the same decision-points that our research team had identified when selecting the segments aslikely candidates for pedagogical reasoning scenarios. Moreover, one segment was included in the set because itcontained only evidence that students were accurately applying and reasoning about the solution. We reasonedthis would provide a crucible for examining how teachers reason about conceptual accuracy in discussion in theprocess of building a larger explanation of genetic inheritance (i.e., do teachers make connections to previousconcepts, move on to new concepts, etc.). Experienced teachers’ responses to this scenario showed that they wereable to correctly identify the conceptual accuracy of students’ responses. Overall, experienced teachers explicatedboth their reasoning about the dialogic processes of discussion (e.g., disagreements, challenges, clarifications) andthe conceptual processes of the discussion (e.g., the relationship between the proposed genotype and the expressedphenotype).Students are presenting their thinking about the genotypes of the cats and attempting to supporttheir thinking with explanation of how their genotypes fit the parent cats...Phil was able to seepast Aamir's solution to how it could be possible for the orange parent cat could beheterozygous. At no time however did any students express their thinking in probabilities or byreferencing evidence beyond the explanation of what they could see. (T1: Experienced)We found that novices, however, did not explicate their reasoning about segments beyond the generaldescription that students were participating in discussion. These teachers scored a median/mode of 1 (describedinteraction in general terms), as in T5: “In this segment there is a small group discussion on inheritance.”Mid-level teachers also scored a median of 3, but scores ranged from 1-4. At times they described theinteraction rotely, as in T4: “The teacher gives a prompt. Then one student responds with his answer andexplanation. The next student gives his answer and explanation. The teacher then cues the other group membersto speak. They agree.” In the same scenario, T3 identified a specific pedagogical issue: “The two respondingstudents have obviously different levels of understand[ing], and the class doesn't see the difference.” In otherscenarios, T4 was equally able to articulate such a response. Their expertise at recognizing pedagogical issuesappears to be emergent, which may explain their ability to explicate reasoning more substantively at some timesbut not others.With respect to pedagogical actions in light of their reasoning, experienced teachers frequently took intoaccount the current state of the class discussion and tied their next steps directly to the problem that they believedwas happening, e.g., T2: “I feel like the students are missing the recessive phenotype and I would want to pull theclass back to examining the phenotypes of the adults again.” Novices, however, generally indicated that theywould either continue the current trajectory (e.g., T6: “I would continue the activity by have the students draw outthe Punnett square and discuss what they found”), or they suggested that they would switch to something elseentirely (e.g., T5: “I would just make sure that the problems are on the board to give them a visual reason tobelieve it as well.”). In addition, for every single scenario, novice responses indicated that they believed the distalgoals were being met, and their proposed follow-up actions made no connection to these goals. Distal goals wereintroduced at the beginning of the survey, and again in each scenario accompanying question probes about whetherthe goals had been met within the segment. Instead, their responses focused on proximal aspects of the interactionand only in very general terms.Third, with respect to the content, novices provided evidence of lack of understanding of the sciencecontent being discussed within scenarios (e.g., excerpts below).Phil was probably at a slightly lower level of understanding because he believed that the colorof the litter was by chance or luck which is a possibility but when there is only heterozygousallele there is no way for there to be any other color other than dark orange. (T6: Novice)Phil probably has an advanced level of understanding since he was able to see that there wasmore than one answer and [the] probabilities. (T2: Experienced)ICLS 2016 Proceedings996© ISLSWe interpret these differences by experience level as fundamental differences in how teachers see theinteractions in science discussions.Conclusions and implicationsWhile the sample size is small, the dataset from this instrument is rich, and the findings indicate there are distinctqualitative differences in the way novice and more experienced teachers see dialogic and conceptual processes inscience discussions. Mid-level and experienced teachers show greater specificity in their diagnoses of scenariosand rationales for intended actions in light of problems they identify. In addition, mid-level and experiencedteachers demonstrated an adeptness to weed through the ‘noise’ of classroom discussions and attend to studentthinking. Novice teachers were not able to identify moments where there were conceptual impasses in discussionthat merit the intervention of the teacher, and the strategies that they propose for moving discussions forward aregeneral rather than content driven. However, we caution the conclusion that novices lack pedagogical reasoningor PCK. We think these findings provide evidence that novice teachers’ reasoning attends primarily to surfacefeatures of classroom interaction. Thus, these findings raise the question of the extent to which novices’ decisionmaking is tethered to substantive features of class discussions.These findings help to identify places where teachers may need support in developing their pedagogicalreasoning in science discussions. In addition, they show that dexterity with dialogic processes may not be the only,or most pressing challenge for teachers’ use of dialogic pedagogy. Rather, issues may lie in teachers’understanding of the content, and thus interfere with their ability to assess students’ evidence and claims (proximalgoals) and then efficiently use these processes towards achieving a conceptual end (distal goals).This study contributes to growing scholarship in the learning sciences on teacher learning processes. Weprovide insight into teachers’ reasoning processes engaged in the midst of dialogic discussions in science, andthus some of the challenges of facilitating dynamic discourse processes. In future work, we seek to leverageinsights from this instrument to develop an adaptive educational technology to support teachers’ learning.ReferencesBrown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning. EducationalResearcher, 18(1), 32-42.Clarke, S. N., Chen, G., Stainton, C., Katz, S., Greeno, J. G., Resnick, L. B., & Rosé, C. P. (2013). The impact ofCSCL beyond the online environment. In N. Rummel, M. Kapur, M. Nathan, & S. Puntambekar (Eds.),To see the world and a grain of sand: Learning across levels of space, time, and scale: CSCL 2013 (Vol.1, pp. 105-112). Madison, WI: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Howe, C. (2010). Peer dialogue and cognitive development: A two-way relationship? In K. Littleton & C. Howe(Ed.), Educational dialogues: understanding and promoting productive interaction (pp. 32-47). London:Routledge.Levin, D. M., Hammer, D., & Coffey, J. E. (2009). Novice teachers' attention to student thinking. Journal ofTeacher Education, 60(2), 142-154.McNeill, K. L., González‐Howard, M., Katsh‐Singer, R., & Loper, S. (2015). Pedagogical content knowledge ofargumentation: Using classroom contexts to assess high‐quality PCK rather than pseudoargumentation.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 53(2), 261-290.McNeill, K. L. & Knight, A. M (2013). Teachers’ pedagogical content knowledge of scientific argumentation:The impact of professional development on K–12 teachers. Science Education, 97(6), 936-972.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next generation science Standards: For states, by states. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Osborne, J., Simon, S., Christodoulou, A., Howell-Richardson, C., & Richardson, K. (2013). Learning to argue:A study of four schools and their attempt to develop the use of argumentation as a common instructionalpractice and its impact on students. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 50(3), 315-347.Resnick, L. B., Asterhan, C. S. C., & Clarke, S. N. (Eds.). (2015). Socializing intelligence through academic talkand dialogue. Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.Shulman, L. (1987). Knowledge and teaching: Foundations of the new reform. Harvard Educational Review,57(1), 1-23.AcknowledgmentsThis work was conducted with the support of NSF-CISE-IIS #1464204 and the IES, U.S. Department of Educationgrant R305B090023. We would also like to thank Lauren B. Resnick for her support for this project.ICLS 2016 Proceedings997© ISLS