“That’s Your Heart!”: Live Physiological Sensing andVisualization Tools for Life-Relevant and Collaborative STEMLearningLeyla Norooz, Tamara L. Clegg, Seokbin Kang, Angelisa C. Plane, Vanessa Oguamanam, Jon E. Froehlichleylan@umd.edu, tclegg@umd.edu, sbkang@umd.edu, aplane@umd.edu, vanogu@umd.edu, jonf@umd.eduUniversity of MarylandAbstract: Wearable technology and large-screen display systems show potential for helpinglearners engage in STEM in ways relevant to their daily lives, but it is important to understandhow learning activities coupled with these tools can promote rich learning experiences. Toadvance these goals, our work utilizes a new genre of embodied technology tools for STEMlearning—live physiological sensing and visualization (LPSV) tools, called BodyVis andSharedPhys—that display learners’ physiological functions in real-time on a wearable, e-textileshirt and a large-screen display, respectively. We iteratively developed a set of learningactivities to evaluate how these tools can support STEM engagement. Our findings showpotential for LPSV tools to enable new forms of life-relevant and collaborative scientificlearning experiences.Keywords: embodied learning, STEM, physiological sensing, LPSV toolsIntroductionRecent advances in wearable technologies (e.g., fitness trackers) enable new opportunities to make STEMlearning less abstract and more relevant to learners’ lives. However, to fully realize the potential of wearables forSTEM learning, we must understand how learning activities coupled with these tools can promote meaningfullearning experiences. We advance this understanding in the context of live (i.e., real-time) physiological sensingand visualization (LPSV) tools that support embodied learning to promote life-relevant, collaborative STEMlearning. LPSV tools integrate real-time physiological sensing and visual displays to promote learning about organfunction, physical activity, and scientific inquiry.Our prior work has focused on the design of two LPSV tools, BodyVis and SharedPhys (Figure 1a andc, respectively), to support body learning and engagement in scientific inquiry by visualizing wearers’ live bodydata (i.e., heart and breathing rate) on an electronic textile (e-textile) shirt (BodyVis) and a large-screen display(SharedPhys). We have two high-level goals with our LPSV tools: (i) to help children understand and learn aboutthe body and its connection to the physical world (e.g., eating, exercise), and (ii) to use the body as a life-relevantplatform to help children build general scientific inquiry skills (e.g., Why does my heart rate increase before atest or during soccer practice?). In this paper, we analyze data from several deployments with a commonanalytical lens aimed specifically at better understanding how LPSV tools can support life-relevant andcollaborative STEM learning experiences for elementary-aged youth.Our findings show that LPSV tools were relevant to our participants’ daily lives as they connected theirown organ functions (e.g., heart and breathing rate) to their everyday physical activities, emotions, and socialexperiences. Additionally, learners engaged in collective observation, experimentation, and hypothesis generationas they interacted with our LPSV tools. Our contributions include (i) characterizing learning experiences childrenhave with LPSV tools, and (ii) design implications for LPSV learning activities.Life-relevant and collaborative learning technologiesOur goal is to leverage wearables to deepen learners’ STEM engagement through supporting life-relevant,collaborative inquiry experiences. In life-relevant learning experiences, learners derive meaning relevant to theirlives from acting and thinking like scientists (Clegg, Gardner, & Kolodner, 2010). Such experiences enablelearners to connect science inquiry and learning to their own interests, passions, and lived experiences (Clegg etal., 2010). Two recent approaches to wearable learning tools illustrate the potential of wearables to support liferelevant experiences by investigating one’s own physical and physiological data: (i) using fitness trackers formath analysis—e.g., comparing sports, validating accuracy of fitness trackers, strategizing workouts based onstatistical data analysis (Lee, 2015, Chapter 9) and (ii) exergaming for STEM learning and health knowledge (e.g.,Carter Ching & Schaefer, 2015). These approaches offer opportunities for learners to create and engage in newinquiries with data from activities in their everyday lives (e.g., games, sports).ICLS 2016 Proceedings779© ISLS(a) BodyVis(b) BodyVis in action(c) SharedPhys’ Moving(d) SharedPhys in actionGraphsFigure 1. BodyVis (a) displays live physiological data on a wearable, e-textile shirt while SharedPhys’ MovingGraphs (c) uses a time-series graph representation projected on a large-screen display. Some examples of highimpact activities include dancing with BodyVis (b) and doing jumping jacks with SharedPhys (d).Our LPSV tools are designed to engage multiple learners in collaborative inquiry either in small groups(BodyVis) or in collective inquiry in whole classrooms (SharedPhys). Collaborative inquiry involves dialogamong learners around scientific inquiry practices such as asking questions, designing experiments, collectingdata, and developing claims (Chinn & Malhotra, 2001). Collective inquiry occurs when learners are engaged inscientific inquiry as a whole class, collaboratively negotiating problems and working toward a common goal (Lui,Kuhn, Acosta, Quintana, & Slotta, 2014; Lui, Slotta, & Cober, 2012). Embodied learning technologies can beeffective for engaging learners in collective scientific inquiry. For example, embedded phenomena systems likeEvoRoom and HelioRoom (Lui et al., 2014, 2012) allow learners to engage in small and whole group activitiesaround asking questions, collecting data, and developing claims backed by evidence from the systems. To ourknowledge, our approach to LPSV large-screen displays (Kang et al., 2016) is the first to support collective inquiryand STEM learning more broadly around body-data.DesignWe designed BodyVis and SharedPhys, along with associated learning activities, through an iterative process ofparticipatory design with children and teachers. In this process, we first developed a wearable e-textile approachcalled BodyVis (Figure 1a), in which physiological phenomena (e.g., heart rate and breathing rate) are visualizedon wearable fabric anatomy allowing learners to gain a unique view of the internal body (Norooz, Mauriello,Jorgensen, McNally, & Froehlich, 2015). Next, to support whole-classroom STEM learning and scientific inquirywe developed SharedPhys (Kang et al., 2016). SharedPhys enables collection and analysis of data in real-timeacross multiple learners by visualizing real-time physiological data from up to six simultaneous users on a single,large-screen display. We focus on one of three SharedPhys designs called Moving Graphs, which transformswearers’ live body-data into line-graph form (Figure 1c). We designed LPSV learning activities throughparticipatory design with (i) an intergenerational co-design team of children (7-11 years old) and adult researchers,as well as (ii) a cohort of 20 teachers in a STEM M.Ed. program. Children suggested competitions and games,while teachers suggested experimenting with our tools by brainstorming high- and low- impact physical activitiesthat would affect the heart rate. Informed by these findings, we iteratively designed SharedPhys and LPSVlearning activities to support science inquiry experiences. Our activities focused on having participants use LPSVtools to hypothesize and test physical activities that would lower and raise their heart and breathing rates. Wediscuss our session protocol in the next section.MethodWe conducted six BodyVis and six SharedPhys study sessions independently. Three of the six BodyVis sessionswere reported in (Norooz et al., 2015); here we analyze only the three latest BodyVis sessions which wereconducted with our new LPSV learning activities. BodyVis and SharedPhys sessions followed the same format.Each session was approximately two-hours long. Sessions were primarily conducted in out-of-school programsalthough one BodyVis session was conducted in a joint 2nd and 3rd grade private school classroom. In total, 61children participated in BodyVis sessions (34 boys, 27 girls) aged 6-13, and 69 children (42 boys, 27 girls) aged5-13 participated in SharedPhys sessions. Before sessions began, we randomly assigned participants to groups of4-5 children. We then presented an overview of each respective tool and introduced the inquiry activity. Groupswere given a brainstorming period to develop a set of high- and low-impact activities that would increase anddecrease their heart and/or breathing rates, respectively. Groups recorded these activities on large notepads, thencame back together to present their activities and hypotheses. As each group presented, two BodyVis volunteers,or six SharedPhys volunteers, tested the highest- and lowest- impact activities suggested with the respective LPSVtool. Following each hypothesis test, a facilitator guided a conversation about why they believed the body reactedthe way it did.ICLS 2016 Proceedings780© ISLSAll BodyVis and SharedPhys deployments were video recorded and researchers also took field notes.For the video analysis of each tool, we followed Chi’s eight-step process (1997) using a mixed deductive andinductive approach. Based on observations of a single video, a single researcher developed an initial codebookfor observing learners’ collaboration (e.g., ways wearers and non-wearers interacted) and life-relevant experiences(e.g., indicators of linking experiences to everyday life, demonstrations of excitement and curiosity) for each tool.Two researchers then met and simultaneously coded a second video for each tool, concurrently updating thecodebook. Finally, two researchers coded all videos independently, developed summaries, and then met to discussand co-interpret the data. One researcher wrote a final summary.FindingsWe report findings related to life-relevance and collaboration for both BodyVis and SharedPhys sessions.Life-Relevance. With both LPSV tools, participants referenced activities in their everyday lives (e.g.playing video games, eating, doing homework) to form their hypotheses of activities that would increase ordecrease their heart rates. Each tool also fostered different forms of life-relevance. With BodyVis, participantsexplored how their emotions affected their physiology. For example, when lying down participants found that,contrary to their expectations, the wearer’s heart rate actually increased due to the excitement of the activity. Oneafter-school program regularly required children to reflect on their session experiences at home via a custom-builtscience inquiry app. Using the app, some participants made similar connections between their heart rate andemotions as they observed their heart rate during other activities: “Watching the NBA summer league second gamebrought my heart rate down after running because less blood must be pumped when I am just sitting down andnot stressing my muscles and lungs by breathing hard and also the fact that the game was just summer leagueand not NBA didn't stress me for my team to win.” SharedPhys created a sense of life-relevance for participantsin two ways. First, wearers felt a strong connection with the visualizations because of the live body-data and directcontrol of visualizations. This was apparent during the hypotheses testing, when both wearers and non-wearersinstantly started moving fast (e.g., jogging in place, doing jumping jacks) as soon as the graph was displayed.Second, learners demonstrated excitement and initiated engagement during the hypothesis testing competitionwhere non-wearers cheered their wearer teammates by suggesting movements based on their observations andeven mimicking those movements alongside the wearers.Collaboration. With both BodyVis and SharedPhys, participants collaborated through brainstorming,discussing, experimenting, testing, and revising hypotheses. For activities with unknown outcomes, participantseither discussed reasoning behind possible outcomes or placed the activity in an “unknown” category. Forexample, one group discussed how eating and digestion might affect their heart rate after a group memberexpressed feeling fatigued following a meal, while another thought their heart rate increased. LPSV tools alsofostered unique collaborative experiences. With BodyVis, wearers and non-wearers engaged collaboratively inwhole group discussions when wearers tested the groups’ hypotheses and reacted to unexpected results. With eachunexpected result, discussions—sometimes even debates—organically occurred among participants regarding thebody’s reaction. For example, one group hypothesized that an activity would decrease the heart rate, but in realityit increased. One group member reasoned that the activity involved more muscle activity than they originallythought: “[You are] using so much muscles. Your head is going that way, your arms are going this way. So you'reusing too much energy.” With SharedPhys, most verbal collaboration occurred among non-wearers rather thanwearers (as wearers were quite focused on their tasks); however, wearers collaborated non-verbally throughobservation and physical mimicry. Tasked with making observations about wearers’ data as it was visualized,non-wearers often collaborated by helping each other take notes or repeating things that were not originally heard.Wearers would observe and replicate the physical activity of the winning wearer during the hypothesis testcompetitions. As wearers focused more on their bodies, non-wearers noticed more of the affects of the wearers’physical activities on the Moving Graphs and provided guidance to reach the target heart rate (e.g., “You’re gettinglower!” “Get some high knees in there!”).DiscussionOur goal was to understand the learning experiences children have with LPSV tools, particularly with respect tolife-relevance and collaboration. Here, we discuss the interactions observed in our findings. BodyVis andSharedPhys show that LPSV tools can help learners connect their own everyday activities not only to step andmileage calculations (Carter Ching & Schaefer, 2015), but also to their own organ functions and systems (e.g.,heart/breathing rate, muscular system), and to social and emotional factors (e.g., being nervous). Because learnerscould see body-data change in real-time, they may have been better able to connect the changes of other in-themoment factors (e.g., body movement, social and emotional context) to the changes they observed in theirphysiology. This suggests that LPSV tools offer learners opportunities that promote their consideration of theICLS 2016 Proceedings781© ISLSmultitude of physical and environmental factors that impact their bodies. Next, while prior work emphasizescollective inquiry around data analysis and development of claims backed by evidence (Lee, 2015; Lui et al.,2014), our analysis suggests that LPSV tools enable other aspects of collective inquiry—collective noticing,experimentation, and hypothesis generation. As participants observed the real-time changes in their heart andbreathing rates, they began to collectively discuss other factors simultaneously affecting their bodies. Throughthese observations, learners generated new hypotheses to test and created new collective experiments (e.g.,observing effects of eating). Not only did they collectively discuss inquiry topics, learners often collectively acted.As they observed other groups testing activities, the most effective actions proliferated through the whole group—this sort of collective phenomena is enabled by the visibility of whole-body interactions and the shared, co-locatedcontext of the computer-mediated activities.Wearable tools such as BodyVis require others to be in close vicinity of the wearer, which for some isan uncomfortable experience. LPSV tools and activities must therefore seriously consider learners’ comfort andoffer multiple types of wearer experiences (e.g., ways to reduce spotlight on learners). Additionally, our analysissuggests LPSV tools have the potential to promote a deeper understanding of physiological concepts, beyond thecause-and-effect of physical activities on the body to social and emotional concepts.ConclusionOur work demonstrates the potential of LPSV tools—via the examples of BodyVis and SharedPhys—to enablenew forms of life-relevant and collaborative STEM learning experiences. While we found that LPSV tools cansupport learners’ collective observations and experimentations, more work is needed to understand the mostappropriate learning contexts for their use and ways that they can complement more traditional, retrospectiveanalysis of body-data (Lee, 2015). Our analysis points to several implications for learning activities with LPSVtools. First, learners need formal and informal time with the tools to play, explore, and delve deeper into inquiryand science content learning. Additionally, learners need opportunities to both wear and observe LPSV tools asdifferent forms of engagement are promoted through wearer/non-wearer roles. Finally, learning contexts shouldbe flexible to allow learners to try new activities and investigations.ReferencesCarter Ching, C., & Schaefer, S. (2015). Identities in Motion, Identities at Rest: Engaging Bodies and Minds inFitness Gaming Research and Design. In Learning Technologies and the Body: Integration andImplementation In Formal and Informal Learning Environments (pp. 201–219). Taylor and Francis.Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying Qualitative Analyses of Verbal Data: A Practical Guide. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 6(3), 271–315.Chinn, C. A., & Malhotra, B. A. (2001). Epistemologically authentic scientific reasoning. In K. Crowley, C.Schunn, & T. Okada (Eds.), Designing for science: Implications from everyday, classroom, andprofessional settings (pp. 351–392). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.Clegg, T. L., Gardner, C. M., & Kolodner, J. L. (2010). Playing with Food: Moving from Interests and Goals intoScientifically Meaningful Experiences. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of the LearningSciences - Volume 1 (pp. 1135–1142). International Society of the Learning Sciences.Kang, S., Norooz, L., Oguamana, V., Plane, A. C., Clegg, T. L., & Froehlich, J. E. (2016). SharedPhys: LivePhysiological Sensing, Whole-Body Interaction, and Large-Screen Visualizations to Support SharedInquiry Experiences. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Interation Design andChildren. ACM.Lee, V. R. (2015). Learning Technologies and the Body: Integration and Implementation In Formal and InformalLearning Environments. Hoboken: Taylor and Francis.Lui, M., Kuhn, A. C., Acosta, A., Quintana, C., & Slotta, J. D. (2014). Supporting Learners in Collecting andExploring Data from Immersive Simulations in Collective Inquiry. In Proceedings of the SIGCHIConference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 2103–2112). New York, NY, USA: ACM.Lui, M., Slotta, J. D., & Cober, R. (2012). EvoRoom & HelioRoom: Designing Learning Experiences forCollective Inquiry. Special Issue on EIST in Personal and Ubiquitous Computing (PUC) Journal.Norooz, L., Mauriello, M. L., Jorgensen, A., McNally, B., & Froehlich, J. E. (2015). BodyVis: A New Approachto Body Learning Through Wearable Sensing and Visualization. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACMConference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1025–1034).AcknowledgmentsThis research is funded by NSF Cyberlearning & Future Learning Technologies (Grant #1441184).ICLS 2016 Proceedings782© ISLS