Sketching and Gesturing for New Ideas in Collaborative DesignTellervo Härkki, Pirita Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, and Kai Hakkarainentellervo.harkki@helsinki.fi; pirita.seitamaa-hakkarainen@helsinki.fi; kai.hakkarainen@helsinki.fiUniversity of HelsinkiAbstract: In searching for practices that feed creativity, we compared sketching—anacknowledged design practice that facilitates creativity—with gesturing, which shares many ofthe features important for ideation by sketching. Analyzing two higher education textile designprojects, we found that sketching and gesturing fulfilled differing epistemic roles, althoughthere were some parallels. We suggest that both sketching and gesturing should be treated asepistemic practices that extend beyond easing communication to eliciting new ideas.IntroductionCreative practices are the core of design education. Creativity is also an important twenty-first century skill(Sawyer, 2018). Collaborative design includes communication and coordination, but these two functions are notsufficient for successful designing. Creative design not only reproduces existing solutions but entails emergence—that is, solutions are unexpected and cannot be foreseen or reduced to individual contributions (Sawyer, 2003).Successful designing requires “seeing things differently” through exploration rather than systematic search andcombining of ideas (Cross, 1982). One important design practice that facilitates creativity (i.e., idea generation)is freehand sketching (Purcell & Gero, 1998). However, while sketching appears beneficial to professionaldesigners, it does not always deliver for novices (for a review, see Härkki, Seitamaa-Hakkarainen & Hakkarainen,2016a). In search of practices for design education, we compared sketching with a practice that shares many ofthe same emergence-facilitating features; that practice is gesturing. In particular, we set out to identify theepistemic roles of sketching and gesturing in collaborative design. Further details of the three studies summarizedhere are available in Härkki, Seitamaa-Hakkarainen and Hakkarainen (2016a, 2016b).Designers benefit from sketching and gesturingAs a skill, design sketching differs from artistic drawing. According to Goel (1995), sketches are deliberately leftimprecise, ambiguous, fluid, amorphous, and indeterminate. Sketches are abstractions, schematizations, andconceptualizations (Tversky, 2011); they are not realistic depictions like drawings. In this way, sketches allowfor multiple interpretations, which is considered central to idea generation (Goel, 1995). Gesturing is also basedon ambiguous abstractions. Gestures serve several important functions for education (Alibali & Nathan, 2012),which gesture researchers summarize as follows. Through activation, manipulation, packaging, and explorationof spatio-motoric information, gesturing can lead to changes in both the content and direction of speech andthought, generation of new ideas and ideas that cover a wider range of conceptualizations, to revealing emergingknowledge not available through speech, as well as enhancing abilities to perform spatial transformations (Kita,Alibali & Chu, 2017). Yet, despite this evidence, gestures are rarely studied as a resource for idea generation.According to our literature review (Härkki, Seitamaa-Hakkarainen & Hakkarainen, 2018), gestures are importantfor idea generation because the ambiguity and spatio-temporal character of gestures facilitates the expressionand study of ideas in visual, spatio-motoric and kinesthetic dimensions and invokes new interpretations—newideas to steer the work in unforeseen directions.MethodsThe research setting encompassed two textile design projects: 3D textile puzzles for visually-impaired childrenand sea creature accessories for kindergartners. The participants (first-year students on a craft teacher program atthe University of Helsinki) worked in teams of three. In total, 7 teams and 9 hours of video were analyzed.Focusing on the epistemic roles of sketching and gesturing challenged existing methods of analysis in terms ofhow to preserve their indigenous visual, spatio-motoric and kinesthetic character. To that end, a rigorous microlevel method of video-based qualitative content analysis was developed. Rather than transcripts, the analysisutilized video and segmentation principles that separated each gesture stroke and sketching act (continuous penmovement) for each participant. Categorizations of the characteristic uses, i.e., the epistemic roles, weredeveloped for each study.Major findingsThe developed categorizations revealed that the epistemic roles of sketching and gesturing in collaborative designdid align in some respects. Both introduced several hundred meanings into the design conversation that were notICLS 2018 Proceedings1379© ISLSavailable in accompanying speech. Those meanings (e.g., round; cabin; soft; this; write; that class) often relatedto structure and metacommunication. Even those parts that did not provide complementary meanings (or could beconsidered redundant) could not simply be deemed unnecessary; rather, they are co-expressive and engagemodalities other than language in a communicative move, making messages easier to understand. On the otherhand, sketching and gesturing played several epistemic roles that differentiated them in line with their indigenouscharacter. Sketching was favored for structural explorations, especially those requiring precision and memory.Gestures, as spatio-kinesthetic analogues, were favored for sensory, spatio-motoric, and experiential content. Fordesigning, all of these are central aspects.Conclusions and discussionThis research contributes to the discussion on transforming pedagogy into creative learning outcomes (Sawyer,2018). We suggest that, in the search for productive epistemic practices for creative ideation, gestures should notbe disregarded. Gestures are co-expressive and make messages easier to understand. More importantly, asambiguous abstractions restricted by the affordances of our motor-system, gestures share features that are centralto idea generation by sketching. The ambiguity of sketches is advantageous for design ideation (Goel, 1995); inthe same way, the ambiguity of gestures should be seen as advantageous for generating new ideas.In collaboration, the individual designer’s thought processes are interconnected, nourished, stimulated,and inspired by the actions of other team members. Rich and varied use of all available resources (i.e., languageand other modalities intertwined) serves to multiply the number of meanings fed into the conversation. Thatmultiplication in turn enhances the potential to engage various sensory channels, sparking inspiration andenhancing the team’s capacity to share, evaluate, and build on each other’s contributions, as well as their potentialfor idea generation. At best, active and rich gesturing and sketching in combination with speech can turninteraction into inspiraction—that is, interaction that inspires—eliciting new ideas and (even) more productiveinteraction. Likewise, the epistemic roles of sketching and gesturing could entail the ability to elicit more ideasby enhancing the intensity and richness of collaborative designing. We therefore contend that sketching andgesturing should be approached as epistemic activities—ways of thinking, developing, and inducing newthoughts, as well as enriching the plateau of inspirational material for ideation.Unfortunately, increased potential and more cues do not automatically enhance idea generation. Sharedcues need to be noticed, and appreciative perception may be the requisite counterpart to unreserved sharing. Ourtentative conclusion is that engaging multiple modalities in sharing ideas as they emerge and recognizing eachother’s contributions may benefit students as much as any single creative practice. It seems reasonable, then, toask if sharing and paying attention should be seen as important epistemic practices for creative collaboration.ReferencesAlibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. J. (2012). Embodiment in Mathematics Teaching and Learning. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 21(2), 247–286.Cross, N. (1982). Designerly ways of knowing. Design Studies, 3(4), 221–227.Gero, J. S. (2000). Computational Models of Innovative and Creative Design Processes. TechnologicalForecasting and Social Change, 64(2), 183–196.Goel, V. (1995). Sketches of though. Cambridge: MIT Press.Härkki, T., Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P., & Hakkarainen, K. (2016a). Line by line, part by part: collaborativesketching for designing. International Journal of Technology and Design Education, online first.Härkki, T., Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P., & Hakkarainen, K. (2016b). Material knowledge in collaborative designingand making: A case of wearable sea creatures. FORMakademisk, 9(1), Art. 5. 1–21.Härkki, T., Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P., & Hakkarainen, K. (2018). Hands on design: Comparing the use ofsketching and gesturing in collaborative designing. Journal of Design Research, in press.Kita, S., Alibali, M.W., & Chu, M. (2017). How Do Gestures Influence Thinking and Speaking? The Gesturefor-Conceptualization Hypothesis. Psychological Review, 124(3), 245–266.Purcell, A.T., & Gero, J.S. (1998). Drawings and the design process. Design Studies, 19, 389–430.Sawyer, R.K. (2003). Improvised Dialogues. Westport: Ablex Publishing.Sawyer, R.K. (2018). Teaching and Learning How to Create in Schools of Art and Design. Journal of the LearningSciences, 27(1), 137–181.Tversky, B. (2011). Visualizing Thought. Topics in Cognitive Science, 3(3), 499–535.AcknowledgmentsThis research was funded by the Academy of Finland (project 265922) and the Emil Aaltonen Foundation.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1380© ISLS