Examining Positive and Negative Interdependence in an ElementarySchool CSCL SettingChristian Hartmann, Institute of Educational Research, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, christian.hartmann@rub.deJennifer K. Olsen, Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, jkolsen@cs.cmu.eduCharleen Brand, Institute of Educational Research, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, charleen.brand@rub.deVincent Aleven, Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, aleven@cs.cmu.eduNikol Rummel, Institute of Educational Research, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, nikol.rummel@rub.deAbstract: Social interdependence is a key concept in CSCL research. However, investigationsof students’ positive and negative interdependence during collaborative activities have oftenrelied on self-report, rather than dialogue analysis. Bringing together politeness and socialinterdependence theory, we assessed dialogue indicators of positive and negativeinterdependence from behavioral data (namely, face-saving and face-threatening dialoguemoves) and compared the results with those of self-report scales. We analyzed a data set of 30elementary students learning fractions with an intelligent tutoring system (ITS). Our initialanalyses focus on the link between use of language that is face-saving (e.g., marking identitywith statements such as “we are great”) or face-threatening (e.g., insulting), and students’preferences to collaborate and compete. We found only non-significant correlations betweenthese two broad categories, but found significant correlations between dialogue indicators, suchas the use of identity markers and joking, that suggest directions for subsequent studies.IntroductionA major predictor of how students are learning collaboratively is the dialogue that occurs within a group. Oftendialogues are analyzed for the cognitive aspects of the collaboration while ignoring the social interactions that areoccurring between students. However, in previous studies, in which the social aspects are analyzed, they havebeen found to play a significant role in the student collaboration (Wang et al., 2008; Ogan, Finkelstein, Walker,Carlson, & Cassell, 2012). In CSCL research, social aspects often address types of interdependence amonginteracting students. As a key concept of CSCL research, social interdependence describes the relationshipbetween students, which can be either collaboratively or competitively (Johnson & Johnson, 2014). Whereascollaboration belongs to positive interdependence, because the success of interacting students is positively related,competition describes a situation, in which the students’ chances to succeed are negatively related (Johnson &Johnson, 2014). Investigations of social interdependence have often been limited to investigating positiveinterdependence between students without investigating the impact of negative interdependence on studentlearning. In our paper, we propose to analyze the dialogue between students to understand how both positive andnegative interdependence correlate with the students’ self-reported approach to group learning and their learninggains.Positive and negative interdependence are defined within the social interdependence theory, whichprovides a lens for exploring the social dimension of student collaboration (Johnson & Johnson, 2014). To achievepositive interdependence within a group, the collaborative task must be structured in a way that only allowsstudents to succeed if all group members succeed (Johnson & Johnson, 2014). However, students do not alwaysapproach the task in a collaborative manner and may instead view it as a competition. Competition can lead tonegative interdependence between students. In this state the success of one student depends on the failure ofanother (Johnson & Johnson, 2014). Thus, negative interdependence will likely inhibit collaborative behaviors.Within computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) research the impact (or possibility) ofnegative interdependence often has been neglected. Additionally, learning environments are assumed to fosterpositive interdependence among students without checking if positive interdependence was indeed achieved(Olsen, Aleven, & Rummel, 2016). More generally, within the field of CSCL, there has been little research onbehavioral indicators of positive and, in particular, negative interdependence and how it relates to learning. Moststudies that measure interdependence rely on students’ self-reports about their behavior during the learning phase(Myake & Kirschner, 2014) or their preferences for working collaboratively or competitively (Johnson & NoremHebeisen, 1979). However, as self-reports do not necessarily reflect the actual interactions that occurred duringthe learning activity, exploring additional indicators of positive and negative interdependence by studying thestudent dialogue may offer new theoretical insights into the process of collaborative learning.Politeness theory (Brown & Levinson, 1987) is potentially highly valuable for extending research onpositive and negative interdependence as both forms of interdependence often reveal themselves through theCSCL 2017 Proceedings633© ISLSlanguage and word choice that students use in their communication with each other. Politeness theory stipulatesthat individuals have a need of being appreciated as a valued member of a group (Brown & Levinson, 1987). Toachieve this, individuals avoid excluding statements and actively respect or ‘save’ another person’s face by usingpoliteness strategies. Based on politeness theory, one could expect that collaborating students often attempt tosave each other’s face. For instance, when students use words that indicate they are part of the group – identitymarkers, such as ‘we’ – the face of other group members may be enhanced because they see themselves asrespected within the group. If there is positive interdependence among students, the importance of face-savingbehavior potentially increases since the students need (or want) to succeed as a group. On the other hand, if astudent insults the abilities of another student then there is a threat to that student’s face, and an active dissociationfrom the group identity could be assumed. Such face-threatening behavior may result from negativeinterdependence among students because competition goes along with discrediting the ‘opponent’ to strengthenone’s own position. By analyzing the face-saving and face-threatening behavior that are used within the studentdialogue, politeness theory can help to analyze social interdependence within the dialogue. Specifically, facesaving strategies (e.g., using an identity marker, making jokes, laughing) can be associated with positiveinterdependence whereas face-threatening strategies (e.g., insulting, swearing, disagreement) can be associatedwith negative interdependence.In this paper, we analyze the dialogue data collected during elementary school students’ use of acollaborative intelligent tutoring system (ITS) (Olsen, Aleven, & Rummel, 2016) to explore how students’ selfreported preferences for working collaboratively or competitively are associated with dialogue strategies usedduring learning that focus on face-saving and face-threatening strategies. By bringing together politeness andsocial interdependence theory, we developed and tested indicators of positive and negative interdependence withstudents' dialogue data and compared it with self-reported scales of students' collaborative and competitivepreferences. This explorative research extends existing studies of social interdependence within CSCL byinvestigating students' communication directly and comparing it with self-reported data, which is typically used.We hypothesize that face-saving strategies positively correlate with collaborative preferences and face-threateningstrategies positively correlate with competitive preferences.MethodsFor our analysis, we used dialogue transcripts of N = 30 collaborating elementary students (15 dyads). The datawas from a study investigating 4th and 5th-grade students who worked collaboratively with an ITS (Olsen, Aleven,& Rummel, 2016). The learning phase took place on three 45-minute days with the students’ knowledge measuredat pretest and posttest on two additional days. Within our analysis, we only included students who completed alllearning phases with the same partner. The students either worked on a conceptually or procedurally oriented tutorthat focused on naming, making, equivalent, least common denominator, as well as comparing, adding, andsubtracting fractions. During the time with the ITS, students sat next to each other and thus were able tocommunicate directly. The tutors supported synchronous, networked collaboration through embeddedcollaboration scripts, in which collaborating students had a shared view of the problem state with different actionsand information (task and resource interdependence) available on each of their computers. The scripts weredesigned to support positive interdependence through a distribution of responsibility. For instance, students hadsome actions that only they (and not their partner) could take. Students therefore needed to collaborate since theydid not have access to all necessary information and actions to solve the problem successfully on their own.However, we do not certainly know if the scripts stimulated positive interdependence among the students.Self-reported preferences for collaboration and competitionTo measure students’ preferences for working collaboratively or competitively, we used two scales developed andtested by Johnson and Norem-Hebeisen (1979). In these scales, indicators of collaborative preferences include atendency to help other students, to share ideas and materials, or to consider supportive behavior. In contrast,students with competitive preferences prefer to ‘be better than others’ or to ‘challenge who is best’ (see Johnson& Norem-Hebeisen, 1979 for more information). The collaboration scale (i.e., cooperation in Johnson & NoremHebeisen, 1979) consisted of seven questions, whereas the competition scale consisted of eight questions, whichwere measured on a seven-point Likert scale. All students completed both scales.Examining politeness strategies and face attacks from dialogueWe analyzed transcripts of the students’ dialogue for all three days the students worked with the ITS. Based onpoliteness theory, we identified several face-saving behaviors (i.e., identity markers; compliments; agreements;encouraging participation; joking statements; laughing) and face-threatening behavior (i.e., insulting;disagreement; preventing participation; swearing). Within the students’ dialogues, each of the statements wasCSCL 2017 Proceedings634© ISLScoded for these behavioral codes, and multiple codes could be applied to each statement. For instance, a singlestatement could include laughing, identity marker as well as insults. After coding the transcripts of the first day,we tested the inter-rater-reliability to decide if coding with all categories would be suitable. Because Kappastatistics was low for the most behavioral codes, we coded the subsequent days with only the three variables forface-saving and –threatening behavior that had the best Kappa statistics. These categories included: identitymarker, laughing, joking statement, insulting, disagreement, and swearing (see Table 1 for the Kappa statistic).In the following, we briefly explain the categories we used for our analysis of the students' dialogues. For savesaving behavior, we concentrated on identity makers, laugh as a reaction and joking statements. Identity markersinclude the use of words like ‘we’ which highlight group identity. If students laugh as a reaction, they mightfoster group cohesion or have a close relationship, in which positive interdependence is naturally given. Inaddition, contributing joking statements to cause amusement or laughter can increase (or indicate) group cohesion.For face-threatening behavior, we focused on insults, disagreement and swearing. In contrast to face-savingbehaviors, insulting someone (e.g., ‘you suck’) might attack cohesion between students. The same may be truefor swearing and disagreeing, whereas disagreement also might express constructive criticism that contributes toa collaborative approach to solving the problem. However, politeness theory defines the expression ofdisagreement as well as insulting and swearing as a rude behavior as it is attacking the another person’s face.FindingsWe correlated the face-saving and -threatening behavior, the collaboration and competition scales by Johnson andNorem-Hebeisen (1979), and the students’ learning gains from pre- and posttest (see Table 1). We did not find asignificant correlation between any of the variables and learning gains. However, there was a significant, negativecorrelation between students’ preferences to collaborate and their preferences to compete (rs = -.41, p < .01).Within the behavioral indicators, we found a significant correlation between the use of identity markers and jokingstatements (rs = .61, p < .01) and between showing disagreement and insulting a partner (rs = .67, p < .01). Wefound no significant correlations between any of the remaining variables. Nevertheless, as highlighted in Table 1,we found – even if not significant – moderate negative correlations for all face-attacking variables withpreferences to collaborate, as well as moderate positive correlations between these variables and preferences tocompete.Table 1: Spearman’s rho coefficient and Kappa statistics1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.Learning Gain(Pre-Post)Competition ScaleCollaboration ScaleIdentity MarkerLaughing as ReactionJoking StatementInsulting a PersonDisagreementSwearingKappa12345678.65.85.54.45.41.57-.24.14-.20-.07-.08-.07.02.19-.41*.23-.06.32-.22-.19-.23-.16.17-.11.21.13.31.16.61*.19.22.10.26-.11-.06.33.34.24.35.67*.30.35DiscussionOur explorative analyses examined the link between face-saving statements (e.g. using identity markers, makingjokes, laughing) and face-threatening statements (e.g. insulting, swearing, disagreement) and students’ preferencesto collaborate or compete. By bringing together politeness and social interdependence theory, we developed andtested indicators of face-saving and -threatening actions to compare coded dialogue data with self-reported scales.We hypothesized that face-saving strategies positively correlate with collaborative preferences and facethreatening acts positively correlate with competitive preferences. Although we found a negative correlationbetween the competition and collaboration preference scales indicating divergent validity, the data provides noevidence for our hypotheses regarding the alignment of the face-saving and face-threatening strategies with theself-reported scales. Interestingly, there was a significant positive correlation between the use of identity makersand joking statements. Thus, students, who make more jokes also tend to use more group identity markers suchas “we” or “us”. One could argue that joking occurs especially when students have already established a goodrelationship and thus feel more group identity and social cohesion, which in turn could be represented by the useof identity markers. Conversely, if students do not have a common ground or a close relationship, as could beindicated by a low frequency of identity markers, they likely do not make jokes. In addition, we found a significantCSCL 2017 Proceedings635© ISLSpositive correlation between insulting the partner and showing disagreement, which is of particular interest forresearch on younger students. It could mean that elementary school students tend to express disagreement or aconflicting point of view by using face-threatening behavior such as insulting.Surprisingly, we found positive, even though non-significant correlations for face-threatening dialoguebehaviors and collaborative preferences of the students and, conversely, negative, non-significant correlationsbetween these same dialogue behaviors and competitive preferences. This finding aligns with results of Ogan etal. (2012), who showed that insulting (or rudeness) can be an expression of rapport between students and maylead to higher learning gains. Thus, one could argue that face-threatening behavior indicates collaboration (or atleast, a desire or tendency to collaborate). Students who want to collaborate may not have the abilities to do itappropriately, especially in this young age group. This explanation also is consistent with the fact that insultingcorrelates with disagreement, as younger students might not know how to disagree with each other’s ideas withoutbeing rude and using insults. For subsequent analyses, we may have to rethink our hypotheses.However, using politeness theory to investigate student dialogue provides some challenges. A majorhurdle in analyzing student dialogue based on politeness theory is understanding how a certain message wasintended to be interpreted and how it indeed was interpreted by the addressed student. An insult, for instance, caneither be a face-threatening behavior with the intention to harm someone, or it can express friendship betweenstudents, whose relationship is strong enough to endure rudeness. Further studies may focus on more qualitativeanalyses of dialogue to figure out in more detail how students (co-)construct their relationship within this CSCLsetting. Continuing analyses with more qualitative methods could lead to a deeper understanding of how socialinterdependence manifests itself in dialogue. Furthermore, in learning environments that aim to fosterinterdependence among students, one could expect that the learning outcomes (or success) of students in the sameteam are positively related. To analyze in more detail how students treat each other depending on their preferencesto collaborate or compete, the form of interdependence within the learning situations, and the effects on theirlearning outcome could be an interesting direction for future research in CSCL.ReferenceBrown, P. & Levinson, S.C. (1987). Politeness. Some Universals in language usage. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Johnson, D. W. & Norem-Hebeisen, A.A. (1979). A Measure of Cooperative, Competitive, and IndividualisticAttitudes, The Journal of Social Psychology, 109, 253-261.Johnson, D.W., & Johnson, R.T. (2014). Cooperative Learning in 21st Century. Anales de psicologia, 30(3),841-851.Myake, N. & Kirschner, P.A. (2014). The Social and Interactive Dimensions of Collaborative Learning (pp.418-438). In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of The Learning Science, 2 nd Edition, NewYork, USA: Cambridge University Press.Ogan, A., Finkelstein, S., Walker, E., Carlson, R., & Cassell, J. (2012). Rudeness and rapport: Insults andlearning gains in peer tutoring. In S. A. Cerri, W. J. Clancey, G. Papadourakis, & K. Panourgia (Eds.),Proceedings of the 2012 conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems, Vol. 7315 of the series LectureNotes in Computer Science (pp. 11-21). Berlin, Germany: Springer.Olsen, J.K., Rummel, N., & Aleven, V. (2016). Investigating effects of embedding collaboration in an intelligenttutoring system for elementary school students. In the International Conference of the LearningSciences (pp. 338-345).Wang, N., Johnson, W.L., Mayer, R.E., Rizzo, P. Shaw, E., & Collins, H. (2008). The politeness effect:Pedagogical agents and learning outcomes. Int’l Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 66(2), 98-112.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by Graduate Training Grant #R305B090023 and by Award #R305A120734 from theUS Department of Education (IES).CSCL 2017 Proceedings636© ISLS