The Influence of Students’ Transformative and Non-TransformativeContributions on Their Problem Solving inCollaborative Inquiry LearningVitaliy Popov, University of San Diego, vpopov@sandiego.eduWanli Xing, Texas Tech University, wanli.xing@ttu.eduGaoxia Zhu, University of Toronto, gaoxia.zhu@mail.utoronto.caPaul Horwitz, The Concord Consortium, phorwitz@concord.orgCynthia, McIntyre, The Concord Consortium, cmcintyre@concord.orgAbstract: The effectiveness of collaborative inquiry learning in simulation-based learningenvironments for STEM education has been well-documented. At the same time, researchindicates that some students struggle with articulating relevant concepts, making theirreasoning explicit and regulating their learning—skills that are necessary for effectivecollaboration. In this study, using qualitative and quantitative analysis as well as data miningtechniques, we investigated what promotes meaningful interaction between students whenconducting collaborative inquiry. One hundred and fifty-six students from five high schoolsand colleges in the United States worked in groups of three to solve electronics tasks withincreasing complexity in a virtual environment called Teaching Teamwork. The resultsshowed that when the groups successfully solved the tasks, they showed statisticallysignificant higher proposition generation, regulation and sustaining mutual understanding;when they did not solve the tasks, they showed significantly higher orientation, interpretationand conclusion. Explanations for these results and research recommendations are provided.IntroductionThere is a well-documented body of research that shows the effectiveness of using computer networks forcollaborative learning on STEM education (see Jeong, Hmelo-Silver, Jo, & Shin, 2016, for review). Incomputer-supported collaborative inquiry learning (CSCiL), two or more learners collaborate via the computer,typically in a simulation-based learning environment, to solve problems (e.g., electrical engineering topic as isused in the present study) and co-construct knowledge (e.g., understanding the relation between the values ofvoltage and resistance). This process entails searching for information, hypothesis formulation, experimentation,interpretation, articulation and sharing ideas for collaborating partners to build upon (Stahl, Koschmann, &Suthers, 2006). Research on collaborative inquiry learning has consistently shown that most students struggle toregulate their learning, articulate relevant concepts in order to actively make sense of the subject matter (e.g.,through hypothesis generation and data interpretation) and make their reasoning explicit (de Jong & vanLazonder & Rouet, 2008; Raes et al., 2012; Popov et al., 2017). The core of the present research therefore isconcerned with the question of how to effectively promote the kind of meaningful interaction between studentswhen conducting inquiry tasks that allow them to reap the benefits of collaboration.According to Gijlers and de Jong (2009), when conducting typical collaborative inquiry tasks, studentsare engaged in transformative learning activities (those that are directly related to knowledge construction) andregulative activities (those that are necessary to coordinate and sustain mutual understanding at all times).Transformative learning processes include: orientation, hypothesis generation, experimentation, and conclusion.Regulative learning processes include: sustaining mutual understanding, planning and monitoring (Gijlers & deJong, 2009; de Jong, 2006). Each learning process has specific objectives and requires specific types ofcollaboration, activities where information is transferred from one participant to another, to be effective.Coordination of such collaborative activities and appropriate distribution of group efforts and resources are ofcritical importance to the group problem solving (Rummel & Spada, 2005). Furthermore, learning is particularlylikely to occur when the collaborating students engage in meaning-making processes by formulating hypothesesabout certain phenomenon and connect these hypotheses to prior knowledge, or form new insights based ontheir experiences in the learning environment (Gijlers & de Jong, 2009).Building on previous research, this study investigated to what extent students’ engagement intransformative and non-transformative learning processes predicts groups’ learning outcomes within asimulation-based collaborative inquiry learning environment. By examining which process characteristicspositively influence groups’ learning outcomes, it may be possible to help teachers encourage specific types ofstudent activities to improve students’ learning gains.ICLS 2018 Proceedings855© ISLSPeer collaboration as a source of support in the inquiry learning processInquiry tasks are highly challenging for students if they are not sufficiently supported (Makitalo-Siegl, Kohnle,& Fischer, 2011; de Jong & van Joolingen, 1998). Relevant sources of support are typically teachers, smallgroup scripts (i.e. scaffolding that guides students on what to do, what roles to play, what sequences of activitiesto perform during a learning task), a knowledgeable expert (Mäkitalo-Siegl et al., 2011) or peers (Okada &Simon, 1997). In this study, we focused on peer support by exploring how students find support in working withother peers through collaborative learning, i.e., peer scaffolding. Okada and Simon (1997) found that studentswho worked in dyads were found to outperform students who worked alone on a molecular biology inquirylearning task, because dyads were able to formulate more alternative scenarios. Piaget’s (1926) ideas aboutsociocognitive conflicts and Vygotsky’s (1978) “zone of proximal development” help explain why scaffolding(either provided by peers, teachers or other instructional sources) can be effective in addressing students’individual cognitive abilities. A good scaffold can link a student’s current understanding to the learning context.For example, with peer scaffolding, a student may be good at explaining how chemical reactions relate toenergy, yet have limited understanding how to interact with dynamic visualizations (Gerrard et al., 2009). Thepartner student may have expertise in constructing models, yet struggle to design consequential experiments.Each collaborative or knowledge integration unit will enable students to take advantage of the peer expertise.Based on the Piagetian approach of socio-cognitive conflict, the efficacy of collaborative learningeffort is thought to be influenced by the extent to which students can identify and discuss conflicts in theirknowledge and beliefs (De Lisi & Goldbeck, 1999). For instance, participatory simulations create a kind ofcollaborative learning in which every student’s experience and contributions build towards a collectiveunderstanding of the whole system. This process encourages students to make their thinking visible byexplaining their reasoning to their collaborative partners. It is assumed that students working in groups reach ashared understanding through the negotiation of meaning, which requires students to ask questions, havediscussions, explain their thoughts and ideas, and support their viewpoints with additional information (De Lisi& Goldbeck, 1999). Previous research supports that learning is likely to happen when the collaborating studentsbuild on each other’s reasoning by critiquing, challenging and synthesizing opinions, because this form ofdiscourse triggers cognitive activities that stimulate knowledge construction (Andriessen, Baker, Suthers, 2003).This study explores a series of collaborative (non-)transformative learning processes: orientation,hypothesis generation, experimentation, conclusion drawing, regulation, and sustaining mutual understanding(see Table 1). During orientation, students elicit ideas so that they become aware of their views of the situation,add new ideas to fill in missing information to make sense of the topic and strategize about how toapproach/solve a problem at hand. During hypothesis generation, students typically form a statement or a set ofstatements concerning the relations regarding the values, variables and relation between them in order to solvethe task. Previous research studies have particularly examined hypothesis generation process and ways tosupport this process. This process is important because it triggers students’ activation of their prior knowledgethat they try to connect to the variables presented in a problem to explain phenomena. During experimentation,students design, test, run experiments and make sense of the outcomes; this occurs very quickly in computerassisted simulation-based learning environments. When drawing conclusions, students review theirpropositions/hypotheses based on the experimentation data/experiences (Gijlers & de Jong, 2009). Duringregulation, students manage time allocated to complete the tasks and discuss the big procedures of solving tasksand so forth. Another important aspect of collaborative learning is the ability of group members to sustainmutual understanding throughout the whole process. Several aspects of online communication (e.g., reducedsocial presence, lack of nonverbal and social cues) might further hinder mutual understanding betweencollaborative partners, especially when they do not know each other and are collaborating for the first time.Research questions1.2.How do the transformative/non-transformative learning processes look like in more and less successfulgroups in a collaborative inquiry learning environment?How do groups’ transformative/non-transformative processes influence their group problem solvingresults in a collaborative inquiry learning environment?MethodSettingThe platform supporting this study was Concord Consortium – an online collaborative inquiry learningenvironment that includes a database of interactive STEM activities. The participants involved in a series ofICLS 2018 Proceedings856© ISLSactivities in the electronics domain, which were designed to help them understand and apply Ohm's Law byexploring the relationship between resistance and voltage in series circuits. As shown in Figure 1, the virtualelectronics environment includes a series circuit with supply voltage E, external resistance R, R1, R2 and R3 (atthe bottom of Figure 1); the initial conditions and the goal (at the upper left of Figure 1); a digital multimeter(DMM) with a black and a red probes that can be used to measure the voltage, current, or resistance of theresistor as controlled by a student (at the middle left of Figure 1); a calculator which will appear if clicked‘calculator; and a chat window that allows group members to talk about their goal, discuss how to solve theirtask, monitor their progress and so forth.The students worked in groups of three on separate computers. They were all in the same room, butteam members were kept separate from one another and were not allowed to communicate other than by thecomputer-supported chat window. Before working on the tasks, the students watched an introduction video andwere informed that each of them only controlled part of the circuit and they had to work together as a group tosolve the tasks.The electronics domain was divided into four tasks with increasing complexity. The reason forincreasing complexity gradually rather than requiring students to work on full complexity at the beginning is toavoid overwhelming them (Carroll & Carrithers, 1984). Students were free to start at any level and to moveback and forth of different levels. However, in practice, students usually started with Level A, and then movedto Level B and other more complex tasks. Often, they did not move to the next task until they solved the currentone. In Level 1, both E and R values are given, R equals R1, R2 and R3, and the goal voltage across R1, R2, andR3 equals; in Level 2, both E and R values are given, R does not equal zero, and the goal voltage values acrossR1, R2 and R3 are different; in Level 3, E is unknown, R is given and does not equal zero, the goal voltagevalues across R1, R2 and R3 are different; and in Level 4, both E and R values are unknown and the goalvoltage across R1, R2 and R3 are different.Figure 1. Screenshot of a simulation of Level 1 task.Participants and procedures156 students from five different high schools and colleges in the United States participated in this study, andthey worked in 52 groups. The teachers did not assign the students to any groups ahead of time. Students fromthe same class were given a class code so that they could join in the same class space. When they did theirteamwork, they could select to join in any team as long as there were fewer than three students in the team.Therefore, the grouping process was random. Each student was assigned a fake name, and the students did notICLS 2018 Proceedings857© ISLSknow who their team members were in the teamwork process unless they discussed this issue in the chatwindow.Before students participated in the Teaching Teamwork, they read an introduction on the design of thetasks, how to get started, how to use the online chat window and on-screen calculator, and how to submitresults. Students were also provided with an introduction video to help them get familiar with how the systemworks and how to operate the tools.Predicting transformative and non-transformative discussionIn order to understand group discourse while doing their teamwork activities, we adapted a coding scheme (asshown in Table 1) from Gijlers and de Jong (2009) to analyze what kinds of transformative/non-transformativeutterances influence collaborative inquiry learning. Group discourse was categorized into transformative andnon-transformative utterances. Transformative utterances closely relate to knowledge construction, and arefurther divided into orientation, proposition generation, experimentation, and interpretation and conclusion. Thenon-transformative utterances relate to technical features and time/group/task management, such as regulationand sustaining mutual understanding.Most previous research on communication in small group learning is based on manually coding smallsamples of messages (e.g., Kwon, Liu, & Johnson, 2014; Lee, O’Donnell, & Rogat, 2015). These qualitativeand content analysis techniques are impractical, at least difficult, for thousands of lines of log data in ourcontext. Previous research has demonstrated that it is possible to automate the analysis of conversations inCSCL (Mu, Stegmann, Mayfield, Rosé, & Fischer, 2012; Rosé et al., 2008). Therefore, in this study, machinelearning models were built to automatically identify the transformative and non-transformative messages in thesmall group collaboration. Machine learning models apply statistical procedures to map a set of input features tooutput targeted categories (Wang, Krut, & Levine, 2012). In our data, the inputs were various kinds of featuresand the outputs were categorical values representing the category of transformative and non-transformativediscussion an utterance belongs to.This machine learning model construction involves three steps: first, two human coders manually codea random sample of 25% messages to identify which category of transformative and non-transformativediscussion each message represents. Their judgements are considered as the ground truth data. Second, all thesemanually coded messages are represented by a set of linguistic features as input into machine learningalgorithms. Third, various algorithms are tested with different combinations of feature sets, and then evaluatedfor their performance based on 10-fold cross validation. After the machine learning model is constructed, thismodel will be applied to the rest of the dataset so that every message in all groups can be classified intotransformative or non-transformative category.For the first step in creating a machine learning model, 25% of the chatting messages were randomlysampled from the entire dataset. Two senior researchers with extensive background in CSCL coded themindependently. The sample of the coding is demonstrated as Table 1. The initial agreement between the tworesearchers was 76.8%; the remaining disagreements were discussed and resolved. Second, three types oftextual features were used to capture the different language strategies employed by students when engaging incollaboration: 1) rule-based structural features discovered by the coders that capture the key elements of highorder concept propositions. These features are based on the researchers’ qualitative insights as what words ornumber combinations are more likely belong to which kinds of transformative or non-transformative categories;2) functional and linguistic relevant words (e.g. emotion and cognition words) from the Linguistic Inquiry andWord Count (LIWC) program (Pennebaker et al., 2015); and 3) topical features based on Latent DirichletAllocation (LDA) topic modeling to create specialized small group collaboration related dictionaries (as shownin Table 2). Then each LDA topic feature computes the frequency of words in an utterance matching itscorresponding topic dictionary. Third, to optimize the performance of the machine learning model, fourdifferent kinds of classic algorithms were used: Naïve Bayes, Logistic Regression, Support Vector Machines(SVM), and Decision Tree. Details of these algorithms can refer to Kotsiantis, Zaharakis, and Pintelas (2007).All these algorithms were evaluated based on 10-fold cross validation to show the robustness of the predictionperformance.ResultsBy using various algorithms and features, the machine learning models were built and their performance isshown in Table 3. The performance of the machine learning model was measured by precision measure, aclassical metric to evaluate the supervised models. Through comparing various algorithms and different featuressets, the results showed that the decision tree with structural features had the best performance, reaching 79.8%predictive power.ICLS 2018 Proceedings858© ISLSTable 1: The coding scheme of the chatting history during the collaborative inquiry learning processContribution typeTransformative(utterances thatdirectly result inknowledgeconstruction)CategoryOrientationDescriptionForm an idea of thestructure and thecomplexity of the taskat hand by collectinggoal-relatedinformation, thecurrent values of theresistance or voltageand how thesemeasures meet theindividual or groupgoals.Form a statement or aset of statementsconcerning therelations regarding thevalues of the resistanceor voltage in order tosolve the task.Include testing theirideas, and adjusting theresistors by makingthem lower or higher.Exampler = 560 here;ok i need 6.69;i got my v; how manyvolts do you guysneed? its a seriescircuitInterpretation andconclusionReview the propositionin light of theexperimentationoutcomes.RegulationManage time, groupdialogue, the bigprocedures of solvingtasks and so forth.i still need to adjust;well our total v of c1 c3 is12.24 right; sothere is a 3.76 dropacross r=560 totals to16Lets get move onsnow; one sec; where tfis the other person; letstry calculating; get tothe goal; dont we needthe third persSustaining mutualunderstandingIndicateshared/differentunderstanding amongdifferent groupmembers.Information that cannotbe coded with the sixcategories above.PropositiongenerationExperimentationNon-transformative(utterances relate totechnical features, andtime/group/taskmanagement, etc.)N/AICLS 2018 Proceedings859youre gonna need ahigher resistance valuethen; so we can find thecurrent at 6.71mAgoing thur the resistor,then we can find our rvalues using ohms laweveryone set to 180 see what that does;let me get 1v hold up;let me readjust; ok letme go a little higherthen; R1 at 680 ohmsjust lowered to 3.8 V; Iwill switch R1 to 680;can u just change yourresistor to 4.7k ohms ijsut wanna seeOk; same here; yea; gotit; now it does; thatsgoodwho this; who cares;and I aint trynna dothis math tbh;© ISLSTable 2: Feature setsStructural featuresdeed (to be) + number,getting + number, number+ away, at + number,what is everyone.LIWC featuresSummary Dimensions– word count, sentence count, tonePunctuation marks– period, comma colon, exclamation,dash, quote etc.Function words– pronounce, article, adverb, negateOther Grammar– verb, adj, compare, number, quantetc.LDA topical featuresanger, sad, family, friend,social, insight, cause, differ,hear, feel, percept, body,affiliation, power, reward,risk, forecast, future, motion,space, time, money, leisure,assent, swear etc.Table 3: Prediction PerformanceFeature setsStructural FeaturesLIWC FeaturesTopic FeaturesStructural + LIWC FeaturesLIWC Features + Topic FeaturesStructural + LIWC + Topic FeaturesNaïve Bayes43.0%20.2%38.5%39.1%34.6%42.9%Logistic Regression72.3%35.2%61.8%69.4%61.8%66.5%SVM72.2%41.6%54.4%64.5%60.2%60.2%Decision Tree79.8%44.1%52.2%76.0%61.9%72.6%Table 4: Significant Univariate Effects for PerformanceDependent VariableOrientationPerformance1 (Task solved)0 (Task unsolved)1 (Task solved)Means64.973.40.78Standard Deviations10.0415.331.87Interpretation and conclusion0 (Task unsolved)1 (Task solved)0 (Task unsolved)1 (Task solved)0.0413.211.181.090.271.258.812.21Regulation0 (Task unsolved)1 (Task solved)2.517.44Sustaining mutual understanding0 (Task unsolved)1 (Task solved)Proposition generationExperimentation0 (Task unsolved)* < .05, ** < .01, *** <- 0.001F9.55Pr > F0.003**5.740.018*9.550.2664.340.040*5.048.964.70.032*4.0812.594.617.686.90.010**9.786.41We then applied this built model to the rest of the group chats. Then for each category of thetransformational and non-transformational discussions, we calculated the percentage of each category in eachtask chat. Table 4 shows the descriptive statistics of those transformative and non-transformative discussionsover the tasks groups.A MANOVA analysis in which students’ performance on tasks as independent variable and the sixcodings as dependent variables showed a significant multivariate effect for the six latent variables as a group inrelation to performance of different group students in different levels of tasks (p<0.001). Univariate ANOVAs(as follow-ups to MANOVA) were conducted in order to check which individual variables (as opposed to allvariables together) differ between solved and unsolved tasks. The results indicated that the frequency ofproposition generation, regulation and sustaining mutual understanding were significantly higher in the solvedtasks than that in the unsolved tasks; the frequency of orientation and interpretation and conclusion weresignificantly lower in the solved tasks than that in the unsolved tasks; and the difference of experimentation inthe solved and unsolved tasks was not significant (as shown in table 4).ICLS 2018 Proceedings860© ISLSDiscussionThis study was conducted in an authentic setting and on large scale, which supports its ecological validity. Theintellectual merit of this study originates from its contribution to our understanding of the role that bothtransformative and non-transformative learning processes play in collaborative inquiry learning and howimportant they are to the success of problem-solving. Specifically, we discovered the extent to whichtransformative and non-transformative learning processes contribute the group problem solving outcomes. Forexample, the importance of orientation, as well as interpretation and conclusion, is well recognized in theliterature (Gijlers & de Jong, 2009), but we found that if students do not go beyond orientation and focus toomuch on making conclusions without sufficient experimentation evidence or without discussing about therelationship between variables seriously through proposition/hypothesis generation process, they do not end upsolving the task. Also, it should be noted that the groups, which had higher frequency of sustaining mutualunderstanding contributions, were more likely to solve the task. This finding shows the importance of the socialaspect, which plays a large role for the group cohesion, coordination efforts and interactional dynamics of thegroup in general (Kreijns et al., 2003).The results showed the importance of understanding topic-related cognitive knowledge, forming it intoa statement and conveying it to other group members, managing time, dialogue and problem-solvingprocedures, and achieving shared understanding between the group members. On the other hand, when thegroup members focused too much on discussing their goal and reporting their resistor and voltage status but didnot really discuss the relationship between resistance and voltage or interpreted and concluded without enoughevidence or explanation, they were likely to fail in the collaborative problem solving. Previous studies alsoshowed the difference between high-performing and low-performing groups. For instance, Malmberg, Järvelä,Järvenoja and Panadero (2015) indicated that high-performing groups mainly focused on regulating thecognitive, motivational, and social aspects of their collaboration while low-performing group focused more onexternal challenges such as the environment and time management. Sinha, Rogat, Adams-Wiggins and HmeloSilver (2015)’s study showed that some social, cognitive and metacognitive, as well as emotional indicators,may influence students’ engagement in collaborative learning, resulting in improving students’ learningperformance. Their study indicated that the low engagement group developed vague and incomplete plans; theideas contributed by the group members were not elaborated, backed up with evidence, or further discussed;their task monitoring was mainly focused on the spelling of components rather than its content; and the wordsthey used indicated a focus on individual thinking and individual activity such as “I think”, “I am going to” and“my turn”, while the high engagement group used words that refer to the collective (e.g., we).Furthermore, in this study we built accurate machine learning models to identify the transformative andnon-transformative discussion in small group collaborative learning. While previous CSCL studies (e.g., Kwon,Liu, & Johnson, 2014; Lee, O’Donnell, & Rogat, 2015) usually applied qualitative analysis to examine a fewgroup collaborative processes, this research examined a relatively large number of groups and theircollaborations. Such larger scale endeavors can provide more generalizability compared with qualitative casesstudies. In addition, this study is not a purely quantitative and data mining research. In fact, we started withhuman qualitative coding and examination of the group collaboration process for the transformative and nontransformative discussion, and then applied machine learning algorithms to capture the human insights forautomatic coding. By using diverse set of features through various algorithms, we optimized the performance ofthe automatic coding process. The extracted features can be easily applied to construct prediction models inother group learning contexts. While the LIWC features can be readily to use in other scenarios, the rule-basedfeatures and LDA topic features may need to be adapted for specific context. These two steps usually requirelittle effort. As a whole, this study is a practical exemplar for future research to conduct large-scale CSCLanalysis while not losing the human insights.Collaborative inquiry learning manifests many facets and remains a complicated process, asdemonstrated by the results of this study. The findings can inform instructional design choices as wells offerrecommendations for teachers in terms of what specific types of student activities need to be fostered and wheresupport is most needed to benefit from CSCiL.ReferencesAndriessen, J., Baker, M., & Suthers, D. (2003). Argumentation, computer support, and the educational contextof confronting cognitions. In Arguing to learn (pp. 1-25). Springer Netherlands.Carroll, J. M., & Carrithers, C. (1984). Training wheels in a user interface. Communications of the ACM, 27(8),800-806.De Jong, T. (2006). Technological advances in inquiry learning. Science.ICLS 2018 Proceedings861© ISLSDe Jong, T., & Van Joolingen, W. R. (1998). Scientific discovery learning with computer simulations ofconceptual domains. Review of educational research, 68(2), 179-201.De Lisi, R., & Goldbeck, S. L. (1999). Implication of Piagetian theory for peer learning. In A. M. O’Donnell &A. King (Eds.), Cognitive perspectives on peer learning (pp. 3-37). Mahwah: Erlbaum.Gerard, L. F., Varma, K., Corliss, S. B., & Linn, M. C. (2011). Professional development for technologyenhanced inquiry science. Review of educational research, 81(3), 408-448.Gijlers, H., & de Jong, T. (2009). Sharing and confronting propositions in collaborative inquiry learning.Cognition and Instruction, 27(3), 239-268.Jeong, H., Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Jo, K., & Shin, M. (2016, January). CSCL in STEM Education: PreliminaryFindings from a Meta-Analysis. In System Sciences (HICSS), 2016 49th Hawaii InternationalConference on (pp. 11-20). IEEE.Kwon, K., Liu, Y. H., & Johnson, L. P. (2014). Group regulation and social-emotional interactions observed incomputer supported collaborative learning: Comparison between good vs. poor collaborators.Computers & Education, 78, 185-200.Lazonder, A. W., & Rouet, J. F. (2008). Information problem solving instruction: Some cognitive andmetacognitive issues. Computers in Human Behavior, 24(3), 753-765.Lee, A., O’Donnell, A. M., & Rogat, T. K. (2015). Exploration of the cognitive regulatory sub-processesemployed by groups characterized by socially shared and other-regulation in a CSCL context.Computers in Human Behavior, 52, 617-627.Mäkitalo-Siegl, K., Kohnle, C., & Fischer, F. (2011). Computer-supported collaborative inquiry learning andclassroom scripts: Effects on help-seeking processes and learning outcomes. Learning and Instruction,21(2), 257-266.Malmberg, J., Järvelä, S., Järvenoja, H., & Panadero, E. (2015). Promoting socially shared regulation oflearning in CSCL: Progress of socially shared regulation among high-and low-performing groups.Computers in Human Behavior, 52, 562-572.Mu, J., Stegmann, K., Mayfield, E., Rosé, C., & Fischer, F. (2012). The ACODEA framework: Developingsegmentation and classification schemes for fully automatic analysis of online discussions.International journal of computer-supported collaborative learning, 7(2), 285-305.Okada, T., & Simon, H. A. (1997). Collaborative discovery in a scientific domain. Cognitive science, 21(2),109-146.Pennebaker, J. W., Boyd, R. L., Jordan, K., & Blackburn, K. (2015). The development and psychometricproperties of LIWC2015.Piaget, J. (1926). Language and though of the child. London: Paul Kegan. (original work published 1923).Popov, V., Leeuwen, A., & Buis, S. C. A. (2017). Are you with me or not? Temporal synchronicity andtransactivity during CSCL. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 33(5), 424-442.Raes, A., Schellens, T., De Wever, B., & Vanderhoven, E. (2012). Scaffolding information problem solving inweb-based collaborative inquiry learning. Computers & Education, 59(1), 82-94.Rosé, C., Wang, Y. C., Cui, Y., Arguello, J., Stegmann, K., Weinberger, A., & Fischer, F. (2008). Analyzingcollaborative learning processes automatically: Exploiting the advances of computational linguistics incomputer-supported collaborative learning. International journal of computer-supported collaborativelearning, 3(3), 237-27Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate: An instructional approach to promoting collaborativeproblem solving in computer-mediated settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 201-241.Sinha, S., Rogat, T. K., Adams-Wiggins, K. R., & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2015). Collaborative group engagementin a computer-supported inquiry learning environment. International Journal of Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning, 10(3), 273-307.Stahl, G., Koschmann, T. D., & Suthers, D. D. (2006). CSCL: An historical perspective.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind and society: The development of higher mental processes . Cambridge.Wang, Y. C., Kraut, R., & Levine, J. M. (2012, February). To stay or leave?: the relationship of emotional andinformational support to commitment in online health support groups. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (pp. 833-842). ACM.ICLS 2018 Proceedings862© ISLS