An Initial Examination of Designed Features to SupportComputational Thinking in Commercial Early Childhood ToysMegan M. Hamilton, Jody Clarke-Midura, Jessica F. Shumway, and Victor R. Leemegan.hamilton@usu.edu, jody.clarke@usu.edu, jessica.shumway@usu.edu, victor.lee@usu.eduUtah State UniversityAbstract: A number of commercial toys have been developed and marketed for youngchildren that purportedly support the development of computational thinking and codingskills. However, we have yet to specify how these toys are supposed to support computationalthinking. In this poster, we provide an initial examination of designed features in 20commercial toys marketed to 5 and 6 year old children.IntroductionSeveral toys have begun to appear commercially that purport to help children with computational thinking andcoding skills. For instance, Learning Resources has released a “Programmable Robot Mouse” toy that isintended to help children develop computational thinking skills by interacting with a series of buttons on thetoy’s body that determine how the toy will move. The Robot Mouse is just one example in a marketplace that isbecoming rapidly populated with computationally-themed toys. As a research team, we are interested in howsuch toys are actually used and the extent to which they support computational thinking among young children.As a first step, we present in this poster the beginnings of an analytical framework for viewing thecomputational potential of these toys and an initial frequency analysis of some designed computational featuresin coding toys currently on the market.Commercial toys as designed play artifactsPlay has been recognized as fundamental, both developmentally and socially (Piaget, 1962; Vygotsky, 1978).Indeed, learning scientists have argued that play is an underutilized resource that can be made more prominentin the design of novel immersive learning environments (Enyedy, Danish, Delacruz, & Kumar, 2012). As aparallel point, we believe that specific handheld artifacts are also an important component of play to examine.With commercial toys, we assume that particular forms of play are intended in the design of those artifacts.Taking that assumption seriously, we posit there are a set of intended features associated with codingtoys that we designate as ideational and physical. Ideational features rely upon the primitive operationalmeanings and the presumed perspective of the designer. For instance, pressing a button with a forward facingarrow on the Robot Mouse toy is intended to map onto a forward move instruction. It is akin to aspects of whatNorman (1988) refers to as the mental model mapped to a user interface. It refers to the way in which thebehavior of the artifact could be understood. The physical features are those visible and manipulable aspects thatare associated with material affordances (Norman, 1988). The button on the Robot Mouse with the forwardfacing arrow affords pushing, implying it is part of the toys operation. Other computational-themed toys mayhave physical features such as instruction tiles that afford grasping and placing in specific locations.We characterize intended play with these toys as involving a dynamic integration of physical featuresand ideational features. Intended play practice may be that the child is supposed to help an agent (such as amodified mouse) navigate a space (the floor) to complete a journey by way of giving algorithmic instructions.The purported computational relations are then assumed to be particular mappings of ideational features tophysical features that instantiate some aspect of computational thinking. Given those assumptions, we providean examination of several computation-themed coding toys marketed for young children.Data sources and analysisEach toy found in our initial search was screened for inclusion/exclusion based on the following criteria (1):proposed target audience of children ages five to six years old and (2) marketed as a learn-to-code toy orproduct. A final sample of twenty toys were selected, including Bee-Bot, Blue-Bot, Code-a-pillar, Coding Jam,Coji Robot, Cubetto, Dash, Dot, Finch Robot, FurReal Proto Max, Bunny Trails, Robot Races, Kibo, Let’s GoCode Activity Set, Ozobot, Puzzlets, Robot Mouse, Robot Turtles, Siggy Scooter, and Unruly Splats.As a next step, these toys were examined and reviewed based on evaluation of their components,structure, manuals, and/or observation of their use in some informal youth play activities. From review of thesetoys, we identified five categories for how coding is ‘physically’ instantiated. These include tangible, screenbased, button-based, non-electronic, and blended forms. Five computational thinking skills were also identifiedICLS 2018 Proceedings1739© ISLSfrom comparable recent research (e.g., Ehsan, Beebe, & Cardella, 2017). We coded each toy with one or moreof the following: algorithmic thinking, defined as requiring a sequence of steps to complete a task; scaffoldeddebugging, defined as support for finding or fixing goal-deviant errors, problem decomposition, defined asbreaking a goal into subgoals or more restricted actions; abstraction, defined as defining reusable routines orsequences; and pattern recognition, defined as identifying repeating sequences or structures.Figure 1. Youth playing with some of the examined toys, including Robot Mouse (left), Cubetto (center), andOzobot (right).FindingsFigure 2 below shows the distribution of physical features across the twenty toys. Button-based media involvephysical button features and are represented by the Robot Mouse and Bee-Bot. Tangible media are physicalpieces that are placed or manipulated as represented by Cubetto. Figure 3 also shows the distribution ofcomputational thinking skills that are presumed to be specific ideational/physical mappings intended by design.We found that all of the examined toys incorporated algorithmic thinking. Only six covered abstraction. Initialfindings indicate the primary focus of most current coding toys targeting five and six year old children is onteaching algorithms and scaffolded debugging.Figure 2. Physical Features.Figure 3. Computational Thinking Skills.ConclusionWithin the commercial sector, toys that are intended to promote computational thinking are mobilizing a varietyof ideational and physical features. The primary emphases tend to be through tangible and screen-based (i.e.,tablets) media using visual programming languages. Algorithmic thinking and scaffolded debugging appear toreceive more emphasis. Future research should explore how commercial early childhood toys can be integratedwith curriculum to include lesser represented computational thinking skills such as abstraction. In future work,we will examine whether these intended features and computational thinking skills are indeed realized whenchildren are playing with these toys in early childhood education settings.ReferencesEhsan, H., Beebe, C., & Cardella, M.E. (2017) Promoting Computational Thinking Using Apps Paperpresented at P-12 Engineering & Design Education Research Summit, Chicago, Illinois.Enyedy, N., Danish, J., Delacruz, G., & Kumar, M. (2012). Learning physics through play in an augmentedreality environment. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 7(3), 347378.Norman, D. (1988). The Design of Everyday Things. New York: Basic Books.Piaget, J. (1962). Play, dreams, and imitation in childhood. New York, NY: Norton.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes Cambridge, Mass.:Harvard University Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1740© ISLS