Social Interaction, Constructivism and their Applicationwithin (CS)CL TheoriesChristian Hartmann, Jennifer Charlotte Angersbach and Nikol Rummelchristian.hartmann@rub.de, jennifer.angersbach@rub.de, nikol.rummel@rub.deInstitute of Educational Research, Ruhr-Universität BochumAbstract: We argue that the diversity of theories underlying CSCL research and the disputeconcerning the distinction between the terms cooperation and collaboration may be explained(at least in part) by the variability of assumptions concerning the role of social interaction forindividual learning. In this paper we identify different roles ascribed to social interaction intheories of learning and attempt to link them to different forms of constructivism in order tocategorize theoretical conceptualizations of (CS)CL. This categorization may provide astarting point for developing a framework that enables consolidating various theoretical pointsof view.Keywords: cooperation, collaboration, constructivism, social interaction, learning theories, theoreticalframeworkIntroductionThe field of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) is influenced by several scientific disciplines(e.g. psychology, sociology, philosophy, computer science). Therefore CSCL research builds upon a variety ofdifferent theoretical points of view (Stahl, 2013). The phenomena that lie at the heart of CSCL researchcomprise social interaction and learning in the context of information technology (Ludvigsen & Mørch, 2010).To date, no single, overarching theory or paradigm is able to explain the relationship between those terms (orconcepts) comprehensively (Goldbeck & El-Moslimany, 2013). We argue that a potential reason for this may bethat there is no clear and universally valid definition of the concepts social interaction and learning. Someapproaches appear to be compatible, while others seem incommensurable as they diverge concerning centralassumptions concerning the nature of human cognition and social interaction. In this paper, we identify differentroles ascribed to social interaction within theories of (CS)CL and attempt to link these roles to different forms ofconstructivism (see Table 1). We hope that this categorization may facilitate a harmonization of divergingapproaches within CSCL; however, we acknowledge that this short paper provides just a starting point fordeveloping a more formal theoretical framework.Table 1: Theoretical overviewSocial InteractionConstructivismProductExemplary TheoryContextual: variations ofsocial interaction producevariations in individuallearningExogenous: the source ofknowledge is the environmentno common product(individual)Social Learning Theory(Bandura)Enabling: social interactionenables individual learningEndogenous: the source ofknowledge construction areindividual processesConstitutive: socialinteraction is a part of theprocess that producesindividual learningDialectical: the source ofknowledge construction is asynthesis of bothCSCL 2015 Proceedings553additive(cooperative)synergistic(collaborative)Social Interdependence(Deutsch)Distributed Cognition(Hutchins)© ISLSTheoretical conceptualizations of (Computer-Supported) CollaborativeLearningTheoretical conceptualizations of (CS)CL include three major constituent parts: social interaction, individuallearning, and the affordances information technology can bring to these. Due to space constraints, we focus onthe first two parts. We argue that the theoretical diversity within CSCL research might be explained – at least inpart – by the role ascribed to social interaction for learning. Social interaction is a complex construct and nocommon definition of the term exists. This also could explain the controversial issue emphasized by Lipponen(2002) concerning the distinction between the terms collaboration and cooperation within research on CSCL.There is some evidence that the term cooperation relates to a different role of social interaction within learningprocesses, than collaboration does. Therefore we also address this aspect in our conclusion. Social interactionbroadly defined entails the exchange of information between at least two individuals. According to Jaegher, DiPaolo and Gallagher (2010), social interaction can relate to individual learning in three ways: it can be (1) acontextual, (2) an enabling, or (3) a constitutive factor for individual cognitive phenomena. We will explainthese concepts below. Theories of CSCL also include several forms of constructivism (Goldbeck & ElMoslimany, 2013). Moshman (1982) distinguishes between exogenous, endogenous, and dialectical directionsof constructivism. As will be detailed below, we argue that the three roles of social interaction and the threeforms of constructivism can be linked to each other (see Table 1). This then allows categorizing assumptionsabout the nature of learning that underlie theories of CSCL.From the perspective of empiricism, knowledge exists within the empirical or ”external world”, andcan be experienced and processed by an individual (Goldbeck & El-Moslimany, 2013). According to this pointof view, social interaction is a contextual factor for individual learning (Jaegher, Di Paolo & Gallagher, 2010).Variations of individual learning or behavior can be explained by variations within the social environment.Within social learning theory (Bandura, 1977) and corresponding instructional approaches, social interaction isalso a contextual factor. According to Moshman (1982), the construction of knowledge is exogenous and can beexplained on the basis of external input (cf. exogenous constructivism). Expanding behaviorist views, theseapproaches particularly focus on social interaction and the environment as a contextual factor, which serve as aninput for cognitive outcomes (Moshman, 1982).According to a rationalist point of view, and also with reference to cooperation, the nature ofknowledge is described by organizational processes “imposed by the human mind” (Goldbeck & El-Moslimany,2013, p. 43). The ideas of Piaget (1977) can be subsumed under this theoretical direction. Learning is not solelya passive reaction, but it is the process of internal knowledge construction, due to the equilibrium of cognitivestructures. Moshman (1982) therefore localizes Piagets' theory within endogenous constructivism. Socialinteraction is not regarded anymore as merely a contextual factor for individual cognition, but it plays anenabling role in individual learning (Jaegher, Di Paolo & Gallagher, 2010). Against the background of folktheories, Marx argues, that for cooperation “a large number of workers are brought together in one place forpurpose of production” (as cited in Morrison, 1995, p. 86). Further, “the effect of combined labor could not havebeen produced by the isolated worker and […] the combined effect creates a form of cooperation whichincreases the productive power of the individual” (as cited in Morrison, 1995, p. 86). This definition emphasizesthe enabling character of cooperation. Translating this to educational research, cooperation is regarded as a formof social interaction that enables individual cognition. Early research on cooperative learning particularlystressed the benefits of cooperation in comparison to individual learning (Johnson & Johnson, 2002). Insummary, social interaction has an enabling character within cooperation, which causes individual cognitiveprocesses. This thought parallels the ideas of endogenous constructivism.Further, Slavin (1995) distinguishes between motivational and cognitive theories of cooperativelearning. Both threads have in common that they expect social interaction to enable cognitive development.While cognitive approaches focus on explanation-giving or socio-cognitive conflicts as an enabling factor forindividual development (see Mugny & Doise, 1978), motivational approaches focus on the conditions of socialinteractions which foster the motivation to cooperate. Deutsch (1949) highlights the need for socialinterdependence, therefore social interaction becomes an enabling factor for motivation and thus for individualcognition. Social interdependence as an enabling factor illustrates the main characteristic of cooperation, thedivision of labor and unshared information. According to Dillenbourg (1999), the division of labor is a centralaspect when attempting to distinguish cooperation from collaboration. Most concepts of cooperation comprisethe idea that splitting the responsibility for the task product facilitates beneficial social interaction (Damon &Phelps, 1989). Dividing up unshared information can enable individual cognition because of explanations thatarise from the interdependence of the interacting individuals (Aronson, Blaney, Stepan, Sikes & Snapp, 1978).Stahl (2004) agrees with this notion, claiming that in contrast to collaborative learning where ”the work is doneby the group as a whole” (p.63), in “cooperative or coordinated work, tasks are often divided up so thatCSCL 2015 Proceedings554© ISLSindividuals actually work and build knowledge on an individual basis and then attempt to share the results”(Stahl, 2004, p.63). Thus, one can trace back each individual part of the common, and thereby additive, product.In contrast, the concept of collaboration emphasizes a more creative meaning of working together (Kvan, 2000),where the common product is more synergistic, and thus the different contributions of each member cannotclearly be ascribed to just one individual effort. This attribute of collaboration lead us to an understanding ofsocial interaction and constructivism which differs from the enabling, endogenous characterization.Collaboration is more related to dialectical constructivism, and to the assumption that social interactionis a constitutive factor. This perspective can be illustrated by Vygotsky’s zone of proximal development(Moshman, 1982). The zone of proximal development bridges between an enabling and constitutive role ofsocial interaction. On the one hand, it emphasizes social interaction as an enabling factor, because it stresses the”gap between what individuals can do by themselves […] and what they can do in collaboration” (Stahl, 2013,p. 78). On the other hand, the zone of proximal development underlines a constitutive role of interaction.Against the background of specific requirements for development inside the learner, individual cognition andthe social environment presuppose each other. The individual stage of development influences the structure ofthe educational environment, while the environment directs “the course that development takes” (Moshman,1982, p. 375). This interrelation between endogenous and exogenous sources of knowledge is characterized bydialectical constructivism. According to this theoretical viewpoint, social interaction is not just a contextual oran enabling factor, it constitutes individual cognition (Jaegher, Di Paolo and Gallagher, 2010). Social interactionbecomes a part of the cognitive process itself. An important view on (CS)CL which goes along with such aninterrelated conception of individual learning and social interaction is the approach of distributed cognition(Hutchins, 1995). Along similar lines to group cognition (Stahl, 2006), distributed cognition emphasizes thedialectical and constitutive relation between individual cognition and the social or socio-technical environment(e.g. the speed bug within an airplane). In other words, the group product and particularly cognitive processescannot be traced back to individual cognitive processes (endogenous) or the social environment itself(exogenous). It is a reciprocal, dialectical composition of both. Therefore the group product cannot be attributedto the actions of the individuals, but must be attributed to the group as a whole. Furthermore, cognitivephenomena cannot be described exhaustively by individual processes, nor solely by social interaction, but mustbe conceptualized as a complex interplay of both. Most approaches which stress the synergistic and dialecticcharacterization of social interaction use the term collaboration. According to Beers, Boshuizen, Kirschner andGijselaers (2005), the enabling characterization of social interaction focuses on the development of commonground and shared knowledge, formed through negotiation and knowledge exchange. In contrast, the product ofa constitutive and therefore dialectical process particularly stresses the construction of new knowledge as aresult of a synergistic integration. Theoretical approaches like social interdependence theory (Deutsch, 1949)describe social interaction as an enabling factor for individual cognition. In contrast to endogenousconstructivism (e.g. Piaget, 1977), approaches as distributed cognition (Hutchins, 1995) are related to dialecticalconstructivism, and the assumption that social interaction is a constitutive part of the cognitive process itself.ConclusionThe purpose of this paper was to categorize theoretical accounts of (CS)CL concerning their underlyingdefinitions of social interaction and constructivism. Both aspects are central to understanding ‘collaborativelearning’. Social interaction can enable or constitute individual cognitive processes. These roles of socialinteraction are linked to the versions of constructivism identified by Moshman (1982). We stress that theorieswithin CSCL research can be categorized concerning both aspects. This categorization may be the first steptowards a framework that allows integrating the diverse theories of (CS)CL. Though this goal of integrationcannot be realized in this paper, we were able to point out the two central roles of social interaction concerningcooperative and collaborative learning. In addition we linked these roles to the versions of constructivismsuggested by Moshman (1982). In doing so, we found indications for the assumption that the reason for thesometimes controversial usage of the terms cooperation and collaboration could exist because of itscontroversial relation concerning social interaction. Dillenbourg (1999) for example argues that cooperationrelates to the division of labor, while collaboration is related to working together, not individually by solvingsub-tasks. He also developed some conditions for collaboration, for example the “symmetry of knowledge”.Individuals should have a common ground concerning knowledge in order to collaborate. According to that, weclaim that cooperation can be used in order to generate a common ground. The process of cooperation, startingwith finding out who knows what, hence resulting in division of labor and finally learning with the additiveproduct, enables a common ground. Cooperation then can be seen as an optional sub-process of collaboration,which takes place if the symmetry of knowledge is not assured. Summed up, social interaction has an enablingrole within cooperation: it enables the common ground, by dividing the work and finding out, who knows what.CSCL 2015 Proceedings555© ISLSThe knowledge construction though is an individual process, yet the product is additive and gives eachindividual the ability to again construct knowledge individually in order to generate the common ground neededfor collaboration.ReferencesAronson, E., Blaney, N., Stepan, C., Sikes, J., & Snapp, N. (1978). The jigsaw classroom. Beverley Hills, CA:Sage.Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.Beers, P. J., Boshuizen, H. P. A., Kirschner, P. A., & Gijselaers, W. H. (2005). Computer support for knowledgeconstruction in collaborative learning environments. Computers in Human Behavior, 21(4), 623-644.Damon, W., & Phelps, E. (1989). Critical distinctions among three approaches to peer education. InternationalJournal of Educational Research, 13(1), 9-19.De Jaegher, H., Di Paolo, E., & Gallagher, S. (2010). Can social interaction constitute social cognition?. Trendsin Cognitive Science, 14(10), 441-447.Deutsch, M. (1949). A theory of cooperation and competition. Human Relations, 2, 129–152.Dillenbourg, P. (1999). What Do You Mean by “Collaborative Learning”?. In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.),Collaborative Learning. Cognitive and Computational Approaches. Amsterdam & Boston: Elsevier.Goldbeck, S. L., & El-Moslimany, H. (2013). Developmental Approaches to Collaborative Learning. In C. E.Hmelo-Silver, A. Chinn, C. K. K. Chan & A. M. O’Donnel (Eds.), The International Handbook ofCollaborative Learning (41-56). New York, NY & London: Routledge.Hutchins, E. (1995). How a Cockpit Remembers Its Speeds. Cognitive Science, 19, 265-288.Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (2002). Social interdependence theory and university instruction. Theory intopractice. Swiss Journal of Psychology, 61(3), 119-129.Kvan, T. (2000). Collaborative design: what is it?. Automation in Construction, 9, 409-415.Lipponen, L. (2002). Exploring foundations for computer-supported collaborative learning. In proceedings ofCSCL ‘02, 72-81.Ludvigsen, S. R., & Mørch, A. I. (2010). Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning: Basic concepts, MultiplePerspectives, and Emerging Trends. In B. McGaw, P. Peterson, & E. Baker (Eds.), The InternationalEncyclopedia of Education (290-296), 5. Oxford, UK: Elsevier.Morrision, K. (1995). Marx, Durkheim, Weber. Formations of Modern Social Thought. London: Sage.Moshman, D. (1982). Exogenous, Endogenous, and Dialectical Constructivism. Developmental Review, 2, 371384.Mugny, G., & Doise, W. (1978). Socio-cognitive conflict and structure of individual and collectiveperformance. European Journal of Social Psychology, 8, 181-192.Piaget, J. (1977). The development of thought: Equilibration of cognitive structures. Oxford (GB): Viking.Slavin, R. E. (1995). Research on Cooperative Learning and Achievement. What We Know, What We Need toKnow. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 21, 43-69.Stahl, G. (2004). Building collaborative knowing: Elements of a social theory of CSCL. In J.-W. Strijbos, P.Kirschner, & R. Martens (Eds.), What we know about CSCL: And implementing it in higher education(53-86). Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA:MIT Press.Stahl, G. (2013). Theories of Cognition in Collaborative Learning. In C. E. Hmelo-Silver, A. Chinn, C. K. K.Chan & A. M. O’Donnel (Eds.), The International Handbook of Collaborative Learning (74-90). NewYork, NY & London, UK: Routledge.CSCL 2015 Proceedings556© ISLS