Orchestration Challenges Raised by Transposing a Paper-BasedIndividual Activity into a Tablet-Based CSCL Activity:An ExamplePatrick Wang, Université Grenoble Alpes, France, Patrick.Wang@imag.frPierre Tchounikine, Université Grenoble Alpes, France, Pierre.Tchounikine@imag.frMatthieu Quignard, CNRS, ICAR, Lyon, France, Matthieu.Quignard@ens-lyon.frAbstract: This article presents an analysis of the implementation and orchestration challengesraised by turning a traditional paper-based activity (dictation) into a CSCL activity. Itillustrates how implementing a CSCL version of a classical teaching setting can raise manynew issues for teachers. Teachers must make design (scripting) decisions at different stages,both before and during the session. Some support must therefore be provided, such as meansto manage learner productions, focus learner tasks or support learner interactions in differentways. Although the concerns identified and the features implemented here relate to aparticular study, they may have a wider scope of application.Keywords: orchestration, CSCL scripts, tools for teachers, tabletsIntroductionA limiting factor to the introduction of CSCL in standard practices is that collaborative activities, especiallycomputer-based collaborative activities, may be more complex for teachers to manage than traditional ones.This issue may be addressed using the notion of orchestration, which has been defined as “how a teachermanages, in real-time, multi-layered activities in a multi-constraints context” (Dillenbourg, 2013). The balancebetween the interest of the CSCL activity (with respect to an individual and/or not-computer-supported activity)and the difficulty of orchestrating it is a crucial issue. To promote adoption of CSCL activities, teachers shouldbe offered tools that help them orchestrate the setting. At this level, a known issue is that tools that are notsufficiently user-friendly and adapted to the unpredictable context of a classroom may discourage teachers fromengaging in CSCL activities (Roschelle, Dimitriadis, & Hoppe, 2013).In the context of scripted collaborative activities, orchestration may be seen as comprising scripting(primo- and runtime scripting) and conducting activities (Tchounikine, 2013). Primo-scripting consists indefining the learners’ tasks, roles, and resources before the session. Conducting consists in monitoring andanalyzing learner performance and, on this basis, engaging in actions such as providing hints or adapting details(e.g., moving a learner from one group to another if it will not change any important aspect of the settingrationale). Runtime scripting consists in making or reconsidering design decisions according to the actualperformance.In this ongoing project, we are investigating what means should be proposed to teachers to orchestrateCSCL settings. For this purpose, we identified a paper-based pedagogical activity that is traditionally conductedindividually. Then, using an iterative and participative methodology, we designed a computer-basedcollaborative version of the same activity. This version includes a task-related system that allows learners toperform the activity and a minimal version of an orchestration system that, for the moment, just allows teachersto set the session and carry out the necessary conducting and runtime scripting actions. Working with teacherson the design of these systems and then conducting preliminary tests shed some light on orchestration issues andthe requirements for a full-fledged orchestration tool.In the next section, we will present the pedagogical activity we used as an example and identity theimplementation and orchestration challenges encountered. We will then present and discuss the lessons learnedfrom preliminary experiments.From a paper-based individual activity to a CSCL activityDictation is a standard primary school exercise. The teacher dictates a text to the class, and students must writeit out with as few mistakes as possible. The educational objectives are numerous: learning new words;translating spoken language into written language; applying knowledge of grammar and conjugation; andlearning to correct oneself using this knowledge. However, this last objective is probably the hardest one toreach as it is difficult for students to identify their own mistakes.CSCL 2015 Proceedings523© ISLSTo address this issue, negotiated dictation is an option (Cellier, 2004). First, students do a regulardictation. Second, the teacher retrieves all the students’ productions, examines them, and creates groups of threeor four. Each group has to collaboratively rewrite a common version of the text using their individual dictations.This task involves spotting the differences in the individual texts, agreeing on a common version, and justifyingthe final text. During this phase, the teacher interacts with groups only to unblock/support them or solveconflicts. Finally, in an institutionalization phase, teachers may (for example) retrieve all the groups’ dictationsand engage in a discussion with the whole class. This is the scripted setting we implemented: we respected itsrationale and individual/collective structure, and worked out how to support it using electronic devices.In the national context within which this project is conducted, implementation of negotiated dictationsin basic practice is still uncommon. The four school teachers with whom we worked, and all the ones withwhom we informally discussed, unanimously acknowledged that it is a highly interesting setting. Yet, it is alsomuch more complex for teachers to manage, and its implementation raises many interrelated orchestrationissues. Working with these school teachers allowed us to identify some of these challenges.Due to space limitations, in this section we will both introduce our design and explain the orchestrationchallenges (in italics).The first design decision was to equip all students, and the teacher, with an individual tablet. Withrespect to the collaboration objective, the mobility of tablets enables students to join their group with theirtablet. Moreover, the possibility to lay them flat on a table prevents the devices from being seen as physicalbarriers and promotes face-to-face interactions between learners (Alvarez, Brown, & Nussbaum, 2011).With respect to orchestration issues, the use of tablets presents the following advantages:• Respects learner pace. The dictation is stored in an audio file and cut into small sections that studentslisten to using headphones (see Figure 1, A). This allows each student to type and edit the dictation(individual phase; see Figure 1, B) at his/her own pace, and to listen to sections again as needed. Froma teacher perspective, it makes it possible to respect individual differences, which is impossible whenorally dictating to the class.• Facilitates teacher support. Using a tablet allows the teacher to conduct the session while physicallygoing from one student/group to another and helping them as needed.Figure 1. Student interface during the individual phase (using an example in English).The students produce a digital file (list of characters), which may thus be computationally manipulated.This allows for different issues to be addressed, including the following:• Facilitating teacher management of learner productions. In the described setting, this issue is criticalbecause groups are created between the individual and the collective phase. In the paper-based version,collecting and analyzing the student’s dictations is time-consuming, and the collective phase is oftendelayed to the day after. In our design, the teacher is presented with a compilation of the individualdictations immediately after the individual phase, and provided with tools to set and launch thecollective phase with no delay (see below).• Focusing learner tasks. In the paper-based version, when students work together they have to copy theentire text again, which is tedious. In our design, when a group is constituted they can manipulate theirindividual productions to create their collective version. This makes it possible for groups to focus onthe goal of the exercise, i.e., to collaboratively consider the grammatical rules and their applications,instead of wasting time rewriting the dictation.CSCL 2015 Proceedings524© ISLS•Allowing grouping flexibility. Because of the static nature of paper, it is impractical to modify groupsduring the collective phase of a traditional negotiated dictation. In our design, groups may be changedon the fly, with data managed accordingly on the tablets (this is also another example of facilitatingteacher management of learner productions). A student may thus be prompted to negotiate the firstsentence with two peers and the second sentence with two others. This allows the setting to be scriptedby implementing a priori strategies—such as creating homogeneous groups (as a way to promotecollaborative construction of justifications) or heterogeneous groups (as a way to promote tutoringinteractions)—and then, while groups enact the collaborative phase, adapting the groups on the fly.Figure 2. Student interface #1 during the collective phase: aligned dictation and voting toolConsidering together the design of the system offered to students and the orchestration issues led us toelaborate new notions such as “aligned dictation”. An aligned dictation merges the group’s three individualdictations (see student view in Figure 2, C; each word appears as many times as there are different spellings forit in the individual dictations; following the teachers’ suggestion, the dictations are not tagged with the students’names to avoid stigmatization). This calls the students’ attention to the differences and allows them to fullyfocus on their negotiation/justification tasks. The aligned dictation also opens up further possibilities to focuslearner tasks by designating and/or ordering words that a given group should negotiate (in red and underlined inFigure 2, C). These words may be designated before the session (primo-scripting) or once the teacher hasanalyzed students’ individual productions (run-time scripting), by selecting these words in the aligneddictations.The “aligned dictation” notion, however, raises teacher management of learner productions issues,including a very practical one. As students may write words in an incorrect way (e.g., writing “your self” insteadof “yourself”) or omit some words, the words in individual dictations may not correspond one to one. Toaddress this orchestration issue, we designed a production management tool that displays the dictations onebelow the other on the teacher’s tablet and offers him/her features to align the dictations by merging multiplewords into a single word, dividing words into multiple words, or adding blank words (via “gestures”, i.e., directmanipulations on the tablet screen, Figure 3). In Figure 3, the first line shows the correct sentence as thereference for aligning the dictations as necessary. Here, the string “moment,but” must be separated into twowords. In some cases, such as this one, the required treatment is obvious and may be more or less automated; inothers it requires human intervention, which is the rationale for this tool.Figure 3. Teacher interface to align the students' dictations.Another important orchestration aspect is offering teachers different ways of supporting learners. Theraison d’être of negotiated dictations is to make students discuss grammar and conjugation rules and how theyCSCL 2015 Proceedings525© ISLSapply. Researchers and practitioners agree that it is difficult for students/groups to engage in such interactionsand propose well-constructed justifications. This difficulty depends on multiple factors, such as the students’characteristics, group composition, the dictation, or students’ experiences with this exercise. To deal with this,teachers are interested in means for adapting the support provided to students.To explore this issue, we designed an agreement/justification support tool that functions as follows:During the collective phase, the groups of three students share two dedicated tablets. On the first one, they startby selecting the word or group of words to be negotiated by touching it on the screen (Figure 2, C). The systemthen displays a voting tool (Figure 2, D) on that same tablet. This voting tool requires students to adopt anindividual position (which may be the same as or different from that of their peers) by selecting a spelling (i.e.,agreeing on one of the solutions submitted by students) or proposing a new one. When they have voted, thesystem displays a justification tool on the second tablet. Different options are available for this phase (Figure 4).For example, support can be provided in the form of predefined justifications, or students can be asked to typetheir own justification in a blank text box.Figure 4. Student interface #2 during the collective phase: two different justification tools.As a final summary, the activity proceeds as follows: Students first copy a predefined sentence to getused to the tablet, and then engage in their individual dictation. The teacher then terminates that phase, alignsthe dictations, creates the groups, and then defines the words groups should negotiate. The students are assignedto a group via a message on their tablet and join their peers. Each student/tablet in a group is associated with arole: one tablet displays the group’s aligned dictations and the “voting” device (Figure 2, C and D); one tabletdisplays the selected justification tool (Figure 4); and the third tablet displays some help (e.g. conjugationtables). Here again, this gives options, such as switching roles. Finally, the teacher receives all the groupdictations and justifications and can proceed to the institutionalization phase. Although we have not yetaddressed this phase, teacher interviews and overall design characteristics suggest many strategies based ondisplaying/sorting the different dictations and/or justifications.Preliminary tests and lessons learnedWe conducted preliminary tests with three successive groups of three students (grade 4, 9-10 years old) and thena second test in a classroom (grade 4, 28 students). The first test included the individual and collective phases. Itaimed to verify technical functioning and usability of the student system; to determine whether studentsnegotiate; and to verify technical functioning of the system (i.e., that it enables setting the session, visualizingand aligning dictations, creating groups, and prompting students to join their group for the collective phase). Thesecond test focused on the individual phase. It was conducted in half-classes, i.e., approximately 15 studentsworking on the dictation while the others worked on other activities. It aimed to verify that the setting could bedeployed in an actual classroom, i.e., given the potential technical and pedagogical issues related to use of thesystem by 15 students, and to identify further orchestration issues. The considerations identified hereafter arebased on data collected during these two preliminary tests.Some of the students were already familiar with tablets because they had one at home, while otherswere discovering this type of device for the first time. None of the students, including those who wereunfamiliar with tablets, had serious difficulty in manipulating the tablets or, most critically, typing thedictations. All of them quickly became familiar with the system. There were, however, important differences inhow long it took to type the dictation, with times ranging from 13 to 26 minutes, and average and median timesclose to 20 minutes.All the students tested indicated high appreciation of being able to listen to the audio dictation at theirown pace and to listen to sections again as needed.The first test, within which the groups used the system during the negotiation phase, showed they docollaborate. This corroborates the findings of not-computer-supported negotiated dictations. How the system’soverall design (e.g., the aligned dictations) and the justification interface (e.g., use of predefined sentences)CSCL 2015 Proceedings526© ISLSimpact this negotiation will be examined in future studies with a larger number of groups. However, studiesrelated to scripted argumentation (Stegmann et al., 2007; Weinberger et al., 2010) suggest that such design maypositively impact collaboration.With respect to orchestration, teachers were afraid that students’ dictations would be difficult to align.In fact, very few required merging or dividing effective words. However, many dictations did not respecttypographic conventions regarding the use of whitespace characters with punctuation marks. This suggests aneed to support teachers by implementing an automated preprocessing phase prior to manual alignment tomanage easy cases (i.e., another teacher management of learner productions tool). Similarly, it may be useful tofacilitate teacher grouping process. In both cases, interactions with teachers clearly define the design strategy tobe adopted: propose a solution to the teacher, who can accept or refine it as needed.These tests also suggested additional features that the full-fledged orchestration tool should provide,including the following:• Heterogeneity management. The counterpart of the (positive) fact that students go at their own pace isthat, in a given amount of time, they will write a significantly different number of sentences (see thefigures on dictation typing time). In the tested groups, there were also disparities in the time spentjustifying words. This highlights the importance of helping teachers deal with heterogeneity. In ourcase, it may be addressed by offering teachers the means to decide when to stop the individual phase(typically, when all students have advanced sufficiently to have issues to negotiate on), then adapt thenumber of words to justify, and finally manage the groups accordingly. Another option is to offerteachers means to decide whether some students should skip to the collective phase while otherscontinue the individual one, and to manage the activity accordingly.• Management of technical issues. Teachers are often reluctant to use technology because the systemsmay not work. This is wise. Addressing this issue presents a technical challenge. In our case, givenhow tablets function, it is technically impossible to prevent students from quitting the applicationand/or generating events that may cause the application or network to break down. Therefore, it hasproven essential that the technical architecture be natively designed to account for the fact that suchproblems will occur and deal with them, i.e., that teachers be offered features to seamlessly reintegratestudents facing technical issues into the activity without disturbing others.DiscussionThe first test we conducted allowed us to check technical aspects of the system and its usability. The second testconfirmed the usability and provided hints for further orchestration means. Both of these tests, althoughinvolving a limited number of students/groups, suggest that the CSCL version of the exercise works well.However, because of the innovative nature of this project, the setting has two important characteristics thatmake it difficult to analyze results.The first issue concerns disentangling the effect of the system’s designed properties from the impact ofusing a new technology in classroom. The students were not used to working with tablets in a school context,and some were even manipulating tablets for the first time. Their general reaction was very positive, assuggested by their enthusiasm when they discovered the tablets, their use of the devices and their wishes to usethe system again. At this level, however, it is difficult to separate the effects of the system and its designedfeatures from the effects of using some “cool” technology in class.The second issue involves disentangling the tool from the procedure. Negotiated dictation is still veryuncommon, and none of the teachers or students had participated in such a task before. The positive feedbackfrom teachers and students may thus be partly related to the negotiated dictation principle and partly to how thesystem supports it.Disentangling these aspects is not easy, and requires repeating experiments.Nevertheless, these tests at least illustrate how the technology facilitates the negotiated dictationprocedure (e.g., by avoiding copying text) and provides teaching options (e.g., by offering different types ofjustification support). They further suggest that the design is usable (students reported no difficulty and actedintuitively).ConclusionWe have presented a case study that illustrates different aspects of CSCL scripted settings orchestration issues.First, implementing a CSCL version of a very classical teaching setting may raise many new orchestration issuesfor teachers, which may prevent “teachers acting in standard situations” (as opposed to “teachers acting withresearchers”) from taking the plunge. It is therefore important to consider teachers’ perspectives and requests asCSCL 2015 Proceedings527© ISLSsuch, and offer them high flexibility. Second, considering the task-oriented system and the orchestration systemjointly suggests design options for both systems. Third, orchestration requires that teachers make design(scripting) decisions at different stages, both before and during the session.Although this is far from an exhaustive typology, we have highlighted and illustrated a number oforchestration features that were implemented in a context-specific way but have a larger scope of application:facilitating teacher management of learner productions; focusing learner tasks; enabling grouping flexibility;offering different ways of supporting learners; offering means for managing heterogeneity; and offering meansfor managing technical issues. These features include conducting features (means to respect individual learningpaces, offer different supports, facilitate teacher support for learners, facilitate teacher management of learnerproductions, manage heterogeneity, and manage technical issues) and scripting features (means to facilitate thegrouping process, to allow group flexibility, to focus learners’ tasks, and to support learners interactions indifferent ways).The research agenda includes deepening these orchestration features, studying how to avoidoverwhelming teachers with too many options or too much information, and empirically studying whether theproposed features allow them to satisfactorily orchestrate the session.Whether the system allows teachers to adequately orchestrate the session may be regarded fromdifferent perspectives. One is the output in terms of learner collaboration and learning. The other is the teacher’sperception of how the system allows him/her to set and manage the session. For instance, we mentioned thatteachers proposed different ways of supporting/constraining learner interactions (allowing differences orimposing one group answer; asking for individual or group justifications; proposing a predefined justificationsentence to be instantiated or no support). The outputs of these strategies in terms of learner collaboration andlearning may be tested by empirical work. From an orchestration perspective, however, another interestingaspect is that teachers had different opinions on the strategy they would like to use, and reported that it wouldvary by learner and over time. Offering teachers the flexibility to decide (and to change decisions on the flyif/when needed) was perceived positively, whereas imposing an option could prevent adoption of the system.Studying these aspects is a critical issue for research on orchestration and, more generally, educational softwaredesign (Tchounikine, 2011).ReferencesAlvarez, C., Brown, C., & Nussbaum, M. (2011). Comparative study of netbooks and tablet PCs for fosteringface-to-face collaborative learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 27(2), 834–844.Cellier, M. (2004). Dire l’orthographe: quelques dispositifs. In C. Vargas (Ed.), Langues et études de lalangue : Approches linguistiques et didactiques (pp. 311–321). Publications de l’université deProvence.Dillenbourg, P. (2013). Design for classroom orchestration. Computers & Education, 69, 485–492.Roschelle, J., Dimitriadis, Y., & Hoppe, U. (2013). Classroom orchestration: Synthesis. Computers &Education, 69, 523–526.Stegmann, K., Weinberger, A., & Fischer, F. (2007). Facilitating argumentative knowledge construction withcomputer-supported collaboration scripts. International Journal of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning, 2 (4), 421-447.Tchounikine, P. (2013). Clarifying design for orchestration: Orchestration and orchestrable technology, scriptingand conducting. Computers & Education, 69, 500–503.Tchounikine P. (2011). Computer Science and Educational Software Design - A Resource for MultidisciplinaryWork in Technology Enhanced Learning. Springer. DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-20003-8_6.Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K., & Fischer, F. (2010). Learning to argue online: Scripted groups surpassindividuals (unscripted groups do not). Computers in Human Behavior, 26, 506–515.AcknowledgmentsThis work is partially funded by a grant from the ARC6 action of the Rhône-Alpes region (France).CSCL 2015 Proceedings528© ISLS