The Student-Produced Electronic Portfolio in Craft EducationAuli Saarinen, Pirita Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, Kai Hakkarainen,auli.h.saarinen@helsinki.fi, pirita.seitamaa-hakkarainen@helsinki.fi, kai.hakkarainen@helsinki.fiDepartment of Education, Faculty of Educational Sciences, University of HelsinkiAbstract: The authors studied primary school students’ experiences of using an electronicportfolio in their craft education over four years. A stimulated recall interview was applied tocollect user experiences and qualitative content analysis to analyse the collected data. Theresults indicate that the electronic portfolio was experienced as a multipurpose tool to supportlearning. It makes the learning process visible and in that way helps focus on and improves thequality of learning.IntroductionThe aim of this study is to research the use of an electronic portfolio (ePortfolio) in craft education at the primaryschool level and especially to develop its use as a method of documentation. The main research question focuseson the pupils’ experiences of the functions and the benefits of using an ePortfolio.The ePortfolio is a personalized tracking of learning with authentic evidence (e.g., Carmen and Christie,2006; Lorenzo and Ittelson, 2005; Barrett, 2010). The ePortfolio´s role relatively often culminates in assessmentand its main task is to bring forth the successes (Sherman, 2006). Sherman argues for more versatile use of theePortfolio, such as reflection, goal setting and communication. Furthermore, Waltz (2006) defines university levelstudents’ definitions of the ePortfolio’s role in their studies. Students described the ePortfolio as a means of storingtheir work, a way of collecting evidence of their development, a tool for information management and a tool forconnecting and communicating with their teachers and other students. Parallel results were obtained with primaryschool students (Saarinen et al, 2016). Fundamentally ePortfolios should be studied as a means to increase pupils’own understanding of their learning (Barrett, 2003). The documentation of one’s own learning process and itsemphasis in assessment strongly emphasized in the renewed curriculum for craft education in Finland, whichcame into effect in 2016. The learner’s active role, mastery of ICT tools and metacognitive skills are componentsof transversal competences, which are integrated across all school subjects in all grade levels (FNBE, 2014).This longitudinal development study is based on data collected over four years, during which the studentsprogressed from the beginning of the 3rd grade to the end of the 6th grade. The ePortfolio process was facilitatedwith one-hour starting session and general discussion of how to document, what to document and how often. Thedigital application starts portfolio with an empty white paper, which student fills with photos, writings and audioelements. The functionalities and instruction for using the ePortfolio were developed across the years: theminimum list of documentation was defined (the first year), video clips guidance was offered (the second year),peer-assessment was added (the third year) and optional video recording was permitted (the fourth year).MethodA semi-structured stimulated recall interview was applied when the students were in the fifth grade to collect theirexperiences after three years of using the ePortfolio. Holding interviews provided an easier and more flexiblemeans of gathering data than having the students write about their experiences. The students’ own ePortfolioswere used as stimuli during the interviews, as their use facilitated the students’ recollection of past events. All theinterviews (n=38) were video recorded, transcribed and analysed using data-driven content analysis. A qualitativecontent analysis program (ATLAS.ti) was used to analyse the data. The students’ notes were organized accordingto the message of the notation. One notation could be divided into smaller units, but then again, the length of oneunit could vary from one word to thirty words.ResultsThe results indicate that an ePortfolio is a useful method for craft education. When students begin using it duringthe early school years, it is experienced as a natural part of the work process. The four key functions identified bystudents (see Figure 1.) were the storing and management of information, as well as communication andverification of development (inner circle). The experienced educational benefits were related to supporting thework process: for instance, the activities documented in the appeared to operate as stimuli to memory, elicitingthe recollection of concepts in a way that deepened the understanding of past experiences (outer circle).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1417© ISLSFigure 1. The student-identified functions of the ePortfolio are in the inner circle, and its benefits in the outercircle.DiscussionThe ePortfolio makes it easier to draw attention to the learning process. It offers a means of concretizing the stepsof the learning process, which in turn enables the learner, or others, to monitor, reflect on and assess it afterwards.The method was considered to be positive and encouraging, and several benefits were pointed out. Each pupillearned to find their own individual style of using the method and had the opportunity to emphasize their ownperspective. These results are in line with earlier research results (Walz, 2006), and relevant because they areuseful to teachers both in developing their pedagogical practices and in expanding their understanding of themultiple possibilities of the ePortfolio.ReferencesBarrett, H. C. (2003). The research on portfolios in education. Retrieved September, 3.Barrett, H., 2010. Balancing the two faces of ePortfolios. Educação, Formação & Tecnologias-ISSN 1646-933X,3(1), pp. 6-14.Finnish National Board of Education, (2014). Perusopetuksen opetussuunnitelman perusteet 2014 [National CoreCurriculum of Basic Education 2014].Carmean, C. and Christie, A., 2006. EPortfolios: Constructing meaning across time, space, and curriculum.Handbook of research on ePortfolios, pp. 33-43.Lorenzo, G. and Ittelson, J., 2005. An overview of e-portfolios. Educause learning initiative, 1, pp. 1-27.Sherman, G., 2006. Instructional roles of electronic portfolios. Handbook of research on ePortfolios, pp. 1-14.Saarinen, A., Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P. and Hakkarainen, K. (2016). The Functions and Benefits of the ePortfolioin Craft Education at the Primary Level. Design and Technology Education. 21(3), pp. 29-40Walz, P. (2006). An overview of student ePortfolio functions. Handbook of research on ePortfolios, pp. 194-205.AcknowledgmentsThe present study has been supported by the Academy of Finland (under project no. 12863837).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1418© ISLS