Mobile City Science:Technology-Supported Collaborative Learning at Community ScaleKatie Headrick Taylor, University of Washington, kht126@uw.eduDeborah Silvis, University of Washington, dsilvis@uw.eduAbstract: In a new era of digital media and democracy, there is widespread concern thattechnologies have incapacitated us from learning and teaching across diverse communitiesand perspectives. While this notion may ring true in certain contexts, this paper describes astudy, “Mobile City Science,” that designed a novel learning experience in which educatorsand young people used mobile and place-based technologies to document and analyze thediverse perspectives of community members living in rapidly changing urban areas. Theobjective of this work was to teach young people digital literacies associated with “cityscience,” an emerging interdisciplinary field that creates data-driven approaches tocomplicated community issues. Participants were videotaped as they collected and analyzedinformation about a specific neighborhood using wearable cameras, GPS devices, heart ratemonitors, and a GIS software. Early findings show that Mobile City Science uses technologyto engage people with diverse perspectives around a community scale problem.Major issues addressedTechnology has changed the nature of political engagement. For every “success” story of increased governmenttransparency and youth mobilization, there is an instance of political balkanization and divisiveness (e.g.,Manjoo, 2016). In this new era of digital media and technology, many have argued that the sheer ubiquity of ourtechnological interactions have incapacitated us from learning and teaching across diverse communities andperspectives. In an article titled, “How We Broke Democracy,” Rose-Stockwell wrote, “If we cannot build thetools of our media to encourage empathy and consensus, we will retract further into toxic divisions that havecome to define us today” (2016). This study, “Mobile City Science,” represents one such attempt to usetechnology and digital media as a means of encouraging empathy and building consensus around a “live”community problem. Importantly (and in contrast to Facebook and Twitter), technologies in Mobile CityScience engage young people and youth educators in neighborhoods, in face-to-face interactions, to generatenew information and representations of diverse perspectives.Before the most recent presidential election, social science was promoting the idea that “big data,”produced by our multiple devices and technologies, would make cities and their citizens “smarter,” or workbetter together. After the results of the election came through on November 8, 2016, several fundamentalquestions are now being asked about the promise of big data. Whose lives do these data actually represent? Wholearns what from these data? What is the origin of data, and who has legitimacy to make interpretations andarguments from it? How did communities become so balkanized and bifurcated, bolstered by “data?”While these questions remain problematic issues for political engagement at large, they also open-upnovel teaching and learning opportunities for underrepresented young people to create and engage with vastamounts of data across stakeholders that may have divergent perspectives on community issues. Creatinginsights and data-driven approaches to community issues, or “city science,” is an interdisciplinary field that isemerging alongside ubiquitous computing (MIT Media Lab, n.d.). Geospatial applications and mobile devicesare especially conducive to this kind of data-driven inquiry process; these tools support and promote movingaround the community and interfacing with shopkeepers, residents, and visitors in place. The mappingcapabilities of geospatial apps and tools support a spatio-temporal way of recording, interpreting, arguing fromthe data collected around the neighborhood. These technological affordances have been shown to differentlyengage people in community-based issues, in ways that leverage physical mobility, be it walking, bussing, orbicycling around a geographic area (e.g., Nold, 2009; Taylor, 2013).Potential significance of the workAs a whole, this research takes seriously the role of underrepresented young people using technology in JaneJacobs’ (1961) provocation that “…cities have the capability of providing something for everybody, onlybecause, and only when, they are created by everybody” (p. 238). Mobile City Science (MCS) provides four keycontributions to the learning sciences and other fields concerned with new ways of engaging underrepresentedyouth in community-level issues and dialogue through technology. First, MCS informs and contributes totheories of embodied learning (e.g., Alibali & Nathan, 2012; Farnell, 1999; Glenberg, Gutierrez, Levin,CSCL 2017 Proceedings391© ISLSJapuntich, & Kaschak, 2004; Goldin-Meadow, Cook, & Mitchell, 2009) by analyzing how and what youngpeople, and the people that educate them, learn about complex community issues from being on-the-movethrough their neighborhoods with mobile and location aware technologies. Second, MCS formalizes innovativeways of teaching community engagement to young people living in underserved areas of the city; MCS is a setof on-the-move teaching and learning experiences that support young people in collecting, analyzing, andarguing from spatial and other forms of data (e.g., GPS tracks, geo-referenced video files, density plots, placeelicited interviews). Again, these data represent the diversity of lived experiences within the geographic area.Third, MCS provides accessible, technologically enhanced ways for youth-serving organizations, communitydevelopers, urban planners, and/or social science educators to engage young people in civic processes andconversations happening at the scale of the city. Finally, MCS will contribute to a new theory of social changewhere technologies potentially democratize (rather than balkanize) learning and participation (e.g., Bilkstein,2013; Papert, 1991; Resnick, et al., 2000; Wilensky & Papert, 2010) in processes of community development toinclude young people’s data-driven perspectives in planning and policy implementation.ApproachesThe past decade has seen rapid growth in development and distribution of location-aware technologies (e.g.,GPS in mobile devices), digital mapping tools (e.g., Google Maps, Open Maps), and tools for spatial analysisand modeling (e.g., QGIS, MapBox, mobile augmented reality). These technologies create new opportunities forlinking data on personal mobility with a growing variety of spatially organized, open, and large-scale data sets(Busch, 2014; Kahn & Hall, 2016). In the hands of consumers, including school-aged youth, these tools anddiverse sources of information are increasingly taken up in emerging practices of “neo-geography” (Goodchild,2009; Graham, 2009; Liu & Palen, 2010). Some of these practices involve substantive learning opportunities inoverlapping conceptual domains for STEM disciplines (e.g., Enyedy & Mukhopadhyay, 2007; Radinsky, 2008)and the humanities (e.g., Farman, 2013, 2015; Van Wart, Tsai, & Parikh, 2010).Theoretical approachesEngaging young people and adult stakeholders in mobile experiences through the city exemplifies a blurring ofphysical experience and representation that is so central to theories of embodiment. Blurring the disconnectbetween the physical and the represented is the basis for embodied learning, and is arguably a more authenticmeans for teaching and learning irrespective of content domain (e.g., Alibali & Nathan, 2012; Farnell, 1999;Glenberg et al., 2004; Goldin-Meadow, Cook, & Mitchell, 2009). Embodied learning theorizes learning as aprocess that is distributed across all of the sense-making modes of the body. This multimodality of sensemaking is fundamental to not just learning in situ, but to how we organize “perceptual symbol systems”(Barsalou, 1999) individually and socially. For instance, Lakoff & Johnson (1980) demonstrated how seeminglyabstracted metaphors are grounded in, or harken back to, some fundamental embodied experience that makesthem almost universally understood in interactions.Importantly for this work, researchers pursuing questions with an embodied learning lens carefullyconsider how all of these meaning-making modes are mediated by the various technologies that permeate dailylife (e.g., Hall, Ma & Nemirovsky, 2015; Lee & Thomas, 2011; Keating & Sunakawa, 2011). An aim of MCS isto contribute to a more robust theory of embodied learning by providing descriptive and comparative analysesof how young people and adult professionals make “body sense” (Cajete, 2000) of the urban spaces in whichthey are engaging with technology. In a special issue of the Journal of the Learning Sciences, researchersprovided arguments for the centrality of the body for learning mathematics (Hall & Nemirovsky, 2012). Whilethat work has most recently promoted embodied cognition as a viable theory of learning, educators andeducational researchers still struggle against the tendency to fetishize abstracted, “pure knowledge” over theways in which our moving, feeling bodies make sense of the world. Additionally, and as Stevens (2012) pointedout in his commentary to the “Modalities of Body Engagement in Mathematical Activity and Learning” JLSSpecial Issue, attempting to build a broad understanding of how the body and learning relate via solelyclassroom-based studies is a major limitation to robust theory-building. Thus, MCS provides a (literally)grounded account of embodiment that problematizes the absence of space and place in previous accounts oflearning.Cognitive and learning scientists agree that “the original function of any brain is to control motion –only mobile organisms have brains” (Streek, Goodwin, & LeBaron, 2011, p. 7). However, leveraging physicalmobility as a learning resource is still undervalued and underutilized in more traditional learning arrangements.Some researchers have pushed the possibilities of learning on-the-move with location aware and wearabletechnologies for creating place-based, mobile experiences (e.g., Hall, Ma, & Nemirovsky, 2014; Rosner, et al.,2015; Ryokai & Agogino, 2013; Taylor & Hall, 2013; Taylor, accepted). One early example of using mobilityCSCL 2017 Proceedings392© ISLSas a means for learning about and showing an experience of a place is the art of Jeremy Wood, an artist workingat the intersection of cartography, visual arts, and geometry (Lauriault & Wood, 2009). Wood made visible hisown embodied experiences through the landscape by re-appropriating GPS, a tool historically used by the USMilitary to precisely locate and track its missile submarines (Sample, 2014). Wood’s “GPS drawings”represented a coordinating effort of walking (or driving or biking or swimming) and technology to tell a storyabout a place. These stories, in the form of geospatial representations, taught viewers about a practiced, livedlandscape that an overhead satellite map makes invisible. In this way, physical mobility (mediated by geospatialtechnology) not only allowed the maker to see a place differently through first walking it and then viewing theGPS tracks, but also taught an audience about a different experience of that place.This novel way of using mobile mapping technologies highlights how walking especially remains anact of civic and political agency (Rosner, 2015; Ingold, 2007; Suchman, 1995). Silent marches, migrations, and“memory walks” (Bonilla, 2011) are acts of dissatisfaction with the status quo; these walks also represent aprocess of teaching and learning where diverse publics inform more powerful others of inequitable livedexperiences. This notion of mobility was a launching point for Mobile City Science; this designed experiencesupports youth to produce maps that are representative of their lived experiences of being a young person in arapidly shifting urban setting, and the experiences of others. Moreover, MCS is intended to bridge the world ofmapping and quantification familiar to urban planners and cartographers to the world of place-based storytelling and affect to produce a new opportunity space for teaching and learning at the interface of diverse publics(e.g., young people, shopkeepers, residents, urban planners, neighborhood school educators, parents).Methodological approachesMobile City Science is a community-based design research project (e.g., Bang, Faber, Gurneau, Marin, & Soto,2016) to understand and create new forms of techno-civic engagement for young people with mobile andlocation-based tools. We are asking these top-level research questions that guide the design study: (1) How doparticipants (i.e., young people and youth educators) use the designed MCS activities (e.g., historicneighborhood geocache, GPS drawing) to engage diverse perspectives on a community issue? (2) What kinds ofdata do participants collect and produce about their communities using these tools? (3) Whose lived experiencesand perspectives do these data represent? (4) How are young people using data, and these tools, to makeinformed arguments and representations about changes to their communities?We are working closely with three youth-serving organizations, Oasis Center, Digital Youth Network,and New York Hall of Science. These three organizations are highly respected for their technologically richversions of “citizen science” they already do with young people and adult community members in Nashville,Chicago, and Queens, New York. We held, and are still holding, co-design meetings that are audio recorded andanalyzed thematically. We held a training for youth educators from these organizations to implement the MobileCity Science curriculum in their respective communities. The four-day training was audio and video recorded.The MCSC we create builds upon the current on-the-move citizen science programs that these youthserving institutions already deliver. Importantly, MCS activities leverage mobile and location awaretechnologies for youth to collect, analyze, and argue from spatial and other forms of data. Some of the followingteaching activities, and corresponding learning objectives, are included in past and ongoing MCSimplementations (see Figures a, b, c, and d below for examples):MCS designed activities• Pre/Post Assessment: On the first and last days of the MCSC, young people are asked to draw theirneighborhood on paper (i.e., “free recall maps,” Hart, 1977) and asked open protocol questions as theydraw. The changes between the free recall maps drawn on the first day of the study and the final dayhelp us understand how young people’s perceptions of their neighborhoods, and maps as a particularway of representing their neighborhoods, have changed over the course of the curriculum.• Youth Neighborhood Data Collection supports young people to understand the current state of theirneighborhood. Two examples of collecting neighborhood data are below:o Youth conduct walking and biking audits of the neighborhood with maps in hand. As theymove through the neighborhood, they annotate the map with the routes they take, things thatare missing on the map, map inaccuracies, and conventions that would be helpful for this wayfinding exercise. Young people also take geo-tagged digital photos, and collect heart rate data(dramatic elevation changes are a real barrier for pedestrians and cyclists, especially inSeattle). They add this data, including the photos and heart rate information, into an opensource GIS software (i.e., Google Earth). There are two important learning objectivesCSCL 2017 Proceedings393© ISLSo•••associated with this activity. The first learning objective is to learn about maps and spatialdata through different representations (i.e., a paper map and a digital map) of a familiar place.The second related objective is for young people to learn about what different types of mapsshow, ignore, and highlight and how these different portrayals achieve a different purpose andcan convey very different messages regarding the same place.Youth conduct an historic geocache of the neighborhood with GPS devices in hand to collecthistoric data about the place in which they live (e.g., famous residents, important institutions,urban development decisions). At each cache, they have to produce some form of data (e.g.,geo-tagged photo, geo-referenced video, GPS tracks, interview). Participating youth add thisdata as another map layer into an open source GIS software. The learning objectives for thisactivity are threefold. First, young people learn how different spatial phenomena areconnected and impact people differently, over time. Secondly, young people gain facility withGPS devices and open source GIS software through recording and representing their owndata. Related to this second objective, youth will begin to understand the affordances andlimitations of these technologies based on one’s purpose for using them. Third, young peopleare encountering notions of difference and multiple experiences of the same place.Youth Data Analysis supports young people to interrogate data as a different way of seeing one’sneighborhood. Two examples of analyzing data are below:o Participating youth collect and analyze their personal time geography with GPS track datathat show “typical” routes and locations that young people use and frequent (Hagerstrand,1979). They analyze this data in a GIS to learn how to look for patterns, problems, andpossibilities from spatial data. For example, patterns might be in relation to the grid network.Problems might be about the interstate system cutting through the neighborhood. Andpossibilities could be about additional bus routes for youth to access a library.o Thinking closely about the data they have collected, young people create asset maps of theneighborhood and greater community. Asset maps show the things that are working wellabout the geographic area, the deficits that exist, and the assets young people are imaging forthe future of this place. As an instructional activity, asset mapping will support youth to thinkabout places as developing over time and that this development is, in part, planned andmapped first.New Neighborhood Maps support young people to show and say something new about theirneighborhoods from the multiple perspectives they have encountered and considered. Two examples ofcreating new neighborhood maps are below:o In the neighborhood, participating youth produce GPS drawings with GPS devices in hand(e.g., Lauriault & Wood, 2009). GPS drawings are novel messages or images written or drawnat the scale of the neighborhood chosen and produced by youth. After walking or biking thesenew messages or images, the GPS tracks are loaded into a GIS and shared with the group. Asa neo-geography practice, young people learn about the emerging affordances of thesemapping tools for showing affective responses to the places in which they live.o Young people build geospatial simulations, or mobile augmented reality (MAR; Heinrich etal., 2008; Rothfarb, 2011; Ryokai & Agogino, 2013) experiences using Aris (an open sourceplatform for building map-based, mobile tours and interactive stories). These MARexperiences allow others to experience potential changes to the neighborhood and communityfrom the perspective of the young person making it. In other words, as a person walks througha young person’s community with Aris open on her phone, that young person’s suggestedchanges to the built environment in that place will populate the smartphone screen (thinkPokemon Go without the monsters). Building MAR experiences is a chance for young peopleto consider ways of building persuasive spatial arguments around their own experience ofliving in an underserved area of the city.Youth Data-Driven Arguments support young people to recommend evidence-based changes for theirneighborhoods through maps. Participating youth create counter-maps of their neighborhoods, usingall of the data collection and analysis they have done over the course of the study, and share these withtheir peers, adult educators, and researchers. This part of the curriculum allows young people topractice making claims to space and resources from spatial data. Young people share counter-mapswith the community stakeholders with whom they came into contact during the above on-the-moveCSCL 2017 Proceedings394© ISLSactivities, and also interested professionals (e.g., planners, transportation engineers, public schooladministrators and educators).(a)(b)(d)(c)Figures 1a, 1b, 1c, 1d. These images show snapshots of some of the teaching activities involved in MCS. Image(a) shows a participant’s free recall map geo-referenced to track data he collected and a base layer map of hisneighborhood using a GIS. Image (b) shows participants examining and talking about their GPS track dataduring the personal time geography activity. Image (c) shows participants learning about GPS technology beforedoing the historic neighborhood geocache. Image (d) shows what one group wrote/walked through theirneighborhood during the GPS drawing activity.Data collection and analysisFor each MCS implementation, we are collecting video recordings of youth engagement, including their ownwearable camera footage. We also collect artifacts that young people (and educators in the training) create asanalyzable materials. These artifacts include free recall maps, GPS tracks, geo-tagged photos, digital maps,mobile augmented reality (MAR) experiences, and interviews with community members. These artifacts aretreated as evidence of learning, or youth changing their perspectives over time, since their technical andcommunity engagement practices become more sophisticated over the course of their participation in MCS. Wealso conducted ongoing and retrospective analyses of the design experiment as a “paradigm case” (Cobb et al.,2003, p. 13; Brown, 1992) of on-the-move embodied learning throughout and about the city. As we run andanalyze implementations, we refine the design of MCS to address youth-relevant issues that are specific to eachcommunity, and to better address our design objectives. Implementations also provide comparative materialfrom which to see differences in youth participation and learning based on the specific context and the refineddesign of the “experience.”Major findingsWhile iterations of Mobile City Science are still underway in Chicago and New York, we can report some majorfindings from the first rounds of youth participation (Nashville) and educator trainings (Seattle). Also, somefindings come from facilitated design charrettes where youth participants shared their findings and argumentswith urban planners, directors of the non-profits serving the youth of that community, cartographers, andparents.The first major finding of this work is that moving between daily, lived experience (at the embodied,mobile, and practiced scale) and the representation of that experience (at the abstracted, static, and mappedscale) provides young people, and adult educators, with new insights about the technological and dataCSCL 2017 Proceedings395© ISLSinfrastructures that support community level decisions. Because MCS participants are generating original dataof a familiar neighborhood or community, they see how and what gets distilled from lived experience to a “datapoint” so that it can be mapped. Participants often find this distillation process (e.g., Bowker & Star, 2000)unnerving or frustrating. In the GPS drawing activity, for instance, a group of young women expressed concernabout their track data not showing how difficult it was to walk up and down steep hills and the overall physicaleffort that task required. After talking with a local merchant during the geocache, a participant struggled to finda way to show, through maps, the shopkeeper’s anxieties about a quickly gentrifying neighborhoodThe second major finding is that re-mediating the daily mobility of young people with old and newtechnologies (e.g., bicycles, GPS devices) provided youth with powerful comparative leverage when groundtruthing maps and arguing for “on the ground” changes. On-the-move activities leveraged all of the sensemaking modes of the body so that learning/problem-solving experiences were vividly recounted and used asevidence in conversations with (adult) stakeholders. During a final community design charrette, several youthargued for a protected bicycle path along a high traffic corridor. To make their point, several young peopleanimatedly recounted, and then showed their maps of, being “buzzed” by a city bus while they were on bicyclesalong a designated bike route. The MCS facilitators also showed the head camera footage of that event. Theadult stakeholders that attended were visibly moved by this data-driven argument.Finally, the familiar context of the neighborhood and/or school community provided participants with abiographically relevant setting and authentic motivation for imagining a better future for that place. The familiarcontext of the neighborhood and/or school community allowed young people to leverage a variety of learningresources – neighbors, favorite locations, memories – that are often absent in de-contextualized, stationarymapping exercises or citizen science more generally. The adult residents, professionals, and stakeholders withwhom youth came into contact during the on-the-move activities often fueled this interest and motivation foryouth as they provided previously unknown stories and concerns about the community. In another examplefrom the historic neighborhood geocache activity, a group of MCS participants spoke with a local shopkeeperwho had been operating her store in the same location for more than twenty years. The shopkeeper alerted theMCS participants that the neighboring university was advocating for a dramatic change to the “character” of theneighborhood to include high-rise buildings; she was afraid that this shift would force her out of her building,unable to afford the higher rents. While the MCS participants were familiar with the argument to increasedensity in urban areas for several reasons, they were not aware of the consequences this could have on longtimeresidents and shopkeepers in older, rent stabilized buildings.Conclusions and implicationsWhile technologies continue to emerge, the demands they make on us change, but so do the opportunities theygive us. Rather than thinking only of digital media and technology as keeping us apart (cf., Turkle, 2011),isolating us from the range of lived experiences and perspectives that exist within even a single community (orhome), Mobile City Science follows the tradition of computer-supported collaborative learning. Mobile CityScience represents an attempt to use technology and digital media as a means of learning through empathy andconsensus building around a “live” community problem. The technologies in Mobile City Science engage youngpeople and youth educators in neighborhoods, in face-to-face interactions, to generate new information (data)and representations of diverse perspectives. MCS as a learning experience supports young people to identifyimportant local issues, understand multiple perspectives on those issues, and synthesize across these data toproduce a cogent recommendation for neighborhood change. Similar to the intended outcomes of work byGordon, Elwood, and Mitchell, (2016), MCS “expands adult-centric notions of civic agency and developsparticipatory mapping practices that elicit young people’s knowledge on their own terms” (p. 2). Creating andarguing from data produced with geospatial technologies is an emerging techno-civic literacy that young peoplemust learn for influencing change in their communities.After the latest presidential election, President Obama stated that our current media ecosystem “meanseverything is true and nothing is true” (Remnick, 2016). By this statement, he meant that “non-truths” are easilycirculated through digital media and people cannot only become misinformed but also bolstered bymisinformation that agrees with their existing worldview. This issue is a national teaching and learning crisis;people can use technology to roadblock consensus building from a shared set of data treated as “truth.” In such acontext, we argue that the learning sciences must focus its efforts on creating not just tools, but completeteaching and learning experiences, that encourage empathy and consensus across a diverse range of stakeholdersand community members. Otherwise, we may continue to “retract further into toxic divisions that have come todefine us today.” We hope Mobile City Science is one such teaching and learning experience for young peopleand the adults that educate them in youth-serving organizations.CSCL 2017 Proceedings396© ISLSReferencesAlibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. J. (2012). Embodiment in mathematics teaching and learning: Evidence fromlearners' and teachers' gestures. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(2), 247-286.Bang, M., Faber, L., Gurneau, J., Marin, A., & Soto, C. (2016). Community-based design research: learningacross generations and strategic transformations of institutional relations toward axiologicalinnovations. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 23(1), 28-41.Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral and brain sciences, 22(04), 577-660.Blikstein, P. (2013). Digital fabrication and ‘making’ in education: The democratization of invention. FabLabs:Of machines, makers and inventors, 1-21.Blikstein, P., & Wilensky, U. (2009). An atom is known by the company it keeps: A constructionist learningenvironment for materials science using agent-based modeling. International Journal of Computers forMathematical Learning, 14(2), 81-119.Bonilla, Y. (2011). The past is made by walking: Labor activism and historical production in postcolonialGuadeloupe. Cultural Anthropology, 26(3), 313-339.Bowker, G. C., & Star, S. L. (2000). Sorting things out: classification and its consequences. Cambridge: MITPress.Brown, A.L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.Cajete, G. (2000). Native science: Natural laws of interdependence. Santa Fe, NM: Clear Light Publishers.Cobb, P., Confrey, J., Disessa, A., Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educationalresearch. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9.Enyedy, N., & Mukhopadhyay, S. (2007). They don't show nothing I didn't know: Emergent tensions betweenculturally relevant pedagogy and mathematics pedagogy. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(2),139-174.Farman, J. (2013). The mobile story: Narrative practices with locative technologies. Routledge.Farnell, B. (1999). Moving bodies, acting selves. Annual Review of Anthropology, 341-373.Glenberg, A. M., Gutierrez, T., Levin, J. R., Japuntich, S., & Kaschak, M. P. (2004). Activity and ImaginedActivity Can Enhance Young Children's Reading Comprehension. Journal of Educational Psychology,96(3), 424.Goldin-Meadow, S., Cook, S. W., & Mitchell, Z. A. (2009). Gesturing gives children new ideas about math.Psychological Science, 20(3), 267-272.Goodchild, M. F., & Janelle, D. G. (2010). Toward critical spatial thinking in the social sciences andhumanities. GeoJournal, 75(1), 3-13.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Vossoughi, S. (2009). Lifting off the ground to return anew: Mediated praxis,transformative learning, and social design experiments. Journal of Teacher Education.Hägerstrand, T. (1970). What about people in regional science? Papers in Regional Science, 24(1), 6-21.Hall, R., Ma, J. Y., & Nemirovsky, R. (2014). Rescaling Bodies in/as Representational Instruments in GPSDrawing. In V.R. Lee (Ed.), Learning Technologies and the Body: Integration and Implementation InFormal and Informal Learning Environments (112-135). Routledge.Hall, R., & Nemirovsky, R. (2012). Introduction to the special issue: Modalities of body engagement inmathematical activity and learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(2), 207-215.Halverson, E. R. (2013). Digital art making as a representational process. Journal of the Learning Sciences,22(1), 121-162.Hart, R. (1979). Children's experience of place. Irvington.Heinrich, M., Thomas, B.H., & Mueller, S. (2008). ARWeather: An augmented reality weather system. InProceedings of the 7 th IEEE/AM International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (2008 March).Washington, D.C.: IEEE Computer Society.Hutchins, E. (1995). How a cockpit remembers its speeds. Cognitive science, 19(3), 265-288.Ingold, T. (2007). Lines: a brief history. Routledge.Jacobs, J. (1961). The Death and Life of Great American Cities. Vintage.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The journal of the learningsciences, 4(1), 39-103.Kahn, J. & Hall, R. (2016). Getting personal with big data: Stories with multivariable models about globalhealth and wealth. Paper presented at the annual meetings of the American Educational ResearchAssociation, Washington, D.C. Best Paper award, SIG for Learning Sciences and Advanced Technologies.CSCL 2017 Proceedings397© ISLSKeating E, Sunakawa C. (2011). ‘A full inspiration tray’: multimodality across real and virtual spaces. InGoodwin, C. & LeBaron, C. (Eds.), Embodied Interaction in the Material World (194–206). Cambridge:University Press.Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). The metaphorical structure of the human conceptual system. CognitiveScience, 4(2), 195-208.Lauriault, T. P., & Wood, J. (2009). GPS tracings–personal cartographies. The Cartographic Journal, 46(4),360-365.Lee, V. R., & Thomas, J. M. (2011). Integrating physical activity data technologies into elementary schoolclassrooms. Educational Technology Research and Development, 59(6), 865-884.Manjoo, F. (2016, November 16). Social media’s globe-shaking power. The New York Times. Retrieved fromhttp://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/17/technology/social-medias-globe-shaking-power.html?_r=0MIT Media Lab. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.media.mit.edu/special/groups/city-scienceNold, C. (2009). Emotional Cartography. Bio Mapping website.Papert, S. (1991). Situating Constructionism. In S. Papert & I. Harel (Eds.), Constructionism. Cambridge, MA:MIT Press.Radinsky, J. (2008). Students' roles in group-work with visual data: A site of science learning. Cognition andInstruction, 26(2), 145-194.Remnick, D. (2016, November 28). Obama reckons with a Trump presidency. The New Yorker. Retrieved fromhttp://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/11/28/obama-reckons-with-a-trump-presidencyResnick, M., Berg, R., & Eisenberg, M. (2000). Beyond black boxes: Bringing transparency and aesthetics backto scientific investigation. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(1), 7-30.Rose-Stockwell, T. (2016, November 11). How we broke democracy: Our technology has changed this election,and is now undermining our ability to empathize with each other. Medium. Retrieved fromhttps://medium.com/@tobiasrose/empathy-to-democracy-b7f04ab57eee#.m7ru89641Rosner, D. K., Saegusa, H., Friedland, J., & Chambliss, A. (2015, April). Walking by Drawing. In Proceedingsof the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 397-406). ACM.Rothfarb, R.J., (2011). Science in the city AR: Using mobile augmented reality for science inquiry activities. InProceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH 2011 Posters. ACE, New York, NY.Ryokai, K., & Agogino, A. (2013). Off the paved paths: Exploring nature with a mobile augmented realitylearning tool. International Journal of Mobile Human Computer Interaction (IJMHCI), 5(2), 21-49.Sample, M. (2014). Location is Not Compelling (Until It is Haunted). In J. Farman (Ed.), The mobile story:Narrative practices with locative technologies. Routledge.Stevens, R. (2012). The missing bodies of mathematical thinking and learning have been found. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 21(2), 337-346.Suchman, L. (1995). Making work visible. Communications of the ACM, 38(9), 56-ff.Taylor, K. H. (2013). Counter-mapping the neighborhood: A social design experiment for spatial justice. Ph.D.Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University.Taylor, K.H. (accepted). Learning along lines: Locative literacies for reading and writing the city. Journal of theLearning Sciences, (forthcoming).Taylor, K. H., & Hall, R. (2013). Counter-mapping the neighborhood on bicycles: Mobilizing youth toreimagine the city. Technology, Knowledge and Learning, 18(1-2), 65-93.Townsend, Anthony M. (2013) Smart cities: big data, civic hackers, and the quest for a new utopia. WWNorton & Company.Van Wart, S., Tsai, K. J., & Parikh, T. (2010, December). Local ground: A paper-based toolkit for documentinglocal geo-spatial knowledge. In Proceedings of the First ACM Symposium on Computing forDevelopment (p. 11). ACM.Wilensky, U., & Papert, S. (2010). Restructurations: Reformulating knowledge disciplines through newrepresentational forms. Paper presented at Constructionism 2010, Paris, France.AcknowledgmentsThe work is funded by NSF #1645102. We would like to acknowledge the loving and empathetic work the adulteducators do with youth at Oasis Center, Digital Youth Network, and New York Hall of Science. We aregrateful to have the chance to work with you and with the communities of young people you serve.CSCL 2017 Proceedings398© ISLS