Encountering and Becoming Role Models: CombatingUnderrepresentation in STEMLeighanna Hinojosa, University of Colorado Boulder, Lehi6796@Colorado.EDUAbstract: Neuroscience Education Outreach (NEO) is a program sponsored by a large publicuniversity located in the mountain west region of the United States which employsundergraduate students pursuing degrees in Science, Technology, Engineering, andMathematics (STEM) to perform outreach and be liaison to community and university partners.Undergraduate instructors perform roles of preparing and teaching age appropriate lessons inlocal classrooms, thus brokering relationships among the university and K-12 students. Threecase studies show how, through participation in outreach, undergraduate instructors from groupshistorically underrepresented in STEM are positioned as neuroscientists and gain professionalskills which contribute to the development of their personal and professional identities in theirSTEM field. By using the Zone of Proximal Identity Development (ZOPID) framework, Ianalyze how identity development occurs incrementally within an authentic outreachcommunity setting.Keywords: Community Engagement, Outreach, Informal Learning, IdentityResearch problemThere is a considerable lack of similar role models for women in Science, Technology, Engineering, andMathematics (STEM) as (white) men make up the majority of STEM faculty in universities in the United States(National Science Foundation, National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, 2013); and women are alsomore likely to leave STEM majors as compared to their male peers (Strenta, et al.,1994). Along racial lines,representation of women of color in STEM is further limited. According to the NSF (2013), White womencomprised 20% of the STEM workforce, Black and Hispanic women made up 2% respectively, while Asianwomen comprised 5% of the STEM workforce and 1% of women who self-selected “other category” comprisedthe US STEM workforce.This gender and racial disparity in STEM may signal to women they do not belong or cannot succeed inthese fields (Walton & Cohen, 2007; Hermann et al., 2016). And because women entering STEM fields tend tounderestimate their self-efficacy (Correll, 2001; Meece et al., 1982; Deaux & Emswiller, 1974), non-stereotypicalrole models, or historically underrepresented role models in STEM, have been thought to improve femalestudents’ sense of self-efficacy and success in fields of STEM. In fact, in a psychological study examining effectsof stereotypes, Cheryan et al. (2011) found differences in women's’ sense of self-efficacy in STEM were mediatedby the perceived dissimilarity from stereotypical role models. In addition, female role models have been shownto increase retention of women in STEM fields (Hermann et al., 2016); therefore, work on the effects of seeingone’s self as a STEM role model for women and minorities needs to be further explored.Studies have also shown women and minorities in STEM are more likely to succeed in institutionalenvironments with social and academic support systems such as mentorship opportunities (MacPhee et al., 2013).In a study conducted by Griffith (2010) using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Freshmen (NLSF)and the National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS:88) fewer women and minority STEM studentspersisted in their majors as compared to male and non-minority students, however differences in persistence alsocorrelated with differences in college preparation and educational experiences. Institutional characteristics andopportunities for women of color in STEM to frequently engage their peers about course work, to be involved inSTEM-related student organizations, and have access to participate in undergraduate research programs canpositively impact female and minority student retention in STEM (Espinosa, 2011).Finally, outreach programs have been shown to play a crucial role in the engineering education ofgraduate and undergraduate student instructors by fostering communication skills, leadership skills, and selfconfidence among women who participate in delivering outreach (Pickering et al., 2004). Community outreachand engagement thus provides a perfect place to explore how participation in STEM related programs in aninstitution support undergraduate STEM education and professional identity development. By havingnondominant students discuss their experiences, educational researchers can better understand how outreach istaken up by those students and what effect participation in outreach has on students and their identification withSTEM. The purpose of this paper will be to examine, through case study, how individuals underrepresented inSTEM participated in outreach, leading to their own development as “non-stereotypical” role models in STEM.ICLS 2018 Proceedings120© ISLSFurthermore, understanding how “non-stereotypical” role models develop can better aid in retention andengagement of groups underrepresented in STEM.Scholarly significanceIn this study, I tracked 10 students’ academic trajectories and observed students interacting with their peers andwith K-12 youth. Preliminary data analysis suggests students in this program are learning leadership skills, beingprovided with networking opportunities, building self-efficacy in their respective fields, and going on to becomeprofessionals in STEM after graduation (Hinojosa, Torres, Callejas, & Speer, 2016). This paper describes howserving as a role model in outreach contributes to professional identity formation in First Generation CollegeStudents (FGCS), a group underrepresented in STEM and higher education. Key components of the studentexperience appear to be: encountering and being mentored by role models (program leaders) and peers (moreexperienced students) from underrepresented groups in their field of study, and then assuming the position ofbeing a non-stereotypical role models themselves for youth of similar backgrounds. Understanding how nonstereotypical role models develop can better aid in engagement and retention of groups historicallyunderrepresented in STEM by demonstrating to younger generations that scientists are as diverse as the peoplewho populate this planet; thus, aiding to dispel negative stereotypes which may cause students to perform poorlyin school (Marx, Ko, & Friedman, 2009).The contribution of this study to the Learning Sciences community is to extend the theoretical frameworkof identity formation as a result of being mentored and mentoring others. The authentic outreach communityworks as a model for learning and identity development using 2 layers of mentoring and role modeling. In thecontext of the outreach program, NEO, the undergraduate instructors spend the fall semester preparing lessonsand activities for outreach into K-12 local classrooms and developing their understanding of content knowledgein neuroscience topics. This is done with peers, the program leader, and guest faculty speakers doing currentresearch in neuroscience. In the following semester—in the Spring—undergraduate instructors go out to localcommunities positioned as experts in neuroscience and as representatives of the university. Because programrecruitment is focused on diversity, the majority of participants are women from underrepresented groups inSTEM. This mean they are directly positioned not only as role models in neuroscience, but as non-stereotypicalrole models in that field. In this paper, I examine how this positioning of being a non-stereotypical role modelcontributes to identity development as a role model and as a professional in STEM.Theoretical frameworkThe distance measuring the individual’s actual identity to a future possible identity imagined by self and others isrepresented by the Zone of Proximal Identity Development (ZOPID; Polman, 2006, p.246). Using the ZOPID—similar to Vygotsky’s (1978) Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD)—identity development is viewed as tied tothe participant’s past positioning and positioning by self and others during social activities. Positioning within theoutreach program is structured within a mentorship model which has two main components of mentorship: (1)mentoring from both faculty/staff; and (2) mentoring from more knowledgeable peers to newcomers in theprogram. A third component also emerges when undergraduate instructors go out to the classrooms as they areplaced in the position of role models to youth from similar backgrounds, thus modeling to youth that a scientistcan appear as they do. Figure 1 (below) is a diagram of how undergraduate instructors move between the differentstages of the outreach program and how their positioning and identification changes in moments of time. The redhighlights the portions of the outreach program where participant’s identity positionings are incrementallyscaffolded to become more knowledgeable peers to newcomers as well as experts in neuroscience to the localcommunities. This contributes to the development of a professional STEM identity and a non-stereotypical rolemodel in STEM. By using the ZOPID, I seek to unpack how this development occurs over time for three NEOinstructors who identify as Latina women and the first generation to attend college in their families.Neuroscience Education Outreach (NEO) is an outreach program sponsored by a large public universitylocated in the mountain west region of the United States. The goal of NEO is to empower and engage K-12students to take charge of their mental and physical health through neuroscience education. Lessons are designedto teach children and adolescents about their brain through a series of fun activities around lessons whichdemonstrate how the brain works. Undergraduate students in STEM serve as the instructors who prepare thelessons and activities, go into the surrounding schools and communities (in pairs or more), and facilitate the ageappropriate lessons and activities (see figure 1 for NEO program structure).ICLS 2018 Proceedings121© ISLSFigure 1. The outreach model is structured to accommodate both newcomers into the program as well as moreseasoned peers I refer to as More Knowledgeable Peers (MKP). In the fall semester timepoint 1 (T 1 ) outreachinstructors, who are recruited in a manner which is focused on diversity, prepared age appropriate lessons andactivities to go out into the local classrooms. They are scaffolded by the program leader, who invites universityneuroscientists to discuss current research, as well as by the MKPs. In the Spring semester, or timepoint 2 (T 2 ),outreach instructors positioned as the experts go into local classrooms and facilitate the lessons and activities.By doing so they become MKPs themselves and assist other undergraduates in planning future sessions in thefollowing Fall semester, or timepoint 3 (T 3 ). I seek to explain identity development as the undergraduatementors move through this model in real time.Methods and data sourcesParticipants at the time of the study included 10 undergraduate instructors, however for the scope of this paper Ielaborate on 3 instructors (Sarah, Zena, and Abby), who identify as first-generation college students (FGCS).Sources of data include annual surveys and interviews as well as peer and classroom observations of interactionsconducted throughout 2 academic years: Fall 2015- Spring 2017.Analytic Approach: Trajectories of Identification. I use sociocultural theory (Wertsch, 1998) toconceptualize learning environments as places where participants connect their past, present, and future selves,and in this way, make sense of who they are which further leads to how they participate in those environments.Using the trajectories of identification framework (Polman & Miller, 2010) I theorize participation and identityas dynamic and co-constructed via participation in social interactions and activities. To further analyze trajectoriesof identification, I looked at the parameters of prolepsis, positioning, agency, and scene.Prolepsis occurs on the individual, cognitive level, and refers to how participants (and those they interactwith) make sense of and act out connections between the participant’s past (prior lived experiences and memories),present, and their imagined future (Cole, 1996). This imagined future can be either imagined for the participantby others and/or by the participant him-/herself. Prolepsis therefore can lead the participant toward, or deter awayfrom different types of imagined individual trajectories or pathways. The parameter includes “prolepticreferences” to the participants’ past (or similar types of people); to possible futures (for self and others similar);and finally, analyzes how present-day activities and interactions connect to either past or future selves. Theseproleptic references include stories which refer to role models and mentors, as well as imagined stories ofthemselves and others. Prolepsis can therefore be seen in the narratives participants tell about themselves and/orothers, as well as seen in the actions and interactions of the individual participants during social activities.Prolepsis can also lead to positioning as identity is dialogically negotiated, and the enactment of envisionedidentities and trajectories (both by self and others) shapes directly how that individual participates in thatcommunity. In the analysis, I distinguish between how one positions self and others, as well as how they arepositioned by others within the outreach community. The individual can then either resist or accept forms ofpositioning which can be seen in social interactions and actions. How the individual reacts to positioning constituteforms of resistance to, or acceptance of certain trajectories of identification.Positioning also refers to identifications from society and community. Society and community positionindividuals, either explicitly or implicitly, within that society before that individual begins to act in society. Evenbefore one is born, there is an imagined future by parents (prolepsis) and one is positioned by culture and society(e.g., "girls' clothes, toys, colors, etc.) to be something imagined for that person (Turner & Reynolds, 2010).Therefore, prolepsis and positioning are also shaped by societal factors and influences which further shapeICLS 2018 Proceedings122© ISLStrajectories of identification. These influences at the societal level may refer to identifications such as stereotypes(which are often negative, promoting a deficit view based on race, gender, etc.), or may refer to lack ofrepresentation or role models, and are recognized by individuals as they participate in social activities andinteractions (Peteet et al., 2015; Steele, 1997; Clance & Imes, 1978). Therefore, identity is constantly beingnegotiated and renegotiated during interactions with others; and with how the individual is positioned by self,others, and also society. Agency refers to the capacity of an individual to act independently and be an agent intheir own decision making (and thus identification and participation). In demonstrating competence inneuroscience content and outreach responsibilities, undergraduate instructors begin to position themselves asagents in their own trajectories of identification.Lastly, learning environments are both structured and constrained by community and institutional goalsand ways of positioning, referred to as scene. The STEM environment is not a-cultural, but instead STEMpractices are embedded in deep cultural contexts which may be taken for granted as “norms” by insiders; and thisis further embedded in a university environment. The community and institutional environment (and embeddednorms) are referred to as the scene or place. Analyzing scene included looking at how particularly types of peopleand practices are taken up or not by the university outreach program. In conclusion, prolepsis, positioning, agency,and scene interact to form trajectories of identification for the individual leading to identity development.Because identity is constantly evolving in time and is situated in context, I used narrative analysis toexamine expressions of identity (de Fina, 2015) in multiple interviews trajectory of identifications framework. Iexamined interviews and field notes of interactions with public and peers to look for positioning cues and prolepticreferences. Salient social categories began to emerge. One particular category, first generation college student(FGCS), encompassed other traditionally underrepresented groups in STEM and presented elements of socialinfluences (i.e., lack of role models or college preparation) contributing to that identification. Using the ZOPID(Polman, 2010) and trajectories of identification framework (Polman & Miller, 2010), I analyzed trajectories ofidentification in the development of non-stereotypical role models for three FGCS instructors as they progressedin their role in outreach and in their college career.BackgroundWomen and other minoritized groups are lumped together when NSF and other institutions discussunderrepresentation in STEM disciplines and submit proposals to aid in bolstering that representation, yet theterm “underrepresented” is never explicitly clarified other than its inclusivity of women (including white women)and minorities (people of color). Through analysis of interview data and examining the role the category of FGCSplays, one can see members of FGCS tend to also share other categories which are considered underrepresentedin science and engineering. For instance, Sarah, Zena, and Amber in this study share the categories of FGCS andLatina and have similar tensions and experiences when adapting to the college environment. In addition, thesewomen of color find encountering and becoming role models exciting and inspiring for their own persistence inSTEM. In fact, atypical of the current demographics of the university and its STEM programs, the majority of theinstructors in NEO are women and/or minorities in the STEM field.This type of environment is referenced by Amber as providing guidance and mentorship in academia, aswell as providing a community of women in science with similar goals of outreach (i.e., a social and academicsupport system). In the case of Sarah, outreach to those with “similar backgrounds” is especially appealing as shebegins to take on the identity of role model. Lastly, while the majority of the instructors are women fromnondominant communities, there is also a mix of men and women from dominant communities.ResultsExamining FGCS more closely from the point of view of FGCSs, one can see the main associative factor is lackingknowledge of the college experience, lacking role models, lacking economic resources, and being a minority(and/or woman) student in STEM, which resonated in the narratives of Amber, Zena, and Sarah (Hinojosa, 2018).A first-generation college student is a student whose parents have not obtained a degree from a higher learninginstitution. This implies a lack of family resources or role models when students go into college. In all excerptsSarah, Amber, and the program leader make connections to social factors which further contribute to attritionfrom STEM: being female, being from a lower SES background, being Latina, being a first-generation collegestudent, as well as lacking role models in STEM. Sociohistorical factors influence the present-day scene in highereducation and these factors contribute further to the academic achievement gap and STEM underrepresentation(Spring, 2016; Solomon, 1985). While this does not disprove any profound finding previously aboutunderrepresentation in STEM, it does provide evidence outreach and community engagement is an effectivemedium to create more non-stereotypical role models of students who are underrepresented in science.ICLS 2018 Proceedings123© ISLSThe NEO program structures itself as a mentorship model, and has two main components of mentorship:(1) mentoring from both faculty/staff; and (2) mentoring from more knowledgeable peers to newcomers in theprogram. A third component also emerges when undergraduate instructors go out to the classrooms as they areplaced in the position of role models to youth from similar backgrounds, thus modeling to youth that a scientistcan look like they do. Brooke (all proper names are pseudonyms) is the director of the outreach program, and isfrequently referred to by the instructors as being a role model, resource and mentor. While NEO’s goal is todisseminate neuroscience information to the public, the instructors are receiving a level of role modeling andguidance which ultimately contributes to their persistence in STEM. Preparing instructors to teach lessons andfacilitate activities is akin to an apprenticeship model whereby a novice is introduced to the content knowledge,and scaffolded on how to manage classroom interactions and activities by more knowledgeable peers (experiencedinstructors) (Rogoff, 1995) to practice science communication and public speaking skills. Lastly, Brooke positionsthe instructors as expected to succeed in their college careers, and as young scientists and role models.Case Study 1:Sarah is a double major in biology and philosophy in her third year at the university (after much uncertainty andswitching majors), and currently works in a neuroscience and psychology lab on campus studying the effects ofphysical activity on the brain. She regrets not starting out in neuroscience, and attributes her decision to lack ofknowledge about neuroscience before starting college. She is interested in pursuing a career in medicine yet hasexpressed uncertainty in her future career plans. Below she discusses neuroplasticity to high school femalestudents and how first-generation students may struggle more in college compared to the traditional student (dueto “inequalities”, perhaps referring to low SES or lack of knowledge/college preparation). She remarks how thiswas frustrating at first, but the brain can learn and adapt.[Excerpt 1]:…I kinda spoke about my experience as a first generation college student howacademia is—especially at the higher levels—is really challenging…[a]nd how often times youjust wanna kinda say like…“Oh my gosh, I’m so dumb”, or “I’m so behind” but neuroplasticitykinda gives you evidence to suggest that you can improve inequalities that you’re not happyabout... like studying habits and stuff and… neuroplasticity…helps you become better atsomething that you wanna do (Sarah, Interview, August 2016).The above excerpt is from an interview with Sarah about her teaching experience in a college prep groupfor high school girls from low socioeconomic background, primarily from the local Latino communities—thesestudents are on the college track and would be the first in their families to attend. Prolepsis was apparent whenSarah expressed her feeling “connected” to the students instantly because she holds membership in a socialcategory the students are likely to share in their near future. Sarah also stated she was from a “similar background”and later stated she felt this connection due to the shared category of being Latina and low SES, as well as beinga FGCS. Sarah noted that she saw herself as a role model to students (who reminded her of herself in high school)that day and even exchanged emails with one student interested in neuroscience. This went beyond therequirements of outreach as Sarah took a more personal interest in the imagined trajectories of the students withwhom she interacted.Case Study 2:Amber graduated from the university with a degree in Biology in December 2016. Amber positioned herself as aFGCS during her college career. After she graduated she took a job as an analytical chemist in order to gain labexperience and go into the health field. Her desired career and projected identity is a diabetes researcher. She sawBrooke and other female professors as role models and found a supportive environment of peers in her outreachcommunity.[Excerpt 2]: [I]n my opinion…we really down-sell the mentorship part of this program becausethere's a huge, through [Brooke], through the other students, there's a huge mentorshippart…(Amber, Interview, May, 2016).This was in stark contrast to the university scene for Amber, as she lacked a sense of belonging at first, which sheattributed to her dissimilarity from the average university student. Amber remarked that she could not quit school,despite typical FGCS challenges, because she wanted to be a role model to others, especially to young girlsinterested in science. As noted in the next case, Zena shared similar sentiments.Case Study 3:ICLS 2018 Proceedings124© ISLSZena was a psychology major (after much uncertainty and switching majors) in her fifth year at university, andwanted to pursue a career in education. She attributed her motivation to teach as tied directly to her participationin NEO. During outreach, she was positioned as a neuroscientist by the NEO director and by classroom teachersand students. Zena also used her social categories of FGCS and Mexican to connect to communities with peoplesharing a similar background. In this way, Zena was positioned as a non-stereotypical role model in the Latinocommunities she interacted with.In Spring 2017, Zena organized events for the Latino community to involve parents to discusseducational neuroscience and how that related to childcare. Many of the parents and community memberspositioned Zena as a role model for their children, and were very interested in hearing the story of a FGCSsucceeding. Parents began to see their own kids’ possible futures as being similar to Zena’s. Zena felt she couldgive the Latina mothers advice based on her own hardships and adversities as a FCGS, and in this way, waspositioned by her community and herself as a role model of a successful university student. “Telling [thecommunity] what I do I feel… gives them a broader sense of what they can do” (Zena, Interview, April 2017).Zena continued to express a sentiment Amber expressed in her 2016 interview:So like I mentioned before, letting other people down...‘Cause you know I want to be aninspiration to someone... to at least one person and so being able to say, “yeah, I came here andit was hard and difficult, but I did it and look at where I am now” kind of thing. I want to beable to say that and the kids that we go and teach are like: “wow, you go to university, you gothere! How did you make it that way?” And so if I didn’t, if I decided no, maybe I’ll go hereinstead cause it just feels safer or closer to whatever then I would feel like I kind of gave up onsomething and I was not what I thought I was (Zena, Interview, April 2017).In the above excerpt Zena’s identity of being a successful first-generation college student is linked to her successat the university she attends, which is known for its excellence in STEM. By doing service work as a studentrepresentative of a major university, which lacks in diversity and in her experience, has had professors discourageher from pursuing her degree, Zena is combating those institutional and societal identifications and positioningsimposed upon her in the university setting. She resists this scene by being a role model to others who might facesimilar challenges in pursuit of a higher degree at a major STEM university. Zena thus gains inspiration fromoutreach, as she inspires youth she interacts with, to continue her degree in this particular university: “...the kidsI teach have been really inspiring to me ‘cause...I wanna work hard and fight [for them] (Zena, Interview, April2017).” Themes of connecting to youth from similar backgrounds, seeing one’s self as a role model to youth andsimultaneously building confidence and inspiration to continue in school are shared among Zena, Amber, andSarah.This bias of having lower expectation for poor students (and students of color) speaks to a larger deficitdiscourse of teachers, administrators, and policy makers (Benner & Mistry, 2007; Diamond et al., 2004; Cooperet al., 1982). In the U.S., where K-12 teachers are predominantly white and from middle class backgrounds, thiscan be devastating as classrooms are becoming increasingly diverse (Steele, 2001;2008). Furthermore, thisassumption resonates with teachers from nondominant backgrounds as in the case of Zena. Zena sees this asimportant to her projected future trajectory as a K-12 teacher:I guess, the assumption that like lower income kids don’t know as much...those were definitelychallenged. I was like “oh my gosh, why have I been thinking this?” They definitely know as much andthey are definitely interested and want to learn this stuff and...that was helpful and it really challengedme and totally changed my mind and now I’m like “oh my gosh, I cannot be thinking this way if I’mgoing to be a teacher” (Zena Interview, April 2017).Zena specifically points out her challenged assumptions of low income students not knowing as much as studentsfrom more affluent groups (i.e., lower expectations of the knowledge lower income students bring to theclassroom). This was a shock to Zena as she herself is from a lower income background, wants to work with thoseyouth, and is on track to become an educator. These biases and assumptions are deeply embedded and can remainunconscious; only when those biases are challenged by our immediate interactions with those we don’t normallyinteract with do the biases come to the surface. The outreach instructors in NEO, including Zena, spent time aftereach lesson writing their reflections after performing outreach for both program feedback as well as for their ownpersonal learning and growth. The reflexivity afforded by this practice may have contributed to her assertingagency in social awareness to overcome personal bias.Discussion of major findingsICLS 2018 Proceedings125© ISLSBy examining identity formation through moments in time within an authentic outreach model using thetheoretical framework of the ZOPID, the practices associated with STEM retention and student achievement intheir STEM degrees can be seen as encountering and becoming non-stereotypical role models. In the cases ofSarah, Zena, and Amber, these Latina women share the category of FGCS and have similar tensions andexperiences when adapting to the college environment, or the university scene. The motivation behind doingoutreach for all three participants was to empower communities with less access to pertinent neuroscienceinformation to effect change in their own lives, and to inspire others to do science by being roles models to youthlike themselves. Evidence shows the outreach instructors both found role models in their field (in the programsupervisor and more knowledgeable peers), as well as saw themselves as role models during interactions with K12 students. Thus, prolepsis may occur in the K-12 youth’s mind as they see themselves in the outreach instructors,leading to the development of trajectories of identifications involving science in the future for the youth. Hence,the distance between their imagined identity and their actual identity (the ZOPID) diminished. During outreachparticipation, the three instructors were positioned by themselves and others as scientists and role models foryouth from nondominant communities interested in exploring or pursuing a science career. Some instructorsexplored other challenges in participating in outreach in nondominant communities, and upon further examination,a larger negative stereotyping discourse of low income, non-white communities can be seen in the educationalscene. Zena mentioned this tension even though her own background is low income, non-white, and firstgeneration to go to college. As noted elsewhere, unconscious biases related to students' membership in minoritizedgroups can be harmful for students as teacher expectations affect student outcomes (Benner & Mistry, 2007;Diamond et. al, 2004; Cooper et al., 1982). Using reflexivity, Zena began to draw connections from herassumptions and actual interactions with youth from nondominant communities, thus allowing her more agencyin her conceptions of low income youth. This allows her to see youth in new imagined trajectories, leading to adifferent positioning of the youth which links their pasts to present and ultimately to imagined futures of being asuccessful college student in STEM. This provides room for a rippling effect of role models begetting future rolemodels.Conclusion and further implicationsThis study provides evidence of how mentorship models within university outreach can be an effective site forthe development of non-stereotypical role models in science. In order for Amber, Zena, and Sarah to continuewith their college careers they all had to overcome the scene of the university environment and how those in theenvironment positioned them differently than how they were positioned during outreach. For example, professorsintimidated the FGCSs during classes often remarking “you should already know this,” referring to domaincontent knowledge, leaving Zena and others to equate their lack of college preparedness to lack of intelligence.During outreach, instructors found a group of similar and supportive peers, as well as found female role modelsin science who positioned them also as such. The three FGCS instructors have since learned how to talk to facultymembers (networking) and how to navigate STEM institutions contributing to their engagement and retention inSTEM. Zena and Amber attribute their networking skills to having a strong social network of peers, mentors andnon-stereotypical role models. This impact, i.e., empowering youth to effect change in their lives, is somethingall instructors pointed to as their personal motivation to perform outreach work. This study thus demonstratespersonal growth and professional identity development during participation in community outreach. Futureimplications involve bringing this model and framework to university settings to foster student success and bolsterdiversity in STEM higher education and ultimately into STEM professional fields.ReferencesBenner, A. D., & Mistry, R. S. (2007). Congruence of mother and teacher educational expectations and lowincome youth's academic competence. Journal of Educational Psychology, 99(1), 140-153.Cheryan, S., Siy, J. O., Vichayapai, M., Drury, B. J., & Kim, S. (2011). Do female and male role models whoembody STEM stereotypes hinder women’s anticipated success in STEM? Social Psychological andPersonality Science, 2(6), 656-664.Clance, P. R., & Imes, S. A. (1978). The imposter phenomenon in high achieving women: Dynamics andtherapeutic intervention. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research & Practice, 15(3), 241.Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: Belknap.Cooper, H. M., Findley, M., and Good, T. (1982). Relations Between Student Achievement and Various Indexesof Teacher Expectations. Journal of Educational Psychology, 74(4), 577-579.Correll, S. J. (2001). Gender and the Career Choice Process: The Role of Biased Self‐Assessments1. Americanjournal of Sociology, 106(6), 1691-1730.ICLS 2018 Proceedings126© ISLSde Fina, A. (2015). Narrative and identities. In A. De Fina & A. Georgakopoulou (Eds.), The handbook ofnarrative analysis (pp. 351-368). Boston: John Wiley & Sons.Diamond, J. B., Randolph, A. & Spillane, J. P. (2004), Teachers' Expectations and Sense of Responsibility forStudent Learning: The Importance of Race, Class, and Organizational Habitus. Anthropology &Education Quarterly, 35, 75–98. doi:10.1525/aeq.2004.35.1.75Deaux, K., & Emswiller, T. (1974). Explanations of successful performance on sex-linked tasks: What is skill forthe male is luck for the female. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 29(1), 80.Espinosa, L. L. (2011). Pipelines and pathways: Women of color in undergraduate STEM majors and the collegeexperiences that contribute to persistence. Harvard Educational Review, 81(2), 209-240,388.Griffith, A. L. (2010). Persistence of women and minorities in STEM field majors: Is it the school that matters?Economics of Education Review, 29(6), 911-922.Herrmann, S. D., Adelman, R. M., Bodford, J. E., Graudejus, O., Okun, M. A., & Kwan, V. S. (2016). The Effectsof a Female Role Model on Academic Performance and Persistence of Women in STEM Courses. Basicand Applied Social Psychology, 38(5), 258-268.Hinojosa, L., Torres, B.O., Callejas, P., & Speer, N. (2016, April). The Impact of Neuroscience Outreach inCommunities. Poster presented at the Rocky Mountain Psychological Association, Denver, CO.Hinojosa, L. (2018, April). Encountering and Becoming Role Models Underrepresented in STEM. Paper to bepresented at the Annual Meeting of the the American Educational Research Association, New York. fMacPhee, D., Farro, S., & Canetto, S. S. (2013). Academic self‐efficacy and performance of underrepresentedSTEM majors: Gender, ethnic, and social class patterns. Analyses of Social Issues and Public Policy,13(1), 347-369.Marx, D. M., Ko, S. J., & Friedman, R. A. (2009). The “Obama effect”: How a salient role model reduces racebased performance differences. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45(4), 953-956.Meece, J. L., Parsons, J. E., Kaczala, C. M., & Goff, S. B. (1982). Sex differences in math achievement: Towarda model of academic choice. Psychological Bulletin, 91(2), 324.National Science Foundation, National Center for Science, & Engineering Statistics. (2013). Women, minorities,and persons with disabilities in science and engineering: 2013. Special Rep. NSF 13–304. Arlington,VA: Author. Retrieved from http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/2015/nsf15311/Peteet, B. J., Montgomery, L., & Weekes, J. C. (2015). Predictors of imposter phenomenon among talented ethnicminority undergraduate students. The Journal of Negro Education, 84(2), 175-186.Pickering, M., Ryan, E., Conroy, K., Gravel, B., & Portsmore, M. (2004, June). The benefit of outreach toengineering students. In Proceedings of the 2004 American Society for Engineering Education AnnualConference & Exposition (p. 12).Turner, J. C., & Reynolds, K. J. (2010). The story of social identity. In Rediscovering social identity: Key readings.New York: Psychology Press, Taylor & Francis.Sleeter. C. E. (2001). Preparing Teachers for Culturally Diverse Schools Research and the OverwhelmingPresence of Whiteness. Journal of Teacher Education, 52(2), 94-106Sleeter, C. E. (2008). 32 Preparing White teachers for diverse students.Solomon, B. M. (1985). In the company of educated women: A history of women and higher education in America.New Haven: Yale University Press.Spring, J. (2016). Deculturalization and the struggle for equality: A brief history of the education of dominatedcultures in the United States. New York: Routledge.Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and performance. AmericanPsychologist. 52 (6), 613–629.Strenta, C., Elliott, R., Adair, R., Matier, M., & Scott, J. (1994). Choosing and leaving science in highly selectiveinstitutions. Research in Higher Education, 35, 513–547.Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question of fit: Race, social fit, and achievement. Journal of Personalityand Social Psychology, 92, 82–96.Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. New York: Oxford University Press.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.AcknowledgementsThis project was supported by the Office of Outreach and Engagement and School of Education at the Universityof Colorado Boulder. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent theofficial views of the university.ICLS 2018 Proceedings127© ISLS