When Is It Safe Enough? Considering Diversity and Equity WhenBrokering Pre-Professional Opportunities to Youth of ColorRafi Santo, New York University, Rafi.Santo@nyu.eduDixie Ching, New York University, Dixieching@gmail.comKylie Peppler, Indiana University, Kpeppler@indiana.eduChris Hoadley, New York University, Tophe@nyu.edEda Levenson, Scope of Work, Eda@scopeofwork.orgGeneva White, Scope of Work, Geneva@scopeofwork.orgMikey Cordero, Scope of Work, Mikey@scopeofwork.orgAbstract: This study conceptualizes “brokering pre-professional learning opportunities” as apractice that goes beyond facilitating access across settings to include concerns about when,exactly, an opportunity is “safe enough” as a fundamental question when connecting youth toopportunity. Utilizing a design-based research approach, we report results of an organizational‘vetting’ routine used to assess companies being considered as work-placement sites for youthof color. Our findings confirm that characteristics of staff diversity and equity orientation ofwork-placement organizations can support or hinder positive learning outcomes. However, wealso found that both strengths and limitations in terms of diversity and equity, in concert withother supportive factors, can be productive resources within the context of future goal settingfor youth of color. We close with implications for researchers and designers interested inpromoting equity-oriented cross-setting learning.As learning scientists have theorized learning as a cross-setting phenomenon (Banks et al., 2007), the question ofhow to equitably support productive connections across settings has become a focal point for intervention design(Acholonu, Pinkard & Martin, 2015). One practice, that of brokering learning opportunities from one setting toanother, has emerged as a key form of support for cross-setting learning pathways that sit within a largerframework of Connected Learning (Ching et al., 2016; Ito et al., 2013). However, the practice of brokering caneasily be misunderstood as one that rests solely on an assumption that access to new learning opportunities is theonly challenge to be addressed in order to support equitable learning pathways (Vossoughi, 2017). However, fornon-dominant youth interested in various disciplinary pathways, opportunities brokered to them may themselvesnot be considered by youth or educators to be places that are productive, comfortable or ‘safe.’ Often, this can beconnected to lack of representation of non-dominant groups in those industries and limits in terms of companies’orientations to equity and pro-social concerns within their organizational activities and business models.This study is based in a research-practice partnership focused on developing brokering routines acrosslearning settings within Hive NYC, a network of informal education organizations focused on digital learning.We report results from a design partnership with one organization, Scope of Work (SOW), which addressed issuesof access to and transformation of creative industries in terms of under-represented youth. SOW’s approach tobrokering focused on not only considering issues of access, but also on assessing various characteristics relatedto diversity and equity of the settings they were ‘brokering into’ – the workplace sites they planned to match withtheir youth. Our cross-organization team co-designed and tested an organizational ‘vetting’ routine that could beused to assess the potential of a workplace to provide a positive early employment experience for youth of color.Because of SOW’s organizational focus, all workplaces in the study were associated with creative sectors.This analysis considers two factors the vetting routine focused on: How were organizationalcharacteristics of staff diversity and equity orientation consequential to positive early workplace experiences ofnon-dominant youth of color? The pilot summer program, framed as a fellowship, involved five youth of coloraged 16-21. Each was placed at a company in the creative sector including a high-end fashion brand, a hip-hopand electronic music record label, and three design and branding studios. This analysis utilizes data from three ofthe youth, including semi-structured interviews with the youth, with supervising employees at each of the workplacement organizations as with SOW staff and, finally, observations of weekly activities SOW staff facilitatedwith the youth participants where youth discussed their week’s work experiences.Three findings emerged with regards to the role of staff diversity and equity orientations in organizations.Two were more straightforward and tracked with SOW’s design conjectures that were indexed in the vetting toolabout the consequentiality of the focal factors – that relative strengths and limitations in terms of diversity andequity orientations could contribute to positive and negative youth workplace experiences, respectively.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1671© ISLSIn the case of Mateo, an 18-year-old Dominican American, diverse leadership at his placementcontributed to a positive orientation towards his work placement, to positive relationship development with staff,and to shifted conceptions related to diversity and business leadership. In talking about Rob, the company’s CEO,he shared: “When I first started learning about business, I had this image of a CEO: In a corporate building, witha suit on, and you know, like bougie [short for ‘bourgeois’], like ‘don’t talk to me you peasant!’ [jokingly]. Sothen when I talk to [Rob]… he listens to rap music, I listen to rap music, he plays basketball, I play basketball.It’s cool to see that you don’t have to change, and be some type of robot to be successful.”Likewise, the experience of Sean, a 20-year-old African-American, provided additional confirmation ofthe importance of staff diversity. He shared that, for him, “there sure was not a culture fit” with staff at the recordlabel he was placed at. He saw a lack of shared class background as hindering the formation of social bonds withstaff through common interactions like ‘water cooler’ conversations; “If you can't relate, how are you going tojump into the conversation?”.The final case was the most notable, and unexpected, in terms of the ways that diversity and equityorientations of partner organizations played into youth’s socio-political professional goal-setting. Eve, a 21-yearold identified as female, African-American and Puerto-Rican-American, was one of two women of color withinan organization led by three white men with the rest of the staff made up of white cis-female interns. Her casehighlighted distinct ways that both strengths around as well as weaknesses related to staff diversity in herworkplace setting were utilized as a resource within her process of identifying what kind professional setting shewanted to be in in the future with regards to workplace diversity. Additionally, a perceived lack of equityorientation in the business model of the company Eve was placed in — a brand strategy firm called Signal thatserved corporate clients to promote their businesses —was leveraged as she affirmed and specified her plansaround her professional future, plans that involved more explicit orientations to addressing issues of equity andcelebration of black identity. She shared with us, in terms of these corporate clients, that “my voice and the workthat I want to do is not for them. […] I want to be a part of something that's celebrating community... what itmeans to really be a human being, and a black human being, in America.”The final case of Eve led us to conclude that both strengths and limitations of learning settings in termsof diversity and equity orientations, in concert with the support to understand such experiences from a criticaland socio-political lens, can be productive resources within the context of future goal setting for youth of color.Within efforts to promote cross-setting learning for non-dominant youth, this study highlights theimportance of broadening approaches to brokering from a purely access-orientation to include an equityorientation concerned with the nature of the opportunities being organized for youth. In particular, in confirmingconjectures that diversity and equity orientations of workplace environments can consequentially impactoutcomes, it highlights the need for care and consideration when considering whether an opportunity is ‘safeenough.’ At the same time, findings show that limitations, along with strengths, can be productively utilized withinyouths’ socio-political professional goal setting. The finding confirms existing research on the importance ofsense-making supports set outside of work placement sites (Bronkhorst & Akkermen, 2016), of supporting youthto critically ‘read’ the dynamics at play within a work environment (Diemer & Blustein, 2006) and of extendingcritical youth development approaches into workplace learning settings (Ginwright & Cammarota, 2002). Giventhat reality, the answer to the question of “when is it safe enough?” likely depends, in some part, on what kindsof supports non-dominant youth have to engage with a worksite through critical and socio-political lenses.ReferencesAcholonu, U., Pinkard, N., & Martin, C. K. (June, 2015). Locating opportunity gaps by mapping the computerscience landscape in Chicago. Presented at Digital Media and Learning Conference, Los Angeles, CA.Bronkhorst, L.H., Akkerman, S.F. (2016). At the boundary of school: Continuity and discontinuity in learningacross contexts, Educational Research Review, doi: 10.1016/ j.edurev.2016.04.001.Ching, D., Santo, R., Hoadley, C., & Peppler, K. (2016). Not just a blip in someone’s life: integrating brokeringpractices into out-of-school programming as a means of supporting youth futures. On the Horizon, 24(3).pp. 296-312.Diemer, M. A., & Blustein, D. L. (2006). Critical consciousness and career development among urban youth.Journal of vocational behavior, 68(2), 220-232.Ginwright, S., & Cammarota, J. (2002). New terrain in youth development: The promise of a social justiceapproach. Social justice, 29(4 (90), 82-95.Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., ... & Watkins, S. C. (2013). Connectedlearning: An agenda for research and design. Digital Media and Learning Research Hub.Vossoughi, S. (2017). Access and equity in out-of-school learning. In K. Peppler (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Out-ofSchool Learning. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1672© ISLS