Pedagogically Informed Peer Teaching as a Mechanism forSystematically Maximizing Sociocultural Theories of LearningSoren Rosier, Stanford University, rosier@stanford.eduAbstract: Those who have witnessed peer-to-peer teaching are familiar with the typical ritual:“This is how you do it… do you get it?” followed by a head nod from the learner and theymove on. In a world where student discourse is increasingly the vehicle for learning, it iscritical that we give students tools to engage effectively with each other’s thinking. Over thepast year, I developed and tested a web-based application that successfully shifts how studentsthink about peer-to-peer tutoring.What I propose to share in an ICLS poster session is an activity system that acknowledges both the constructivenature of conceptual change and the critical importance of social interaction for learning. I call it pedagogicallyinformed peer teaching. This activity system is contingent upon students’ abilities to learn and enact strongpedagogy, which I have been training students to do using online simulations and tutorials over the past year. Inmy poster session, I would share the results of a pilot study completed last spring.Theorizing a more effective activity system for promoting learningSocioculturalists assert that learning is a process of reciprocal transformation of self and environment, mediatedby the tools, signs, and people around a learner. Critically, the nature of those tools and signs that mediateactivity, along with the specific goals that focus activity, produce varying forms of practice and learning. Forsocioculturalists, all learning is culturally mediated and interactionally dependent. While socioculturalistsrecognize the central role of unique cultures and the reciprocal influence of culture on person and person onculture, they often abstain from offering a granular recipe for the process of learning. For Vygotsky (1986),learning occurs through interaction with a more knowledgeable other, through using tools and signs at the ready,and internalizing those ideas and processes that began as social and external.Mere exposure to knowledgeable others is not enough to promote learning, though. As Vygotsky(1986) recognized, abstract thought necessitates verbalizing, a process whereby learners use language as a toolto connect complex ideas. Dialogic instruction, frequently performed by learner-centered teachers and experttutors (Lepper, 2002), supports students in overcoming the type of disequilibrium students experience whenencountering new and complex ideas that do not fit with their existing schema. Effective questioning makesvisible to a learner how their current schema support and contradict the acquisition of new ways of thinking.Many expert teachers are currently being trained to use “talk moves” (Chapin et al., 2009) to elicit studentthinking, probe it, and prompt reflection of it to support this process of overcoming disequilibrium, i.e. learning.However, teachers in classrooms with 30 students cannot feasibly perform this type of questioning foreach of their students who needs support. Fortunately, classrooms have many students with some degree ofmastery over the content at hand. These students are the most underutilized instructional resources inclassrooms, as they represent knowing others who can stretch the zones of proximal development for theirpeers. But we should not assume that students with mastery over content are good teachers. Studies have shownthat when given a chance to teach, student tutors tend to do much more explaining than tutees (King, 1997),place minimal demand on tutees when questioning (Graesser et al., 1995), and rarely stimulate deep-levelreasoning or do much to monitor the understanding of tutees (Graesser et al. 1995; Roscoe and Chi 2007).If students learn through a process of overcoming disequilibrium, if overcoming disequilibrium issupported by effective questioning from a knowledgeable other, and if peers are the most readily availableoption for performing such questioning, we must discover ways of training students to serve in such a capacityfor one another. This is the mission of this research project.Design principles for training pedagogically informed peer tutorsI designed the PeerTeach web application to train students to use evidence-based discourse tools (or “talkmoves”) to support the learning of their peers. As a design-based research project (Brown, 1992), thisapplication is being developed through an iterative process of implementation, analysis, and adaptation. Thegoal is for PeerTeach to become a robust intervention that prepares students to be effective tutors for oneanother. At a high level, the system is predicated on the theory that students will become more effective realworld tutors if they have the opportunity to 1) practice noticing and tagging high-leverage teaching movesduring animated tutoring sessions and 2) practice using those same high-leverage teaching moves whenICLS 2018 Proceedings1709© ISLSselecting the utterances of a virtual tutor in a game-like virtual tutoring experience. Sherin’s (2005) noticingframework asserts that teachers (or in this case, tutors) must attend to important teaching moments, relate themto a useful pedagogical framework, and act based on pedagogically sound reasoning. Practicing such noticingshould provide useful preparation for using better teaching moves. Practice using better teaching moves insimulated contexts provides necessary application. Seeing realistic responses from an automated virtual learner,in addition to symbolic representations of that virtual character’s learning, reinforces belief and fluency aroundthe new pedagogy, which I predict will translate to real world tutoring improvement.Last year, data was collected to test the first aspect of the aforementioned theory of change: canminimal practice noticing high-leverage teaching moves in a mediated virtual space prepare students to observewith a pedagogically trained eye. Three groups of students were assessed before and after the PeerTeachnoticing intervention on their abilities to tag “good” teaching moves in realtime; their scores were compared tothose of math teachers who recently graduated from a prestigious, apprentice-based Masters and credentialingprogram.The results in Figure 1 suggeststudents across all three groups improved intheir ability to accurately identify high qualitymoves as good, but lag far behind adultteachers. Notably, students in both East Bay,California groups identified dramatically fewerhigh quality moves as good than did thestudents in Harlem, New York, who all hadprior experience as both tutors and tutees. Onaverage, the Harlem students identified 3.18high quality moves as good in the postassessment while the East Bay studentsidentified, on average, only 1.23, suggestingthe importance of tutoring experience for beingable to analyze observed tutoring.Figure 1. Tagging GOOD Moves.This is the first in a series of studies aimed at identifying which aspects of the PeerTeach trainingplatform are effective mechanisms for improving students’ abilities to notice good teaching, choose effectiveteaching moves in virtual simulations, and eventually to tutor more effectively in real life. This poster session isintended as an exploration of this proposed activity system as an optimized model of learning and the studenttraining it requires. The discussion will address both theoretical and practical points, grounded in the actualtechnology of PeerTeach and the data that emerged as students interacted with it.ReferencesBrown, A. (1992). Design Experiments: Theoretical and Methodological Challenges in Creating ComplexInterventions in Classroom Settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141–178.Chapin, S. H., O'Connor, C., & Anderson, N. C. (2009). Classroom discussions: Using math talk to helpstudents learn, Grades K-6. Math Solutions.Graesser, A. C., Person, N. K., & Magliano, J. P. (1995). Collaborative dialogue patterns in naturalisticone‐to‐one tutoring. Applied cognitive psychology, 9(6), 495-522.King, A. (1997). ASK to THINK-TEL WHY: A model of transactive peer tutoring for scaffolding higher levelcomplex learning. Educational psychologist, 32(4), 221-235.Lepper, M. R., & Woolverton, M. (2002). The wisdom of practice: Lessons learned from the study of highlyeffective tutors. Improving academic achievement: Impact of psychological factors on education, 135-158.Piaget, J., & Cook, M. (1952). The origins of intelligence in children (Vol. 8, No. 5, p. 18). New York:International Universities Press.Roscoe, R. D., & Chi, M. T. H. (2007). Understanding Tutor Learning: Knowledge-Building and KnowledgeTelling in Peer Tutors’ Explanations and Questions. Review of Educational Research, 77(4), 534–574.Sherin, M. G., & Van Es, E. A. (2005). Using video to support teachers' ability to notice classroominteractions. Journal of technology and teacher education, 13(3), 475-491.Vygotsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and language (rev. ed.).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1710© ISLS