Rethinking TPACK in the Digital Age:Non-Linear Relationships Between Learning by Design,Teachers’ Technology-Related Knowledge andTechnology Integration in the ClassroomJoan Bruner-Timmons, Walden University, joan.bruner-timmons@waldenu.eduNicolae Nistor, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München; Walden University, nic.nistor@uni-muenchen.deIonuț Dorin Stanciu, Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Romania; Walden University,ionut.stanciu@dppd.utcluj.roAbstract: Teachers are increasingly required to integrate educational technology in theclassroom, therefore to acquire and practically apply technology-related knowledge. Thisknowledge was described by the TPACK (Technological, Pedagogical and ContentKnowledge) framework, and it is assumed to be best acquired by teachers’ participation inLearning by Design (LbD) practice. However, little is known about the relationships betweenLbD, TPACK and technology integration (TI) in the classroom. A survey involving N = 101US American secondary school mathematics teachers was conducted in a northeastern state toaddress this research gap and, surprisingly, it revealed non-linear relationships. These suggestthat, while TPACK partially mediates the LbD-TI relationship as expected, technologicalknowledge can have a saturation effect on TI, and both LbD and TPACK can, under certaincircumstances, decrease TI. Consequences for further research and teacher professionaldevelopment practice are discussed.IntroductionLittle is currently known about which knowledge and competences may enable teachers to integrate technologyin the classroom in a meaningful and effective way, and how teachers can acquire the needed knowledge. Oneof the few approaches on teachers’ technology competences is the Technological, Pedagogical and ContentKnowledge (TPACK) framework established by Mishra and Koehler (2006), who further propose the Learningby Design (LbD) approach (Kolodner et al., 2003) carried out in teachers’ communities of practice as a means toacquire the necessary TPACK. However, little is known about the relationships between LbD, TPACK, andtechnology integration (TI) in the classroom. After a brief overview on TPACK and LbD, the paper presents astudy addressing this research gap. The findings imply consequences for further research and for teacherprofessional development, as discussed in the final part.Research questions and methodologyAiming to address the research gap identified above, the following research questions were examined. RQ1: Towhat extent does teacher participation in Learning by Design predict their TPACK? RQ2: To what extent doesteacher TPACK predict technology integration? RQ3: To what extent does TPACK mediate the relationshipbetween participation in Learning by Design and technology integration?A quantitative, correlative field study was employed using cross-sectional questionnaire survey data.The examined population (N = 101) was located in a northeastern US American school district with a total of2862 teachers, from which 127 were teachers of mathematics. The TPACK and LbD variables were measuredusing the adapted TPACK questionnaire by Zelkowski et al. (2013); additional items were formulated ad-hocfor TPACK and TI. Besides IBM SPSS Statistics 24, data were analyzed using WarpPLS 6.FindingsIn response to RQ1 (Figure 1 a, b), two nearly linear and positive relationships were found, LbD–TK (β = .42, p< .01, R2 = .18) and LbD–TPACK2 (β = .38, p < .01, R2 = .14). The relationships LbD–TPK (β = -.26, p < .01,R2 = .07), LbD–TCK (β = -.21, p < .01, R2 = .04) and LbD–TPACK (β = .26, p < .01, R2 = .07) were significantin the sense that a curve describing the relationship could be fitted to the data, however the relationshipexplained a small amount of variance in the dependent variable (R2 < .10). Therefore, these relationships weredisregarded. In response to RQ2, four strongly curvilinear relationships were found (Figure 1 c, d, e, f): TK-TI(β = .23, p < .01, R2 = .18), TPK-TI (β = .28, p < .01, R2 = .20), TCK-TI (β = .19, p < .01, R2 = .16), andTPACK2-TI (β = -.24, p < .01, R2 = .18). The relationships TPACK–TI and TPACK1–TI were not significantICLS 2018 Proceedings1553© ISLS(p > .05). The mediation analyses responding to RQ3 indicated both direct and mediated, significantrelationships between LbD and TI, with R2 between .16 and .20. The relationship LbD–TI was U-shaped, withminimum points corresponding to z values of LbD between .25 and .45, as shown in Figure 1 g, h. Themediation by TPK and TCK was disregarded due to the small amount of mediator variance involved (R2 < .10).(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h)Figure 1. Relationships corresponding to RQ1: (a) LbD–TK, (b) LbD–TPACK2; RQ2: (c) TK–TI, (d) TPK–TI,(e) TCK–TI, (f) TPACK2–TI; RQ3: (g) LbD-TK-TI, and (h) LbD-TPACK2-TI.DiscussionIn general, LbD predicted TI, as suggested by Mishra and Koehler (2004), however according to a U-shapedrelationship. This relationship was partially mediated by TK and TPACK2 (specific, applicative technologyrelated knowledge). More in detail, LbD predicted TK and TPACK2 displaying a nearly linear relationship; andTK, TPK, TCK, and TPACK2 were significant, curvilinear predictors of TI. Interestingly, TPACK1 (generaltechnology-related knowledge) did not predict TI. The surprising results mainly consisted of the curvilinearshaped relationships found between the variables. This suggests that, in the teaching practice, TI may beinitially, or partially, based on spontaneous action, rather than on well-founded knowledge. Further unexpectedresults were the non-linear relationships TK–TI and TPACK2–TI. The relationship TK–TI (Figure 1c) suggestsa saturation effect, in the sense that an increase in teachers’ knowledge of educational technology may be usefulfor technology integration only up to a certain limit, after which additional technology applications are hardlypossible. Similar findings were reported by Valtonen et al. (2017).The validity and applicability of the presented findings are limited by several methodological aspects.The findings are based on self-report data, whereas several authors (e.g., Valtonen et al., 2017) criticize theconstruct validity of the TPACK instrument. The presented results support this point of critique and emphasizethe need for a more thorough construct validation, and for the complementary use of more objective data.Furthermore, some authors regard non-linear relationships as a euphemism for non-significant relationships.However, in this study we have made a distinction between both. Lastly, only mathematics teachers wereexamined, and the study does not include an insight in teachers’ specific LbD activities.ReferencesKolodner, J. L., Camp, P. J., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., Puntambekar, S., & Ryan, M.(2003) Problem-based learning meets case-based reasoning in the middle-school science classroom:Putting Learning by Design™ into practice. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(4), 495-547.Mishra, P., & Koehler, M. (2006). Technological pedagogical content knowledge: A framework for teacherknowledge. The Teachers College Record, 108(6), 1017–1054.Valtonen, T., Sointu, E., Kukkonen, J., Kontkanen, S., Lambert, M. C., & Mäkitalo-Siegl, K. (2017). TPACKupdated to measure pre-service teachers’ twenty-first century skills. Australasian Journal ofEducational Technology, 33(3). Retrieved from https://www.learntechlib.org/p/180264Zelkowski, J., Gleason, J., Cox, D., & Bismarck, S. (2013). Developing and validating a reliable TPACKinstrument for secondary mathematics preservice teachers. Journal of Research on Technology inEducation, 46(2), 173–206.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1554© ISLS