Investigating the Use of Anchoring for Promoting Design ThinkingChandan Dasgupta, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay (India), cdasgupta@iitb.ac.inAbstract: There has been an increased emphasis on integrating design thinking in every aspectof student learning at an early stage. However, teachers still lack the resources and scaffolds tofacilitate such integration. In this paper, I present a way for scaffolding design thinking inmiddle school classrooms by using incomplete models as anchors. Findings show that the useof an incomplete seed model as an anchor evoked different responses from the student designers– some extending it immediately, some returning back to it after exploring other design options,and some likely referring to it implicitly. The incomplete seed model provided an example tothe students for practicing design thinking and make tradeoffs. The incompleteness also allowedstudents to pursue different design trajectories.IntroductionWe are faced with a future where engineers have to increasingly make very complex design decisions, startingfrom determining how to build efficient autonomous vehicles, to designing secure artificial intelligence drivenpersonal assistants and even building interplanetary settlements. These endeavors will require design thinking atevery stage and it is best to start training as early as possible. In order to prepare students for this future, policychanges to the middle and high school standards require US school curricula to integrate design thinking in everyaspect of student learning (NAE, 2009). However, this implementation has been slow to come primarily due tolack of age-appropriate resources and scaffolds for young students that might help them practice design thinking(Moore et al., 2014). In this paper, I address this gap and present a way for scaffolding design thinking in middleschool classrooms by using incomplete models as anchors.FrameworkModels are simplified representations of complex systems that are frequently used as a thinking tool forunderstanding the system by manipulating various model parameters (Harrison & Treagust, 2000). Models helpmake reasoning and ideas inspectable amongst peers as well as evaluators (Lehrer & Schauble, 2000). Inclassrooms, models serve as tools for overcoming inert knowledge (Renkl, Mandl & Gruber, 1996) by anchoringinstructions and discussions to a concrete representation of the system (CTGV, 1990). Anchoring using suchmodels situates new knowledge “in the context of immediate application to a problem solution and not in anabstract, decontextualized way” (Renkl, Mandl & Gruber, 1996, p. 119). Models, in particular the incompleteones that allow the user to fill in the gaps, have been found to be helpful during problem-solving tasks byencouraging self-explanations (Renkl & Atkinson, 2000). Thus, in this study I use incomplete models to drivestudents’ problem-solving process using design thinking while they are working on a design challenge. Designthinking as the systematic iterative process of determining the goal or scope of a problem, generating ideas foroptimizing the solution, evaluating the ideas by making tradeoffs and checking their fit in the solution space, andimplementing the ideas to achieve the intended goal (Sheppard, 2003).MethodThis case study was conducted in an urban school in the Midwest US and spanned across 10 lessons, each 45minute long. 12 students – grouped into 4 teams or “plumbing companies” – from the 6th grade worked on a designchallenge using an incomplete model as the seed model. Every group was given the incomplete model that actedas an initiator for design ideas. Students had to optimize this seed model within the given constraints ($3000budget and min 10 psi at each of the three taps A, B and C). Data sources included student conversations andmodels created by them. The incomplete model had a cost of $1203 and connected the source supply only to tapB. Three types of pipes were provided for completing the model, each having a certain cost and resulting in aspecific pressure drop – 1-inch ($45, 1 psi drop), ¾-inch ($33, 4 psi drop) and ½-inch ($28, 12 psi drop).Findings and discussionThree ways of using the incomplete model emerged during the design process- delayed anchoring, immediateanchoring, and implicit anchoring. In the first instance, students demonstrated delayed anchoring. In the firstiteration, after analyzing the seed model, Team B took it apart and reflected on the types of pipes that they hadused; mostly 1-inch diameter pipes. S2 mentioned that they were trying to reduce the cost while satisfying thepressure constraint (10 psi). After this, the team revised their model by using different combinations of pipeICLS 2018 Proceedings1529© ISLSdiameters. They also moved the placement of pipes to reduce the cost of the model and ensure adequate pressureat the taps. The team also used the seed model to reflect on their prior design decisions and brainstormedalternative paths that may reduce the cost while meeting the pressure requirement. The team finally settled on adesign similar to the seed model’s design since it had the least pipe bends and thus was their cheapest model.In the second instance, students demonstrated immediate anchoring. Team C began their design sessionby analyzing the seed model - “Just connect it using more pipes… but we have to get it cheap, under budget”.The team then modified the model by simply adding more pipes to the seed model’s design thereby extending it.They made tradeoff decisions, determining what diameter of pipes to use for extending the seed model and alsofiguring out whether they needed to replace any pipes in the seed model. They kept the pressure at tap B samesince it satisfied the pressure constraint and went on to make sure that their cost was below the budget (“thispremade one (seed model) is exactly 10. So, our psi is good. We just have to make sure our money is good”). S9used the given pressure of 10 psi at tap B to justify why they did not need to replace the ¾-inch diameter pipes ofthe seed model. However, he indicated that the team needed to worry about the cost, moving the team towardsmaking tradeoffs between cost and pressure. The final model looked very similar to the seed model’s design.In the third instance, students demonstrated implicit anchoring. After analyzing the seed model duringthe first iteration, Team A concluded that the model could be improved for the “greater good” but at a higher price(more than the incomplete model’s cost). The team then took apart the model and started rebuilding it. Theydiscussed various ideas, gesturing where the pipes should go and, in the end, opted for a design that was verysimilar to the seed model. However, the team did not refer to the seed model explicitly in this case. S3 suggestedusing ¾-inch diameter pipes but realized immediately that it would cause a huge drop in pressure, thus using 1inch diameter pipes instead of ¾-inch diameter pipes. S13 then cautioned S3 that using only 1-inch pipes wouldincrease their cost, highlighting the tradeoff of using 1-inch diameter pipes. In response, S3 used ½-inch diameterpipe near the taps to keep the cost down. The final model looked very similar to the seed model’s design.The use of incomplete seed model as an anchor evoked different types of students’ responses – someextending it immediately, some returning back to it after exploring other design options, and some likely referringto it implicitly. The seed model appears to have provided an example helping students engage in the designthinking process and make tradeoffs. Students were able to immediately apply their knowledge about relationshipbetween system variables to improve the seed model’s design, potentially avoiding the new knowledge frombecoming “inert.” Additionally, the incompleteness of the seed model seems to have offered different designtrajectories to the teams who ultimately gravitated towards optimal designs. Thus, anchoring using suchincomplete models provide an age-appropriate effective scaffold for introducing design thinking in middle school.Further research is needed to determine the generalizability of these findings as well as evaluate the far transfereffect of such scaffolds. Also, future work will explore software-based representation of incomplete models tofurther understand the effect of form factor of the models on scaffolding design thinking.ReferencesAtkinson, R. K., Derry, S. J., Renkl, A., & Wortham, D. (2000). Learning from examples: Instructional principlesfrom the worked examples research. Review of Educational Research, 70(2), 181-214.Harrison, A. G., & Treagust, D. F. (2000). A typology of school science models. Intl’ J. Sc Ed, 22(9), 1011- 1026.Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2000). Developing model-based reasoning in mathematics and science. Journal ofApplied Developmental Psychology, 21(1), 39-48.Moore, T. J., Glancy, A. W., Tank, K. M., Kersten, J. A., Smith, K. A., & Stohlmann, M. S. (2014). A frameworkfor quality K-12 engg. education: Research and development. J. of Pre-college Engg. Ed. Res, 4(1), 2.National Academy of Engineering and National Research Council of the National Academies. (2009).Engineering in K–12 Education: Understanding the status and improving the prospects. Washington,DC: The National Academies Press.Renkl, A., & Atkinson, R. K. (2002). Learning from examples: Fostering self-explanations in computer-basedlearning environments. Interactive learning environments, 10(2), 105-119.Renkl, A., Mandl, H., & Gruber, H. (1996). Inert knowledge: Analyses and remedies. Ed. Psych., 31(2), 115-121.Sheppard, S.D. (2003). A Description of Engineering: An Essential Backdrop for Interpreting EngineeringEducation, Proceedings (CD), Mudd Design Workshop IV, Claremont, Cal.: Harvey Mudd College.The Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1990). Anchored instruction and its relationship to situatedcognition. Educational Researcher, 2-10.AcknowledgmentsThis research was part of the dissertation completed at the University of Illinois at Chicago. I would like to thankDr. Tom Moher for guiding the larger dissertation research study and sharing valuable feedback.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1530© ISLS