STEAM Learning in an In-school Makerspace: The Role ofDistributed Spatial SensemakingKay E. Ramey, Reed Stevens, and David H. Uttalkay.ramey@northwestern.edu, reed-stevens@northwestern.edu, duttal@northwestern.eduNorthwestern UniversityAbstract: This study examines technology-enhanced STEAM learning among fifth and sixthgrade students in one set of in-school makerspaces. It focuses on the learning of one set ofmeta-disciplinary skills, spatial skills. Prior research has shown these skills to be relevant forSTEAM achievement, but they have been underemphasized in our schools and in theliterature on learning through making. Informed by a distributed cognition perspective andusing a combination of qualitative categorical coding and interaction analysis, this studyprovides a learning sciences approach to studying spatial thinking and learning. Analysesshow that during making activities students engaged in frequent and diverse spatial thinkingwith a variety of social and material resources and that the sociomaterial contexts of differentmaking activities facilitated different types of spatial thinking. They also show that spatialthinking developed over time and led to problem-solving insights.Keywords: STEAM, makerspace, spatial thinking, interaction analysis, mixed methodsMakerspaces have become explosively popular in recent years. Many believe they hold promise as contexts forintegrated STEAM (science, technology, engineering, arts, and math) learning, meta-disciplinary skill learning,and promoting interest and equity in STEAM (e.g., Blikstein, 2013; Hilton, 2010; Martin, 2015; Sheridan et al.,2014; Vossoughi & Bevan, 2014; Vossoughi et. al., 2013). However, we still know relatively little about whatis actually learned in these spaces, how it is learned, and how to evaluate learning in ways that don’t interferewith the informal structure of making activities. As makerspaces gain in popularity and move increasingly frominformal contexts into schools, it is essential that we answer these questions.This paper tackles these questions, using one particular set of skills, spatial skills, as an example.We’ve chosen to focus on this particular set of skills, because spatial skills predict performance in collegeSTEAM courses (e.g., Hsi, Linn, & Bell, 1997; Sorby, 1999; Sorby, 2009; Sorby & Baartmans, 2000; Sorby, etal., 2013; Tseng & Yang, 2011) and entry into STEAM disciplines (e.g., Humphreys, Lubinski, & Yao, 1993;Lubinski, 2010; Shea, Lubinski, & Benbow, 2001; Wai, Lubinski, & Benbow, 2009). They also play a centralrole in the practices of STEAM professionals (e.g., Dogan & Nersessian, 2010; Stevens & Hall, 1998), and areoften used in everyday thinking and learning (e.g., Hutchins, 1995; Scribner, 1984; Wagner, 1978). Further,contrary to the historically dominant notion that spatial skills are innate and fixed, recent research hasdemonstrated that these skills are learnable (Uttal et al., 2013) and thus can be improved through instruction orhands-on experience. However, traditional, textbook learning often de-emphasizes spatial thinking, in favor ofverbal or analytic approaches to knowledge. As a result, spatial skills are systematically undervalued andunderdeveloped in our schools (e.g., NRC, 2006; Newcombe, Uttal, & Sauter, 2013).In contrast, hands-on, project-based, learning activities, like the ones found in makerspaces, have thepotential to spatialize (Newcombe, et al., 2013) STEAM content, by situating learning within work withphysical and digital objects and spatial representations, rather than limiting it to the verbal and analytic domains.In particular, the technological tools used in makerspaces, such as CAD (computer aided design) software and3D printers, both require and have the potential to improve spatial skills (Basham & Kotrlik, 2008; Onyancha,Derov, & Kinsey, 2009; Shavalier, 2004; Sorby, et al., 2013). However, analysis of the development of theseskills is conspicuously absent from the literature on learning in makerspaces. This leaves open questionsregarding how or whether these skills are actually used or learned in these spaces and how they support othertypes of learning. This paper addresses these questions using data from an ethnographic study of middle schoolstudents engaged in STEAM learning activities in one set of technology-rich, in-school makerspaces.Theoretical frameworkWe know relatively little about how spatial skills are learned and how they might support early STEAMlearning, either in makerspaces or in other STEAM learning contexts. This is, in part, because the research thathas been done on spatial thinking and learning has relied primarily upon psychometric assessments or laboratoryexperiments and exogenous rather than endogenous (Hall & Stevens, 2015; Stevens, 2010) accounts of learning.ICLS 2018 Proceedings168© ISLSFurther, efforts at improving spatial thinking have focused on didactic, teacher (or experimenter) led instructionon specific, narrowly-constrained topics, rather than on ways to support student inquiry and problem-solving(e.g., Atit, et al., 2016; Congdon & Levine, 2017; Novack, et al., 2014; Stull & Hegarty, 2016).In contrast, learning in makerspaces is more student- and inquiry-driven and spans a wide variety oftools and concepts. This necessitates a shift in focus away from didactic instructional approaches andstandardized assessments and toward: (1) understanding the ways in which students spontaneously engage inspatial thinking and problem-solving, using a variety of social and material resources; and (2) designingactivities that provide the right resources and task constraints to encourage particular types of spatial thinking.To fill this gap, we draw on distributed theories of thinking and learning (e.g., Goodwin, 2000;Hutchins, 1995; Latour, 2005; Ramey & Uttal, 2017; Stevens & Hall, 1998) to frame our investigation of spatialthinking in makerspaces. Based on this theoretical framing, we conclude that spatial thinking should beexamined within the sociomaterial context in which it is learned and applied. We also conclude that we should:(1) examine the specific interactions between people, tools, and representations through which spatial thinkingis enacted and developed; and (2) trace specific spatial representations as they traverse across representationalmedia, in order to understand how spatial understandings are distributed to or co-constructed by learners andtheir sociomaterial context. In doing so, we draw on the construct of distributed spatial sensemaking, or theidea that learners both employ cognitive spatial processes and draw on context- and activity-specific social andmaterial resources to co-construct understandings of spatial phenomena (Ramey & Uttal, 2017). Here, weexpand upon prior work by exploring: (1) the role that specific technological tools and activities available inmakerspaces (e.g., CAD software, 3D printers, electronic circuits) play in facilitating specific types of spatialthinking; (2) how participation in making improves spatial thinking over time; and (3) the role that spatialthinking plays in supporting other forms of STEAM thinking and learning.MethodThe research presented here was conducted in one set of in-school makerspaces, FUSE Studios (Stevens et al.,2016). FUSE provides students with a set of integrated STEAM making and design challenges. Thesechallenges are designed to be interest-driven, learner-centered, and inclusive of many different types of learners.There are almost 30 challenge sequences in which students complete challenge levels of increasing difficulty,according to their interests. Guidelines and resources for FUSE challenges are housed on the FUSE website(https://www.fusestudio.net). However, the actual challenges are done using a combination of open-sourcesoftware programs, such as Sketchup or Inkscape, housed on students’ local computers, and physical tools andmaterials, such as 3D printers, circuit boards, or building materials, stored in individual FUSE studios.The research presented here was conducted in five fifth and sixth grade classrooms, from one large,suburban, school district, with a relatively racially and socioeconomically diverse student population. Of the 127students in the five focal classrooms, 90 agreed to participate in this research. Of these, 58 were fifth graders,and 32 were sixth graders. 42 were male, and 48 were female.Drawing on cognitive ethnographic methods (Hutchins, 1995; Hollan, Hutchins, & Kirsh, 2000), weconducted ethnographic observations of classroom activity in five FUSE studios, one during the Spring of the2014-15 academic year, and the other four during the entire 2015-16 academic year. For these observations, I,or another a member of the research team, attended every FUSE session (two per week for a total of 90minutes), and collected field notes, video recordings, and pictures of artifacts. Video was collected using onetripod-mounted, stationary camera, and six point-of-view cameras (small Go-Pro®, Drift®, or Mobius® camerasmounted on tennis visors), worn by six focal students in each class.Initial content-logging of the video data showed that of the 24 different FUSE challenges available tostudents during our observations, we had adequate documentation of students doing 18 of them (at least twostudents or groups of students doing the challenge over one or more classes). For these 18 challenges, weselected for analysis two, contrasting cases of a student or group of students doing the challenge. We selectedthe first student case based on the amount and quality of available video, privileging cases where studentsworked most or all the way through the challenge. In selecting the second student case from each challenge, wechose a case that contrasted with the first case along one or more theoretically important dimensions (e.g.,individual versus collaborative, fifth versus sixth grader, or systematic versus tinkering approach). For eachcase, we analyzed all of the video data of that student doing the given challenge (anywhere between 30 min andfifteen hours of video per case).In analyzing this data, we used a combination of qualitative categorical coding and interaction analysis.We used a modified version of Ramey and Uttal’s (2017) coding scheme to code multimodal idea units forevidence of distributed spatial sensemaking. This included coding talk, gesture, and object manipulation forevidence of cognitive spatial processes. Codes for cognitive spatial processes were derived from a recentICLS 2018 Proceedings169© ISLStaxonomy (Newcombe & Shipley, 2015; Uttal, et al., 2013), which compiles the diverse array of spatial skillsidentified in literature and divides them into intrinsic-static (e.g., disembedding), intrinsic-dynamic (e.g., mentalrotation), extrinsic-static (e.g., locating an object or self with respect to a frame of reference), and extrinsicdynamic (e.g., perspective taking). For the purposes of this study, we also revised this coding scheme, based onour observations of the types of spatial thinking students were engaging in. Drawing on prior work by Hutchins(1995), Goodwin (2000), and Stevens and Hall (1998), we also coded participants’ idea units for both thehuman and non-human resources they were drawing on to aid in spatial sensemaking and problem-solving,including diagrams, instructional videos, written instructions, other students’ descriptions (multimodal),instructors’ descriptions (multimodal), and tinkering with or exploring materials. Then, we also analyzedepisodes of distributed spatial sensemaking, using interaction analysis (e.g., Goodwin, 2000; Hall & Stevens,2015; Jordan & Henderson, 1995; McDermott, Gospodinoff, & Aron, 1978; Mehan, 1982). We did this to betterunderstand not just what cognitive processes and practices were being used, but how they were being used ininteraction and what it was about the specific sociomaterial conditions and task constraints of the FUSEactivities that led to their use.FindingsOur analyses yielded four findings related to spatial thinking and STEAM learning in the context of FUSEactivities. First, in making sense of and working through FUSE challenges, students engaged in frequent anddiverse forms of spatial thinking and drew on a variety of both social and material resources, often incoordination with one another. Further, the different sociomaterial contexts and task constraints of differentFUSE challenges facilitated different types of distributed spatial sensemaking. Over time, the spatial thinkingoccurring during different FUSE challenges developed, and finally, that spatial thinking led to STEAMproblem-solving insights.Students engaged in frequent and diverse spatial thinking with a variety of resourcesAcross all the data we analyzed of students working through FUSE challenges, we found 9393 instances ofspatial thinking demonstrated through talk, gesture, or object manipulation. Students engaged in 13 differenttypes of spatial thinking, spanning all four quadrants of the two by two taxonomy. The most commonlydemonstrated were extrinsic-static skills (57 percent of total instances of spatial thinking), including thinkingabout spatial relations between objects or between self and objects (54 percent) and describing relative size (3percent). These were followed by intrinsic-static skills (24 percent), including disembedding (17 percent),quantifying space (5 percent), and categorizing space (2 percent), then extrinsic-dynamic skills (11 percent),including perspective-taking (6 percent) and thinking about dynamic spatial relations between objects (5percent), and finally intrinsic-dynamic skills (8 percent), including mental rotation (3 percent), 2D to 3Dtranslation (3 percent), scaling or scale changes (1 percent), mental simulation (1 percent), and mental folding(less than 1 percent).There are two things that are important to highlight in these findings. The first is the very large amountof spatial thinking going on during these activities (9393 instances). The second is the broad range of differentspatial skills students demonstrated, and in particular, the relative infrequency of intrinsic-dynamic spatialthinking (8 percent or 713 instances), relative to other types of spatial thinking. This is important, because mostof the psychometric tests used in correlational studies test primarily for these intrinsic-dynamic skills. So, byrelying only on those, it’s clear that we’re missing a lot of what’s going on in real-world problem-solvingcontexts.Another important aspect of spatial thinking in real-world learning contexts that laboratory andcorrelational studies fail to account for is the heterogeneity of social and material resources that students drawon to make sense of spatial concepts and how the use of those resources shapes spatial thinking. In makingsense of the spatial aspects of the various FUSE challenges, students used a variety of both social and materialresources, often in coordination with one another. Social resources included both other students in theclassroom (44 percent of total resources used) and the adults serving as FUSE facilitators (9 percent). Materialresources included diagrams (3 percent), help videos (10 percent), and written instructions from the FUSEwebsite (7 percent), physical or digital materials specific to challenges (28 percent), and sketches created bystudents (1 percent).There are two things that are important to notice in these numbers. First is that many of the resourcesstudents drew upon, such as help videos, diagrams, sketches, and physical and digital materials had strong,inherently spatial components, whereas others, such as other students, facilitators, and written instructions, werenot inherently spatial but were able to convey spatial information through practices such spatial language,gesture, and object manipulation. The second thing worth noticing is how infrequently students drew on theICLS 2018 Proceedings170© ISLSfacilitator as a resource, relative to other resources available in the classroom. This contrasts with the structureof a traditional school classroom, where the teacher is the primary resource from whom knowledge is dispensed.This difference is important, as it emphasizes the need to move away from those traditional, didactic approachesto studying and improving spatial thinking and learning (or any thinking and learning) and toward looking atstudents’ own spontaneous thinking and problem-solving with a variety of social and material resources.Different challenges facilitated different types of spatial thinkingAs one might expect, given the role that other people and material resources played in spatial thinking, thedifferent sociomaterial contexts provided by different FUSE challenges led to different types of distributedspatial sensemaking. For example, Figure 1 shows the different spatial skills demonstrated during differentchallenges.Figure 1. Spatial skills by challenge, as a percentage of total spatial idea units communicated through talk,gesture, or object manipulation during completion of that challenge.There are two main things that are important to notice here. First is the relatively high frequency of bothintrinsic-dynamic and extrinsic-dynamic spatial thinking in FUSE challenges involving CAD software (e.g., 3DYou, Keychain Customizer, Print My Ride, Eye Candy, Dream Home, and Dream Home 2). This indicates theimportance of particular technology tools in facilitating particular types of spatial thinking. Second is therelatively high frequency of extrinsic-dynamic skills in challenges, such as 3D You and Get in the Game. Weargue that this is because these challenges required the coordinated movement of multiple people, physical anddigital representations, and objects simultaneously, in order to complete the challenge.Interaction analysis of episodes of distributed spatial sensemaking from these challenges demonstrateswhy this is the case. For example, the transcript in Table 1 shows an interaction between three students, Tia,Kyle, and James, as they worked together to do the last level of the 3D You challenge. The goal of thischallenge level is to use a Kinect to scan a 3D image of one student’s head (in this case James’ head) into asoftware program, so that the student can 3D print a bust of himself. At the opening of the interaction, thestudents were almost done scanning James’ head. All that was left was to scan the top of it. Kyle had beenholding the Kinect, while James, seated in a spinning desk chair revolved slowly in a circle. However, at theopening of this episode, Tia, who had been sitting at the computer monitoring the representation of James’ headon the screen offered to switch places with Kyle and hold the Kinect. So Kyle took on the role of monitoring therepresentation on the computer screen and instructing Tia and James movements in order to finish the scan.In this excerpt, we can see that in order for the activity to proceed successfully, the participants in theinteraction (Kyle, James, Tia, the Kinect, the computer, and the desk chair) needed to both think spatially andcoordinate spatial representations across different representational media (gesture, talk, body position, and thecomputer display). Analysis of the human participants’ contributions to this interaction shows that they engagedin a number of extrinsic-static and -dynamic types of spatial thinking, including perspective taking (lines 14-15,ICLS 2018 Proceedings171© ISLS24-25), and both static (line 6) and dynamic (lines 7, 10, 12, 14-19, 24-15) spatial relations. This episodedemonstrates how an activity can be designed to encourage or necessitate the use of particular spatial skills. Thiscontrasts with prior approaches to teaching spatial skills, which have involved didactic teacher-led instruction.Table 1: A Distributed Cognitive System Does the Last Level of the 3D You ChallengeLinePersonTalkActions6Tia:Okay.1 Gosh,2 how did you stay inthis position?17Kyle:18910Kyle:James:Kyle:11121314James:Kyle:Tia:Kyle:15James:16Tia:171819Kyle:James:Kumar:20212223Computerscreen:TiaKyle:James24Tia:25James:Now, James, you gotta move alittle bit.James!What?1Okay, move your chair.((reaches across Kyle’s body and takes Kinectfrom him without moving it)) 2((holds Kinect inplace with right arm outstretched))1((walks around table and stands in front ofcomputer, looking at computer screen))((looks at the representation of James on thecomputer screen))((turns body and chair slowly))1Okay, come over here a little bit1((waves hand to the right))11((begins moving to her right with the Kinect))Me?No no no no1 Now how do we get 1((holds hand out in “stop” gesture)) 2((lifts onethe top of his head? Because if you hand up, then the other))try to pick it up2, it just says goback to last pose.((leans forward so they can scan the top of hishead))There we go. Now circle aroundholding your breath.Yeah, circle around.((begins to turn slowly))Ok, slowly, and wait. But this has 1((waves hand to the right)) 2((points toto be1 a little bit more.2representation of James’ head on the computerscreen, then waves hand to the left))((Image of James’ head rotates to side of screen soit looks like he's sitting on the wall.))11Whoa!((laughs))((laughs))((looks at screen and rotates his head slightly toalign with the angle of his head on the screen))1((rotates Kinect back and forth but representationWhat happened? Am I like1on screen stays the same))11Ok, let's watch the video2((gets up and points to the back or exit button onthe screen)) 2((points to the screen again))1Spatial thinking developed over timeInteraction analysis of spatial thinking during FUSE challenges also led to two important findings concerninglearning. First, students’ spatial thinking developed over time, through work on the FUSE challenges. Forexample, while working on the Dream Home challenge, one student, Johanna, tried to add an extra wing to herCAD model home. However, because when she created it, she was looking at her house from above, sheaccidentally created it on an angle, rather than flat on the ground. After initially getting frustrated, she decidedthat she liked the diagonal structure and turned it into a pyramid, which she used as a garage for her home. Infact, she liked it so much that, after accidentally closing her file without saving, she recreated it. In doing so, shewas forced to employ perspective-taking to figure out how she had created it in the first place.Then, in her later work on the Dream Home 2: Gut Rehab challenge, she demonstrated how her abilityto engage in perspective taking in the CAD environment (Sketchup) had improved with experience. Theillustrated transcript presented in Figure 2 shows how, after an initial plea for assistance from her friend,Victoria, she was able to independently and efficiently use the “orbit” and “pan” tools in Sketchup to selectICLS 2018 Proceedings172© ISLSappropriate perspectives on her home to complete her desired task – placing a rug flat on the floor.Figure 2. Johanna engages in perspective taking to place a rug on the floor of her model home.Spatial thinking led to STEAM problem-solving insightsThe other way in which distributed spatial sensemaking led to learning was by advancing problem-solving. Forexample, as one group of students worked through the Solar Roller challenge sequence, they encountered anumber of problems, many of which were solved though spatial insights. For example, when they began Level 2of the challenge (which requires that students create a 50-inch-long tunnel for their solar car to drive through),they searched for objects in the classroom that could be arranged into the shape of a tunnel. First, they usedchairs, then printer paper, then box tops. Meanwhile, noticing that the wheels of their solar car were spinningfaster in midair than on the carpet, they hypothesized that the car would go further or faster on a smooth surface.First, they tried pieces of paper on the carpet; then they moved to a smooth countertop. The students alsointegrated spatial thinking with mathematical thinking, calculating how many chairs, pieces of paper, or boxtops they would need to create a 50-inch tunnel, and measuring the distance their solar car travelled on each run.Finally, throughout the challenge, the students engaged in multiple rounds of troubleshooting and iteration withthe solar car itself, using help videos and diagrammatic instructions from the FUSE website or a combination ofobservations and tinkering to reconfigure their car, all of which involved spatial thinking.Conclusions and implicationsThis analysis of learning in FUSE makes four main contributions. First, using spatial skills as an example, itprovides a missing, close analysis of learning in makerspaces and thus provides a template for the systematicstudy of other types of thinking and learning during making activities.Second, it shows that spatial thinking occurs in making activities, and how it both develops over timeand advances problem-solving. As a result, the findings presented here improve our understanding of what islearned in makerspaces and how that learning happens. They also challenge traditional, psychologicalconceptions of spatial ability as individual, innate, and fixed. Finally, they provide both a missing account of therole of spatial thinking in early STEAM learning and an alternative set of methods for improving spatial skills.Third, the prevalence of a wide variety of spatial skills and the frequent use of other people, tools, andrepresentations shows what we’re missing from only using psychometric assessments to study spatial thinkingand learning. This finding emphasizes the importance of augmenting quantitative, exogenous accounts of spatialthinking and learning with qualitative, endogenous ones (Hall & Stevens, 2015; Stevens, 2010). This shift inmethods may be particularly beneficial for capturing the spatial thinking and learning of female and low SESstudents, who underperform on psychometric assessments (e.g., Eliot & Fralley, 1976; Levine, Huttenlocher,Taylor, & Langrock, 1999; Levine, et al., 2005; Linn & Peterson, 1985) but may be capable of more whenplaced in more authentic problem-solving contexts and allowed access to relevant social and material resources.Finally, this analysis shows how the different sociomaterial contexts and task constraints of differentactivities facilitate different types of distributed spatial sensemaking (e.g., intrinsic-dynamic spatial thinkingwith CAD software or extrinsic-dynamic spatial thinking in 3D You). This provides an understanding of thetypes of tools, social arrangements, and activities that facilitate different types of spatial skills. As a result, thisanalysis can serve as a guideline for educators in selecting making activities to facilitate particular types ofspatial skills. It also improves our understanding of the advantages of providing students with access toparticular technology tools available in makerspaces, such as 3D printers and CAD software.ICLS 2018 Proceedings173© ISLSReferencesAtit, K., Weisberg, S. M., Newcombe, N. & Shipley, T. (2016). Learning to interpret topographic maps:Understanding layered spatial information. Paper presented in D. H. Uttal (Chair), Supporting SpatialThinking to Enhance STEM Learning. Symposium conducted at the annual American EducationalResearch Association Conference, San Antonio, TX, April 2017.Basham, K. L. & Kotrlik, J. W. (2008). The effects of 3-Dimensional CADD modeling on the development ofthe spatial ability of technology education students. Journal of Technology Education, 20(1), 32-47.Blikstein, P. (2013). Digital fabrication and ‘making’ in education: The democratization of invention. In J.Walter-Herrmann & C. Büching (Eds.), FabLabs: Of Machines, Makers and Inventors (pp. 1-21).Bielefeld, Germany: Transcript Publishers.Congdon, E. & Levine, S. C. (2017). Making Measurement Mistakes: How Actions and Gestures Can RectifyCommon Student Misconceptions. Paper presented in D. H. Uttal (Chair), Supporting Spatial Thinkingto Enhance STEM Learning. Symposium conducted at the annual American Educational ResearchAssociation Conference, San Antonio, TX, April 2017.Dogan, F. & Nersessian, N. J. (2010). Generic abstraction in design creativity: The case of Staatsgalerie byJames Stirling. Design Studies, 31(3), 207-336. doi:10.1016/j.destud.2009.12.004Eliot, J., & Fralley, J. S. (1976). Sex differences in spatial abilities. Young Children, 31(6), 487-498.Goodwin, C. (2000). Action and embodiment within situated human interaction. Journal of Pragmatics, 32,1489-1522.Hall, R., & Stevens, R. (2015). Developing approaches to interaction analysis of knowledge in use. In diSessa,A. A., Levin, M., & Brown, N. J. S. (Eds.), Knowledge and interaction: A synthetic agenda for thelearning sciences. New York, NY: Routledge.Hilton, M. (2010). Exploring the intersection of science education and 21st century skills: A workshopsummary. National Research Council. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.Hollan, J., Hutchins, E., & Kirsh, D. (2000). Distributed cognition: Toward a new foundation for humancomputer interaction research. Transactions of Computer-Human Interaction, 7(2), 174-196.doi:10.1145/353485.353487Hsi, S., Linn, M. C., & Bell, J. E. (1997). The role of spatial reasoning in engineering and the design of spatialinstruction. Journal of Engineering Education, 151-158. doi:10.1002/j.2168-9830.1997.tb00278.xHumphreys, L. G., Lubinski, D., & Yao, G. (1993). Utility of predicting group membership and the role ofspatial visualization in becoming an engineer, physical scientist, or artist. Journal of AppliedPsychology, 78(2), 250-261. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.78.2.250Hutchins, E. L. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 4, 39–103.Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to Actor-Network Theory. New York: OxfordUniversity Press Inc.Levine, S.C., Huttenlocher, J., Taylor, A. & Langrock, A. (1999). Early sex differences in spatial ability.Developmental Psychology, 35(4), 940-949.Levine, S. C., Vasilyeva, M., Lourenco, S., Newcombe, N. & Huttenlocher, J. (2005). Socioeconomic statusmodifies the sex difference in spatial skill. Psychological Science, 16(11), 841-845.Linn, M. C. & Peterson, A. C. (1985). Emergence and characterization of sex differences in spatial ability: Ameta-analysis. Child Development, 56, 1479-1498.Lubinski, D. (2010). Neglected aspects and truncated appraisals in vocational counseling: Interpretingtheinterest-efficacy association from a broader perspective: Comment onArmstrongandVogel(2009). Journal of Counseling Psychology, 57(2), 226-238.Martin, L. (2015). The promise of the Maker Movement for education. Journal of Pre-College EngineeringEducation Research, 5(1), 30-39.McDermott, R. P., Gospodinoff, K., & Aron, J. (1978). Criteria for an ethnographically adequate descriptionof concerted activities and their contexts. Semiotica, 24, 245-275.Mehan, H. (1982). The structure of classroom events and their consequences for student performance. In P. G.& A. A. Glatthorn (Eds.), Children in and out ofschool: Ethnography and education (pp. 59-87).Washington: Center for Applied Linguistics.National Research Council (2006). Learning to think spatially. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.Newcombe, N. S. & Shipley, T. F. (2015). Thinking about Spatial Thinking: New Typology, New Assessments.In J. S. Gero (Ed.), Studying visual and spatial reasoning for design creativity. Springer.doi:10.1007/978-94-017-9297-4_10ICLS 2018 Proceedings174© ISLSNewcombe, N.S., Uttal, D.H. & Sauter, M. (2013). Spatial development. In P. Zelazo (Ed.), Oxford handbook ofdevelopmental psychology, Vol. 1: Body and mind (pp. 564-590). New York: Oxford University Press.Novack, M. A., Congdon, E. L., Hermani-Lopez, N., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2014). From action to abstraction:Using the hands to learn math. Psychological Science, 25(4), 903-910.Onyancha, R. M., Derov, M., & Kinsey, B. L. (2009). Improvements in spatial ability as a result of targetedtraining and computer-aided design software use: Analyses of object geometries and rotation types.Journal of Engineering Education, 98, 157-167. doi: 10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01014.xRamey, K. E. & Uttal, D. H. (2017). Making sense of space: Distributed spatial sensemaking in a middle schoolsummer engineering camp. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 26(2), 277-319.Scribner, S. (1984). Studying working intelligence. In B. Rogoff & J. Lave (Eds.), Everyday cognition: Itsdevelopment in social context (pp. 9-40). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Shavalier, M. (2004). The effects of CAD-like software on the spatial ability of middle school students. Journalof Educational Computing Research, 31(1), 37-49.Shea, D., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. (2001). Importance of assessing spatial ability in intellectually talentedyoung adolescents: A 20-year longitudinal study. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93, 604-614.doi:10.1037/0022-0663.93.3.604Sheridan, K., Halverson, E., Litts, B., Brahms, L., Jacobs-Priebe, L., & Owens, T. (2014). Learninginthemaking: A comparative case study of three makerspaces. Harvard Educational Review, 84(4), 505-531.Sorby, S. A. (1999). Developing 3-D spatial visualization skills. Engineering Design Graphics Journal, 63(2),21-32. Retrieved from http://www.edgj.org/index.php/EDGJ/article/viewFile/126/122Sorby, S. (2009). Educational research in developing 3-D spatial skills for engineering students. InternationalJournal of Science Education, 31(3), 459–480. doi:10.1080/09500690802595839Sorby, S., & Baartmans, B. (2000). The development and assessment of a course for enhancing the 3-D spatialvisualization skills of first-year engineering students. Journal of Engineering Education, 301-307.doi:10.1002/j.2168-9830.2000.tb00529.xSorby, S., Casey, B., Veurink, N. & Dulaney, A. (2013). The role of spatial training in improving spatial andcalculus performance in engineering students. Learning and Individual Differences, 26, 20-29.Stevens, R. (2010). Learning as a Members' Phenomenon: Toward an Ethnographically Adequate Science ofLearning. Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education, 109(1), 82-97.Stevens R. & Hall, R. (1998). Disciplined perception: Learning to see in technoscience. In M. Lampert & M. L.Blunk (Eds.), Talking mathematics in school: Studies of teaching and learning (pp.107-150).Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Stevens, R., Jona, K., Penney, L., Champion, D., Ramey, K. E., Hilppö, J., Echevarria, R., & Penuel, W. (2016).FUSE: An alternative infrastructure for empowering learners in schools. Proceedings of the 12thInternational Conference of the Learning Sciences, Singapore, SG, Volume 2, 1025-1032.Stull, A. T. & Hegarty, M. (2016). Model manipulation and learning: Fostering representational competencewith virtual and concrete models. Journal of Educational Psychology, 108(4), 509-527.Tseng, T., & Yang, M. (2011). The role of spatial-visual skills in a project-based engineering design course. InProceedings of the 118th ASEE Conference & Exposition, June 26-29, 2011, Vancouver, Canada.Uttal, D. H., Meadow, N. G., Tipton, E., Hand, L. L., Alden, A. R., Warren, C., & Newcombe, N. S. (2013).The malleability of spatial skills: A meta-analysis of training studies. Psychological Bulletin, 139(2),352-402. doi:10.1037/a0028446Vossoughi, S. & Bevan, B. (2014). Making and tinkering: A review of the literature. National Research CouncilCommittee on Out of School Time STEM, 1-55.Vossoughi, S., Escudé, M., Kong, F. & Hooper, P. (October, 2013). Tinkering, learning and equity in the afterschool setting. FabLearn Conference Proceedings, Stanford University. Available at:http://www.sesp.northwestern.edu/docs/publications/49224626354098196e0b03.pdfWagner, D. A. (1978). Memories of Morocco: The influence of age, schooling and environment on memory.Cognitive Psychology, 10, 1-28.Wai, J., Lubinski, D. & Benbow, C. (2009). Spatial ability for STEM domains: Aligning over 50 years ofcumulative psychological knowledge solidifies its importance. Journal of Educational Psychology,101, 817-835. doi:10.1037/a0016127AcknowledgmentsThis work is supported by the National Science Foundation, under NSF grants DRL-1348800 and DRL1433724. However, any opinions, findings, conclusions, and/or recommendations are those of the investigatorsand do not reflect the views of NSF.ICLS 2018 Proceedings175© ISLS