Connected Cosplay: Fan Work as Pathways Toward OpportunitySophia Bender and Kylie Pepplersobender@indiana.edu, kpeppler@indiana.eduIndiana UniversityAbstract: Connected learning explains how people can build learning pathways that connecttheir interests, relationships with others, and formal learning to lead toward futureopportunities. However, most learning systems are not set up ideally for connected learning.This paper analyzes two case studies of cosplayers—hobbyists who make their own costumesof media characters to wear at fan conventions—who benefited from a well-developedconnected learning ecology. Cases were drawn from a larger interview study and furtheranalyzed as compelling examples of connected learning. Important themes that emergedincluded sponsorship by family, friends, and adult mentors; unique pathways that start with adifficult challenge; and comparisons with formal school experiences. This has implications forhow we can design connected learning ecologies that support all learners on unique pathwaystoward fulfilling futures.IntroductionConnected learning (Ito et al., 2013; Ito, Salen, & Sefton-Green, in preparation) is a framework that helps us toconceptualize learning related to youths’ interests and relationships with others in a way that connects to futureoriented opportunities like school, higher education, careers, and political clout. However, we know very littleabout how learners navigate these pathways in ways that could inform the future design of educational learningenvironments. One way to do this is to turn to retrospective case studies (e.g., Maltese & Tai, 2010) to gatherhistories of how adults have successfully built on their passions toward meaningful future career opportunity.Cosplay (Bender, 2017)—the depiction of characters from media properties through costumes androleplay (thus the portmanteau, “cosplay”), usually at fan events like conventions—provides an interesting casestudy of how learning can be connected to future opportunity. As part of this hobby, cosplayers are motivated topursue their interests, learn numerous skills, connect with mentors and networks, and enrich their experience oflife. Sometimes they are fortunate enough that their hobby leads them down pathways toward careeropportunities. In these cases, cosplayers have benefited from a successful connected learning ecology. But thesystem is not always set up to legitimize the skills they are learning in their hobby, connect their school learningto it, or broker career opportunities related to their skills. By looking at differences between positive connectedlearning in cosplay and examples of disconnected learning, we may glean insights into how we can redesignlearning ecologies at all levels to support unique pathways toward future opportunity for all learners.In investigating the perspectives of cosplayers on their practice, we ask: What sorts of learningpathways exist in cosplay? How can it connect cosplayers to future opportunities? How can we make it—andlearning ecologies in general—work better for those who do not experience connections between theirextracurricular interests and future opportunities?Methodological approachThe lead author was situated as an embedded ethnographer in the cosplay community as part of a researchproject on the math inherent in textile crafts funded by the National Science Foundation. Ten cosplayersparticipating in regional fan conventions were interviewed, using a semi-structured interview protocol thatasked how the participants had learned the skills needed for cosplay, what drove them to participate in thishobby, stories about particular projects, the role communities played in their practice, and their experiences withtheir current occupation and with school. Interviews were transcribed and coded according to the connectedlearning spheres and theoretical principles. Two cosplayers were selected as cases illustrating the positivepotential of cosplay as a connected learning practice that can lead toward future-facing opportunities. They alsohad similar negative experiences with math classes, which they both viewed as disconnected from their lives.While not representative of all cosplayers, these two are models of “positive deviance” (Pascale, Sternin, &Sternin, 2010) that provide suggestions for how a well-developed connected learning model could be scaled toaddress wider-reaching systemic problems with traditional schooling inequities.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1605© ISLSResultsLexi (all names are pseudonyms) had been cosplaying for 9 years and was 31 at the time of the interview. Withher artist mother as a sponsor of learning new craft skills and her friends encouraging her to join their cosplaygroup, Lexi dove right in to the hobby with a costume that was a big challenge to sew. Now, she uses theknowledge she gained about clothing from cosplay in her job for a large intimate-wear company. She continuesto seek opportunities to express fashion creatively through designing for local fashion shows and freelancefashion consulting work. In contrast, she said her math classes “had no basis in reality,” unlike math in cosplaythat is applied directly to a real, tangible project.Tim’s interest in entertainment design was supported early by his enrollment in a performing artsschool that he now, at 33 during the interview, works for as a sculpture teacher. Like Lexi, he began to cosplayin order to join friends at fan conventions and to express his love for particular characters. He also took on a bigchallenge early: making a costume for which there were few existing online resources. Now he is payingforward the sponsorship he received and is encouraging others’ interests in art and cosplay; he lets studentsbring cosplay projects into his class, sometimes even brings his own to class, and allows friends to use his studioat home to work on cosplay and learn techniques from him. He too lamented about how math classes areirrelevant to students’ interests.Discussion and implicationsTim and Lexi’s experiences with learning how to cosplay were positive primarily because they connected toimportant aspects of their lives, as the connected learning framework would suggest. Relationships with peersmotivated their initial engagement, and adult sponsors provided access to materials and skills, whether in personor online. They both began their cosplay journeys with a challenge that “should” have been beyond their currentskill levels, but they managed it and continued to challenge themselves. This contrasts with conventional viewsof learning as following a step-by-step trajectory from easier to more difficult, suggesting that whenappropriately motivated, learners will surmount challenges “beyond their level.” Both cosplayers were alsofortunate to be able to apply their cosplay experiences to their careers, but they also felt a sense of fulfillmentfrom opportunities beyond their careers in which they could sponsor others’ interests in cosplay and clothing.Finally, they both recognized how disconnected their math classes has been from their lives, and contrasted thatwith the way math in cosplay did connect to their interests and goals, suggesting that school should do the same.To create a more equitable learning system that values all learners’ interests and skills and orients themtoward economic and political opportunities, these cosplayers show us that we need to legitimize learners’interests rather than dismiss them as frivolous, support their relationships with peers as positive motivators, actas sponsors who provide access to skills and resources, support youths’ goals even if they seem beyond theircurrent skill level, and recognize opportunities outside of careers as ways to enhance creative expression andmeaningful relationships with others. Considering how disconnected most traditional schooling is from the restof youths’ lives, these cosplayers also suggest that school learning should be applied to contexts that matter tostudents’ interests and future plans. Only when we create supports for unique pathways both in and out ofschool, throughout the lifespan, will equitable connected learning be accessible to all.ReferencesBender, S. (2017). Cosplay. In K. Peppler (Ed.) The SAGE encyclopedia of out-of-school learning (pp. 155157). Los Angeles, CA: Sage Publications.Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., ... & Watkins, S. C. (2013). Connectedlearning: An agenda for research and design. Irvine, CA: Digital Media and Learning Research Hub.Ito, M., Salen, K., & Sefton-Green, J. (Eds.) (in preparation) The Connected Research Network: Reflections on adecade of engaged scholarship.Maltese, A. V., & Tai, R. H. (2010). Eyeballs in the fridge: Sources of early interest in science. InternationalJournal of Science Education, 32(5), 669-685.Pascale, R. T., Sternin, J., & Sternin, M. (2010). The power of positive deviance: How unlikely innovators solvethe world's toughest problems. Boston, MA: Harvard Business Press.AcknowledgementsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1420303awarded to Kylie Peppler and Melissa Gresalfi. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendationsexpressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NationalScience Foundation.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1606© ISLS