Designing Learning Environments to Facilitate CreativityJonan Phillip Donaldson, Drexel University, jonandonaldson@gmail.comAbstract: Creativity is often placed alongside collaboration as a 21st-century skill. However,research in collaborative learning has outpaced research in developing creativity skills. Thisdesign case study uses the Creativity Landscape conceptual framework as a conceptual lensthrough which to operationalize creativity in the design of learning environments, and proposesthat constructionist learning principles, design thinking, designerly ways of knowing, andreflective practice are ideally suited to the development of various aspects of creativity.The creativity landscape frameworkAlthough creativity shares equal billing with collaboration as an essential 21st-century skill (Sawyer, 2014), thevarious conceptualizations of creativity found in the literature promote confusion and lack of systematic guidancefor those who wish to design learning environments which facilitate creativity (Hanson, 2014). And yet therelationship between the design of learning environments and creativity is an area of great research potential(Diego & John, 2011). The Creativity Landscape conceptual framework has been applied to the analysis ofcreativity tools and techniques (Donaldson, 2016), and to analysis of instructional design projects (Donaldson,2017). This paper describes the application of the framework as a guide to design for facilitation of creativity ina specific learning environment. This framework describes the rich landscape of creativity research through theuse of four categories and prominent concepts within each:•Creative Environments: Learning environments which facilitate creativity are highly collaborative,generative, playful, unregulated, and promote lowered inhibition.•Creative Mindsets: The mindsets required for optimal creativity include perseverance, openness toexperiences, tolerance of ambiguity, autonomy, creative self-efficacy, and mindfulness.•Creative Process: The creative process has been conceptualized in various ways. Common featuresamong different process models are stages including identification of problem, framing, preparation, ideageneration, incubation, unconscious cognition, insight, and refining.Creative Cognition: Cognitive processes can be seen as falling somewhere along a continuum rangingfrom divergent to convergent thinking, including metaphor creation, perspective taking, analogicalthinking, frame creation, conceptual combination, abductive reasoning, synthetic thinking, patternrecognition, and elaboration.Optimal facilitation of creativity involves a balance among all four categories, as well as a strong mix of elementsfrom within each category.•Design caseThis design case study was on aspect a larger design-based research project which applied the CreativityLandscape conceptual framework to the design and delivery of a hybrid course on multimedia for teaching andlearning. The 10-week course design included 3-hour weekly face-to-face classes accompanied by a robust onlineaspect in a learning management system organized in weekly modules which included weekly overviews,readings, videos, and online assignments. The course design was aligned as closely as possible to constructionistprinciples (Papert & Harel, 1991). The course design was structured around two group projects, four individualprojects, and frequent reflective assignments. The first group project (weeks 2-4) used a design thinking processmodel, and the second group projects (weeks 5-10) allowed the students to decide on their own processes. Thefour individual projects (weeks 4-7) involved meaning-making through artifact construction. There were reflectiveassignments in both the face-to-face classes and online. After the course was designed and taught by the author,the Creativity Landscape conceptual framework was applied as a diagnostic tool to identify areas in which thefacilitation of optimal learner creativity was strong, as well as areas in need of improvement in future iterationsof the course design. The analysis was conducted according to a breakdown of course design elements: reflectiveassignments, individual projects, group projects, online atmosphere, and face-to-face atmosphere. Each coursedesign element was then scored according to the percentage of creativity aspects specifically addressed accordingto the components in each of the four Creativity Landscape domains. Averages were then calculated for eachassignment type and for each creativity domain.First iteration findingsICLS 2018 Proceedings1419© ISLSThe reflective assignments were weak at facilitating development in the Creative Process Stages domain. Theindividual projects were strong in facilitating development in the Creative Context and Environment domain, andfacilitated minimal development in the three other domains. The group projects addressed more aspects of all fourcreative domains than did any other type of work. These projects were strong in facilitating development in theCreative Context and Environment domain and facilitated moderate development in the Creative Process Stagesand Creative Cognitive Processes domains. They facilitated minimal development in the Creative State of Minddomain. The online atmosphere was designed to focus on preparation (Creative Process Stages) and elaboration(Creative Cognitive Processes). However, it facilitated only minimal development in these domains, and wasweak in facilitating development in the Creative State of Mind and Creative Process Stages domains. The faceto-face atmosphere was particularly strong in facilitating development in the domains of Creative Context andEnvironment and Creative Cognitive Processes. It facilitated only minimal development in the Creative State ofMind and Creative Process Stages domains. In-class instructor feedback emphasized tolerance of ambiguity(Creative State of Mind), playfulness (Creative Context and Environment), and metaphor creation (CreativeCognitive Processes).Second iteration findingsThe second iteration of this course was designed to leverage the strengths of the first iteration towards addressingthe weaknesses. The reflective assignments originally only asked students to reflect on their processes andproducts, but were changed to include reflection upon emotional states, identity, and relevance to their currentand future lives. This led to improvements across the four creativity domains. In the first iteration, the individualassignments were self-contained, but in the second iteration they were integrated into the group project so thateach individual artifact would be woven into the group final project. This increased the creativity across the fourdomains, but there is still room for improvement in the Creative State of Mind and Creative Process Stagesdomains. In the first iteration, only the first group project used a design thinking process. In the second iterationthe second group project was integrated with all the individual projects. This boosted the creativity levels in allfour domains dramatically. The online aspects of the course were redesigned to include greater focus on creativeself-efficacy, metacognitive practices, and a reflective state. As in the first iteration, the online atmosphere wasthe weakest of all design elements, but there were improvements in all four domains. However, a great deal ofwork will be needed in the next iteration to purposefully address the areas in which it was weakest, particularlyin the Creative Process Stages and Creative Cognitive Processes domains.DiscussionIn the first iteration, the use of the Creativity Landscape conceptual framework was effective as a diagnostic toolin providing an easily-applied means of evaluating the degree to which course design features were weak or strongin facilitating development of creativity in general, as well as in particular creative domains. In the second iterationthe Creativity Landscape conceptual framework was effective as an instructional design tool by suggestingconcrete steps which could guide design moves towards increasing creativity. The Creativity Landscapeconceptual framework provided a conceptual lens through which to explore design choices for facilitating greatercreativity in the design of learning environments. This design study suggested that the principles of constructionistlearning, design thinking, designerly ways of knowing, and reflective practice have potential in promotingcreativity and warrant more investigation toward operationalizing creativity in learning environments in light ofcommon placement of creativity on par with collaboration in 21st-century skills.ReferencesDiego, E. U. L., & John, F. C. (2011). The opportunities and challenges of technology driven creativecollaborations Technology for Creativity and Innovation: Tools, Techniques and Applications (pp. 325342). Hershey, PA, USA: IGI Global.Donaldson, J. P. (2016). Alignment of creativity tools and techniques with theory and research. In F. Reisman(Ed.), Creativity in arts, science and technology (pp. 260-279). London: KIE Conference Publications.Donaldson, J. P. (2017). The creativity landscape framework and design of learning. Paper presented at the 2017American Educational Research Association Annual Meeting, San Antonio, TX.Hanson, M. H. (2014). Converging paths: Creativity research and educational practice. Knowledge Quest, 42.Papert, S., & Harel, I. (1991). Situating constructionism. In S. Papert & I. Harel (Eds.), Constructionism (pp. 111). New York, NY: Basic Books.Sawyer, R. K. (2014). Conclusion. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (2nded., pp. 747-776). New York, New York: Cambridge University Press.Funding was provided in part by Drexel University Office of International Programs.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1420© ISLS