Authentic to Whom and What? The Role of Authenticity in ProjectBased Learning in English Language ArtsJoseph L. Polman, University of Colorado Boulder, joseph.polman@colorado.eduKristina Stamatis, University of Colorado Boulder, kristina.stamatis@colorado.eduAlison Gould Boardman, University of Colorado Boulder, alison.boardman@colorado.eduAntero Garcia, Stanford University, antero.garcia@stanford.eduAbstract: Presents a framework for authenticity that informed co-design of a project-based 9thgrade English Language Arts course. A qualitative study examined ways teachers and studentsexperienced authenticity. Three types of authenticity contributed to engagement and learning:being (1) authentic to self through opportunities for choice and agency; (2) authentic to othersby addressing audiences through public performances and products; (3) providing opportunitiesto use authentic, genre-specific tools. Challenges to implementation—assessment anddisciplinary norms— are discussed.Keywords: Learning Environments, Literacy, English Language Arts, Project-Based LearningMajor issuesProject based learning (PBL) has a long history in US schooling (Dewey, 1938), but much of this work in recentyears takes place in STEM contexts, developing practices around projects and inquiry, and connecting learning toreal world challenges. Some school-based PBL takes place in history classrooms, but less has been studied aboutPBL in the English language arts classroom (ELA; Condliffe, 2016; a notable exception is Beach and Myers,2001). Project based learning is intended to provide opportunities for teachers and their students to create learningspaces that are authentic and relevant. This study examines how 9th grade language arts teachers and students,during a design-based research project, encountered and experienced the issue of authenticity in PBL. Ourresearch questions are: (1) What aspects of authenticity in ELA PBL do teachers take up and see as mostmeaningful? (2) How does authenticity relate to student perceptions and engagement with ELA PBL?Theoretical approachOur overall perspective on learning and human action draws on notions of mediated action and communities ofpractice. Our perspective on project-based learning is centered on the notion of “authentic making.” As in mostproject-based approaches (e.g., Baines & DeBarger, 2017), we see a question or challenge driving and providingpurpose and coherence to multi-week project work, where activities lead toward a culminating production, in theform of a concrete, complex artifact or performance. Three design criteria unpack the notion of authenticityapplied to ELA PBL: “Authentic to self”, “Authentic to others”, and “Authentic tools”.Authenticity criteria are based on prior work (Polman, 2012), where we noted three kinds of authenticitythat learning environment designers across disciplinary contexts often attempt to achieve: encouraging “authenticpersonal agency”, having “authentic community connections”, and using “externally authentic cultural tools”.Context and methodsEleven 9th grade teachers from five schools in two school districts in a United States Mountain West stateparticipated over a two-year period (2015-16 and 2016-17) with a research and development team (including theauthors) consisting of six university-based faculty members (in Schools of Education), one specialist on digitalmedia and learning in ELA based at a community library, and six university-based doctoral students (in Schoolsof Education). The majority of the research and development team were former ELA teachers. Using a co-designmodel (Penuel, Roschelle, & Shechtman, 2007), the team of researchers and teachers developed and refined ayear-long 9th grade English Language Arts course. The course is called "Compose Our World," and consists offour core projects that aim to make ELA emotionally and intellectually engaging for all students as they“compose” themselves, connect to wider communities, and become active world citizens. Additionally, all coursematerials are designed for local adaptation, so teachers can create experiences that are meaningful to theirparticular students, that adhere to specific standards, and that are engaging to teach. Teachers taught between oneand four projects each year for two years. Teachers participated in a four day initial design institute, six two-hoursessions, and received individual support throughout the year.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1669© ISLSData sources on teacher perceptions, student perceptions, and classroom enactments including fieldnotes, surveys, interviews, and artifacts such as teacher reflections, student work products, and emails wereanalyzed. Observations occurred 2-4 times monthly during enactment.We used a design-based research model in which data analysis is conducted while teachers implementcourse materials, contributing to building local theories and informing subsequent instruction. We conductedongoing and retrospective analysis, using qualitative research methods to code data, identify themes, and conductprocedures for trustworthiness. We combined etic and emic approaches to identify codes: starting with etic codesfor the three broad senses of authenticity described above, and searching for emergent, emic senses whereauthenticity became salient to students and teachers.FindingsAcross classrooms, teachers and students pointed to authenticity as valuable. Teachers frequently referencedauthenticity as valuable to student learning. In interviews and surveys, students consistently expressed feelingincreased excitement and connection when projects offered choice and opportunities for real audiences.Teachers enacted activities that students found to be authentic to self by providing opportunities for:choice, self-reflection, and connections to students’ lives. Data analysis revealed that both teachers and studentssaw choice as key for developing feelings of ownership and agency during project enactment. Across the fourprojects, teachers provided students with opportunities to choose topics, groups, ways to structure class time, andmeans of self-expression. In interviews, students also expressed feeling most connected to projects when they feltthat they had choice. A tension that arose was differences in interpretation of choice. While teachers andresearchers assumed that students would recognize projects as authentic to self when they had freedom to choosetopics and means of expression, students across classrooms voiced stronger feelings of ownership over and agencywithin projects when they were given the opportunity to determine how they spent their time to complete projectgoals and when they perceived that each step in learning and composing was not predetermined by the teacher.Authenticity to others was emphasized by each of the 11 teachers. Analysis illustrated a significant shiftfrom year one to year two in enactment of the projects and the ways students were encouraged to develop productsfor authentic audiences. Additionally, researchers recognized that while teacher interviews and survey responsesemphasized authenticity to others as directly tied to audience for students’ final product, students demonstratedhigher levels of engagement in project goals from the moment they began considering their audience.In each of the course project designs, students take on roles (e.g., investigative journalist or museumexhibit developer) that provide them with opportunities to create products that mirror those found in the worldoutside of the classroom. To create these products, students adopt the tools of the professionals they are emulating,while teachers help to create connections between these authentic tools and the English language arts skills taughtin 9th grade. The themes that emerged from our data in this area were (1) the importance of capitalizing on studentfamiliarity with literate practices using genre-specific tools, and also addressing teacher discomfort withunfamiliar tools, and (2) teachers’ tensions around navigating the use of authentic tools while attending to theneed to document learning through assessment and grading.ReferencesBaines, A., DeBarger, A. H., De Vivo, K., Warner, N., Brinkman, J. & Santos, S. (2017). What is rigorous projectbased learning? San Rafael, CA: George Lucas Educational Foundation.Beach, R., & Myers, J. (2001). Inquiry-based English instruction: Engaging students in life and literature. NewYork: Teachers College Press.Condliffe, B., Visher, M. G., Bangser, M. R., Drohojowska, S., & Saco, L. (2016). Project-based learning: Aliterature review. New York, NY: MDRC.Dewey, J. (1938/1950). Experience and education. New York: Macmillan.Penuel, W. R., Roschelle, J., & Shechtman, N. (2007). Designing formative assessment with teachers: An analysisof the co-design process. Research & Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 2(1), 51-74.Polman, J. L. (2012). Trajectories of participation and identification in learning communities involvingdisciplinary practices. In D. Yun Dai (Ed.), Design research on learning and thinking in educationalsettings: Enhancing intellectual growth and functioning (pp. 225–242). New York: Routledge.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. New York: Cambridge Univ Press.AcknowledgmentsWe are grateful to participating teachers and students. This work was funded by the George Lucas EducationalFoundation. All opinions are the authors'.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1670© ISLS