The Effect of Scaffolding on the Immediate Transfer of Students’Data Interpretation Skills Within Science TopicsRaha Moussavi, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, raha@wpi.eduJanice Gobert, Rutgers University, janice.gobert@gse.rutgers.eduMichael Sao Pedro, Apprendis, mikesp@apprendis.comAbstract: Cultivating science inquiry skills is increasingly seen as important to students’science literacy and effective scaffolding can support productive and successful inquirypractices. In this paper, we examine the evaluations of data interpretation practices of studentswho conducted inquiry within Inq-ITS, an intelligent tutoring system for science. We tracestudents’ progress on data interpretation tasks to a new science topic after having receivedscaffolds that assist with the procedural aspects of data interpretation. Results show that, overall,after receiving data interpretation scaffolds within the system, students were more skilled atinterpreting data in the new topic. However, there were still certain aspects of data interpretationwith which students experienced difficulty after receiving the scaffolding.IntroductionDeveloping explanations is a key inquiry practice in national science standards and is seen as essential for fosteringstudents’ science literacy (McNeill & Krajcik, 2011). Toulmin’s (1958) model of argumentation identifies threeaspects of explanation: the use of claims, evidence, and reasoning; others concur (Gotwals & Songer, 2009).Students often have difficulties with science argumentation practices, such as using appropriate and sufficient dataand providing reasoning for their claims (McNeill & Krajcik, 2011). Other research has shown that students: maynot link their data to their claims (Schunn & Anderson, 1999), change ideas about causality (Kuhn, Schauble, &Garcia-Mila, 1992), do not relate outcomes of experiments to the tested theories (Schunn & Anderson, 1999), andrely on theoretical arguments rather than evidence (Schunn & Anderson, 1999). These previous studies have usedeither verbal protocols or written responses to measure and address these difficulties, but, important to our work,have not lead to scalable support for inquiry practices requiring claims, evidence to support claims, and reasoninglinking claims to evidence. Creating assessments of these skills is a critical yet challenging task (McNeill &Krajcik, 2011) because coding the types of data collected through verbal protocols and written responses is laborintensive and requires the use of inquiry progressions and rubrics (e.g. Gotwals & Songer, 2009; McNeill &Krajcik, 2011). Supporting students in the development of this form of inquiry is also critical and challenging(Gotwals & Songer, 2009). The use of computer-based support may help facilitate this by automating theassessment and delivery of scaffolds, but there has been a lack of research examining either how these explanationpractices can be assessed and supported or how computer-based scaffolding can help foster students’ developmentof these skills over time (Windschitl, 2000).The goal of this study is to use real-time scaffolding integrated into Inq-ITS, Inquiry Intelligent TutoringSystem (Gobert et al., 2013b; inqits.org), to foster the development of the inquiry practices of data interpretationand warranting claims, which, to us, underlie argumentation practices necessary for communicating sciencefindings. Secondly, we evaluate how well students can transfer these data interpretation practices to a new topicafter receiving scaffolding via our pedagogical agent, Rex, a cartoon dinosaur. We address the question of whetherscaffolding has a positive effect on data interpretation by looking at students’ performance on a task in a newphysical science topic immediately following scaffolding (Sao Pedro et al., 2012).Transfer and scaffolding of inquiry skillsOne way to provide support for the acquisition and transfer of inquiry practices is through the use of scaffolds.When students are having difficulty with inquiry, scaffolds can help them achieve the success they could not ontheir own (Kang, Thompson, & Windschitl, 2014; McNeill & Krajcik, 2011). Specifically, scaffolds that aredeveloped to address specific aspects of scientific inquiry on a fine-grained level can help students receive thehelp they need and target the exact sub-skill on which they are having difficulty. Furthermore, scaffoldingapproaches that react in real-time within a computer environment can provide scalable guidance and support thedevelopment of inquiry skills by automatically detecting problems with inquiry (Sao Pedro et al., 2013; 2014),contributing to a deeper understanding of the content and inquiry processes.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1002© ISLSInq-ITSInq-ITS is a web-based science environment that assesses and scaffolds middle school students’ inquiry skills(NRC, 2011) in real time as they experiment with interactive simulations for Physical, Life, and Earth Science.Within each activity, students conduct inquiry by articulating a testable hypothesis, “experimenting” by collectingdata, and interpreting data. In this paper, we focus on inquiry activities for two Physical Science topics: Densityand Free Fall. The activities in the Density microworld aim to foster understanding about the density of differentliquid substances (water, oil, and alcohol). The activities in the Free Fall microworld aim to foster understandingabout the relationship between a ball’s mass, initial and final kinetic and potential energy, or its final speed andacceleration, when it is dropped from different heights.A key aspect of the system is its capacity to provide an assessment of students’ inquiry practices basedon the processes a student follows and the work products created. The system uses knowledge-engineered anddata-mined rules to evaluate log files generated from student interactions within the microworlds as a measure ofstudent performance. Inq-ITS has been shown to be an effective method for assessing inquiry skills in authenticscenarios (Gobert et al., 2013b). For data interpretation, these assessed skills are:•Selecting correct IV for claim•Selecting correct DV for claim•Correctly interpreting the IV/DV relationship•Correctly interpreting the hypothesis/claim relationship•Warranting with controlled trials•Correctly warranting the IV/DV relationship•Warranting the claim with more than one trialCorrectly warranting the hypothesis/claim relationshipInq-ITS can also deliver scaffolds to students in real time via a pedagogical agent. Prior work in Inq-ITS(Sao Pedro et al., 2013; 2014) has shown that scaffolding can help students both acquire and transfer two datacollection practices that students did not know at the onset of the study. The data interpretation scaffolds used inInq-ITS are designed to address four categories of procedurally-oriented difficulties that hone in on the sub-skillsunderlying data interpretation to provide targeted support for students’ specific difficulties (Moussavi et al., 2015).These data interpretation scaffolding categories are: (1) The claim IV/DV does not match the hypothesis IV/DV;(2) The trials selected for warranting are not properly controlled; (3) The claim does not reflect the data selected;and (4) The claim is incorrect as to whether it supports/ does not support the hypothesis.•MethodologyData was collected over the course of students’ interactions in two virtual labs in Inq-ITS.ParticipantsData was collected from 23 8th grade students from the same school in Massachusetts. All the students hadpreviously used Inq-ITS, but not with its scaffolding component.ProcedureTopic 1: DensityStudents completed the density activities in their science classroom after the content had already been introducedin the class. There were three activities. The first activity had no scaffolding support so as to record baseline dataof students’ inquiry practices. For the next two activities, students received scaffolding support in hypothesizing,data collection, and data interpretation. While the focus here is on the data interpretation scaffolding, it wasimportant that students be scaffolded throughout the inquiry process because students must have a testablehypothesis and have collected appropriate data before they can try to correctly analyze the data and create a claim.Topic 2: Free fallThis set of activities took place three weeks after the activities in topic 1. Students completed the free fall activitiesin their science classroom. Students had not yet learned about the content presented in these activities and as such,these activities served as a sort of content pre-test. No scaffolding support was present for any student throughoutthese activities.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1003© ISLSData analysisThe skill evaluations generated from the assessments within Inq-ITS (as described above) were examined forimmediate skill transfer (Sao Pedro et al., 2012). To analyze transfer, we first looked at students’ first chance todemonstrate the various data analysis practices in the second topic (Free Fall). This allows us to get an initial lookat the students who received data interpretation scaffolding in the first topic to see if it had a positive impact onthe transfer of data interpretation practices across topics. If scaffolding had a positive impact on data interpretationskills, we would expect to see more students demonstrating the skills correctly in the second topic than in the first.FindingsResults from this analysis (see Table 1) showed that for 6 out of 8 of the data interpretation skills evaluated, atleast 50% of the students demonstrated the skill correctly on their first try in topic 2. The three skills that thehighest percentage of students demonstrated correctly on their first try in topic 2 were: selecting the correct DVfor the claim, selecting the correct IV for the claim, and warranting the claim with more than one trial. The twoskills that less than 50% of the students demonstrated correctly on their first try in topic 2 were: correctlyinterpreting and correctly warranting the claim/hypothesis relationship.Table 1: Students' progress in topic 2Evaluated Data Interpretation SkillInterpreting the IV/DV relationshipSelecting correct DV for claimSelecting correct IV for claimInterpreting the hypothesis/claimrelationshipWarranting with controlled trialsWarranting the IV/DV relationshipWarranting the claim with more thanone trialWarranting the hypothesis/claimrelationshipStudents demonstratingskill correctly in topic 2# of% ofstudentsstudents(out of 23)1252.17%2191.3%2087%Students demonstrating skill correctly in topic 2after demonstrating incorrectly in topic 1# of studentsNumber of students% ofincorrect inthat got skill correctstudentsTopic 1in Topic 214642.86%8787.5%2150%1043.48%15640%131256.52%52.17%10142520%35.71%2087%6350%1043.48%15533.33%To get a closer look at how scaffolding is affecting the transfer of skills, we took a second look at thedata, this time using only students who did not correctly demonstrate the skill on their first try in topic 1. This willensure that we do not include students who may have already known the skill prior to using the microworlds andinstead focus on the students who are acquiring the skill through the support of the scaffolds. These results showedthat some degree of acquisition and transfer of skill was evident for all data interpretation skills. The three skillsthat the highest percentage of students demonstrated correctly on their first try in topic 2 were: selecting the correctDV for the claim, selecting the correct IV for the claim, and warranting the claim with more than one trial. Thetwo skills that the lowest percentage of students demonstrated correctly on their first try in topic 2 were: warrantingwith controlled trials and correctly warranting the claim/hypothesis relationship.Conclusion and implicationsOur findings showed that, after scaffolding, students were better able to create a claim (focusing on the appropriateIV/DV) and choose more than one piece of evidence to warrant their claim, two previously documented areas ofdifficulty for students (McNeil & Krajcik, 2011; Schunn & Anderson, 1999). This suggests that our targetedscaffolding, which provides real time help when students need it, can help students with difficult practicesunderlying explanation.Our findings also showed that students continued to struggle in the new topic with warranting claimswith controlled trials and correctly interpreting/warranting the claim/hypothesis relationship. The difficulty withwarranting claims with controlled trials may be linked to another known difficulty students have with scienceinquiry – collecting data with controlled trials (Sao Pedro et al., 2012) and may therefore be a more persistentdifficulty needing more scaffolding support. The student behavior surrounding the difficulty with interpreting andICLS 2016 Proceedings1004© ISLSwarranting the claim/hypothesis relationship is less clear, as not much research has been conducted on thisparticular skill. While students may be asked to provide a rebuttal of a different claim (with qualifying evidenceand reasoning) once they have made their own claim (e.g. McNeill & Krajcik, 2011), students are rarely asked todefinitively give a statement about whether or not their claim supports or refutes their original hypothesis. Furtherresearch is needed to address why students have difficulty with this, but it is possible that the acquisition of thisskill is impeded by students experiencing confirmation bias and having a disinclination to abandon a favoredhypothesis despite having interpreted their evidence to come up with a different claim (Klayman, 1995).Conceptualizing and supporting the components of the explanation framework – claim, evidence, andreasoning – in an automated and fine-grained way with appropriate sub-skills can help us unpack and target knowndifficulties documented by previous research (Gotwals & Songer, 2009; McNeill & Krajcik, 2011; Schunn &Anderson, 1999). This work shows that scaffolding these data interpretation practices in real-time can be abeneficial way to aid students in both acquiring and transferring these skills to new science topics, even whenstudents may not have initial content knowledge in that topic. This work also shows that students can havepersistent difficulty with regard to classifying the relationship between a claim and a hypothesis (i.e. saying if theclaim supports or refutes an initial hypothesis), suggesting that this skill may be more difficult for students toacquire and transfer and may, therefore, need more scaffolding support.ReferencesChinn, C., & Brewer, W. (1993). The role of anomalous data in knowledge acquisition: A theoretical frameworkand implications for science instruction. Review of Educational Research, 63, 1-49.Gobert, J. D., Sao Pedro, M., Raziuddin, J., & Baker, R. S. (2013b). From Log Files to Assessment Metrics forScience Inquiry Using Educational Data Mining. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 22(4), 521-563.Gotwals, A. W., & Songer, N. B. (2009). Reasoning up and down a food chain: Using an assessment frameworkto investigate students' middle knowledge. Science Education, 94(2), 259-281.Kang, H., Thompson, J., & Windschitl, M. (2014). Creating opportunities for students to show what they know:the role of scaffolding in assessment tasks. Science Education, 98(4), 674-704.Klayman, J. (1995). Varieties of confirmation bias. Psychology of learning and motivation, 32, 385-418.Kuhn, D., Schauble, L., & Garcia-Mila, M. (1992). Cross-domain development of scientific reasoning. Cognitionand Instruction, 9(4), 285-327.McNeill, K. L., & Krajcik, J. S. (2011). Supporting Grade 5-8 Students in Constructing Explanations in Science:The Claim, Evidence, and Reasoning Framework for Talk and Writing. Pearson.Moussavi, R., Kennedy, M., Sao Pedro, M.A., Gobert, J.D. (2015). Evaluating a Scaffolding Design toAutomatically Support Students’ Data Interpretation within a Simulation-Based Inquiry Environment.Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association. Chicago, ILNational Research Council. (2011). A Framework for K-12 Science Education. Washington, D.C.: NationalAcademies PressSao Pedro, M., Baker, R. S., & Gobert, J. D. (2013). Incorporating Scaffolding and Tutor Context into BayesianKnowledge Tracing to Predict Inquiry Skill Acquisition. In S.K. D'Mello, R.A. Calvo, & A. Olney (Eds.)Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Educational Data Mining, (pp. 185-192).Memphis, TN.Sao Pedro, M. A., Gobert, J. D., & Baker, R. (2014). Impacts of Automatic Scaffolding on Students’ Acquisitionof Data Collection Inquiry Skills. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American EducationResearch Association. Philadelphia, PA.Sao Pedro, M., Gobert, J., & Baker, R. (2012). Assessing the Learning and Transfer of Data Collection InquirySkills Using Educational Data Mining on Students' Log Files. Paper presented at The Annual Meeting ofthe American Educational Research Association. Vancouver, BC, CASchunn, C., & Anderson, J. (1999). The Generality/Specificity of Experise in Scientific Reasoning. CognitiveScience, 23(3), 337-370.Toulmin, S. (1958). The Uses of Argument. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge, UK.Windschitl, M. (2000). Supporting the development of science inquiry skills with special classes of software.Educational technology research and development, 48(2), 81-95ICLS 2016 Proceedings1005© ISLS