Mathematical Argumentation and Proof –Supporting a Complex Cognitive SkillDaniel Sommerhoff, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, sommerhoff@math.lmu.deStefan Ufer, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, ufer@math.lmu.deIngo Kollar, University of Augsburg, ingo.kollar@phil.uni-augsburg.deAbstract: During the last decades, research has provided evidence that handling mathematicalargumentation and proof (MA&P) represents a complex cognitive skill, which requires variousconstituent skills. However, research on MA&P skills as well as their facilitation largelydisregards this fact and effective means to foster the constituents and overall MA&P skillsremain mainly unclear. Transferring research on the facilitation of complex cognitive skills frominstructional design, two approaches may be effective: Fostering the constituents one by onerespectively fostering them simultaneously. We therefore present an intervention study thattakes a holistic approach on MA&P skills and their constituents, comparing a sequential (oneby-one) and an integrated (simultaneous) instructional approach to foster each constituent skillas well as students’ overall MA&P skills. The results show that learners in the integratedcondition and the sequential condition have very similar learning gains that differ only in theirmathematical strategic knowledge, which is superior in the integrated condition.Keywords: mathematics education, proof, argumentation, intervention, whole-task approachIntroductionReasoning, argumentation and proof are of special importance within the proving science mathematics. Therefore,research on mathematical argumentation and proof (MA&P) skills has been a long-term focus within mathematicseducation (Hanna, 2000). Most MA&P research, however, disregards the fact that MA&P is a complex cognitiveskill integrating a variety of domain-general and domain-specific constituents, e.g. knowledge facets, sub-skills,and beliefs. A recent review on research on MA&P within mathematics education has shown that studies takingthese constituents into account and conceptualizing MA&P skills in a holistic way are rare (Sommerhoff, Ufer, &Kollar, 2015). However, research on instructional design (Anderson, Reder, & Simon, 1996; Branch & Merrill,2011; van Merriënboer & Kester, 2007) shows that acknowledging the complex structure of MA&P skills hasimportant implications for how MA&P skills and their constituents should be supported and which instructionaldesigns should be used. Knowing how to best foster MA&P skills and their constituents is important since researchhas repeatedly revealed students’ severe problems with MA&P tasks (e.g. Weber, 2001). We therefore present anintervention study focusing on several constituents of MA&P skills, comparing a sequential and an integratedinstructional approach to foster these within university mathematics.MA&P as a complex cognitive skillResearch on complex cognitive skills, e.g. (information) problem solving, has become increasingly important ininstructional design. Yet, in spite of several theoretical accounts and a multitude of studies on how complex skillscan be effectively fostered in general, empirically validated approaches to foster MA&P skills are still scarce.However, most studies underline that acknowledging the constituents of the complex skill is essential fordesigning powerful learning environments.Table 1: Constituents of MA&P skills investigated in the current studyConstituentMathematicalknowledge baseMethodologicalknowledgeMathematicalstrategic knowledgeProblem solvingstrategiesICLS 2016 ProceedingsCharacterizationBasic conceptual and procedural knowledge in the field of mathematics (Ufer etal., 2008)Knowledge of the nature and the functions of proof as well as the acceptancecriteria for a valid proof (Healy & Hoyles, 2000)Knowledge about cues within mathematical tasks and problems that indicate whichconcepts and representation systems can be used productively (Weber, 2001)Domain-general and domain-specific problem solving strategies (Schoenfeld,1985)811© ISLSMA&P skills represent a complex cognitive skill and up to now several constituents of MA&P skills have beenidentified and shown to be predictive for the success of MA&P processes (e.g. Chinnappan, Ekanayake, & Brown,2011). In our study, we utilize a model that includes four main constituents of MA&P skills (Table 1). It is basedon existing, models for geometry proofs (Chinnappan et al., 2011; Ufer, Heinze, & Reiss, 2008) as well asframeworks for general mathematical problem solving (Schoenfeld, 1985) and self-regulated learning (De Corte,Verschaffel, & Eynde, 2000).Supporting mathematical argumentation and proof skillsTaking the perspective of MA&P skills being dependent on various constituents and thinking about an optimalway to facilitate these, at least two opposing strategies for the design of powerful instruction emerge: Supportingeach constituent separately one-by-one (sequential approach) or handling all of these simultaneously (integratedapproach). Although little research has been done on the promotion of constituents of MA&P skills, hints can befound in instructional design research. Within the last decades, instructional design researchers have debated aboutthe effectiveness of part-task vs. whole-task approaches (Anderson et al., 1996; Branch & Merrill, 2011; Lim,Reiser, & Olina, 2009). Classical instructional design approaches assume the decomposability of complex tasksinto less complex part-tasks and recommend the separate training of each of these less complex part-tasks. Thedecomposition theory from ACT-R (Anderson, 2002) even breaks down complex tasks to actions happeningwithin milliseconds. The part-task approach is guided by the ideas that instruction on part-tasks is of higherinstructional clarity for the students, that each part-task is easier to master and that the learning gains on the parttasks transfer easily to learning gains on the overall task.On the other hand, the whole-task approach (van Merriënboer & Kester, 2007) as well as the situatedcognition approach (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989) reject this atomization of tasks, provide evidence for thesituatedness of learning, and point to difficulties that are associated with attempts to transfer from part-tasks tothe overall task (Anderson et al., 1996). This implies teaching knowledge facets, sub-skills, attitudes, and beliefsconstituting a complex cognitive skill in an integrated way (van Merriënboer & Kirschner, 2007).Leveraging these two positions and transferring them back to MA&P skills and their constituents, wetherefore contrast these two approaches empirically: A sequential approach, with students working on proof taskswith an explicit focus on only one of the required constituents at a time, compared to an integrated approach, withstudents working on proof tasks with a specific focus on multiple constituents at a time.Aim and research questionThe goal of the present intervention study is to explore the effects of an integrated and a sequential instructionalapproach on four constituents of MA&P skills (mathematical knowledge base, methodological knowledge,mathematical strategic knowledge, and problem solving strategies). We therefore investigated whether theseapproaches differ in their effects on students’ knowledge and skills regarding these constituents. No a priorihypothesis was established regarding the greater effectiveness of each approach since theoretical arguments andevidence in support of both approaches exist (Lim et al., 2009). Yet, both approaches were expected to yieldpositive learning gains from pretest to posttest.MethodsStudy design, dependent variables and procedureWe used a quasi-experimental design for our study. The intervention was offered as a voluntary course for firstyear mathematics university students entitled “Mathematical proof: that’s how you do it”. It was scheduledbetween first and second semester and consisted of a pretest and a posttest as well as four two-hour interventionsessions across three consecutive days. The intervention consisted of two parallel courses representing theintegrated condition and the sequential condition, respectively. Two instructors with prior experience in lecturingled the courses and switched after two units to eliminate instructor effects. Both courses covered the same content,the same tasks and time on task, although tasks and content were arranged in a different order.During the intervention, students were provided with information on all four constituents by shortpresentations. Additionally, they were given a short list of prompts meant to enhance the analysis of tasksaccording to each constituent prior to the actual solving process (e.g. “Excerpt all important objects and propertiesfrom the task, explain these in your own words and compare them to the formal definition.”, ”Search the task forkeywords that you know from other tasks. What methods did you use there?”). The instructor afterwardsdemonstrated the usage of the prompts for each of the constituents. All in all, students worked on eight tasks, andeach task was analyzed regarding two constituents, solved and discussed with the instructor. Both groups receivedICLS 2016 Proceedings812© ISLSguidance during their work on the tasks. For the sequential group, each session contained a presentation on oneconstituent as well as four tasks that the students analyzed regarding the same constituent. Each task was thenpicked up in another session for the analysis of a second constituent. Within the integrated condition, thepresentations were divided into two larger blocks, so that most theory on each constituent was given in session 1and only additional points were introduced in session 3. The students directly analyzed each task regarding twoof the four constituents. In order to have the students of the integrated condition work two times on each task likethe students in the sequential condition, tasks that had already been analyzed and solved were reconsidered brieflyonce more in this condition.InstrumentsThe pretest and the posttest included self-designed scales assessing the constituents of MA&P skills on limits andinfinite sums, a scale of four MA&P items, as well as control variables for inferential reasoning, metacognition,and scientific reasoning and argumentation (Gormally, Brickman, & Lutz, 2012; Inglis & Simpson, 2008; Schraw& Dennison, 1994). The MA&P items covered in the course and tests were closely related to a regular prooforiented calculus course, but novel to the students in order to avoid bias by prior experience. The pretest andposttest were created using parallel items and contained open as well as closed items. The closed items wereevaluated using mark-recognition software with a subsequent manual control of the recognition results. Two raterscoded the open items following a theory-based coding scheme. The interrater reliability of the coders was κ > .76(M = .92; SD = .09). The scales used in the both tests had an overall acceptable internal consistency of αMean = .70(SD = .10) with individual values ranging from α = .58 (mathematical strategic knowledge; 4 items) to α = .81(problem solving strategies; 48 items). The results for all constituents were re-scaled to values between 0 (worst)and 1(best). Additionally all documents used by the participants were gathered throughout the intervention toanalyze this process data later.SampleA total of 46 students (19 male, 27 female) participated in the study. The participants were first and second yearmathematics students (first year: 36, second year: 5, no indication: 5). They can be assumed to have participatedin the calculus I lecture and have had prior experience with proof-based real analysis. 24 and 22 students wereassigned to the integrated and sequential condition, respectively. Several participating students had failed the examof the calculus I course, thus the sample can be assumed to be slightly lower performing than average.FindingsThe pretest results verified that both conditions were comparable in their performance on the constituents prior tothe intervention (Table 2, upper part). A Mann-Whitney U test indicated no significant differences between bothconditions could be shown. Only methodological knowledge slightly approached significance (U = 184.5, p =.078). There were also no significant differences between the two conditions regarding the assessed controlvariables (mean final high school qualification grade, high school qualification grade in mathematics, inferentialreasoning skills, metacognition, scientific reasoning and argumentation skills). Accordingly, they were notcontrolled for in the further analysis.Table 2: Mean values for MA&P constituents obtained in the pre- and posttestKnowledge basePretestPosttestSequentialIntegratedSequentialIntegratedM0.320.390.430.48SD0.170.160.210.13MethodologicalknowledgeMSD0.420.510.570.610.160.180.160.16Math-strategicknowledgeMSD0.340.390.590.700.170.170.170.18Problem solvingstrategiesMSD0.530.580.660.710.150.110.130.10The posttest results (Table 2, lower part) showed significant (p < .001) learning gains for both conditions and allconstituents. Nevertheless, the longitudinal effects across groups for mathematical strategic knowledge (dC =1.595) and problem solving strategies (dC = 1.052) were larger than for methodological knowledge (dC = 0.751)and mathematical knowledge base (dC = 0.582) although the same amount of time was spent on all constituents.Comparing the results of the integrated and sequential condition in the posttest, a significant differencecan only be found for mathematical strategic knowledge (U = 164.5, p = .027), in favor of the integrated group.All other comparisons between conditions were insignificant (U > 179, p > .061).ICLS 2016 Proceedings813© ISLSConclusions and implicationsThe results of our study reveal that both instructional approaches differ less than implied by the theories promotinga part-task and a whole-task approach, respectively (Anderson et al., 1996; Branch & Merrill, 2011). Goodarguments for both approaches exist and within this study, both approaches yielded comparable learning gains forthe constituents of MA&P skills with the exception of mathematical strategic knowledge, which showed betterlearning outcomes for the integrated approach.Remarkably, the results of our relatively short intervention study show large learning gains, especiallyfor mathematical strategic knowledge and problem solving strategies. Large learning gains particularly for thesetwo constituents are reasonable, because university instruction usually does not explicitly focus on theseconstituents so that little prior knowledge can be assumed. The absolute effect sizes, however, should beconsidered with care due to the lack of a proper control group, addressing e.g. re-testing biases or effects by thesheer engagement in proofs. Creating such a control group is challenging because approaches with students notdoing proofs at all or practicing unguided both have drawbacks. Nevertheless, such a controlled study will be animportant step to validate effect sizes of individual constituents. Ongoing evaluation of collected data will showthe effect of the intervention on overall MA&P skills as well as overall MA&Ps relation to the constituents. Theresults will give further insights how to create an effective holistic approach to foster MA&P skills.ReferencesAnderson, J. R. (2002). Spanning seven orders of magnitude: a challenge for cognitive modeling. CognitiveScience, 26(1), 85–112.Anderson, J. R., Reder, L. M., & Simon, H. A. (1996). Situated Learning and Education. Educational Researcher,25(4), 5–11.Branch, R., & Merrill, M. D. (2011). Characteristics of instructional design models. In R. A. Reiser & J. VDempsey (Eds.), Trends and issues in instructional design and technology (3rd ed.). Upper Saddle River,NJ: Merrill-Prentice Hall.Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning. EducationalResearcher, 18(1), 32–42.Chinnappan, M., Ekanayake, M., & Brown, C. (2011). Specific and General Knowledge in Geometric ProofDevelopment. SAARC Journal of Educational Research, 8, 1–28.De Corte, E., Verschaffel, L., & Eynde, P. O. (2000). Chapter 21 - Self-Regulation: A Characteristic and a Goalof Mathematics Education. In M. Boekaerts, P. R. Pintrich, & M. Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of SelfRegulation (pp. 687–726). San Diego: Academic Press.Gormally, C., Brickman, P., & Lutz, M. (2012). Developing a Test of Scientific Literacy Skills (TOSLS):Measuring Undergraduates’ Evaluation of Scientific Information and Arguments. CBE Life SciencesEducation, 11(4), 364–377.Hanna, G. (2000). Proof, explanation and exploration. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 44(1-2), 5–23.Healy, L., & Hoyles, C. (2000). A Study of Proof Conceptions in Algebra. JRME, 21(4), 396–428.Inglis, M., & Simpson, A. (2008). Conditional inference and advanced mathematical study. Educational Studiesin Mathematics, 67(3), 187–204.Lim, J., Reiser, R., & Olina, Z. (2009). The effects of part-task and whole-task instructional approaches onacquisition and transfer of a complex cognitive skill. Educational Technology Research andDevelopment, 57(1), 61–77.Schoenfeld, A. H. (1985). Mathematical problem solving. New York: Academic press.Schraw, G., & Dennison, R. S. (1994). Assessing metacognitive awareness. Contemporary EducationalPsychology, 19(4), 460–475.Sommerhoff, D., Ufer, S., & Kollar, I. (2015). Research on mathematical argumentation: A descriptive review ofPME proceedings. In K. Beswick, T. Muir, & J. Wells (Eds.), Proceedings of the 39th Conference of theIGPME (Vol. 4, pp. 193–200). Hobart, Australia: PME.Ufer, S., Heinze, A., & Reiss, K. (2008). Individual predictors of geometrical proof competence. In O. Figueras& A. Sepúlveda (Eds.), Proceedings of the Joint Meeting of the 32nd Conference of the IGPME and theXX North American Chapter (Vol. 1, pp. 361–368). Morelia, Mexico: PME.van Merriënboer, J. J. G., & Kester, L. (2007). Whole-task models in education. Handbook of Research onEducational Communications and Technology, 441–456.van Merriënboer, J. J. G., & Kirschner, P. A. (2007). Ten Steps to Complex Learning: A Systematic Approach toFour-component Instructional Design. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Weber, K. (2001). Student difficulty in constructing proofs: The need for strategic knowledge. EducationalStudies in Mathematics, 48(1), 101–119.ICLS 2016 Proceedings814© ISLS