Teachers Collaboratively Creating Micro-Credentials forProfessional DevelopmentSandra Thatcher Powell, Brigham Young, University, sandy.powell@byu.eduHeather Leary, Brigham Young University, heather.leary@byu.eduLisa McLachlan, Brigham Young University, lisamclach@byu.eduKaren Johannesen Brock, Provo City School District, karenbr@provo.eduAbstract: Micro-credentials are an effective means of providing teacher choice and evidenceof achievement in professional development. Engaging teachers in a co-design process tocreate micro-credentials for professional development activities provides quality requirementsand options that are valuable for improving teacher’s knowledge and skills, and impactingclassroom practice, providing an opportunity to bridge the gap between research and practice.Through a research practice partnership between a suburban school district and a localuniversity and using design-based implementation research, a co-design process fordeveloping multiple micro-credentials was successfully implemented. Teachers with little tono previous experience with micro-credentials are capable of designing rigorous and relevantrequired tasks for professional development that targets improvements to classroom practicesfor improvements to student achievement.IntroductionMicro-credentials, also called digital badges, are a mini form of a full, traditional credential and are valued byschool administrators for professional development because of their ability to provide evidence of specificknowledge and skills gained during professional development (Keane, Otter, Oxley, & Lipscomb, 2016).Teachers appreciate relevant professional development choices provided by well-constructed micro-credentials(Gamrat & Zimmerman, 2015) and value professional development options that “respond to personal andprofessional schedules” (Gamrat, Zimmerman, Dudek, & Peck, 2014, p. 1146). Metadata from digital microcredentials presents valuable research opportunities on teacher learning and development (Hickey, Ottow, Itow,Schenke, & Chow, 2014).However, a major challenge in the development of a micro-credential program for professionaldevelopment rests in aligning the micro-credential system to the organization culture and faculty interests(Goodrum, Abaci, & Morrone, 2016). Research shows that for professional development to be effective,meaningful, and lasting, it should contain relevant and current content, be ongoing, be collaborative, provideopportunity for practice, be connected to local context, and enact the pedagogy promoted by the professionaldevelopment (Kennedy, 2016; Desimone, 2009; Penuel, Fishman, Yamaguchi, & Gallagher, 2007). A co-designapproach to creating transformative teacher professional development (Kyza & Nicolaidou, 2016; Palincsar &Heerenkohl, 2002) shows promise for enhancing the benefits of micro-credentials and overcoming thechallenges.A district in the western United States partnered with researchers from a nearby private university tofacilitate teacher co-design of micro-credentials for professional development. The university and school districthave participated together in a public-school partnership for over thirty years and have recently formalized aresearch-practice partnership for this project (Penuel & Gallagher, 2017). This young research-practicepartnership includes the school district professional development director, teachers, and coaches with auniversity education professor and graduate students. Together they identified a district need that aligned withresearcher interests and committed to a long-term partnership to continuously improve knowledge and practice.The district student population of approximately 16,000 is 66% white, 24% Hispanic/Latino, 3% PacificIslander, 3% multiple races, 2% Asian,1% African American, and 1% American Indian, 46% low socioeconomic status, and 10% limited English proficient. Almost one third of the 676 teachers in the district are intheir first three years of teaching.BackgroundThe district professional development coordinator identified high impact pedagogical strategies shown toimprove student learning around which to build professional development micro-credentials. The first microcredential, titled Teacher Clarity, was created by the district professional development coordinator, inconsultation with the district content specialists team, on the pedagogical strategy of consistentlycommunicating learning targets and success criteria with students (Moss & Brookhart, 2012).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1157© ISLSThe micro-credential structure and requirements were based on research by Joyce and Showers (2002)and Knight (2014), indicating that collaboration and coaching are needed to improve teacher implementation ofprofessional development strategies in the classroom. The requirements include reading articles and watchingvideos explaining the theory and research basis behind the use of the strategy, watching demonstration videosand attending a training about the topic, practicing several times using the strategy in the classroom, writing alesson plan emphasizing the use of the strategy, videotaping and analyzing the videos of class sessions wherethe strategy was presented to students, collaborating with other teachers to discuss successes and struggles withimplementing the strategy, and submitting evidences of improved classroom practice and its effect on studentachievement.A pilot group of 16 teachers worked through the micro-credential requirements during the last fourmonths of the school year and then completed a survey about the experience. The professional developmentcoordinator and content coaches revised the Teacher Clarity micro-credential based on the survey results andcomments from participants in the pilot, and created a template for use in creating future micro-credentials.MethodTo examine the impact of co-design on teacher professional development using micro-credentials we adopted adesign-based implementation research (Penuel, Fishman, Cheng, & Sabelli, 2011) methodology, where design,implementation, and research take place in cycles and inform one another. Researchers from the universityworked with the district professional development coordinator, teachers, and content specialists to co-designmore micro-credentials.The summer after the Teacher Clarity micro-credential was introduced, small groups of teachers andcontent specialist participated in one of several three-hour introductory workshops which introduced microcredentials and the co-design process, defined the product to be created, and built team cohesiveness. A surveywas completed by participants at the beginning of the workshop which included questions about experience withmicro-credentials and design-based implementation research, as well as asking about the importance of choicein professional development. Following the workshop, co-design teams met at their convenience over thesummer, divided the workload, and worked together to design a new micro-credential following the template.Support was available to teams by request, and some teams invited a researcher to participate in team meetings,while others submitted digital documents to other teams, researchers, and the district professional developmentcoordinator for review. Completed micro-credential documents were submitted for review and subsequentrevisions were made based on feedback received.By the end of the summer, five micro-credentials were accepted as complete by the district professionaldevelopment coordinator. Two micro-credentials, Questioning and Classroom Discussion, and ProactiveClassroom Management, were chosen to pilot as an option for district educators for professional development.For the pilot, courses taught by members of the co-design team were offered to assist teachers in completing themicro-credential requirements. These courses were held during scheduled professional development days andinvolved 30-70 teachers in each course. Two specific-use micro-credentials, New Teacher and SpecialEducation, were approved for limited use and the Elementary Science, Technology, Engineering, andMathematics (STEM) micro-credential was deemed complete, but not selected for the pilot.ResultsThe introductory workshops involved 32 teachers and district content specialists, creating 10 co-design teamsbased on the results of an interest survey completed by the workshop participants. This paper presents resultsfrom a survey on teachers’ perceptions about professional development, micro-credentials, and the co-designprocess, as well as data gathered during the co-design process for the Questioning and Classroom Discussionmicro-credential.Survey results suggest that all participants believed choice in professional development was importantor extremely important, with an average score of 9.0 on a scale of 1 (not at all) to 10 (extremely important).Most were comfortable working with peers on assessment design (7.8 of 10, where 10 means extremelycomfortable), while experience using micro-credentials in teaching (2.4 of 10, where 1 is none and 10 is I’m anexpert!), creating micro-credentials (2.1 of 10), and earning micro-credentials (2.5 of 10) were all very low.During the second introductory summer workshop, four participants had expressed interest indesigning the Questioning and Classroom Discussion micro-credential and became a co-design team. The teammembers created a collaborative online folder and began work filling out the template. The team decided onmeeting dates and invited the researcher to collaborate with them. At the fourth introductory workshop, twomore participants chose to help design the Questioning and Classroom Discussion micro-credential. They wereintroduced to the original team by the researcher, at which time researchers were informed that two of theICLS 2018 Proceedings1158© ISLSoriginal team members were no longer able to participate in the summer co-design work. Team members 1 and2 were part of the original team while members 3 and 4 joined the team after a later workshop, but before thefirst team meeting. Member 1 is a district content specialist, member 2 is a middle school teacher, member 3 isan elementary teacher, and member 4 is a high school teacher.At the first team meeting after the workshop, the team collaborated on necessary steps to complete themicro-credential design, divided the tasks, and continued populating the template. The researcher providedguidance and clarified expectations. During the remainder of the summer, the team met online one more time,and collaborated by email and in the collaborative online folder. In that time, 29 revisions were made to thetemplate on 16 separate days and 59 edits or additions were made to supporting documents. Team membercontributions to the design process are shown in Figure 1.Figure 1. Co-design team member contributions.While the team members did not participate equally in ways that were easily measurable, the groupworked well together, communicated with each other and the researcher, and completed the design to the givenspecifications. The completed and approved micro-credential includes a theory section containing links to 12quality articles (participants choose 1 from each of 3 sections and select quotes from the reading to answerquestions) and requirements to attend a training, putting into practice one strategy learned then reflecting on theresults, and to present the concept formally to another teacher. The demonstration portion of the microcredential includes a video reflection form and links to 10 videos, from which participants are to watch twofrom each of two sections, and complete and submit the reflection form, and a live observation form to be usedduring each of three classroom observations. The practice section includes a document to plan for questioningand discussion, a requirement for participants to film 20 minutes of three of their own lessons and reflect on theuse of questioning strategies, and an assessment of the impact of questioning strategies on students through theuse of exit slips. The collaboration and peer coaching section requires the use of questioning and classroomdiscussion strategies in at least 3 lessons followed by completion of a reflection form, and inviting threeteachers to observe in the participant’s classroom and fill out the form provided. On completion of therequirements, participants are to meet with a badge facilitator to review learning and determine if the microcredential has been earned. For clarity, a completion checklist outlines the requirements to earn the microcredential.When the pilot for the Questioning and Classroom Discussion micro-credential is complete,participants will complete a survey. Survey data and co-design team feedback will be used to revise andstrengthen the micro-credential completion requirements prior to future use.ConclusionsThrough this research-practice partnership, a co-design process for developing multiple micro-credentials wassuccessfully implemented. Teachers with very little experience creating, using, or earning micro-credentials arecapable of creating quality requirements for earning professional development micro-credentials in a co-designICLS 2018 Proceedings1159© ISLSprocess. Teachers were empowered by the process of co-design for their own learning, but also for the futurelearning of peer teachers as some teachers assumed the responsibility to participate in piloting the microcredentials as professional development activities. Micro-credentials provided an opportunity to differentiateprofessional development as well as provide a vehicle for tracking implementation in the classroom and thecontent learned in a professional development program. They are a way to record progress and learning on asmall scale and are used to document learning of specific skills, knowledge and abilities. Additionally, microcredentials provided transparency into teachers’ professional development activities and supported theclassroom implementation practices. Providing background theory and understanding of micro-credentials, anexample micro-credential, a template, and assistance as needed allows teams of teachers to effectively designrigorous and relevant badges informed by Learning Sciences methodologies.The school district administration will have access to the micro-credential metadata to betterunderstand teacher professional development. District teachers have more options of micro-credentials tochoose from for personal professional development, which can be earned at times that are convenient for themand in teams that can support their learning. Researchers will have access to the metadata for future studies. Theresearch practice partnership between the district and the university has provided multiple benefits for allinvolved.ReferencesDesimone, L. M. (2009). Improving impact studies of teachers’ professional development: Toward betterconceptualizations and measures. Educational Researcher, 38(3), 181-199.Gamrat, C., Zimmerman, H. T., Dudek, J., and Peck, K. 2014. Personalized workplace learning: An exploratorystudy on digital badging within a teacher professional development program. British Journal ofEducational Technology. (Nov. 2014), 45, 6, 1136–1148.Gamrat, C. & Zimerman, H.T. (2016). Teacher learning journeys: a design case study of a learner-centeredSTEM digital badging system. In Mullenburg, L.Y. & Berge, Z.L. (Eds.), Digital Badges in Education.(pp. 215-225). New York, NY: Routledge.Goodrum, D. A., Abaci, S. & Morrone, A.S. (2016). Learning technologies badges for faculty professionaldevelopment: A case study. In Mullenburg, L.Y. & Berge, Z.L. (Eds.), Digital Badges in Education.(pp. 249-260). New York, NY: Routledge.Hickey, D. T., Otto, N., Itow, R., Schenke, K., Tran, C. and Chow, C. (2014). Research design principles forstudying learning with digital badges. Badges Design Principles Documentation Project. IndianaUniversity Center for Research on Learning and Technology.Joyce, B., & Showers, B. (2002). Student achievement through staff development, 3rd edition. New York, NY:Association for Supervision & Curriculum Development.Keane, J., Otter, M., Oxley, T., & Lipscomb, L. (2016). VIF International Education: Global-Ready TeacherBadging. In Mullenburg, L.Y. & Berge, Z.L. (Eds.), Digital Badges in Education. (pp. 226-238). NewYork, NY: Routledge.Kennedy, M. M. (2016). How does professional development improve teaching? Review of EducationalResearch, 86(4), 945-980.Knight, J. (2014) High-Impact Instruction: A Framework for Great Teaching. Thousand Oaks, CA:Corwin/Learning Forward.Kyza, E. A., & Nicolaidou, I. (2016). Co-designing reform-based online inquiry learning environments as asituatedapproachtoteachers’professionaldevelopment.CoDesign.DOI:10.1080/15710882.2016.1209528Moss, C.M., & Brookhart, S.M. (2012). Learning Targets: Helping Students Aim for Understanding in Today’sLesson. Alexandria, VA: ASCD.Palincsar, A. S., & Herrenkohl, L. (2002). Designing collaborative learning contexts. Theory into Practice, 41,26-32.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Yamaguchi, R., & Gallagher, L. P. (2007). What makes professionaldevelopment effective? Strategies that foster curriculum implementation. American EducationalResearch Journal, 44(4), 921-958.Penuel, W. R. & Gallagher, D. J. (2017). Creating research-practice partnerships in education. Cambridge,MA: Harvard Education Press.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development at theintersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331-337.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1160© ISLS