Middle School Student Ideas on the Relative Affordances ofPhysical and Virtual ModelsElizabeth McBride, Jonathan Vitale, and Marcia C. Linnbethmcbride@berkeley.edu, jonvitale@berkeley.edu, mclinn@berkeley.eduUniversity of California, BerkeleyAbstract: This research investigates students’ perceived differences between doing activitiesin hands-on versus virtual environments. Students explored an interactive virtual model of asolar oven and then built and tested a physical solar oven. We found that students oftenquestioned the accuracy of virtual models, yet come to recognize the value of features in thevirtual model, including visualizations of energy flow and ability to analyze trends in graphs.ObjectivesWhen designing inquiry curriculum, we often use interactive virtual models to allow students to investigate howvariables in a system may be related. This study compares student perceptions of virtual and physical models.Models improve student learning by abstracting away unnecessary features and making invisible phenomena morevisible (Snir, Smith, & Grosslight, 1993). Virtual models are now quite ubiquitous, however, their ubiquity is stillrelatively new, and while there is a wealth of research on supporting student learning of science concepts throughthe use of virtual models, not much work has been done to explore how students understand the practices involvedin utilizing these virtual models.Many studies have found students learn concepts, inquiry skills, and scientific practices at the same levelor at a higher level through the use of virtual laboratories (versus physical laboratories) (e.g., De Jong, Linn, &Zacharia, 2013; Brinson, 2015). Virtual models allow students to develop their own knowledge by askingscientific questions, answering those questions using evidence, and connecting explanations to scientificknowledge. However, students may develop additional questions relating to the practice of using models (e.g.,why do scientists use models? What can models tell us? What are the limitations of models?).We use the knowledge integration framework to develop the curriculum about solar ovens, because theframework focuses on building coherent understanding (Linn & Eylon, 2011). The knowledge integrationframework has proven useful for design of instruction featuring dynamic visualizations (Ryoo & Linn, 2012) andengineering design (McElhaney & Linn, 2011). The framework emphasizes linking of ideas by eliciting all theideas students think are important and engaging them in testing and refining their ideas. Helping students todistinguish which sources of evidence are relevant and supportive (or not) of their ideas is a particular challengefor instruction. In order to develop relevant instruction, we need to know how they naturally think about therelative affordances of each type of model.MethodsFive teachers from three different schools participated in this study, along with their students (N= 640). Allstudents were in the 6th grade, and all schools are in the suburbs of a large U.S. city serving mainly middle SEScommunities. Teachers A (N=137) and B (N=80) teach at school A, teachers C (N=190) and D (N=78) teach atschool B, and teacher E (N=155) teachers at school C. Students completed pre- and posttests individually; duringthe curriculum, students worked in pairs or triads.This study was implemented in a curriculum unit entitled Solar Ovens. The goal of the unit was tofamiliarize students with the way energy transforms from solar radiation to heat using a hands-on project andinteractive models, covering the modeling aspect of the Science and Engineering Practices of the NGSS, as wellas the standards associated with energy (NGSS Lead States, 2013). Students engaged with the curriculum in WISE(Web-based Inquiry Science Environment), utilizing a variety of instructional and assessment tools (Linn &Eylon, 2011). Students followed the design, build, test cycle with two iterations. During each design phase,students use the interactive model to test different features on a virtual solar oven.We aim to find ideas students hold about the benefits and drawbacks of physical and virtual models byassessing student responses to a pre-/posttest question called David’s Claim. This question asks students to helpa fictional student, David, decide whether the box he will use for his solar oven should be tall and skinny or shortand wide. Students are told that David thinks the tall and skinny box will heat up faster because the window onthe top is smaller and will let less energy leave the box. Students are then asked whether David is correct orincorrect, and to explain their answer using evidence from the interactive model (where they can only manipulatebox shape).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1393© ISLSTo understand student thoughts about affordances of physical and virtual models, we analyze a followup question, asking students whether they would rather use a physical or virtual model to help David (item:Opinion). While more students preferred to use the physical model at both the pretest and the posttest, there wasa sight shift toward students preferring to use the virtual model or to use both models at the posttest. We foundthat students had ideas about benefits (or drawbacks) of physical and virtual models that fell in 10 categories,shown in Table 1.Table 1: 10 categories for student ideas about the relative affordances of physical and virtual models, withdescription and nameNameVirtual AccuratePhysical AccurateVirtual VisiblePhysical VisibleVirtual FunPhysical FunVirtual Fast/EasyPhysical Fast/EasyPhysical ExperienceVirtual LimitationsDescriptionVirtual models are more accurate or valid than physical modelsPhysical models are more accurate or valid than virtual modelsVirtual models have features that make them easier to use for explaining and learninghow energy works (e.g., graphs, depiction of energy using symbols)Physical models are better because you can see them and see what’s happening fromany angleVirtual models are more fun than physical modelsPhysical models are more fun than virtual modelsVirtual models are faster and easier to use than physical models, and do not requirematerialsPhysical models are faster and easier to use than virtual modelsPhysical models give a better experience, and help students learn and focus betterVirtual models have limitations and cannot show all the options that exist in real lifeResultsBy far the most common responses to the Opinion item were that students felt the physical model was moreaccurate than the virtual model and students found value in the features of the virtual model (e.g., the graph, thevisualization of the phenomenon). From pre- to posttest, students’ belief in the greater accuracy of the physicalmodel compared to the virtual model increased, as did student appreciation for the visibility offered by the virtualmodel. Student reasoning about the limitations of the virtual model also increased drastically from pretest toposttest. In contrast, student statements about the benefits of the visibility of the physical model decreased, as didstudent statements that the experience of building a solar oven would help them to explain.ConclusionThis work takes advantage of a curriculum featuring both physical and virtual models of solar overs to explorebenefits and drawbacks. Moreover, the virtual model acts as a representation of the physical model students willbuild, providing students with an opportunity to explore the relative affordances of each type of model. This studyreveals limitations in student understanding of virtual models that deserve attention to increase effectiveness ofinstruction featuring models. Focusing on increasing student consideration about relative benefits of physical andvirtual models could help students appreciate virtual models and have lasting impact on their use of models.ReferencesBrinson, J. R. (2015). Learning outcome achievement in non-traditional (virtual and remote) versus traditional(hands-on) laboratories: A review of the empirical research. Computers & Education, 87, 218-237.De Jong, T., Linn, M. C., & Zacharia, Z. C. (2013). Physical and virtual laboratories in science and engineeringeducation. Science, 340(6130), 305-308.Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B. S. (2011). Science learning and instruction: Taking advantage of technology to promoteknowledge integration. Routledge.McElhaney, K. W., & Linn, M. C. (2011). Investigations of a complex, realistic task: Intentional, unsystematic,and exhaustive experimenters. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 48(7), 745-770.Ryoo, K., & Linn, M. C. (2012). Can dynamic visualizations improve middle school students' understanding ofenergy in photosynthesis?. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 49(2), 218-243.Snir, J., Smith, C., & Grosslight, L. (1993). Conceptually enhanced simulations: A computer tool for scienceteaching. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 2(2), 373-388.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1394© ISLS