Teachers’ Views on Supporting Self-Regulated Learning in EarlyChildhood Science EducationAudrey K. Kittredge, Natalie Day, Lenka Janik-Blaskova, Heyi Zhang, and Sara Bakerakk42@cam.ac.uk, nad45@cam.ac.uk, lb653@cam.ac.uk, heyizhang@cantab.net, stb32@cam.ac.ukUniversity of CambridgeAbstract: There are few in-depth qualitative investigations evaluating the challenges of childled learning programs that might support children’s self-regulated learning. We conductedfocus group workshops with kindergarten and first grade teachers in the UK and found that,while teachers recognized potential benefits of child-led approaches in science education, theyalso expressed challenges that were novel in the literature on teacher views. In particular,teachers had a more detailed consideration of EF skill development, and reflected on theconsequences to children’s learning of how much instructional guidance they provided.Moreover, we found differences in challenges reported by kindergarten and first gradeteachers. Future research is needed with teachers of low-income children and a broader rangeof education stakeholders, in programs that produce a measurable change in teachers’ andchildren’s learning.IntroductionClassrooms which give children some control over their learning – an approach often called “child-led learning”– have existed for some time. Yet only recently has there been systematic study of the specific learning benefitsthat child-led learning might provide. Some early childhood educational programs which emphasize child-ledlearning – such as Montessori and Tools of the Mind – are associated with enhanced self-regulated learning(“SRL”, the ability to control one’s behavior and guide one’s own learning), and the related ability of executivefunction (“EF”, e.g. the ability to adapt to changing contexts) (Lillard & Else-Quest, 2006; Blair & Raver,2014). Both SRL and EF are associated with children’s school achievement and various positive outcomes laterin life (e.g. Moffitt et al., 2011), and are implicated in the flexible thinking skills on the international PISA test(Ramos & Schleicher, 2016).Existing child-led educational programs that support SRL and EF require a huge investment ofresources in extensive training for teachers (Hsueh, Lowenstein, Morris, Mattera, & Bangster, 2014). As effortsto get teachers in everyday schools to adopt child-led approaches have been known to fail dramatically(Bakkenes, Vermunt, & Wubbels, 2010), it is critical to develop a better understanding of the challengesteachers face when trying to adopt child-led methods without extensive teacher training. We focus on child-ledmethods in playful science education, because science involves skills that embody SRL and EF (such asreflecting on evidence; e.g. Nayfeld, Fuccillo, & Greenfield, 2013), and play may motivate children to use suchskills (Golinkoff, Hirsh-Pasek, & Singer, 2006). There is a small literature on teacher views of child-ledlearning programs, but none of these specifically focus on developing SRL and EF in early science learning.We assessed UK teacher views on the feasibility of child-led learning in science. We ensured thatteachers’ views were evidence-based by engaging them in practice-based focus group workshops. Ourworkshops had features of professional development, such as teachers reflecting on their own practice together.Furthermore, we engaged teachers as co-researchers, to mirror the learner-led approach that teachers wereencouraged to use. Unlike most other research on teacher views, we explicitly compared teachers from bothkindergarten and first grade because they tend to differ in their use of child-led learning: First grade in the UK ismore curriculum-bound than kindergarten, and subsequently tends to be less child-led (Wood & Bennett, 1999).MethodsParticipantsWorkshop participants included 8 female teachers (see Table 1), 6 researchers (5 female), and 1 female EarlyYears Adviser from the Cambridgeshire County Council. We recruited kindergarten and first grade teachersfrom each school (one kindergarten teacher was unable to represent her school in the workshops due to illness).Table 1: Teacher participantsICLS 2018 Proceedings1101© ISLSYear groupTeacher codesSchools representedKindergartenFirst gradeK-S1, KS-2, KS-3F-S1, F-S2, F-S3-1, F-S3-2, F-S4S1, S2, S3S1, S2, S3, S4Years of experienceAverage72Median62Range3-121-5SchoolsSchools were a convenience sample, selected because of their interest in the project and their proximity to theresearchers. Additional demographic and contextual information is presented in Table 2.Table 2: School demographics (Higher Derivation Pupil Premium percentage indicates lower family incomes)SchoolcodeLocation (UKcounty)S1S2S3S4CambridgeshireNorfolkCambridgeshireCambridgeshireNo. ofstudents207139295202Student:Teacherratio24.3:120.5:123.5:123.2:1Students eligiblefor DeprivationPupil Premium8.2%12.9%7.5%13.9%GovernmentinspectionratingOutstandingGoodGoodRequiresImprovementProportion ofstudents ofwhite Britishheritage2/3MajorityMajorityNot availableProcedureWorkshop Participants met four times in seven weeks. Each workshop was four hours long, and consisted ofresearcher-led interactive activities, short researcher presentations, teacher reflections (both individual and inyear groups), and collaborative planning sessions. Workshops were audio- and video-recorded.Throughout the series of workshops the researchers would lay the theoretical framework, which aimedto simultaneously encourage the use of child-led practices and support for children’s SRL. Researcherspresented evidence on child-led practices associated with developing SRL and EF (e.g. Perry, Hutchinson, &Thauberger, 2008), as well as classroom-relevant examples of child-led learning (e.g. using hooks to elicitchildren’s interest in science). Teachers were encouraged to share relevant experiences in their practice (e.g.examples of SRL in their classrooms), highlighting opportunities and challenges. They were then asked to planchild-led activities across the next two weeks, which they often did collaboratively. At the next workshop, manyteachers brought evidence in the form of photos from their classrooms, and reflected as a group on their recentexperiences trying child-led learning methods in the classroom. The workshop topics became gradually moreteacher-led, mirroring our theme of child-led learning: In the first two workshops teachers planned activitieswith shared goals (e.g. supporting children’s SRL with a scientific investigation), and in the third workshopteachers chose a specific issue to focus on in their classroom. While we did not specifically aim to inducechange in teachers’ practice or learning, because our workshops had elements of professional development, theysymbiotically met the needs of both researchers and teachers.Data coding and analysisTranscription of audio files was done partly by our research team and partly outsourced to a company. Teacherswere identified by researchers present at the workshops, who recognized voices in audio recordings and linkedthem to transcripts, cross-checking with video recordings as necessary. Only passages which included teacherdiscussion (as opposed to researcher-only discussions) were included in the final analysis.In total, six researchers (three of whom participated in the workshops) were involved in thematicanalysis using NVivo 11. In the first stage of analysis, the second author and a research assistant coded thetranscribed workshop recordings for instances of Challenges (either obstacles that teachers see arising duringchild-led learning which may prevent them from implementing the approach, or things that teachers identifiedas desirable but not something they currently had). These instances were then grouped into commonly recurringthemes (Braun & Clarke, 2006) by the authors. Then the third author and another research assistant, supervisedby the first author, recoded Challenges to ensure systematicity and classified each instance of a Challengeaccording to a final list of themes derived from the first stage of analysis. They also identified instances ofBenefits (positive consequences of using a child-led approach). They did this by first coding data from the firstworkshop, checking reliability until a sufficient rate of agreement (at least 86%) was reached. Then the researchassistant coded the remaining data. This paper presents a subset of the coded themes to which all teachers in atleast one of the year groups contributed to.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1102© ISLSResults and discussionTeachers expressed the view that the child-led learning methods they had adopted resulted in numerous benefits,as in previous research (e.g. Sak, Erden, & Morrison, 2016), but also identified many challenges.Researcher-initiated themes: Challenges in supporting children’s SRL and EFThe workshops focused on aspects of teaching that were not common in teachers’ current practice, such asconsciously focusing on practicing children’s SRL. As in prior work, teachers felt that appropriate help-seekingto further one’s own learning (an SRL strategy) was lacking in their children (e.g. Sak et al., 2016). Teachers inour workshops also discussed a novel challenge, the ability to be flexible mentally (similar to the EF of“cognitive flexibility” or “switching”) in science problem-solving: K-S3: “It’s hard for them to process how todo it in a different way. […] the ice melting in the sun, where else can the ice melt?”. Teachers also reflected onother novel themes, such as classroom organization barriers to supporting children’s SRL: K-S1: “I know thatthey won’t just think, “Oh, I’d better go and do that”, and then go and grab the resources. […] it’s sort of likethe way the room is set up, to a certain extent. And I think then, that’s a barrier, isn’t it?”Emergent themes: Challenges of instructional guidance and individual needsWhile the themes of SRL and EF were initiated by researchers, there were many themes that teachers initiated intheir discussions. Teachers discussed a lack of appropriate resources (e.g. space, materials, budgets) thatresonated strongly with previous research (e.g. Sak et al., 2016). They also focused on how much instructionalguidance to give, an open, hotly debated question in psychology research (e.g. DeCaro, DeCaro & RittleJohnson, 2015). Both our teachers and others note a tension between children’s interests and teachers’ learninggoals (Jónsdóttir, 2017). However, while other studies discuss the consequences of providing less guidance forstudents’ enjoyment of activities (Jónsdóttir, 2017), our teachers focused on the consequences of providing lessguidance for children’s learning. For instance, they focused on opportunities for knowledge assessment,scientific misconceptions, and acquiring knowledge different from the original learning goal: K-S2: “I think it’simportant to […] be careful not to jump in too quickly, you can find out what they know by listening to them...”.Our teachers thus contributed a novel emphasis on children’s learning to teacher views on instructionalguidance, which aligns with psychology researchers’ focus on learning goals (e.g. DeCaro et al., 2015).Some children’s needs prevented them from reaping the benefit of child-led activities. In particular,teachers in our workshops emphasized the barrier of language difficulties in child-led learning, in contrast toprevious research which reports benefits of child-led learning for language skills (Beneke & Ostrosky, 2009): FS1: “We really didn’t want to lead him to use any particular language, so it was a bit of a challenge for us toallow him to be open-minded and to allow him to decide what he wants to do. If he doesn’t have the vocabulary,he can’t explain to us.” Our teachers’ attention to individual differences in children’s response to lessinstructional guidance is noteworthy, as this is an active topic of psychology research (e.g. DeCaro et al., 2015).Differences between kindergarten and first grade teachersSeveral themes were more prevalent in one year group (i.e. over ¾ of the instances of the theme came fromteachers in one year group). Kindergarten teachers voiced challenges with lesson planning more than first gradeteachers, perhaps because of less practice structuring activities around learning goals (other work has mainlynoted such planning challenges in older classrooms; So et al., 2014). First grade teachers, by contrast, wereoverwhelmingly more frustrated with classroom-external constraints. They were more than nine times as likelyas kindergarten teachers to discuss challenges of national curriculum and assessment, school-level rules,timetables, and staffing issues. First grade teachers were also vocal about challenges in trying to followchildren’s interests and in group work, perhaps because these were different from their usual practice. Thesethemes echo much past research (e.g. Sak et al., 2016), but the contrast with kindergarten teachers is novel.ConclusionThese novel challenges with child-led learning that teachers voiced in our workshops were not trivial, and thedifferences between kindergarten and first grade teachers underscore the difficulty of using a child-led approachin more curriculum-focused first grade classrooms (Wood & Bennett, 1999). Taken together with the perceivedbenefits of child-led learning, these findings can inform efforts to improve early childhood education. Futurework could draw on larger samples of teachers, and focus on including teachers of children from differentdemographics to assess the generalizability of these findings. Future research could also evaluate whether otherstakeholders such as children, parents, senior school leadership, and policy makers share similar views on thechallenges of child-led learning. Moreover, as teachers need to change in their own professional learning andICLS 2018 Proceedings1103© ISLSbehavior to see a change in children’s learning and behavior (Vrikki, Warwick, Vermunt, Mercer, & VanHalem, 2017), future work should systematically evaluate challenges of child-led learning in programs thatcause a measurable change in both teacher learning and children’s SRL and EF skills.ReferencesBakkenes, I., Vermunt, J. D., & Wubbels, T. (2010). Teacher learning in the context of educational innovation:Learning activities and learning outcomes of experienced teachers. Learning and Instruction, 20, 533-548.Beneke, S., & Ostrosky, M. M. (2009). Teachers’ views of the efficacy of incorporating the project approachinto classroom practice with diverse learners. Early Childhood Research & Practice, 11(1). Retrievedfrom http://ecrp.uiuc.edu/Blair, C., & Raver, C. C. (2014). Closing the achievement gap through modification of neurocognitive andneuroendocrine function: Results from a cluster randomized controlled trial of an innovative approach tothe education of children in kindergarten. PLoS ONE, 9(11), e112393.Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology,3(2), 77–101.DeCaro, D.A., DeCaro, M.S., & Rittle-Johnson, B. (2015). Achievement motivation and knowledgedevelopment during exploratory learning. Learning and Individual Differences, 37, 13-26.Diamond, A., Barnett, W. S., Thomas, J., & Munro, S. (2007). Preschool program improves cognitive control.Science, 318(5855), 1387–1388. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1151148Golinkoff, R. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Singer, D. (2006). Why play = learning: A challenge for parents andeducators. In D. G. Singer, R. M. Golinkoff, & K. Hirsh-Pasek (Eds.), Play = Learning : How PlayMotivates and Enhances Children’s Cognitive and Social-Emotional Growth. Oxford, UK: OxfordUniversity Press.Hsueh, J., Lowenstein, A. E., Morris, P., Mattera, S. K., & Bangser, M. (2014). Impacts of social-emotionalcurricula on three-year-olds: Exploratory findings from the Head Start CARES Demonstration. (No.OPRE Report 2014-78). Washington, D.C.: Office of Planning, Research and Evaluation, Administrationfor Children and Families, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Retrieved from the MDRCwebsite:http://www.mdrc.org/sites/default/files/Head%20Start%20CARES%203s%20Report%202014.pdfJónsdóttir, S. R. (2017). Narratives of creativity: How eight teachers on four school levels integrate creativityinto teaching and learning. Thinking Skills and Creativity, 24, 127–139.Lillard, A., & Else-Quest, N. (2006). The early years. Evaluating Montessori education. Science, 313(5795),1893–1894.Moffitt, T. E., Arseneault, L., Belsky, D., Dickson, N., Hancox, R. J., Harrington, H., … Caspi, A. (2011). Agradient of childhood self-control predicts health, wealth, and public safety. PNAS Proceedings of theNational Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108(7), 2693–2698.Nayfeld, I., Fuccillo, J., & Greenfield, D. B. (2013). Executive functions in early learning: Extending therelationship between executive functions and school readiness to science. Learning & IndividualDifferences, 26, 81–88.Perry, N. E., Hutchinson, L., & Thauberger, C. (2008). Talking about teaching self-regulated learning:Scaffolding student teachers’ development and use of practices that promote self-regulatedlearning. International Journal of Educational Research, 47(2), 97-108.Ramos, G., & Schleicher, A. (2016). Global Competency for an Inclusive World. Organization for EconomicCo-operation and Development, Directorate for Education and Skills. Retrieved from the OECD website:https://www.oecd.org/education/Global-competency-for-an-inclusive-world.pdfSak, R., Erden, F. T., & Morrison, G. S. (2016). Child-centred education: Preschool teachers’ beliefs and selfreported practices. Early Child Development and Care, 186(8), 1185–1202.So, W-M. W., Cheng, M.-H. M., Kong, S.-C., & Ching, N.-Y. F. (2014). Views of primary science teacherstowards the use of online resources to support the implementation of inquiry learning. Education 3-13,42(4), 386–401. https://doi.org/10.1080/03004279.2012.710640Vrikki, M., Warwick, P., Vermunt, J. D., Mercer, N., & Van Halem, N. (2017). Teacher learning in the contextof Lesson Study: A video-based analysis of teacher discussions. Teaching and Teacher Education, 61,211–224. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2016.10.014Wood, E. & Bennett, N. (1999). Progression and Continuity in Early Childhood Education: Tensions andcontradictions. International Journal of Early Years Education, 7 (1), 5-16.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1104© ISLS