Using Classroom Video and Technology to Blend Teachers’Learning in Independent and Collegial ContextsAnushree Bopardikar, TERC, anushree_bopardikar@terc.eduSusan J. Doubler, TERC, sue_doubler@terc.eduAbstract: This paper reports on a professional learning (PL) program blending independent andcollegial contexts. The program was supported by classroom video and technology to noticeand respond to students’ thinking. Two cohorts of teachers used software and paper supports toplan, capture and study video of their own classrooms, and to develop and share video cases.The research explored what teachers notice about their students’ thinking during independentand collegial studies of classroom video. This paper highlights a case of one teacher’s PL. Videocases, transcripts of independent study, collegial study and of an exit interview were analyzed.Doing the independent study first, the teacher identified problematic student thinking to discusswith colleagues. Collegial discussion subsequently clarified students’ thinking and explorednext steps in teaching. Affordances of independent and collegial learning contexts and the roleof video, technology, and related supports in fostering teachers’ PL are discussed.Keywords: teacher professional learning, classroom video, video analysisMajor issue addressed and significance of the workA key purpose of classroom video in teachers’ professional learning (PL) is to help them reflect on students’thinking. Advances in video annotation technology make it possible to support teachers’ reflection (Rich &Hannafin, 2009). For example, after using a video analysis software emphasizing noteworthy events like issuesin students’ thinking and pedagogy, teachers developed skills in explaining their students’ ideas and the influenceof particular teaching moves on students’ thinking (van Es & Sherin, 2002). Teachers may conceivably use suchtechnology for independent study. Additionally, Video Clubs where teachers share and discuss video of their ownclassrooms with colleagues may promote teachers’ PL. Research shows that collegial discourse bolstered withvideo and questions about students’ conceptions helps teachers examine the meaning behind students’ ideas (Luna& Sherin, 2017), and discuss pedagogy in light of students’ thinking (Sherin & Han, 2004). But there is littleunderstanding of how one may blend independent and collegial contexts to support teachers’ learning, and howclassroom video and technology may serve this end. The issue of blended PL anchored in classroom video andtechnology is critical because learning involves both individual and social aspects (Salomon & Perkins, 1998).By integrating independent and collegial learning, educators may thus leverage the strengths of the two contextsin fostering teachers’ PL. This paper presents a video-supported blended model of teachers’ PL designed to fostertheir skills in understanding and responding to students’ thinking in science.Theoretical approach and research questions (RQ)The PL model and the associated research draw on a framework for teachers’ professional noticing, whichcomprises three inter-related processes: focusing on students’ disciplinary understandings; analyzing or makingsense of these understandings; and deciding how to respond to the understandings (Jacobs, Lamb, & Philipp,2010). Specifically, in science instruction, teachers need to attend to students’ science ideas, interpret the ideas inlight of the learning goals, and use these interpretations to plan next steps (Barnhart & van Es, 2015). This researchexplored two questions to understand how independent and collegial studies of classroom video contribute toteachers’ PL. RQ1 was: During independent study, what do teachers notice about their students’ science thinking?RQ2 was: During collegial study, what do teachers notice about their students’ science thinking?MethodsResearch approach, participants and contextThis paper reports on teacher learning in the context of a video-supported PL program. Two cohorts of four crossgrade, upper elementary school teachers participated in the program. The cohorts were from different schooldistricts. The paper highlights a case study of PL of one teacher (identified with the pseudonym Ms. Collins) fromone of the cohorts. The program aimed to help teachers develop abilities to notice students’ science ideas andreasoning, and to use these understandings to inform next steps in teaching. The teaching experience in the cohortICLS 2018 Proceedings1005© ISLSranged from five years to 22 years. The case study focused on Ms. Collins because she had spent the fewest yearsteaching (and teaching science) compared to the rest of her cohort. The study will thus clarify how video-basedblended PL can support teachers with limited professional experience to notice and respond to students’ thinking.The study took place in a suburban school in Northeastern U.S. The cohort participated in a four-partsequence of PL activities: Plan-Enact-Study-Meet (PESM). Teachers first used hardware, software, and paperbased supports to plan, enact and videotape whole class discussions from their science curriculum on matter, andstudy these videos independently. A paper-based discussion planner prompted teachers to craft student learninggoals and discussion questions, and anticipate students’ ideas and teacher responses. A paper-based study toolprompted teachers to note students’ actual ideas and reasoning heard on video, and generate questions and insightsabout students’ thinking. The software provided an organizing frame called Science Lens to help teachers studystudents’ thinking. The Science Lens presented a set of tags to annotate students’ ideas and reasoning: Idea relatedto Goal, and tags about students’ reasoning based on key scientific practices like making sense of data, andconstructing explanations based on evidence and scientific principles (NRC, 2012). Teachers also used thesoftware and paper-based guidelines to develop and share video cases in Video Club meetings with their cohort.They crafted focus questions for the meetings and selected and presented relevant video clips of students’ thinking.Each teacher implemented the PES parts four times, and a total of five Video Club meetings were conducted.Data collection and analysisMultiple data sources were used. First, Ms. Collins’ commentary was audiotaped and transcribed four times duringthe (independent) Study part of the program (for RQ 1). The first author used generic prompts (e.g., ‘what are younoticing?’) to elicit the teacher’s commentary after studying every two minutes of the videos. The teacher was notprompted to make any specific observations. Second, Ms. Collins’ video cases were examined for her focusquestions (for RQ1). Third, Video Club meetings were audiotaped and transcribed (for RQ2). Ms. Collins sharedvideo cases at three of these meetings. Finally, a post-program interview was conducted and transcribed (acrossRQ). This paper reports on a subset of the data from the first year of implementing the program. The independentstudy and Video Club transcripts were coded based on a rubric derived from literature (e.g., Sherin & Han, 2004)and data from the program. The categories and sub-codes were: topic/focus of attention (e.g., students’ sciencethinking); analytic stance (e.g., interpretive); and pedagogy (e.g., pedagogy connected to students’ sciencethinking). The exit interview transcript was examined to confirm and extend findings from the other data sources.Major findingsThe key findings were that independent study first of her own video, assisted by software and paper tools, allowedthe teacher to focus on and make meaning of her students’ science thinking, and in the process, raise questionsabout students’ thinking and pedagogy. Collegial study subsequently yielded different perspectives, broadeningthe teacher’s understandings of these ideas and of next steps in teaching. Specifically, in a fourth-grade earthscience lesson on comparing the weights of equal volumes of different earth materials (sand, soil, water, andmineral oil), she noticed students’ science thinking, attending to their idea that air pockets (space) between grainsof soil made the soil weigh less. In interpreting this idea, she believed it distracted the students from the goal ofunderstanding that for equal volumes of samples of different materials, some materials are heavier than others.The teacher also remarked that most students ignored how their idea about air pockets did not account for sand –another granular material – having the most weight; the students simply did not apply this idea to a new context.So for some reason, this idea of the pockets and the chunks is just like coming back up again. Ithink it's good because we had just talked about that, so they remembered it. But at the samepoint, I think [they’re] almost getting stuck on it. But no one brought up, in this whole discussionbesides [student name] just now, that sand and soil are the heaviest and the lightest. But theyboth have the air pockets. So that theory doesn't really hold up, which I think [student name] istrying to say. But nobody really got there, which is interesting.Further, with respect to pedagogy connected to students’ science thinking, Ms. Collins saw it importantto probe students for explanations to help them go beyond stating basic observations.A lot of them were talking about, it's just heavier. So I was trying to push them into why is itheavier, which they had a harder time with.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1006© ISLSFor the video case, she focused on questions about students’ thinking and implications for pedagogy.She wondered why students believed the amount of holes a material had made it weigh less, and how she mayrespond to this belief. She also asked for strategies to help students explain why some things are ‘heavy for size’.In a Video Club meeting, Ms. Collins posed these questions and shared video clips showing her students’thinking about why different materials of equal volumes had different weights. In focusing on and interpretingstudents’ science thinking, the collegial discussion clarified which aspects of students’ thinking were problematicand needed to be addressed, whilst revealing other aspects that were promising yet overlooked by the teacher.Colleague 2: So was [student] saying, because I didn't quite hear it, that he's not surprised thatpeople got different measurements for soil? Or he is surprised that people did? [different studentgroups were working with different soil samples during the science lesson]Ms. Collins: He's surprised that about similar measurements for soil.Colleague 2: Because the amount of space in between might differ. That's a pretty sophisticatedthought.Colleague 3: Yeah, I think that is, yeah, having the chunks, so maybe it gives it some morespace, but-- well, and then you would expect that there be different amounts, like holes.Colleague 1: Yeah, it wouldn't be uniform. It's not uniform.Colleague 3: You could take a soil, sample of soil, and have it have different amounts of holes.Colleague 1: I don't really know if their holes idea is really a misconception. I think, in fact, it'sa strength that they understand that it's that empty space that's causing it to weigh less.Ms. Collins: I guess now talking about it, I wish they would have said something about the sand,the thing that nobody…They're all fixated on the soil.Informed by this analysis, the teachers discussed pedagogy connected to students’ science thinking,exploring strategies for redirecting the science discussion and for engaging students with counter-examples.Colleague 1: So how could you redirect the conversation in that way [to discuss why sand wasthe heaviest] if that's where you wanted it to go? I guess that's the question.Ms. Collins: Yeah, I guess we could start the next lesson by saying, you talked a lot about thesoil last time. But no one addressed this idea of sand. So why do you think that weighs the most?Because they clearly know that the soil weighs the least and because-Colleague 3: Well, once they put them on the weight line –Colleague 2: From heaviest to lightest, you could say, oh, look the soil. The sand is the heaviest.It's way over here. Why?Colleague 3: I want to bring it back to the liquid when you're having that conversation - if therearen't bubbles in the oil and bubbles in the water, so there are no holes. Why would there be anydifference? It seems like a counter example. If they can talk about sand is more densely packedtogether than soil is, and that explains some difference between the two. And then go back towater-- Does it explain the whole difference? Hm, so do you think that there's a difference inhow tightly packed the oil is in a container compared to how tightly packed the water is? Now,I guess you'd have to have two samples in front of them without bubbles.Additionally, connecting pedagogy to students’ science thinking, Ms. Collins recognized she haddeveloped a better understanding of her students’ ideas and the missing pieces she needed to address:I feel like (colleagues) helped a lot figuring out what the next thing should be, making me realizethat [students] do know more than I maybe gave them credit for at the beginning, which I feelis just because I know them. But they do have a better understanding than I thought about thisidea of the soil having those air pockets. I want them to connect it to why. Why is [soil] thelightest compared to the other three? I think that's the connection that I was missing.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1007© ISLSIn the exit interview, the teacher pointed to affordances of independent study of classroom video, namelythe repeated opportunities to listen to and examine students’ ideas in relation to the learning goals, and to use thesoftware and paper-based supports to inform video cases and discussions with colleagues:I was able - when we watched [the video] together - to take notes. And then I feel like when Iwas at home, then I looked at those notes. And I found those points and watched what I wantedto again, based on our conversation first. So I really liked the way that was laid out [the paperbased discussion planner and study tools], to think about it and then be able to look back at what were the [learning] objectives? What did I think [the students] were supposed to say versuswhat they actually said? And I think that helped, having watched it and taken just notes the firsttime, and then going into the software and really pinning things and taking things apart[referring to annotation tools]. I think once I did that it got a lot easier making the [video] cases.She also emphasized affordances of collegial study occurring after the independent study, namely thatdiverse interpretations from colleagues helped her notice students’ thinking from a different perspective:I feel when you watch it by yourself, you pick up on things. But I think it's also really helpfulto have other people-- if you notice a problem or a misconception. I really liked being able toshow somebody else. Because I feel when you sit there and watch it-- I feel sometimes I focuson such a small thing. And somebody else would get it, even when I'm questioning it. So I thinkit's helpful to talk with colleagues about the video, once you've seen it yourself.Conclusions and implicationsThis case study is a first step in exploring how a blended PL model of independent study and collegial study,anchored in teachers’ own classroom video, can support them to notice their students’ thinking. The findings lendpreliminary evidence that doing independent learning first, assisted by video analysis software and paper tools,allows teachers to engage deeply with their video, and to revisit their students’ thinking related to the learninggoals. Teachers gain initial insights into their students’ thinking and generate questions to pursue in their practice.These insights prepare them for subsequent collegial learning which, in turn, enhances the initial sense-making.Diverse perspectives from colleagues broaden teachers’ understandings of their students’ thinking and informtheir teaching. This study speaks to the ICLS 2018 theme of exploring technology-facilitated learning in the realworld. The study reveals how a blended PL model, supported by video, software and paper supports can situateteachers’ learning in their own practice, help them develop greater awareness of their students’ thinking, andshape instruction. To further explore the potential of this model, future research will examine the learning of thisand other teacher cohorts and compare the learning of teachers with varying professional experience in the cohorts.ReferencesBarnhart, T., & van Es, E. A. (2015). Studying teacher noticing: Examining the relationship among pre-servicescience teachers’ ability to attend, analyze and respond to student thinking. Teaching and TeacherEducation, 45, 83-93.Jacobs, V. R., Lamb, L. L., & Philipp, R. A. (2010). Professional noticing of children's mathematical thinking.Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 41(2), 169-202.Luna, M. J., & Sherin, M. G. (2017). Using a video club design to promote teacher attention to students’ ideas inscience. Teaching and Teacher Education, 66, 282-294.Salomon, G., & Perkins, D. N. (1998). Individual and social aspects of learning. In P. D. Pearson and A. IranNejad (Eds.), Review of Research in Education (Vol. 23, pp.1-24). Washington, D.C.: AmericanEducational Research Association,Sherin, M. G., & Han, S. Y. (2004). Teacher learning in the context of a video club. Teaching and TeacherEducation, 20(2), 163-183.Rich, P. J., & Hannafin, M. (2009). Video annotation tools: Technologies to scaffold, structure, and transformteacher reflection. Journal of Teacher Education, 60(1), 52-67.van Es, E. A., & Sherin, M. G. (2002). Learning to notice: Scaffolding new teachers’ interpretations of classroominteractions. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 10(4), 571-596.AcknowledgementThe research reported in this paper is funded by grant # 1415898 from the National Science Foundation.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1008© ISLS