Making Energy Easy: Interacting With the Forces UnderlyingChemical Bonding Using the ELI-Chem SimulationAsnat R. Zohar and Sharona T. Levyasnat3@gmail.com, stlevy@edu.haifa.ac.ilUniversity of HaifaAbstract: We developed and explored four increasing levels of embodied interaction as atomsto support chemistry students in grasping the forces and energy changes involved in chemicalbonding. Current results show an increase in students' conceptual understanding in all fourlevels with the highest learning gain among students who felt the forces using a haptic device.VisionThis study seeks to develop and explore high-school chemistry students' conceptual understanding regardingforces and energy involved in chemical bonding. Having no access to the molecular world and lacking theforce-based explanation of chemical bonding, students rely on incorrect interpretations and intuitive heuristics,such as the 'octet-rule', i.e. eight electrons in the outer energy level (Taber, 2002). Most of them view chemicalbonds incorrectly as attached solid spheres for which energy is needed to bring them together, or as coiledsprings that release energy when relaxed (Boo, 1998).We designed and developed an Embodied Learning Interactive environment, ELI-Chem, to alleviatethese difficulties: (1) ELI-Chem removes the abstraction by providing bodily experience with the molecularlevel as proposed by embodied learning theory (Barsalou, 1999); and (2) ELI-Chem is based on a mathematicalsimulation of attraction-repulsion forces between atoms, supporting a force-based teaching approach (NahumLevy et al., 2007; Taber, 2002).ELI-Chem offers sensory-motor experiences of the attraction and repulsion forces while two atomsapproach and move apart, at four increasing degrees of embodiment: (1) observing videos that involves noaction; (2) using a mouse to move an atom in the simulation; (3) using a joy-stick that moves a greater distancethan the mouse; and (4) using a haptic device at greater distance and greater force than the mouse. The first noninteracting degree is a comparison group for the rest. The working hypothesis is that more intense physicalexperience with the underlying electrical forces provides a stronger foundation for understanding energychanges during chemical bonding and related concepts such as chemical stability or bond-length.The participants are forty-eight 12th grade chemistry students, 12 in each group. The study is framed aspretest-intervention-posttest design. Main concepts addressed: repulsive and attractive forces, chemical stability,and energy released/required.Findings show that there was an increase in students' conceptual understanding in all four groups.Three groups - video, mouse and joystick - were indistinguishable in their learning effects. From an explanationbased on the 'octet rule' depicting the atoms as static "touching" balls that energy is required to approach them,all groups turned to consider the dynamic balance between attraction and repulsion forces. Adding hapticinformation to create a multimodal experience of chemical bonding resulted with increased learning gain,indicating on the use of sensorimotor schemes in the building of a more accurate mental models andrepresentations.ReferencesBarsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptions of perceptual symbols. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22(04), 637–660.Boo, H. K. (1998). Students’ understandings of chemical bonds and the energetics of chemical reactions.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35(5), 569-581.Nahum-Levy, T., Mamlok-Naaman, R., Hofstein, A., & Krajcik, J. (2007). Developing a new teaching approachfor the chemical bonding concept aligned with current scientific and pedagogical knowledge. ScienceEducation, 91(4), 579-603.Taber, K., & Coll, R. K. (2002). Bonding. In J. K. Gilbert, O. De Jong, R. Justi, D. F. Treagust, & J. H. VanDriel (eds.). Chemical Education: Towards Research-based Practice (pp. 213-234). Kluwer AcademicPublishers.AcknowledgementsThis research was supported by the Ministry of Science, Technology and Space, Israel.1888