Words Mean Things: How Museum Workers’ Discursive PracticesPosition the Diverse Communities They Seek to EngageKrystal Villanosa, Northwestern University, kvillanosa@u.northwestern.eduMichael Horn, Northwestern University, michael-horn@northwestern.eduAbstract: How do museum workers, particularly those in science and technology centers andmuseums, conceptualize racial, ethnic, and cultural diversity? What might the language theyuse (e.g. “low-income,” “non-English speaking families”) to describe racially, ethnically, andculturally diverse communities reveal about how museum workers position persons andgroups from these communities? In this paper, we present our preliminary findings from aninterview study with science museum workers regarding their beliefs about diversity. In doingso, we offer insights about the racialized narratives embedded in discourses about diversityand diverse communities and discuss the potential implications of their use for learning.Keywords: Positioning, Discourse, Diversity, Equity, MuseumsIntroduction and backgroundCalls for reform in museum education emphasize the need for museums to diversify their audiences(Smithsonian Institution, 2001; Fred & Farrell, 2008). Typically, these appeals for audience diversification arefocused on the cultural, ethnic, and racial identities of museum visitors, directly addressing theunderrepresentation of African Americans/Blacks, Latinos/Hispanics, Asians, and Native Americans whocomprise only 9% of core museum visitors in the United States (Farrell & Medvedeva, 2010). In order to attractvisitors from underrepresented groups, museums have employed a wide variety of marketing, exhibition, andeducational programming strategies. Despite these efforts, participation from communities of color remains low.Common questions asked by museum researchers and practitioners include: How can museums foster museumgoing habits among underrepresented groups (Falk, 1995)? How can museums connect diverse communitieswith social networks that value museums over other forms of leisure (Ostrower, 2005)? How can museumsprovide these communities with the specialized knowledge necessary to understand and appreciate theirresources (Schwarzer, 2006)? While these questions may seem innocuous, the site of change museums seektends to be external to their institutions and located within communities of color.Scholarly criticism of museums suggests that the change that needs to take place is within museumsthemselves (Sandell, 2003; Janes, 2009). Increasing attention is being given to re-examining the fundamentalsof museum practice, particularly the pedagogical frameworks that underpin the design of their exhibitions andeducation programs (Hooper-Greenhill, 1999; Dawson, 2014). Recommendations for re(de)fining museumpractice across the domains of anthropology, sociology, and education have largely converged around the needfor museums to design experiences that take into account cross-cultural differences in meaning-making. Theserecommendations often call for designing experiences in collaboration with the communities museums seek toengage (Wali, 2006). Yet, despite the growing evidence that indicates communities of color feel unwelcome andalienated in museums (Melber, 2006; Dawson, 2014), museums struggle to meaningfully acknowledge, validateand advance the multiple epistemologies that exist across communities of color.There exists a dearth of research on why it has proven so difficult for museums to design inclusive,culturally relevant experiences that attract and meaningfully engage racially, ethnically, and culturally diversecommunities. Some posit that the historical origins of museums make it difficult for them to design for inclusionbecause they have been complicit in the construction of physical and cultural hierarchies that promote inequitiesand negative conceptions of underrepresented groups (Lynch & Alberti, 2010). Others have cited thebureaucratic nature of museums and their tendency to operate by consensus as another obstacle to developingexperiences for diverse publics (Conaty & Carter, 2005). Several have speculated that museums perceivethemselves as already engaged in diversity work by preserving and interpreting materials that provide themainstream public access to the cultural lives of diverse communities (Karp & Lavine, 1991). While this priorwork contributes to our understanding of some of the institutional barriers that are present in museum settings,we seek to shift the normative framing of museums from the organizational level to thinking about museums ashaving intentional actors—curators, exhibition developers, museum educators—whose suite of work is focusedon designing and facilitating educational experiences for existing and potential publics. This shift isconsequential because design decisions are not made in isolation and are deeply influenced by 1) the beliefs ofmuseum workers; 2) their interpretations of the cultural and intellectual values and practices of their potentialICLS 2018 Proceedings1053© ISLSaudience(s); and 3) their understanding of the beliefs and values of their institution, which may be counter totheir own. It is here where we wish to locate our work as we seek to interrogate museum workers’ beliefs aboutracial, ethnic, and cultural diversity as well as their beliefs about persons and groups who come fromcommunities museums have labeled “diverse.” We do this by examining how museum workers positionthemselves discursively in relation to the communities of color they seek to engage.Conceptual frameworkWe use positioning theory, a framework developed within discursive social psychology, as an analytic lens forour work. While positioning theory is typically associated with examinations of interpersonal encounters, it hasalso been applied to textual analyses as well as interview data (Harré & Slocum, 2003; Konaev & Moghaddam,2010). Our paper is a case of applying positioning theory to interviews with museum workers. Positioningrequires that we engage in a close analysis of the sociolinguistic cues that museum workers use to positionthemselves and others. In this paper, sociolinguistic analyses based on positioning theory reveal how museumworkers’ discourses position and instantiate self (and institution) in relation to the communities they wish toengage as well as to the larger, and often ambiguous, concepts of racial, ethnic, and cultural diversity. Theseanalyses also explicitly attend to the narratives people use to ascribe themselves and others rights and duties—inother words, what do they owe and what do others owe them. By studying the way “rights and duties are takenup and laid down, ascribed and appropriated, refused and defended,” positioning theory adds a novel dimensionto examinations of cognitive processes—beliefs and practices related to individuals’ moral commitments orconceptions of their moral qualities (Harré & Moghaddam, 2011, p. 132). While rights and duties are not thefocus of our preliminary findings below, we foreshadow future work detailing the ways that museum workersappear to position themselves as having the right to teach and communities of color as having a duty to learn.We place emphasis on understanding museum workers’ discourse(s) because “language not onlytransmits, it creates or constitutes knowledge or ‘reality’” (Bruner, 1986, p. 132). We also follow theVygostskian notion that the meaning and structure of all discourse (public or private) is shaped by and stemsfrom particular cultural contexts and needs to be examined in relation to the larger normative system(s) in whichpeople live (Vygotsky, 1980). Given that one of the ultimate goals of the learning sciences is to shape, direct, orimprove practice in some way, perhaps if we can understand the reality museum workers construct with theirlanguage, we can intervene in ways that help them consciously re-construct (and sustain) norms and narrativesthat advance the ends they (and more importantly their desired publics) seek.MethodsWe used snowball sampling to recruit 26 science museum workers from 14 institutions across 12 states toparticipate in our study. For this paper, we focus on 10 museum workers, all of whom work in their museum’seducation department in a variety of roles including vice president, director, manager, and coordinator. Wefocus on museum education workers due to the perception that they perform the majority of their institution’sdiversity work (a theme that emerged from our broader interview data). Of our 10 participants, two identify asAfrican American/Black, one as mixed race, one as Latino/Hispanic, and six as Caucasian/White. Three identifyas male, seven as female. Note that “science museum” includes a range of settings including natural historymuseums, museums of science and industry, nature and science museums, and science and technology centers.Last, the museum workers we interviewed work in museums located in major urban areas in the United States.We conducted semi-structured phone interviews, all of which were audio recorded and transcribed.Interviews were between 60 to 90 minutes. Examples of questions we asked included: How does your museumconsider the racial, ethnic and cultural backgrounds of visitors when developing exhibitions and/or educationprograms? How does racial, ethnic, and cultural diversity influence learning in your museum? What role dopeople’s racial, ethnic, and cultural backgrounds play in how they make sense of your museum’s exhibitionsand/or education programs? For this paper, we focus on responses given to the following question: Are thereany groups of people or communities that your museum is trying to reach that do not typically visit?We analyzed what museum workers said by open coding interview transcripts, honing in on thephrases, terms, and labels they use to describe the communities they seek to engage to better understand howthey characterize these communities. We generated codes using a modification of Strauss and Corbin’s (1998)open coding strategy, analyzing turns of talk (rather than a line-by-line analysis), which allowed us to developthemes and identify data that aligned with those themes (Charmaz, 2001). Using Strauss and Corbin’s process ofconceptualizing and labeling events, we brought focus to the data that made itself known as meaningful—moreexplicitly, labeling both micro- and macro-events within the data allowed us to see emerging patterns. Last, weviewed our museum workers as “deep” or “key” informants (Weiss, 1994), whose knowledge was used to refuteor confirm our findings as well as broaden any themes or categories that made themselves known in the data.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1054© ISLSPreliminary findingsWhen asked “Are there any groups of people or communities that your museum is trying to reach that do nottypically visit?,” we find that museum workers rarely or never explicitly name the communities they seek toengage. Instead, they foreground economic labels and terms such as “low-income,” “lower-socioeconomic,”“families in public housing,” “families who rely on food stamps,” “families at or below the poverty line,”“families below a living income,” and “families who live in [XYZ] neighborhoods or zipcodes” with XYZmeaning a neighborhood or zipcode known for having communities of color as their primary residents and/orfor struggling with the realities of economic disparity. Our analysis also uncovered museum workers’ secondarytendency to describe communities by their citizenship status or by the language(s) they speak rather than by theracial or ethnic group to which they belong. Terms and phrases used by museum workers include “bilingual,”“first-generation,” “immigrant communities,” “non-English speaking families,” and “Spanish-speakingfamilies.” When further pressed to name the groups or communities their museums are trying to reach, all 10museum workers identified African Americans/Blacks and Hispanics/Latinos as the communities that areunderrepresented in their visitorship and that they (or their institutions) wish to reach. Only 1 museum worker inour sample mentioned Asian communities and that same museum worker also identified indigenous nativecommunities as a group that they would like to see visit with more frequency. We note that neither theeconomic labels we detailed above nor any descriptors that speak to these communities’ citizenship status orspoken language(s) accompanied the single mention of both Asian and indigenous native communities.DiscussionThere are multiple layers to the responses we received from museum workers, some of which we are stillunpacking. That said, we first put forward that museum workers’ discursive practices position themselves, ortheir museums, as having a role to play in the educational lives of those experiencing some forms of social,economic, and/or political precarity. The labels and terms they use to describe the communities they are hopingto reach make clear a desire to engage families who may be facing food or housing insecurity, families forwhom the United States may not be their country of birth, and/or families for whom English is not spoken as theprimary, or sole, language. The details of the role museum workers feel their institutions can play in the lives offamilies experiencing such pressures will be uncovered in future analyses.We also bring focus to museum workers’ hesitation to explicitly name communities by their race orethnicity, instead heavily relying on the economic labels and terms we detailed above. While phrases like “lowincome” or “lower-socioeconomic” might seem like benign references, museum workers’ confirmation that theyare indexing African Americans/Blacks and Latinos/Hispanics with these terms signals the need to interpretthese phrases as racially coded (and pejoratively classist) language. Furthermore, museum workers’ use of theseracially coded descriptors positions African American/Black and Latino/Hispanic communities as economicallymonolithic groups, completely comprised of families living in poverty. This positioning seems to leave littleroom for recognizing that there is a diversity of diverse experiences among communities of color as well as aneed to historically situate (or cite the social, political, and economic reasons) why and how “low-income”neighborhoods with minority residents came to be. We also ask, what does it mean that museum workers do notidentify or discuss Caucasians/Whites as a group to engage (thus far), particularly lower-socioeconomicCaucasian/White groups given their use of similar economic labels to describe communities of color? And whatdoes it mean that museum workers also rarely mention Asian or indigenous native communities?We see important potential implications from these findings. We speculate that museum workers’ useof coded, economic, and racialized descriptors are constraining their ability 1) to see these communities throughthe lens of racial, ethnic, and cultural heterogeneity; and 2) to assess the cultural and intellectual values andpractices of the communities they seek to engage. These constraints may be limiting museum workers in theirefforts to develop culturally relevant exhibitions and programs that meaningfully engage communities of color.We also suspect that positioning communities of color through a primarily economic lens is influencing theways museum workers are positioning solutions to the “problem” of audience diversity, which tend to beeconomic in nature. Solutions museum workers cite to engage African Americans/Blacks and Hispanics/Latinosinclude discounted or free museum admission, scholarships for education programs, and busing, the latter ofwhich is troublingly similar to desegregation busing practices, wherein students of color are transported topredominantly white schools to remedy racial segregation. Foregrounding issues of citizenship and languagealso seem to lead to certain solutions including one-day cultural festivals, foreign language translations ofexhibitions, and the development of programs or resources that communicate the value of the museum. We notethat the interventions museum workers employ reveal that they seek participation from underrepresented groupsin insubstantial ways and often only when it is culturally congruent. This positions communities of color as aniche audience rather than as valued stakeholders whose histories, narratives, and patronage are honored andICLS 2018 Proceedings1055© ISLSseen as critical components of the system of values museums hold. We must acknowledge that the choicesmuseum workers make are often constrained by their institutional context. However, it is clear that museumsneed to take into full account the multiple epistemologies that exist across communities of color in order tobetter position themselves to design the culturally relevant experiences these (our) communities require to seemuseums as meaningful spaces for engagement.ReferencesBruner, J. S. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Charmaz, K. (2001). “Grounded Theory,” pp. 335-352 in Contemporary field research: Perspectives andformulations, Second Edition, ed. Robert Emerson. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.Conaty, G. T., & Carter, B. (2005). Our story in our words: Diversity and equality in the Glenbow Museum.Looking reality in the eye: Museums and social responsibility, 43-58.Dawson, E. (2014). “Not Designed for Us”: How science museums and science centers socially exclude lowincome, minority ethnic groups. Science Education, 98(6), 981-1008.Falk, J. H. (1995). Factors influencing African American leisure time utilization of museums. Journal of LeisureResearch, 27(1), 41-60.Farrell, B., & Medvedeva, M. (2010). Demographic transformation and the future of museums. AmericanAssociation of Museums Press.Fred, M. & Farrell, B. (2008). Diversifying the arts: Bringing in race and ethnic perspectives. In D. Grams & B.Farrell (Eds.), Entering cultural communities: Diversity and change in the nonprofit arts (143 – 170).New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.Harré, R., & Moghaddam, F. (2011). Positioning theory. In N. Bozatzis & T. Dragonas (Eds.), The discursiveturn in social psychology. Chagrin Falls, OH: Taos Institute.Harré, R., & Slocum, N. (2003). Disputes as complex social events: On the uses of positioning theory. CommonKnowledge, 9(1), 100-118.Hooper-Greenhill, E. (1999). Education, communication and interpretation: Towards a critical pedagogy inmuseums. The educational role of the museum, 2, 3-27.Janes, R. R. (2009). Museums in a troubled world: Renewal, irrelevance or collapse? Routledge.Karp, I. and Lavine, S.D. (1991). Exhibiting cultures: The poetics and politics of museum display. Washington,D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.Konaev, M., & Moghaddam, F. M. (2010). Mutual radicalization. Words of conﬂict, words of war: How thelanguage we use in political processes sparks fighting, 155-171. Westport, CT: Praeger.Lynch, B. T., & Alberti, S. J. (2010). Legacies of prejudice: Racism, co-production and radical trust in themuseum. Museum Management and Curatorship, 25(1), 13-35.Melber, L. M. (2006). Learning in unexpected places: Empowering Latino parents. Multicultural Education,13(4), 36.Ostrower, F. (2005). “The Diversity of Cultural Participation: Findings from a National Survey Report.”Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute.Sandell, R. (2003). Social inclusion, the museum and the dynamics of sectoral change. Museum and Society,1(1), 45-62.Schwarzer, M. (2006). Riches, rivals and radicals: 100 years of museum in America. Washington, D.C.:American Association of Museums Press.Smithsonian Institution. (2001). Increasing museum visitation by underrepresented audiences: An exploratorystudy of art museum practices. Office of Policy and Analysis at the Smithsonian Institution.Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. M. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developinggrounded theory. Sage Publications.Vygotsky, L. S. (1980). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. HarvardUniversity Press.Wali, A. (2006). Beyond the colonnades: Changing museum practice and public anthropology inChicago. Sociological imagination, 42(2), 99-113Weiss, R. S. (1995). Learning from strangers: The art and method of qualitative interview studies. Simon andSchuster.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) grant DRL-1451762.Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed here are those of the author and do notreflect the official views of the NSF.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1056© ISLS