Missing the Brilliance of Scholars of Color: Mathematics TeacherEducator Discourse in a White Zone of Proximal DevelopmentAshley D. Scroggins, University of Colorado, Ashley.Scroggins@colorado.eduVictoria Hand, University of Colorado, Victoria.Hand@colorado.eduTonya Bartell, Michigan State University, tbartell@msu.eduSunghwan Byun, Michigan State University, byunsun3@msu.eduBeth Herbel-Eisenmann, Michigan State University, bhe@msu.eduCourtney Koestler, Ohio University, Koestler@ohio.eduAbstract: In this paper, we describe and critically examine how white mathematics educatorsparticipated in the perpetuation of mathematics education as a white institutional space andzone of proximal development. Following Martin (2008) and Leonardo and Manning (2017),whiteness is examined as a series of discursive moves that frame and guide activity among agroup of mathematics teacher educators. The paper examines mechanisms through whichwhite researchers, working with a racially diverse team on professional development (PD) formathematics teachers, instantiated an institutional space of whiteness despite the expressedgoal of all of the researchers and designers of the PD to interrupt sociopolitical injustice inmathematics education. The analysis uses empirical examples from a particular conversationabout the PD design process that we argue discursively maintains whiteness as theoverarching frame of the joint activity.Keywords: equity, justice, mathematics education, whitenessMathematics education as a white institutional spaceEquity has been an important, long-standing goal in mathematics education. Although efforts toward equity andjustice in mathematics education through research and teacher education are making an impact on the field, thiswork remains situated within broader systems of privilege and oppression that support and constrain theseefforts in various ways. In 2008, mathematics education researcher Danny Martin called on stakeholders inmathematics education research and policy to recognize the field as largely a white institutional space. Feaginand Moore (as cited in Martin, 2008) characterize white institutional space as ideologies and practices in acontext, framed as “neutral” or “fair,” that serve to maintain white supremacy. In this characterization, whiteprivilege is maintained through mundane, transparent practices that operate (often) beyond the consciousattention of the individual actors involved in the activity. This view of white institutional space couples wellwith racialized conceptualizations of Vygotsky’s (1978) zone of proximal development (Leonardo & Manning,2017). As mathematics education scholars committed to equity and social justice, we take up this call to closelyexamine the ways in which our project space maintained white institutional space. We recognize that, asLeonardo (2004) argues, whiteness saturates everyday school life (and also our project work) and that one of thefirst steps to articulating its features is coming to terms with its specific modes of discourse. We mustunderstand whether and how whiteness is operating in order to transgress existing boundaries and engage inexplicit work to disrupt its function.Discursive practices of whitenessThis paper focuses on work that is part of the Access, Agency, and Allies in Mathematical Systems (A3IMS)project, in which our project team set out to design and study a mathematics teacher professional development(PD) that explicitly attended to access, agency, and ally work as embedded components of equitablemathematical systems that support students’ and teachers’ opportunities to learn. This paper examinesmechanisms through which some white researchers on our racially diverse project team instantiated andsustained an institutional space of whiteness through their discursive activity despite the expressed goal of allproject team members to interrupt sociopolitical injustice in mathematics education. This paper, then, speaks tothe question of how mathematics educators committed to equity and justice still perpetuate whiteness in theirwork and, thus, require additional, targeted efforts toward the continued dismantling of oppressive structures.Like Battey and Leyva (2016), we hope not just to name white privilege but to “document the institutional waysin which [w]hite supremacy in mathematics education acts to reproduce subordination and advantage” (p. 51).Specifically, this paper presents empirical examples, drawn from a particular conversation about the originalICLS 2018 Proceedings1141© ISLSplans for part of the PD by the racially diverse research team, to illuminate how whiteness was instantiated andmaintained as an overarching frame of the interactions taking place.Theoretical and methodological approachHere we draw on a range of literature from outside and within mathematics education to introduce and describethe key constructs that inform this study: race and racism, whiteness, white supremacy, white privilege, whiteinstitutional space, and white zones of proximal development.Our project team has been comprised of 16 scholars at various times, in different stages of careers andwith multiple areas of expertise. The five principal investigators on the research project were white. Thescholars of color on the bigger project team were early in their careers and not yet tenured or were doctoralstudents. Yet, all of the project team had teaching experience and various expertise related to the PD design. ThePD design team was made up of three white principal investigators, two white senior personnel, one AfricanAmerican and one white graduate student, and participation on this team was voluntary. It is important to notethat although there is a danger in focusing solely on a single dimension of team members’ identities (see, forexample, Bullock, 2017), we believe strongly that a focus on race helps to illuminate longstanding racialinjustice in the U.S. and in mathematics education. We also acknowledge “choosing” a racialized term to signifyone’s racial identity can be difficult, in part because this identity may not be consistent across contexts and theways in which race intersects other socially-constructed concepts (e.g., ethnicity, nationality). Here we use raceand professional status to illustrate the complexity of tensions present in white institutional spaces reifiedthrough of white zones of proximal development.Across several contributions, Martin has referred to mathematics education and research contexts aswhite institutional spaces (e.g. 2008; 2013). To define white institutional space, Martin tied his early work toMoore (as cited in Martin, 2008, p. 27) to characterize four foundational elements around exclusion, framing,historical construction, and the assertion of neutrality. Martin (2008) argues that even “well-intentionedindividual whites” have benefitted from the historical constructions of race that have produced and reproducedboundaries between whiteness and non-whiteness to create racial hierarchies to reward those who are sociallyconstructed as white. Martin continued by adding that structural and institutional perpetuations of whiteness andwhite privilege also help to maintain white institutional space (p. 390). Given the presence of whiteness andwhite privilege within mathematics education, there is motive to view mathematics education and researchbased work related to mathematics education as white institutional spaces.Martin (2013) adapted his earlier definition of white institutional spaces to apply it to the context ofmathematics education, characterized by (a) numerical domination by whites and the exclusion of people ofcolor from positions of power, (b) the development of a white frame, (c) the historical construction of curricularmodels based on white thought, and (d) the assertion of knowledge production as neutral and unconnected topower relations (p. 323). Martin’s characterization of mathematics education as white institutional space hasinfluenced further investigation into areas mathematics education informed (e.g. Battey & Leyva, 2016; Stinson,2017). Stinson (2017) argued that researching race in mathematics education without researching whitesupremacy in mathematics education is a strategic discursive practice and supports Martin’s (2013) use of whiteinstitutional space and the encouragement to question the type of project and the interests being served by theproject of mathematics education. Battey and Leyva (2016) stressed the importance of naming whiteinstitutional spaces, including their mechanisms of oppression, to provide those in the field of mathematicseducation ideas for combatting racist structures (p. 49). We aim to shed light on one particular whiteinstitutional space in order to share specific encounters with whiteness to support growth toward resistingstructures of racism within the field of mathematics education.Within the instantiation of white institutional space one mechanism for maintaining whiteness is whatLeonardo and Manning (2017) call a white zone of proximal development that works against learning toadvance the actual development of white people and maintains a white zone of proximal underdevelopment (p.24). This application of whiteness extends Vygotsky’s (1978) zone of proximal development, the space wherethe development of one person can be extended through the collaboration with a more capable peer viameditational tools. In this paper, speech, race, and professional status all are potential meditational tools.Therefore, we focus our analysis on discourse processes that mediated the goals of diverse team of PD designersand illustrate the complex interplay between racialized professional identities.One transcript of a project team meeting was selected for the focus of this paper, since the topicsdiscussed dealt explicitly with issues of whiteness. The interaction in this transcript took place at a whole groupmeeting in May 2016 during the second year of the project work, two months before the first week-long PDwith the teachers occurred. This segment of the meeting was meant to allow team members of the researchproject who did not work directly on the design of the PD to give feedback to those who did.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1142© ISLSWe used Haviland’s (2008) analytic framework for identifying white educational discourse to analyzediscourse moves within the transcript that maintained or disrupted whiteness. Drawing on literature from criticalwhiteness studies, Haviland identified discursive techniques involved in 1) power-evasion and 2) affirmingwhiteness. With this framework, we each independently reviewed the transcript, marking instances of powerevasion, whiteness affirmation, and efforts seemingly aimed at disrupting whiteness occurred. Followingmultiple discussions of the discursive moves in the transcript, we jointly identified six key events from withinthe longer transcript for further examination. The selection of key events follows the qualitative researchpractice of choosing excerpts to aid in conceptualization of ideas (Erickson, 1985). The selection of these keyevents was not based on its adequacy to support analysis, but rather to help illuminate and interrogate what weconsider to be instances of whiteness in this particular space.Discursive mechanisms in a white zone of proximal developmentThree primary discursive mechanisms functioned to maintain the discursive (and design) space as largely awhite zone of proximal development situated in a white institutional space. The first mechanism coincides withMartin’s (2008) first element of white institutional space: racial exclusion. In this episode of interaction, turns oftalk, topic changes, and decision making were dominated by white members of the project team. The secondmechanism is reflected in Martin’s assertion that much of mathematics education continues to be guided bycurricular models created and sustained by white elites. In this episode, materials, activities, and ideas used tobuild the PD, and the expertise that was assigned in the construction process, were often located within a whitezone of proximal development, which reifies the white institutional space. The third mechanism stemmed from aconceptualization of “trust” and “readiness” related to white norms (and subsequent practices). Theseconceptualizations emerged in relation to the topic of whiteness deemed “difficult” to discuss with teachers andreflect power-evasive moves that maintained and sustained the white institutional space. We illustrate thesethree mechanisms below through brief abbreviated vignettes from each episode.The complex interplay between race and professional status was prevalent in how more capable peerswere acknowledged in conversation. This was evident in two ways concerning how scholars of color wereinvited into discussions. First, scholars of color from the project were invited only when the conversation turnedto issues of race, despite their expertise in other areas, such as the design and implementation of PD. One whiteprincipal investigator commented on the PD design saying, “I feel like there’s less of the focus on the self, andon whiteness and the history of whiteness in this community and the overlap between whiteness andmathematics. Maybe it is too much to do in a week, but I think it would be good to get other people’s feedbackon that. What do people think?” (May 2016 Transcript, Turn 165). Since the conversation was dominated bywhite scholars up until this point, this discursive move to solicit the feedback of “people” and “other people”was coded language for wanting feedback from scholars of color. Second, when scholars of color were broughtinto the conversation, only those prominent in the field outside of the project were referenced as expects. Awhite principal investigator (turn 275) requested more concrete and detailed suggestions for future changes tothe PD design. “(275) If the thought is, we are really not getting at interrogating whiteness enough, then it wouldalso be helpful to have some suggestions. Move this here or do this instead or make sure…” “(276) Or bring in[outside consultant who is a person of color]. Because I don’t know the activities [they would do in theirinstitutes focused on anti-racism]” (May 2016 Transcript, Turns 275-276). After the request, another whiteprincipal investigator (turn 276) quickly turned to the curricular materials and expertise from a scholar of coloroutside of the research group. References to outside experts and focus on limitations of project members tendedto diminish the opportunity for the project team, especially the project members of color who brought variedexpertise and experience to uncover and develop new sets of expertise.Another way whiteness emerged was in the dismissal of contributions of scholars of colors in favor ofwhite normative conceptualizations. For example, one African American researcher, a graduate student, offereda counter-narrative to the conceptualization of trust and its relation to risk-taking among teachers engaging intopics around equity and social justice advocated by the white researchers stating, “I feel like in the ways inwhich we’re talking about these teachers in terms of not being ready for—I think it’s a little premature” (May2016 Transcript, Turn 186). They highlighted participants’ identities as teachers who teach a particular racialgroup of students (predominantly African American children), which suggested that teachers (white orotherwise) could be ready for race-based conversations based on the context of their work and their connectionto their students. This notion of being prepared for race-based conversation based on participants’ caringrelationship to students was raised again by another scholar of color later in this conversation, but again was nottaken up among other participants.The tensions we faced in attempting to transgress whiteness in the design of this PD are prevalent inthe field of mathematics education research, particularly among white researchers who take a social justiceICLS 2018 Proceedings1143© ISLSorientation to their work. We argue that the discursive mechanisms taking place within and reifying white zonesof proximal development are ubiquitous in the current conditions of mathematics teacher PD, and require closeattention by mathematics teacher educators. As a result, we must critically examine the lines of research thatinform research goals and materials. As Aguirre et al. (2017) argue, it is important to find and draw on researchby scholars of color, and to expand our views on what counts as research that relates to mathematics education.The research of scholars from less-dominant backgrounds should not be “tokenized” as solely related to issuesof equity, but rather inform how we conceive of “knowledge” and the relations between mathematics,community and broader social issues. This calls for the application of more expansive understanding andacknowledgement of expertise and meditational tools in the design and implementation of mathematicallearning experiences. Furthermore, mathematics education researchers should look beyond the scope of ourdiscipline to fields in which ideas around race, racism, whiteness and white supremacy are more deeplytheorized.Relevant scholarly referencesAguirre, J., Herbel-Eisenmann, B., Celedón-Pattichis, S., Civil, M., Wilkerson, T., Stephan, M., … Clements, D.H. (2017). Equity Within Mathematics Education Research as a Political Act: Moving From Choice toIntentional Collective Professional Responsibility. Journal for Research in MathematicsEducation, 48(2), 124-147.Battey, D., & Leyva, L. (2016). A framework for understanding whiteness in mathematics education. Journal ofUrban Mathematics Education, 9(2), 49–80.Bonilla-Silva, E. (2010). Racism without racists: Color-blind racism and the persistence of racial inequality inAmerica. Rowman & Littlefield.Bullock, E. (2017). Beyond “ism” groups and figure hiding: Intersectional analysis and critical mathematicseducation. In A. Chronaki (Ed.), Proceedings of the 9th International Mathematics Education andSociety Conference (MES9, Vol. 1, 29-44). Volos, Greece: MES9.Erickson, F. (1985). Qualitative methods in research on teaching. Occasional Paper No. 81.Haviland, V.S. (2008). “Things get glossed over”: Rearticulating the silencing power of whiteness in education.Journal of Teacher Education, 59(1), 40-54.Leonardo, Z. (2004) The Color of Supremacy: Beyond the discourse of ‘white privilege’, EducationalPhilosophy and Theory, 36:2, 137-152.Leonardo, Z., & Manning, L. (2017). White historical activity theory: toward a critical understanding of whitezones of proximal development. Race Ethnicity and Education, 20(1), 15-29.Martin, D. B. (2008). E(race)ing race from a national conversation on mathematics teaching and learning: Thenational mathematics advisory panel as white institutional space. The Mathematics Enthusiast, 5(2),387-398.Martin, D. B. (2013). Race, racial projects, and mathematics education. Journal for Research in MathematicsEducation, 44(1), 316-333.Stinson, D. W. (2017). Researching race without researching White supremacy in mathematics educationresearch: A strategic discursive practice. In A. Chronaki (Ed.), Proceedings of the 9th InternationalMathematics Education and Society Conference (MES9, Vol. 2, 901-912). Volos, Greece: MES9.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The psychology of higher mental functions.AcknowledgementsWe would like to thank our past and current project team members, Joel Amidon, Michael Eiland, Mary Q.Foote, Frances Harper, Sheeba Johnson, Durrell Jones, Gregory Larnell, Carlos LopezLeiva, Oyemolade(Molade) Osibodu, Anita Wager, and Ayse Yolcu, for their collaboration and contributions to this project andwork. This research was supported, in part, by the National Science Foundation (Grant No. #1417672).Opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed here are the authors’ and do not necessarilyreflect the views of NSF.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1144© ISLS