Playing With Fractions on an Interactive Floor: An ExploratoryCase Study in the Math ClassroomMarianna Ioannou, Cyprus Interaction Lab, Cyprus University of Technology,marianna.ioannou@cyprusinteractionlab.comAndri Ioannou, Cyprus Interaction Lab, Cyprus University of Technology, andri.i.ioannou@cut.ac.cyAbstract: The notion that engaging the body brings additional value in learning has leadresearchers in evaluating technology-enhanced, whole-body learning experiences. Yet, we stillneed compelling evidence for the applicability of relevant tools and methods in schoolclassrooms. We conducted an exploratory case study with 20 elementary-school studentsusing three interactive floor applications in a typical school setting. Results demonstratedpositive emotions; yet, cognitive phenomena require more careful investigation.IntroductionInteractive spaces and surfaces such as interactive tabletops, interactive walls, interactive floors, and interactiverooms afford embodied forms of interaction. In this case, digital information can be manipulated directly withfingers, feet, and body movements, or through a physical intermediary such as token, pen, or other tractableobject (Evans & Rick, 2014). Such technology-enhanced, whole-body experiences may promote learning,enabling the reunification of body, action, and the mind. Yet, we need compelling evidence for the applicabilityand effectiveness of such technologies and methods in formal educational settings. This study aimed toexamine: (i) how students react to a whole-body, game-based learning experience on an interactive floor in atypical math lesson and (ii) what types of interaction design and learning design approaches might beconsidered for establishing meaningful integration of such technology and methods.Background workInteractive spaces and surfaces offer several potential advantages for whole-body learning experiences. Theysupport direct interactions by groups of collocated participants, can engage children in playful learning, and canprovide links between physical action and digital artefacts which might, then, lead to increased engagement,exploration, and reflection (Price & Rogers, 2004).The idea of whole-body learning experiences can be considered through the lens of EmbodiedCognition, as a theoretical framework that tries to understand how being in a body and interacting with aphysical world shapes and impacts the development of thinking, problem solving, and learning (Wilson, 2002).This embodied perspective asserts that human cognition is deeply connected to our sensorimotor system and thebody's interaction with the physical environment and therefore, plays a central role in understanding of theworld (Johnson-Glenberg et al., 2011).Τhe last 30 years has been a period of renewed interest in the issue of embodiment in learning.SMALLab work constitutes the most systematic research in formal educational settings concerning learningbenefits of embodiment. Studies by SMALLab indicate that there are significant achievement gains andtherefore positive impact on collaborative learning when students can work with their whole body in mixedreality environments, compared to traditional learning (Johnson-Glenberg et al., 2011). Despite the enthusiasmfor these technologies as well as widespread conviction that embodiment brings about additional value to users,findings are still inconclusive (Malinverni &Pares, 2014) whilst we miss compelling evidence for theapplicability of such methods in typical school classrooms (i.e., without the cost of a SMALLab).MethodologyThis exploratory case study was conducted with 20 fourth-grade students (aged 9-10; 11 males, 9 females) at apublic elementary urban school in Cyprus.A down-pointing projector was mounted on a special (portable) tripod and was connected to a laptop.The visual output was projected on the floor (as in Figure 1) and the students could move around the peripheryof or directly on the visual output. Visual and auditory feedback was given on the projected display.Three applications on fractions were created. The goal in the first app was to identify fractions as partof a whole (played individually). The goal in the second app was to recognize equivalent fractions (played in agroup). The third app was about adding and subtracting fractions with common denominators (playedindividually).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1635© ISLSMultiple video cameras were setup in the classroom to capture facial expressions, physical movement,social interactions and verbal communication around the interactive floor.Results and discussionIn this exploratory case study we first aimed to examine how students react to a full-body, game-based learningexperience on an interactive floor in a typical school setting. First, the results demonstrate that it is possible tointegrate such methods in the math classroom. Judging from the preliminary results of the study, these types oflearning experiences appear to have value in terms of students’ positive emotions; excitement and participationwere overwhelmingly evident. These results confirm outcomes of previous research that relates physical activityto positive emotions (Bianchi-Berthouze et al., 2007; Kosmas & Ioannou, 2017; Price & Rogers, 2004).Figure 1. Whole-body interactive floor experience.We further sought to understand design elements, in terms of interactions and learning, for meaningfulintegration of such technology in school lessons. Despite the excitement, cognitive phenomena were scarce. Afew students played the game only for fun and their choices were incidental selections with no evidence ofcognitive engagement. We think that our design choice to allow for multiple selections, until the correct answerwas chosen, let students make random choices at no cost. On the other hand, inquiry learning approaches tolesson design -- in which students are guided to solve problems, collaborate, then interact with the floor game -might encourage cognitive engagement.Overall, this work revealed opportunities for the integration of novel methods in classroomenvironments and provided ideas for future work in terms of interaction design, learning design and integrationstrategies. In future studies we aim to capitalize on the properties of the interactive floor and deepen into therelationship between physical activity and cognitive engagement and redesign the apps to truly enact cognitiveengagement through play. Future work should aim to understand possible links between cognitive phenomenaand design elements, focusing on patterns of thought and behaviour. Studies of longer duration are alsonecessary to eliminate novelty effects and allow the researchers to assess the true impact of technology use.ReferencesBianchi-Berthouze, N., Kim, W., & Patel, D. (2007). Does body movement engage you more in digital gameplay? And Why? Affective computing and intelligent interaction, 102-113.Evans, M. A., & Rick, J. (2014). Supporting learning with interactive surfaces and spaces. In Handbook ofresearch on educational communications and technology (pp. 689-701). Springer New York.Johnson-Glenberg, M. C., Koziupa, T., Birchfield, D. (2011). Games for learning in embodied mixed-realityenvironments: Principles and results. In C. Steinkuehler et al. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Games+Learning+ Society Conference (pp.129–137). Pittsburgh, PA: ETC Press.Kosmas P., Ioannou A., Retalis S. (2017). Using Embodied Learning Technology to Advance MotorPerformance of Children with Special Educational Needs and Motor Impairments. In: Lavoué É.,Drachsler H., Verbert K., Broisin J., Pérez-Sanagustín M. (eds) Data Driven Approaches in DigitalEducation. EC-TEL 2017. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 10474. Springer, ChamMalinverni, L., & Pares, N. (2014). Learning of Abstract Concepts through Full-Body Interaction: A SystematicReview. Educational Technology & Society, 17 (4), 100–116.Price, S., & Rogers, Y. (2004). Let’s get physical: The learning benefits of interacting in digitally augmentedphysical spaces. Computers & Education, 43(1), 137-151.Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic bulletin & review, 9(4), 625-636.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1636© ISLS