Increasing the Use of Formative Feedback:Utilizing Game-Based PrinciplesMan-Wai Chu, University of Calgary, manwai.chu@ucalgary.caTeresa Anne Fowler, University of Calgary, tfowler@ucalgary.caAbstract: Formative feedback has been identified as an important mechanism to help studentsenhance their areas of weaknesses (Shute, 2008). This study investigated a game-basedformative feedback report system to delivery simple, real-time, and skill-based feedback tostudents. Preliminary results indicate many students (33.9%) who received the game-basedfeedback used it 3-4 times each week and select groups of these students showed statisticallysignificant improvements in their final unit grades (F(1,53)=4.621, p<0.05).Keywords: formative feedback; gamification; game-based formative feedbackIntroductionFormative feedback is crucial to the process of knowledge and skills acquisition (Leighton, Chu, & Seitz, 2013;Shute, 2008). The use of formative feedback during learning is complex because it is not only a cognitiveprocess but also requires the considerations of affective dispositions (Immordino-Yang & Damasio, 2007). Tofacilitate successful and positive experiences of learning, educators need to consider how human emotionsenhance or hinder students’ use of formative feedback (Lajoie, 2008; Sawyer, 2006). In meeting the goal ofdeveloping a learning environment that is sensitive to students’ emotions, game-based environments are apowerful ally (Shute & Ventura, 2013). Feedback provided to students during a digital game environment (e.g.,earning in-game money or jewels) are often reflected upon by students, and used to enhance their future in-gameperformance (Gee, 2007; Shute & Ventura, 2013). As such, the principles behind these digital game feedbacksystems are useful in an educational environment to help provide formative feedback that is used in ameaningful way.Theoretical frameworkLearning error and formative feedback (LEAFF) modelThe LEAFF model outlines that a learning environment deemed emotionally safe by students allows them tofeel at ease revealing their learning errors which is hypothesized to develop more meaningful feedback forstudents to use during their learning (Leighton et al., 2013). When students feel at ease revealing what they donot understand and thus share their misunderstandings, educators can help correct these misconceptions byproviding relevant formative feedback that is specifically targeted to the errors revealed. Formative feedbackthat is deemed meaningful and relevant to students’ performances are expected to be accepted and used bystudents than they would otherwise (Smith, diSessa, & Roschelle, 1993). Most players deem the gameenvironment as emotionally safe, which leads to positive evaluations of the feedback and increased motivationto use it. Hence, there is a need to investigate this type of game-based feedback so that students may bereceptive of and use their formative feedback to improve their performance in an educational environment.Research QuestionsThe main objective of this study was to investigate whether a game-based formative feedback reporting systemusing classroom-based formative assessments may enhance students’ use of formative feedback in theclassroom as well as knowledge and skill acquisition during the unit. Specifically, the research questions thatguided this study was:1. Do students use game-based formative feedback provided in their classroom?2. How do students use the game-based formative feedback they receive in the classroom?3. Does the use of game-based formative feedback improve students’ achievement during the unit?MethodsThis study was designed to work with the same two teachers while they were teaching the same two concurrentunits over a two-year period. Students in the first year of the study completed all their formative and summativeICLS 2018 Proceedings1471© ISLSassessments without an enhanced formative feedback report while students in the second year of the studycompleted the same formative assessments, but had their feedback provided using a game-based formativefeedback report system.ParticipantsA total of 126 Grade 9 students and their English and Mathematics teachers (n=2) participated in this study overa two-year period. During the first (n=69) and second (n=57) years of this study, students’ data was collectedduring the specified units.Measures used and data collectedDuring the first year of the study, students’ achievement records (e.g., students’ performance on the formativeand summative assessments during the poetry and circle geometry units) were collected. During the second yearof the study, students’ achievement records during the same two units as well as surveys and open-endedresponses investigating student usage of game-based formative feedback were collected.AnalysesInitial analyses of the survey data, which targeted the first research question, indicated that most students(33.9%) who received the game-based formative feedback used the feedback at least 3-4 times a week for eachof the two units. The qualitative data, which investigated the second research question, is currently beinganalyzed using thematic analysis. Students’ achievement data, which focused on the third research question, wassplit into strong, medium, and weak achievers as identified by their course grades before the poetry and circlegeometry units. Statistical comparison of students’ achievement data revealed statistically significantdifferences (F(1,53)=4.621, p<0.05) for students who were considered medium achievers. Specifically, studentsin the medium achiever group who received the game-based formative feedback scored higher (80.22%) whencompared to their peers who did not receive the enhanced feedback (74.66%).Significance of studyThere is a need to develop and use game-based formative feedback reports in the classroom because theyencourage students to use the feedback in a meaningful way Considering the large amount of effort andresources placed on formative assessment and its feedback, it is important to develop proper feedback reports sothat students may understand the feedback and use it to enhance their areas of weakness (Black & Wiliam,1998). This game-based formative feedback system indicates the need to consider digital game design principleswhen developing formative feedback report systems for educational environments (O’Connor, 2011).ReferencesBlack, P. & Wiliam, D. (1998). Inside the black box: Raising standards through classroom assessment. London,United Kingdom: School of Education, King’s College.Gee, J. P. (2007). Good videogames + good learning: Collected essays on videogames, learning and literacy.New York, NY: Peter Lang Publishing.Immordino-Yang, M. H. & Damasio, A. (2007). We feel, therefore we learn: The relevance of affective andsocial neuroscience to education. Mind, Brain, and Education, 1(1), 3–10.Lajoie, S. (2008). Metacognition, self-regulation, and self-regulated learning: A rose by any other name?Educational Psychology Review, 20, 469-475. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-008-9088-1Leighton, J. P., Chu, M-W., & Seitz, P. (2013). Cognitive diagnostic assessment and the learning errors andformative feedback (LEAFF) model. In R. Lissitz (Ed.), Informing the practice of teaching usingformative and interim assessment: A systems approach (pp. 183-207). Information Age Publishing.O’Connor, K. (2011). Fifteen fixes for broken grades (Canadian ed.). Pearson Canada.Sawyer, R. K. (2006). Introduction: The new science of learning. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridgehandbook of: The learning sciences (pp. 1-16). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Shute, V. J. (2008). Focus on formative feedback. Review of Educational Research, 78(1), 153-189. doi:10.3102/0034654307313795Shute, V. J., & Ventura, M. (2013). Measuring and supporting learning in games: Stealth assessment.Cambridge,MA:MassachusettsInstitute ofTechnologyPress.Retrievedfromhttp://myweb.fsu.edu/vshute/pdf/white.pdfSmith, J. P., diSessa, A. A. & Roschelle, J. (1993). Misconceptions reconceived: A constructivist analysis ofknowledge in transition. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(2), 115-163.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1472© ISLS