Social Comparison Theory as Applied to MOOC Student Writing:Constructs for Opinion and AbilityHeeryung Choi, University of Michigan, heeryung@umich.eduNia Dowell, University of Michigan, ndowell@umich.eduChristopher Brooks, University of Michigan, brooksch@umich.eduAbstract: There has been limited research effort toward understanding how diversityattributes might influence peer feedback in Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs). Usingsocial comparison theory, we investigated the influence of socioeconomic status (SES) andagreement on peer feedback text in a data science MOOC. This study contributes tounderstanding how social comparison theory can be operationalized in online writingenvironments.Introduction and literature reviewResearchers have tried to maximize the benefits of peer feedback activity for MOOCs by focusing on featuressuch as the large size of classes and diversity of students. Social comparison theory gives suggestions on howlearner diversity might influence peer feedback in online classrooms. Social comparison theory proposes thatpeople conduct comparisons through two mechanisms: opinions and abilities (Festinger 1954). Not only areattributes such as intensity of practice used, but socioeconomic status (SES) has been perceived as an abilityrelated attribute (Régner and Monteil 2007). Typical classrooms, even under low competitive and individualizedatmospheres, give rich context for social comparison (Dijkstra et al. 2008). Considering MOOCS have studentswith larger diversity including SES and opinion, we believe they offer interesting context for social comparison.Thus, the question we explore is: How does social comparison occur during peer feedback activities inMOOCs?We used psychological distance to explain reasons behind learner behaviors and how they influence thelearning experience of feedback recipients. Emotional intensity and formality of textual response are measurablebehavioral proxies during the feedback activity context in the MOOC. Tu and McIsaac (2002) found that fartherpsychological distance between a sender and a recipient causes more formal and less affective textual responsewhich can discourage learning experience (Van Boven et al. 2010; Tu and McIsaac 2002).We contextualize our inquiry in student writing and peer feedback activities, operationalizing socialcomparison theory through text analytic methods. In particular, we study how learners from countries which aregenerally considered as high SES countries (whose proportion is prevalent in most MOOCs) interact with peersshowing similarity or difference in opinions and in performance during online feedback activity. Throughexperimentation we were able to measure how country and opinion diversity separately and together affect theway a learner responds to peers.MethodsIn all studies, learners read question prompts asking whether they agree with the non-technical issues related todata science and completed a short writing position. A controlled peer activity is where learners were randomlypresented with one of two peer positions which were written by the instructor. Participants were recruitedthrough an optional activity in the ‘Introduction to Data Science in Python’ MOOC taught by ChristopherBrooks on Coursera. IRB oversight was sought under University of Michigan study id HUM00120884. Thenumber of participants in preliminary study was 246 and participants in Study 1 was 138. Learners wereclassified as coming from high, medium, or low SES countries, based on whether they were in the first, secondor third, or fourth quartiles of the UNDP Human Development Report 2016 respectively. In this work we focuson the actions of only those learners who were identified as coming from high SES countries. Then learnerswere randomly presented with one of two peer positions written by the instructor. The position text differed asto whether it was for or against a given argument outlined in the question prompt learners were shown. Thecountry indicator was set either to a high SES country, or a low SES country. Thus, the study was a 2X2 factordesign where each learner was to respond to a one of four types of an instructor response: (a) a high-SES peerwith dissenting opinion, (b) a high-SES peer with agreeing opinion, (c) a low-SES peer with dissenting opinion,and (d) a low-SES peer with an agreeing opinion.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1421© ISLSFindingsPreliminary study and study 1: Hypotheses tested on the different datasetA two-way ANOVA was run on 246 learners. There was a significant difference between agreement anddisagreement on affect (agreeing M (SD)=.21(1.15), disagreeing M(SD)=-.43(.26), F-value=21.90, p<.001) andformality (agreeing M (SD)= -.22(1.02), disagreeing M(SD)=.45(.78), F-value= 24.31, p<.001). There was nosignificant difference between high peer SES and low peer SES either on affect (high M (SD)=.08(1.14), lowM(SD)=-.10,.79, F-value=1.25) or formality (high M(SD)=-.03(.92), low M(SD)=-.04(1.10), F-value=.03). Yet,we observe a trend which gives evidence to build hypothesis on SES. There was no significant interactionbetween the two main independent variables. From results of the preliminary study and social comparisontheory, we posed two hypotheses. First, learners from high SES countries will construct feedback that is moreformal, with fewer emotional language when responding to cases of disagreement with peers, regardless of thecountry disclosure of the peer. Secondly, learners from high SES countries will write a less emotional and moreformal feedback when responding to lower SES peers. We re-tested these hypotheses in Study 1 which used adifferent question prompt to see whether the agreement and SES factors are effective in a different context of apeer feedback activity.Study 1 did not demonstrate supporting evidence to support H1; there was no significant differencebetween agreement and disagreement on affect (agreeing M (SD)=.04(1.01), disagreeing M(SD)=-.16(0.97), Fvalue=2.59) and formality (agreeing M (SD)=-.05(1.10), disagreeing M(SD)=.23(.66), F-value=.02, p<.00). ForH2, evidence was found with respect to formality of responses towards learners in low SES countries (highM(SD)=-.19(1.06), low M(SD)=.23(0.97), F-value=5.04, p<.05), however there was no significant difference inaffect between low peer and high peer groups (high M(SD)=-.08(1.02), low M(SD)=.09(0.99), F-value=3.33).There was no significant interaction between the two main effect variables, agreement and SES.Conclusion and future workBefore concluding SES was not effective ability-related factor, through an analysis of learner responses, werealized that there was a gap in formality between the controlled instructor responses and the actual learnerresponses. In particular, learner responses ranged from a formality score of -.572 to 3.484 (M = .691, sd = .549),while the two instructor created positions which had formalities of .370 and .677 (M = .523). We wereconcerned that peer responses were impacted by the different level of formality which can influencepersuasiveness of textual response (Graesser et al. 2014). Based on current understanding of formality, ahypothesis on peer formality should be posed in the future work.ReferencesDijkstra, Pieternel, Hans Kuyper, Greetje van der Werf, Abraham P. Buunk, and Yvonne G. van der Zee. 2008.“Social Comparison in the Classroom: A Review.” Review of Educational Research 78 (4). AmericanEducational Research Association:828–79.Festinger, Leon. 1954. “A Theory of Social Comparison Processes.” Human Relations; Studies towards theIntegration of the Social Sciences 7 (2). SAGE Publications:117–40.Graesser, Arthur C., Danielle S. McNamara, Zhiqang Cai, Mark Conley, Haiying Li, and James Pennebaker.2014. “Coh-Metrix Measures Text Characteristics at Multiple Levels of Language and Discourse.” TheElementary School Journal 115 (2):210–29.Régner, Isabelle, and Jean-Marc Monteil. 2007. “Low-and High-Socioeconomic Status Students Preference forIngroup Comparisons and Their Underpinning Ability Expectations.” Revue Internationale de PsychologieSociale 20 (1). Presses univ. de Grenoble:87–104.Tu, Chih-Hsiung, and Marina McIsaac. 2002. “The Relationship of Social Presence and Interaction in OnlineClasses.” The American Journal of Distance Education 16 (3). Routledge:131–50.Van Boven, Leaf, Joanne Kane, A. Peter McGraw, and Jeannette Dale. 2010. “Feeling Close: EmotionalIntensity Reduces Perceived Psychological Distance.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 98(6). psycnet.apa.org:872–85.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1422© ISLS