Exploring Teacher Presence During Social Regulation of Learningin Science ClassroomsDalila Dragnic-Cindric, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, daliladc@live.unc.eduNikki G. Lobczowski, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, ngl@unc.eduJeffrey A. Greene, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, jagreene@email.unc.eduP. Karen Murphy, Pennsylvania State University, pkm15@psu.eduAbstract: We studied the extent to which teacher presence relates to social regulation oflearning in a collaborative model-based learning task in two high school physics classrooms.We found that groups engaged in argumentation discourse without the teacher activelymonitored their understanding and used adaptive regulation strategies. The groups in which theteacher was present during the discussion relied on the teacher for regulation of learning. Wediscuss the implications for science teachers and teacher educators.IntroductionIn this qualitative study, we aimed to illuminate how teacher presence relates to high school students’ socialregulation of learning during collaborative work in a model-based learning task in physics. Science educatorshave increasingly relied on collaborative learning in small groups as a preferred way to foster to foster students’argumentation and subsequent learning, because it has been shown to promote both individual and groupknowledge gains (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014). Students’ interpretations of the work of others, supported bythe use of evidence, such as interpretations of models in science, are one example of group knowledge creation(Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014). Thus, science teachers have strived to engage their students in collaborativemodel-based reasoning. However, researchers have found that, without instruction and support, students in groupswill struggle to work together successfully and take control of their learning. Therefore, teachers need to be ableto facilitate students’ knowledge building and engagement in productive argumentation discourse by orchestratingand scaffolding effective collaborative activities (Hmelo-Silver & Barrows, 2008). Additionally, researchers haveshown that successful collaborative learning necessitates that group members have good regulative skills (i.e.,planning, monitoring, controlling and evaluating their learning). In collaborative settings, group regulation skillsand enactment are defined as social regulation of learning (Hadwin, Järvelä, & Miller, 2018).Current theories and models of social regulation of learning have emphasized that regulation is sociallysituated and combines individual and social processes (Hadwin et al., 2018). Thus far, researchers have focusedon emergence of regulation in small collaborative groups, as well as the challenges groups experience and theirsubsequent adaptive responses (Panadero & Järvelä, 2015). In some situations, teachers are also a part of thecollaborative group, but the ways in which such groups’ social regulation of learning may vary due to the teachers’presence remain under researched. Thus, we strived to contribute to the body of knowledge on social regulationof learning through a naturalistic study of two high school physics teachers and their students. Our study wasframed by the following research question: How does presence or absence of the teacher during a collaborativemodel-based learning task in high school physics relate to groups’ social regulation of learning?MethodsOur study was a part of a larger, federally funded project carried out in a large, public high school located in asmall city in the northeastern United States. Participants were two physics teachers and their students. Theschool’s student population was predominantly Caucasian (91%) with a large proportion of students who qualifiedfor the free or reduced-price lunch program (57%). About half of the students in the school were female (49%).For this particular study, we focused on the first learning task in a yearlong curriculum and used videodata of the small groups as our primary data source. We purposefully selected four teacher-formed, heterogeneousgroups of students in two physics classrooms and investigated students’ social regulation of learning. Bothteachers were male. For the two groups in the first classroom (i.e., Group A, n = 6, and Group B, n = 5) the teacherwas present at the group's table for the whole discussion. The two groups in another classroom (i.e., Group C, n= 3, and Group D, n = 3) carried out the discussion independently while the teacher circulated the classroom,stopping by each group intermittently. The lesson focused on why a reusable hotpack released heat after clickingthe activation disk. To answer this essential question, teachers gave students readings, guiding questions, anargument scaffold, and a hotpack. Students then engaged in small group argumentation discourse to evaluate ascientific model of this phenomenon and determine the merit of the model claims, using reasons and evidence.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1631© ISLSFor our data analysis, we employed video analysis according to the guidelines for research in the learningsciences (Derry et al., 2010). Researchers separately watched videos of each of the four groups and then met todiscuss them. We wrote time-indexed notes about each group's session and partially transcribed interestingepisodes. We discussed our observations of the students’ social regulation (i.e., planning, monitoring, controlling,and reflecting) as well as how it differed due to the teacher’s presence, until we reached agreement on themes.Results and discussionDuring the four group discussions, we found that the quality of discussion and social regulation differed betweengroups with and without the teacher. In the two groups with the teacher present (i.e., Groups A and B), the teacherprompted the students to consider each of the three claims separately, and to use reasons and evidence to supporttheir views until they reached consensus on each claim. During these discussions, the students responded mostlyto the teacher prompts and questions, with very limited interaction occurring between students. Thus, the enacteddiscursive engagement aligned with a version of the traditional initiation-response-evaluation pattern. All of theregulation was external to the group (i.e., initiated by the teacher), with limited opportunities for students toregulate on their own. Students in these two groups did not experience joint construction of task understandingand had limited engagement in monitoring of their content understanding or evaluation of the task completion.Groups C and D had quite different discussions. In these groups, the teacher visited the groupsintermittently. In both groups, he visited at the beginning to make sure they understood the task, during the middleof the discussion to make sure they were on the right track, and at the end to determine if they had finished thetask. The rest of the unsupervised time, the students engaged in conversations about task understanding, monitoredtheir understanding of the content using phrases such as “I don’t understand”, sought help from the teacher (e.g.,“I need help”) when he came by to check on them, evaluated their task completion, and engaged in argumentationdiscourse as they determined the merit of the three claims. These groups also, however, engaged in more off-taskbehavior than the groups with the teacher consistently present.Our findings revealed that for our four groups, when teachers were more present, there were feweropportunities for students to regulate their own learning, but students were generally more on task than studentsin the groups with less teacher presence. Importantly, we found that in groups in which the teacher was lesspresent, students more actively monitored their understanding and used adaptive regulation strategies (e.g.,seeking help), as opposed to their counterparts in groups with more teacher presence. We believe that in theabsence of the teacher the control shifted to the group members as the lesson required the students to engage inregulation. Our findings have implications for teachers interested in fostering social regulation in small groupdiscussions. Teachers should teach, scaffold, and support students’ interpretative authority through directengagement as well as intentionally designed lessons. Additionally, these findings are relevant for teachereducators working to improve teachers’ use of effective science teaching and discursive practices.ReferencesDerry, S. J., Pea, R. D., Barron, B., Engle, R. A., Erickson, F., Goldman, R., …Sherin, B. L. (2010). Conductingvideo research in the learning sciences: Guidance on selection, analysis, technology, and ethics. TheJournal the Learning Sciences, 19, 3-53.Hadwin, A., Järvelä, S., & Miller, M. (2018). Self-regulation, co-regulation, and shared regulation in collaborativelearning environments. In D. H. Schunk & J. A. Greene (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation of learningand performance (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Routledge.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Barrows, H. S. (2008). Facilitating collaborative knowledge building. Cognition andInstruction, 26(1), 48-94. doi:10.1080/07370000701798495Panadero, E., & Järvelä, S. (2015). Socially shared regulation of learning: A review. European Psychologist,20(3), 190-203. doi:10.1027/1016-9040/a000226Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, andtechnology. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 397-417).New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) Grant No. 1316347 to thePennsylvania State University and the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Program under Grant No. DGE1144081 to Dalila Dragnic-Cindric. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed inthis material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NSF.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1632© ISLS