Learner Expertise and Emotional Design in Multimedia LearningThomas K.F. Chiu, The University of Hong Kong, thomas.kf.chiu@gmail.comAbstract: Literature shows that learners’ emotions affect the effectiveness of multimedialearning, which is explained by Cognitive-Affective Theory of Learning with Media (CATLM).An emotional design that changes learners’ emotional status can facilitate or suppressmultimedia learning. In CATLM individual difference is an assumption. How learner expertiseaffects the effectiveness of emotional designs remains unclear. This study comprising 122 K12students aims to investigate the effect of learner expertise (novice vs advanced) and emotionaldesign– face-shape like and warm colors – (with vs without) on developing remembering andunderstanding. These results showed that (1) in remembering the emotional design groupperformed better, and (2) in understanding the design benefited the advanced group, but not thenovice group. A plausible explanation is the benefits of the emotional design do not overweighits drawback in the novice group when developing understanding. Further analysis reveals thatlearner expertise and learning outcomes aid to determine the designs’ effects.Keywords: emotional design, learner expertise, CATLM, multimedia learningIntroductionRecent research on multimedia learning has been focusing on the influence of affective processes such as emotionsand motivations (Ng & Chiu, 2017; Park, Knörzer, Plass, & Brünken, 2015). Multimedia design elements that canchange learners emotional status (Heidig, Müller, & Reichelt, 2015) may affect working memory capacities duringlearning, which is supported by many empirical studies (Knörzer, Brünken, & Park, 2016). These studies showedthat learners emotions can facilitate or suppress their learning processes, for examples, Knörzer and colleagues(2016) provided evidences that there are differential effects of diverse emotional status on multimedia learning a facilitating effect of induced positive emotions and a suppressive effect of induced negative emotions occurredon learning outcomes. These empirical evidences can be explained by Moreno’s Cognitive-Affective Theory ofLearning with Media (CATLM) (Moreno, 2009). CATLM suggests that individual difference includes learnerexpertise affects multimedia learning, which is supported by studies of Chiu and Mok (2017), Kalyuga (2007,2014) and his colleagues (2012). However, how learner expertise affects the effectiveness of emotional designremains unclear. The present study aims to investigate the effects of learner expertise and emotional design onlearning outcomes - remembering and understanding. The rest of the paper is organised as follows: we first presentthe theoretical framework of this studies, and previous studies on emotional design in multimedia learning,followed by the purpose and methodology of the study. Then we describe the results of our analyses, followed bydiscussing the results and concluding the study.The present studyThis study investigates how different learner expertise levels affect an emotional design on multimedia learningand attempts to understand how the design affect cognitive capacities available for learning. We expected that thedesign would place extraneous cognitive load on both learners, but have larger facilitating effects on novicelearners in developing understanding due to the expertise reversal effect (Kalyuga, 2007, 2014)The participants comprised 122 primary 1 and 2 students, (5-9 years old, around 52% is boy), and anexperienced mathematics teacher in Hong Kong. A 2 x 2 between subjects factorial design with the factors learnerexpertise (primary 1, P1 vs primary 2, P2) and emotional design (with an emotional deign, ED vs without, ND)was used. This resulted in the four experimental conditions. Materials were written in Chinese (Cantonese style)included learning materials, a post-test and a questionnaire. The learning materials were 5-minute videos; thetopic was understanding geometrical patterns. In the experimental group, face-like shape and warm colors wereused in the design. The post-test was in form of multiple choice questions with 4 answers assessed rememberingand understanding. The questions were used in the experiments of Ng and Chiu (2017) and modified from thestudies of Chiu (2016, 2017), Chiu and Mok (2017), and Chiu and Churchill (2015). The remembering measuredlearning outcomes by means of recall questions, as same as that presented in the videos from the control group;that of understanding were new. Each measure had 10 questions and scored 1. The questionnaire includes a 5scale likert question measuring intrinsic motivation - I find learning the material is fun. This question was used inthe study of Plass and colleagues (2014).Discussions and conclusionsICLS 2018 Proceedings1411© ISLSThere are three major empirical implications. First, the emotional design “face-shape like and warm colors” hadmain effects when developing remembering. Second, the design benefited the advanced group, but not the novicegroup when developing understanding. Final the emotional design derived more fun (instinct motivation) fromthe learning process. In term of theoretical contribution, the results contribute to CATLM, more specifically, howthe emotional design affects cognitive processes through emotion, motivation and attention in multimedialearning. Most previous relevant studies did not take learner expertise / order thinking skill into account whenstudying the emotional designs (see Park et al., 2015, Plass et al., 2014; Knörzer, et al., 2016; Schneider et al.,2016; Um et al., 2012). In their studies, the authors advocated that an appropriate emotional design can facilitatecognitive processing during learning even though it may place extraneous cognitive load on the learners. Thelearners would invest more effort in their cognitive processing to integrate their prior knowledge from long termmemory and organized knowledge from the multimedia presentations into new knowledge. Moreover, this studyaffords two practical suggestions. First, it is more effective to use the face-shape like and warm colors for alllearners in developing lower order thinking skills. The human-like pictures are recommended to be included inmultimedia presentations when the learning tasks are not too complicated. Second, we suggest that teachersshould be very careful when they design activities for drawing interests and fostering motivation because thoseactivities may not lead to better learning outcomes. Multimedia presentation designers are suggested to use learnerexpertise and learning outcomes to determine whether to include emotional design offered to learners. Overall,future research on adaptive learning environments should focus on cognitive processing, and interactions amonglearner prerequisites, emotions and multimedia presentations.ReferencesChiu, T.K.F. (2016). Prior knowledge and mathematics order thinking skill in multimedia learning. InProceedings of The International Conference of Learning Sciences, June 20-24, 2016, Singapore.Chiu, T.K.F. (2017). Effects and Contributions of External Presentation Comprising Prior Knowledge duringMultimedia Learning. AERA Annual Meeting, April 27-May 1, 2017, San Antonio, Texas.Chiu, T.K.F., & Churchill, D. (2015). Exploring the characteristics of an optimal design of digital materials forconcept learning in mathematics: Multimedia learning and variation theory. Computers & Education, 82,280-291. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2014.12.001Chiu, T.K.F., & Mok, I.A.C. (2017). Learner expertise and mathematics different order thinking skills inmultimedialearning.Computers&Education,107,147-164.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2017.01.008Heidig, S., Müller, J., & Reichelt, M. (2015). Emotional design in multimedia learning: Differentiation on relevantdesign features and their effects on emotions and learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 44, 81-95.Kalyuga, S. (2007). Expertise reversal effect and its implications for learner-tailored instruction. EducationalPsychology Review, 19(4), 509-539. DOI:10.1007/s10648-007-9054-3Kalyuga, S. (2014). The expertise reversal principle in multimedia learning. In R.E. Mayer (Ed.), The cambridgehandbook of multimedia learning, (pp. 576-597). New York, NY: Cambridge university press.Knörzer, L., Brünken, R., & Park, B. (2016). Facilitators or suppressors: Effects of experimentally inducedemotions on multimedia learning. Learning and Instruction, 44, 97-107.Moreno, R. (2009). Learning from animated classroom exemplars: the case for guiding student teachers'observations with metacognitive prompts. Journal of Educational Research and Evaluation, 15, 487501.Ng, K.H, & Chiu, T.K.F. (2017). Emotional Multimedia design for Developing Mathematical Problem solvingSkills. HKAECT x AECT 2017 Summer International Research Symposium, June 15-17, 2017, HongKong.Park, B., Knörzer, L., Plass, J. L., & Brünken, R. (2015). Emotional design and positive emotions in multimedialearning: An eyetracking study on the use of anthropomorphisms. Computers & Education, 86, 30-42.Plass, J. L., Heidig, S., Hayward, E. O., Homer, B. D., & Um, E. (2014). Emotional design in multimedia learning:Effects of shape and color on affect and learning. Learning and Instruction, 29, 128-140.AcknowledgementsThank the schools and the University of Hong Kong for the support of this work through a research fund.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1412© ISLS