The Challenge of Working With the Future Within STEM EducationGiulia Tasquier, Alma Mater Studiorum – University of Bologna, giulia.tasquier2@unibo.itOlivia Levrini., Alma Mater Studiorum – University of Bologna, olivia.levrini2@unibo.itAntti Laherto A., University of Helsinki, antti.laherto@helsinki.fiElina Palmgren, University of Helsinki, caitlin@landvernd.isCaitlin Wilson, Institution, Icelandic Environment Association, elina.palmgren@helsinki.fiAbstract: Global crises and societal uncertainty mean that youth perceive the future no longeras a promise but as a threat, and have difficulty projecting themselves into the future. Futurestudies and action competence pedagogies partly inform our EU-funded strategic partnership todevelop teaching strategies and materials that build future-scaffolding skills. The first teachingmodule on climate was implemented in June 2017 in Italy, with 24 Finnish, Icelandic and Italianupper secondary school students and their teachers. Qualitative data were analysed to shed lighton how the module impacted on students’ attitudes toward present and future.IntroductionIn post-modern societies, where social acceleration is a source of anxiety and frenetic standstill (Rosa, 2013), theyoung generation struggles to project themselves into the future and to develop scope as future professionals.Whereas for past generations science and technology were seen as positive possibilities for addressing challenges,now students perceive them as sources themselves of fears (Eurobarometer, 2015). In the face of such a changingworld, what possibilities does STEM education offer for enabling young people to live their present in order tocreate their own future?Although the interdisciplinary field of futures studies has been investigating this problem from a wideperspective, the inclusion of such perspectives within school science curricula is rather rare (for an interestingexception, see Paige and Lloyd, 2016). The notion of agency as a goal of education presents another pedagogicalresponse to the complex challenges of the future, emphasising the ability to take enlightened decisions and actionsas individuals and communities (Mogensen & Schnack, 2010). Agency and action competence are relevant toSTEM education if students are to be able to overcome fear of the future and instead define their roles and waysforward through socio-scientific issues (Roth & Lee, 2004).Our recent EU project I SEE (https://iseeproject.eu) studies the potential of future studies and actioncompetence pedagogies within STEM education to support students in projecting themselves into the future asagents and active citizens.Project, goal and methodsThe project is formed by a strategic partnership among three secondary schools, two universities, anenvironmental NGO, a teachers’ association and a private foundation coming from four European countries (Italy,Finland, Iceland and the United Kingdom). The project designs innovative approaches and teaching modules oncross-cutting and societally relevant fields to address the above-mentioned concerns. We have defined specificfuture-scaffolding skills (Levrini, Tasquier & Branchetti, under review) that should be developed through scienceeducation to render it personally, socially, professionally and scientifically relevant and enhance students’capacity to envisage themselves as agents of change and push their imagination towards future careers in STEM.Modules build on the action competence approach combined with the idea of exposure, i.e. to be able to choosean alternative future and become an agent of it, an individual has to be exposed to it. The first module, focusingon climate change, was implemented in June 2017 in Bologna, Italy, with a culturally diverse group of 24 Finnish,Icelandic and Italian upper secondary school students and their teachers.The module implementation was monitored and analysed to answer this research question: How did themodule impact students’ attitudes toward present and future? During the whole implementation, specific toolswere designed to collect mainly qualitative data. At this level, we analysed focus group discussions and individualinterviews, the aim of which was to let the students express themselves about their overall experience of themodule. Data were analysed through an iterative process that came up with a bottom-up de-briefing phase,conceived for identifying the emergent aspects in the data and generate first interpretative ideas.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1441© ISLSPreliminary resultsBy analysing students’ discourses during the focus groups and the interviews, we identified three main themes: i)future and agency; ii) cultural insights; and iii) STEM careers. The themes have been pointed out by highlightingstudents’ sentences and grouping them.With respect to the first theme, students’ initial views confirmed the trends pointed out by theEurobarometer report (2015) and showed a widespread feeling of negativity as well as a tendency to remove thefuture from their personal horizon because it is too fear-inducing. Indeed, they revealed a tendency to look to thefuture with pessimism and saw little hope for being able to do something about either their future or present,mainly citing a sense of negativity conveyed by the media. During the interviews, they declared to be aware thattheir positions deeply changed and became more positive. As evidenced by their words, they: a) became moreconfident in themselves and in their ability to manage difficult situations, b) acquired a sense of security in thesense of widening their perspectives and developing new ways of thinking, and c) saw the future within theirreach and found ways to see themselves as agents and actors of their own future.With respect to the second theme, the cultural issue appeared to be a constant reference for the students.They revealed that meeting with different cultures gave them something beyond conceptual knowledge, that is,an awareness of others’ lifestyles, approaches, ways of reasoning, environmental cultures, etc., but that all thecultures present were still dealing with the same problems. What emerged with a strong emphasis from all studentsfrom the three different countries is the great opportunity they had to share values and desires to act together forchanging the world internationally.The third theme regarding STEM careers particularly referred to the students coming from one of thecountries. Thanks to their experience with the first module, the students could see new kinds of professions; theysaw jobs that they had never imagined before and, in this sense, they saw the possibility to create their own job inthe future – not necessarily a conventional or existing one.ConclusionThe students’ reactions that emerged from the focus groups and the individual interviews imply that the activitiesof the module had a positive impact on students’ perception of the future and sense of agency, on the personalexperience of cultural diversities as well as on the capability to imagine future careers. To understand how themodule brought about these outcomes, we have started a detailed analysis of students’ discourse in the audiorecordings. We have already recognised systematic shifts and reactions within their discourse and perceived somenew vocabulary that became part of their way of thinking about future. The results of this analysis will providemeans to connect the outcomes to the future-scaffolding skills which were taught in the module. According to thepreliminary analysis, many students abandoned their fear-inducing deterministic future views and started to talkabout future scenarios, referring to a variety of possible, probable, plausible and desirable futures. They alsoshowed vocabulary pertaining to complex systems and reasoned in terms of circular causality. Such findings fromthe discourse analysis help us understand which future-scaffolding skills were learned during the module and howthey may contribute to students’ thinking.ReferencesEurobarometer (2015). Public opinion on future innovations, science and technology. National report Italy,Eurobarometer Qualitative Study, June 2015.Levrini, O., Tasquier, G., Branchetti, L. (under review). Developing future-scaffolding skills through ScienceEducation. Submitted to International Journal of Science Education.Mogensen, F., & Schnack, K. (2010). The action competence approach and the 'new' discourses of education forsustainable development, competence and quality criteria. Environmental Education Research, 16(1),59-74.Paige, K., & Lloyd, D. (2016). Use of Future Scenarios as a Pedagogical Approach for Science Teacher Education.Research in Science Education (1-23).Rosa H. (2013). Beschleunigung und Entfremdung - Entwurf einer kritischen Theorie spätmoderner Zeitlichkeit,Suhrkamp (Eng. Trans: Acceleration and Alienation - Towards a Critical Theory of Late-ModernTemporality, 2015).Roth, W.M., & Lee, S. (2004). Science education as/for participation in the community. Science Education, 88,263-291.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1442© ISLS