Becoming, Being, and Sometimes Leaving: A LongitudinalEthnographic Perspective of Climate Scientists’ Participation inScience and EducationElizabeth M. Walsh, San José State University, elizabeth.walsh@sjsu.eduAbstract: The learning of socio-scientific knowledge and practices in and out of school isfacilitated by the participation of working scientists. In 2016, I interviewed 18 key informantclimate scientists from a longitudinal ethnographic study initially conducted in 2009-2012, toexamine how their participation in education and communication had evolved over time.Findings indicate that scientists’ science and SEC identities were intertwined. Further, scienceand SEC trajectories were shaped by an increasingly polarized social context, as well asscientific structures that limited stability and at times misaligned with scientists’ values.IntroductionThe participation of scientists in science education and communication (SEC) can provide current and detailedexpertise in scientific content, practices and processes, as well as entry points for learners into scientificcommunities. Working in a societally relevant field, climate scientists in particular often have high levels ofinterest in increasing public engagement with climate science (Bowman et al., 2010). Currently there are limitedaccounts of the experiences, motivations and perspectives of those scientists who do choose to participate incommunication and education, and what supports or hinders these activities. Detailed understandings of climatescientists’ trajectories of learning and participation in science education and communication practices is needed,to better support ongoing participation in SEC. This poster presents findings from a five-year longitudinalfollow-up to an ethnographic study and examines how scientists navigated scientific and educational identitiesand structures over time, and what informed the sustainability of their participation in SEC and in science itself.MethodologyTheoretical frameworkAs a cultural group, the scientific community is associated with particular modes of participation in epistemicpractices (Latour & Woolgar, 1987). Because the ultimate purpose of socially relevant sciences, such as climatechange, is often its use by those outside of the scientific community, climate scientists are often called on orchoose to act as participants whose pathways crossed boundaries between science and SEC communities. Thisanalysis draws on Nasir & Hand (2008)’s construct of practice-linked identity to examine science and SEClinked identity through participation in contexts over time. I examine scientists’ roles over time, and howavailable resources, structures, values and practices shaped scientists’ SEC work.Data sources and analysisBetween 2009-2011, I conducted a longitudinal ethnography of climate scientists involved in informal outreachand K-12 education activities. In Fall 2016, follow-up interviews (semi-structured, 45-60 minutes, audio- orvideo-recorded) were conducted virtually with 18 key informants from the initial study, focusing on views ofand experiences with science learning, education and communication, and their activities related to educationand communication during the last five years. Participants also completed an online survey about theirparticipation in SEC. I qualitatively coded transcriptions of interviews using a combination of a coding structuredeveloped during the initial study (Walsh, 2012) and emergent coding (Lofland & Lofland, 2006). Emergentthemes were explicated iteratively using memoranda, and I reviewed and analyzed the data corpus to generateand test assertions as described by Erickson (1986). Data from this round of interviews were triangulated withdata from the 2009-2011 study.Major findingsTrajectories in and out of SEC tied to science identity, career trajectorySEC activities of the scientists were shaped by the career pathway that they took, and these career pathways inturn were shaped by available job prospects, career aspirations, geographic location of available positions andfamily responsibilities. All participants reported a trend to increasing specialization in a particular kind of SECICLS 2018 Proceedings1727© ISLSover time, often related to their jobs. David and Kurt, both research scientists, reported an increase in work withthe media, while Jason, Jennifer and Clara, who had all recently started or were about to start jobs as professors,became much more focused on their own teaching. From 2009 to 2016, there was an increase in critique of thestructure of the scientific community and how science communication efforts are inadequately or inauthenticallyintegrated into science. Some scientists who had left or were considering leaving academia connected this to acritique of how scientific jobs are structured. Kat described an “identity crisis”: her struggle to find a permanentposition as a scientist had affected her science identity to such an extent that she was no longer certain whetheror not she should be encouraging others to pursue science as a career. Several scientists noted that their jobstructure did not provide room for job security or the possibility for participation in valued activities such asSEC or family life; two scientists had left or were considering leaving science as a career for these reasons.Increasing social and political polarization and media influenceMost scientists indicated that they believed that the social context for climate change had become morepolarized since their initial interviews, and many stated that this had a dampening impact on theircommunication activities and had shaped their SEC engagement. Since 2011, participants had becomeincreasingly involved in communication with the media, while at the same time becoming critical of the mediaand its coverage of climate change, especially the proliferation of social media. For example, after graduatestudent Scott’s first scientific paper was picked up by the media and became the target of climate deniers, heconsidered leaving science altogether and took a leave of absence from school. Scientists reported that they hadin many cases reached their limit of trying to communicate directly with the general public outside of workingwith the media, in large part because of the polarization. They reported that the polarization resulted in, asseveral scientists stated, “preaching to the choir” when speaking to liberals, or in no impact when speaking withpeople who did not think climate change was happening. Grant, a professor, described his outlook as much lessopen to listening to or addressing climate skeptics, stating: “I'm a lot less likely to accept crap about climatechange now than I was ten years ago, you know. We've been through all that.” Scientists also noted a concernabout the tendency to highlight the latest finding instead of contextualizing findings. The need for constantinformation, “flashy,” “novel” findings and statistics was mirrored in concerns about the rise of social media.Conclusions and significanceSince 2011, scientists who had started motivated and interested in education and communication had generallyremained active in SEC. Scientists’ modes of participation were deeply intertwined with their identity as ascientist in ways that both encouraged and at times provided a barrier to participation, and led to increasedspecialization over time. While supports for scientists tend to be geared toward a “general” audience, this workelucidates the dynamic nature of scientist’s science communication and education experience. Previous researchhas described scientists as “unwilling” and “reluctant” to take part in media communication efforts, an effortthey have “undervalued” in comparison to their other “professional duties and responsibilities” (Boykoff, 2011p. 71-73). However, for participants in this study, it was not a lack of interest or reluctance on the part of thescientists to engage in SEC, but a consequence of the politically polarized social context and the structure ofscientific and academic institutions. These structures threatened SEC activities, as well as other values highlyimportant to the scientists including job stability, interdisciplinarity, and balance with family life. Some of theyounger scientists expressed disillusionment or lack of motivation and others had sacrificed communities oractivities that they had previously highly valued, such as SEC or even science itself. This has implications forthe STEM education and learning sciences community, as we need to critically examine the institution we arepreparing youth to enter and the consequences of choosing a trajectory of participation in that community.ReferencesBowman, T. E., Maibach, E., Mann, M. E., Somerville, R. C. J., Seltser, B. J., Fischhoff, B., Gardiner, S. M., etal. (2010). Time to Take Action on Climate Communication. Science, 330, 1048-1048.Boykoff, M. T. (2011). Who Speaks for the Climate? Making Sense of Media Reporting on Climate Change.Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Latour, B., & Woolgar, S. (1986). Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Facts. (J. Salk, Ed.).Princeton University Press.Lofland, J., & Lofland, L. H. (1995). Developing Analysis. Analyzing Social Settings: A Guide to QualitativeObservation and Analysis (pp. 181-203). New York: Wadsworth.Nasir, N. & Hand, V. (2008). From the court to the classroom: Opportunities for engagement, learning, andidentity in basketball and classroom mathematics. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17(2), 143-179.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1728© ISLS