Teacher’s Re-design of Virtual Reality Based Curriculum in anElementary ClassroomInsook Han, Temple University, insook.han@temple.eduAbstract: This is a qualitative study that explored teacher’s use of VR contents in an elementaryclassroom using a case study approach. Based on the thematic analysis of written reflections,interview transcriptions, and field notes along with teacher-produced artifacts, I provided indepth descriptions of the entire process of teacher’s planning, implementing, evaluating, andrevising lessons for using VR. The preliminary analysis revealed that a teacher developed hisTPACK of using VR while re-designing VR-based curriculum.IntroductionIn technology-enhanced learning environments, teachers are often considered adopters of technology andexecutors of ready-made curricular materials. However, the teacher's active role in developing a technologyenhanced curriculum has become increasingly important because the meaningful transformation of learning withtechnology requires extensive teacher knowledge of technology, pedagogy, and content (TPACK) (Mishra &Koehler, 2009). While teachers’ design of curriculum is not entirely new (Kirschner, 2015), bringing emergingtechnologies into classrooms demands teachers consider variables that have not been essential previously.Especially, the rapid development of virtual reality (VR) technologies has brought new possibilities to educationand needs of teachers' professional development. However, research on the adoption of VR in real classroomsettings is still immature, and little research has explored the process of curriculum design that involves VR andhow teachers develop their understanding about the use of VR in classroom practices. The complex nature ofdesigning curriculum using emerging technologies does not seem to have been well facilitated by traditional formsof one-time out-of-context professional development (Liu, 2013). Instead, teachers’ curriculum design practiceas a form of professional development has recently gained scholarly attention (Voogt et al., 2015). Despite thisincreased attention, there is scant empirical evidence that demonstrates how teachers develop their knowledgetowards emerging technologies while designing technology-enhanced lessons. Therefore, in this study, I exploredan experienced teacher’s use of VR in an elementary classroom and tried to describe how the teacher developedTPACK while designing VR-based curriculum.MethodsContext of studyIn this study, I worked with one elementary teacher who worked in a private elementary school located in ametropolitan area in South Korea. Mr. Park was a 43 years old male teacher with 19 years of teaching experiencesand was currently working on a doctoral degree. He was a homeroom teacher for 4th graders with 28 students (14boys and 14 girls), that were divided into two groups of 14 students for a class. The teacher was the head of theresearch department at school and had extensive experiences of researching and designing curriculumincorporating various innovations. As part of the study, Mr. Park was introduced to Google Expeditions andsuggested to incorporate it into his teaching. Google Expeditions is a mobile application that provides over 500three-dimensional virtual field trips that can be downloaded on a mobile device and viewed with a low-cost VRheadset.Data collection and analysisThis study is a qualitative one-case case study that has a bounded system of teacher’s work including lessonplanning and teaching, and his interaction with me. Within this bounded system where the teacher designed twounits of lessons, qualitative data was collected in forms of teachers’ written reflections during planning, videorecordings of teacher’s classroom teaching and field notes, and follow-up semi-structured interviews after eachteaching. Also, lesson materials that Dr. David created, such as PowerPoint presentation slides, and studentactivity sheets were also collected. All written reflections, interview transcriptions, and field notes were codedusing a thematic analysis method and triangulated with data from other sources. The results extracted from thepreliminary analysis was reorganized to present the teachers’ development of TPACK.Teacher’s development of TPACK through re-designing VR curriculumICLS 2018 Proceedings1689© ISLSPreparing technologies and reorganizing a physical spaceWhen designing the initial lesson, Mr. Park spent most of his time gathering information and researching aboutVR, and concerning technological aspect of using VR in his classroom. As he searched more about VR, he beganto realize that the use of VR required specific technical specifications and entailed the students’ physicalmovement and reactions to viewing the VR, which needed to be adequately addressed and accommodated. Thetechnological knowledge he developed includes not only the knowledge about VR but also necessary physicalsetup for using VR in his classroom. Based on this knowledge, he reorganized the classroom setting toaccommodate students’ movement during VR experiences as well as prepared two extra chairs at the corner ofthe classroom for students to be able to take a rest when they feel uncomfortable. During the enactment, hecontinuously reflected on some problems emerged, such as Wi-Fi connection, battery shortage, etc. and addressedthem in his second lesson. Instead of having 14 students using VR simultaneously, in the second VR lesson, sevenstudents used VR at a time, and a couple of extra sets of devices were prepared. The classroom was alsoreorganized to have an ample open space in front of the classroom for seven students.Modifying learning content for pedagogical use of VRAnother aspect of teacher knowledge developed was content knowledge with combining pedagogical andtechnological knowledge. During the design of the second lesson for Korean literacy, Mr. Park modified existinglearning objectives and textbook contents to be better aligned with VR contents. While reviewing ‘The use ofinformation' in the Korean elementary curriculum, he realized that their Korean textbook only focused ontraditional media, such as books, newspapers, internet search, and television as information sources. However, hedeveloped his knowledge about a new medium during the design of this lesson and learned that VR is an emergingtechnology that can certainly bring a new type of information in education. Thus, he designed that particularweek’s lesson to include VR and how the information presented in VR is different than the one delivered by othermedia that students were already familiar with.Pedagogical understanding of VR for instructional interventions and student activitiesBased on his understanding of VR and resources available, Mr. Park devised instructional interventions andstudent activities that were implemented in teaching. During the design, he developed the understanding of thepedagogical aspect of using VR. Guided exploration was applied to maximize the purpose of VR experiences byutilizing the guide mode in the Google Expeditions that allowed students to experience the same content with thesame sequence. On the second lesson, a compare/contrast group activity was designed for experiencing twodifferent mediums as information sources.DiscussionThroughout the instructional design process, the teacher was actively involved in curriculum re-design bymodifying a space, content, and activities to incorporate VR. The process of modification was based on the designprocess that follows gathering information, diagnosing what is best for the learners, determining an effectivecourse of instruction, enactment and evaluating the teaching (Kirschner, 2015), which again led to another cycleof the designing process. During the iterative processes of designing and redesigning lessons and activitiesresponding to emerging learners' needs as well as constraints and affordances in educational contexts (Matuk etal., 2015), the teacher developed new TPACK around the use of VR in the elementary classroom.ReferenceKirschner, P. A. (2015). Do we need teachers as designers of technology enhanced learning?. InstructionalScience, 43(2), 309-322.Koehler, M., & Mishra, P. (2009). What is technological pedagogical content knowledge(TPACK)?. Contemporary issues in technology and teacher education, 9(1), 60-70.Liu, S. H. (2013). Teacher professional development for technology integration in a primary school learningcommunity. Technology, Pedagogy and Education, 22(1), 37-54.Matuk, C. F., Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B. S. (2015). Technology to support teachers using evidence from studentwork to customize technology-enhanced inquiry units. Instructional Science, 43(2), 229-257.Voogt, J., Laferrière, T., Breuleux, A., Itow, R. C., Hickey, D. T., & McKenney, S. (2015). Collaborative designas a form of professional development. Instructional Science, 43(2), 259-282.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1690© ISLS