Learning With Songo: The African Board GameRebecca Yvonne Bayeck, Pennsylvania State University, ryb105@psu.eduAbstract: This paper explored learning in the African Songo board game environment tounderstand how learning occurs through audience-player interactions. The study revealed thisspace enhances collaborative and argumentative scaffolding. Further examination of such spaceis important to rethink learning in the digital age.IntroductionThe conception of games as learning spaces is no longer questioned. A growing body of literature demonstratesthat games are environments that facilitates literacies (Steinkuehler, 2007), and useful for understanding learningand literacy (Gee, 2003; Squire, 2005) as it occurs in different cultural contexts and with different learners. Yet,few studies have empirically examined African board games, and particularly SongoSongo (see Figure 1) is an African board game (Bayeck, 2017) from Central Africa, played in countrieslike Cameroon, Congo, Gabon (Meka, 2008). The game is a long board with 14 holes, 70 seeds, played by twoplayers who take turn to consecutively distribute seeds in holes in a clockwise direction (Owona, 2004). A captureis made on the opponent’s side of the board when a pebble falls into a hole with only one, two or three counters(Owona, 2004). In Cameroon, which is the context of this study, the player with 40 seeds wins the game (Meka,2008). Songo represents the Beti/Fang ethnic group philosophical approach to life (Meka, 2008), and the gameplaya true metaphor of social interactions (Owona, 2004).From a sociocultural perspective, learning occurs in social interactions as interactions enhance the coconstruction of ideas (Peppler, Danish, & Phelps, 2013). Board gameplay supports interactions such ascollaboration, and cooperation (Peppler et al., 2013). Given the role of interactions in learning, and boardgameplay, this study explores interactions between players and the audience. The study examines how theaudience participates in the gameplay to start uncovering learning within the space of Songo board game.Figure 1. Songo board game adapted from Owona (2004)Learning and board gamesCompare to research on video games, research on board games and learning is still limited (Carter, Gibbs, &Harrop, 2014). Board games are disregarded in modern game research despite their contribution to thedevelopment of digital games (Carter et al., 2014). Yet, some studies report that these games enhancecollaboration, decision making, computational thinking (Berland & Lee, 2012), and foster communication, andplayers’ social skills (Hromek & Roffey, 2009). However, available research on Songo is mostly descriptive, andmainly in the fields of anthropology, or ethnomathematics (Njock, 1985).MethodFrom a sociocultural perspective, the author explores learning as it occurs through audience-player interactionsin the Songo game space. This microethnography, uses video data in this paper to interpret audience-playerinteractions during gameplay (Derry et al., 2010). Clips of videos were watched multiple times, salient episodesof player-audience interactions selected, transcribed, and discussed as preliminary findings using thematicanalysis. The data were collected in Yaoundé, Cameroon, during a gameplay where six male adults wereinteracting Given its colonial history, Cameroon is a bilingual country, with French and English as officiallanguages, but participants here were all French speakers. The names used in this paper are pseudonyms.FindingsTwo major themes emerged from the preliminary analysis of the video clips: collaborative and argumentativescaffolding.Collaborative scaffolding: occurred multiple times as spectators collaboratively scaffold disadvantagedplayers during the game. As in this excerpt, of Paul and Eric’s gameplay, where Paul in the middle of the gameICLS 2018 Proceedings1611© ISLSlooks at the board, taking more time than usual to make a move, obviously hesitant because he is on the brink tolose the game. At his moment, two spectators intervene:Fonand: Pardon, mets tes pions là, tu vas gagner [please, drop your counters here, you will win].(Paul did not make any move)Vince: ici [here] (Points to the Songo board, and with his hand showed Paul which hole he should play).Acting upon that suggestion, Paul captured three counters from his opponent side. This interactiondemonstrates collaborative scaffolding as Paul received helped from two spectators. This scaffolding is situatedand responds to Paul’s need in the game.Argumentative scaffolding involves discussion between players and the audience where each party triesto justify the decision taken or suggestion given during the game. The excerpt below shows how involvedspectators become during the game giving more suggestions and arguing with the player.Fonand: tu as gagné le match, mets ici, c’est fini [you’ve won the game, drop the counter here, it isfinished] (using his finger to designate a hole on the board)Paul: non, je dois accélerer d’abord avec ceci [no, I must quickly move with this one first](rejects the suggestion and points at a different hole)Fonand: non, mets seulement [no, just drop it](insists on his previous suggestion, and points to the hole where Paul should play from)Doul: mets seulement [just drop it](this spectator insists as Paul hesitates)Fonand: c’etait un but, il devait bien casser [it was a goal, he should have cut it well](reacts to Paul’s rejection of his suggestion, and decision to plays pebbles a different hole)Paul: non il ne faut pas dire ca, c’est que quand on m’indique je m’embrouile [no don’t say that, the factis that I am confused when I am directed]Arguing with Paul, while guiding him evidences complex learning situations that Songo gameplayaffords to participants as they share their knowledge and encourages reflection on a player’s gameplay.ConclusionThe preliminary findings discussed in this paper give insights into forms of interactions important forunderstanding learning in the 21st century and could contribute to the learning sciences rethinking of learning inthe digital age.ReferencesBayeck, R. Y. (2017). A review of five African board games: is there any educational potential?. CambridgeJournal of Education, 1-20.Berland, M., & Lee, V. (2012). Collaborative strategic board games as a site for distributed computationalthinking. International Journal of Game-Based Learning, 1(2), 65–81.Carter, M., Gibbs, M., & Harrop, M. (2014). Drafting an army: The playful pastime of Warhammer 40,000. Gamesand Culture, 9(2), 122-147.Derry, S. J., Pea, R. D., Barron, B., Engle, R. A., Erickson, F., Goldman, R., Sherin, B. L. (2010). Conductingvideo research in the Learning Sciences: Guidance on selection, analysis, technology, and ethics. Journalof the Learning Sciences, 19(1), 3–53.Meka, O. J.M. (2008). Le jeu du songo : Reflets du social. Cameroun : L’HarmattanNjock, G. E. (1985). Mathématiques et environnement socio-culturel en Afrique Noire. Présence Africaine, 3, 321.Peppler, K., Danish, J. A., & Phelps, D. (2013). Collaborative gaming: Teaching children about complex systemsand collective behavior. Simulation & Gaming, 44(5), 683-705.Owona, S. M. (2004). Le jeu de Songo. Paris, France: L’Harmattan.Hromek, R., & Roffey, S. (2009). Promoting social and emotional learning with games: “It’s fun and we learnthings”. Simulation & Gaming, 40(5), 626-644.AcknowledgmentsThis research was funded by the Africana Research Center of the Pennsylvania State University.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1612© ISLS