Empowering Transformative Agency ThroughCritically Experimenting With Arts in Public SchoolingRaymond Kang, University of Illinois at Chicago, rkang2@uic.eduAbstract: The learning sciences face the challenge of conceptualizing how power suffuseseducational contexts. By examining how artists and teacher partnerships design andimplement arts-integrated curricula in public school classrooms, I take a step towardtheorizing how power affects local systems of activity. Through applying lenses from culturalhistorical activity theory, I argue arts-integration provides unique opportunities for students toexercise transformative agency as they critically experiment with bringing their broadersociocultural contexts into their classrooms.IntroductionThis writing serves as an initial reaction to a paper published earlier this year by The Politics of LearningWriting Collective, who challenged “that the rise of nationalism across the globe demands more explicitattention to how power imbues the purposes, mechanisms, and consequences of learning” simultaneouslytroubled our line of inquiry and resonated with the data in which we were immersed (p. 92). The researchprogram presented here occurred at the behest of the Chicago Arts Partnerships in Education (CAPE) focusingon their Artist/Researcher Partnerships (ARP) Program, which pairs artists with teachers to create artsintegrated curricular units for students in CPS. By tracing the trajectory of experimental practices starting fromopportunities for resistance (contradictions in activity) to the ultimate exhibition of their students’ work atConvergence (CAPE’s culminating exhibit for the ARP), the following analysis aims to provide a theoreticalconceptualization of arts-integration practices as an empowering pedagogy that amplifies AR partnerships’ andtheir students’ resistance to power through critical experiments of learning.Theoretical frameworkCultural-historical activity theory (CHAT) supports analyses of power and resistance due to its focus ontheorizing local contexts to support the generation of concrete solutions to unsustainable problems. From apresentation of CHAT as a theoretical framework by Sannino, Engeström and Lemos (2016), I employ threeconceptual lenses in this analysis: (1) object(s) of activity; (2) expansive learning through practicalexperimentation; and (3) transformative agency. First, the defining feature of any human activity is its object, “ahistorically developing entity that is never fully attained or complete … an object carries in itself the pervasivecontradictions of its given socioeconomic formation” (Sannino, Engeström & Lemos, 2016, pp. 602-603). Thesecontradictions require critical experimentation to resolve and transform, manifesting as expansive learning inthe activity system, changing its components, their interrelationships or both. Expansive learning requiresengaging in the practices of resistance and transgression through critical experimentation that abstractsmeaningful tools from the contradictions confronting them. Ultimately, experimenting and expanding withactivity requires empowering transformative agency, where participants “[break] away from the given frame ofaction and [take] the initiative to transform it” (Virkunnen, 2006, as cited in Engeström, Sannino & Virkunnen,2014, p. 124). Within our context of arts-integration in public schooling, this theorization of power and learningserves as the conceptual basis for our research question: How do teachers and artists integrate the arts in theirinstruction to support the development of students’ transformative agency?MethodologyDuring the 2015-2016 and 2016-2017 school years, we conducted a multi-site case study of AR partnershipsparticipating in the ARP for CAPE. This report focuses on the work of two partnerships in two distinct schools,one for each school year of the research conducted to date. As an exploratory and comparative multi-case study,the following analysis applied an analytical framework outlined by Engeström and Sannino (2011) on fourprimary data sources: (1) pre-/post-implementation interviews, (2) classroom observations, (3) student artifacts,and (4) documentation created by the partnerships for their work with CAPE. Within their framework, theauthors identified discursive manifestations of contradictions, two of which are represented here: (1) conflicts,which “take the form of resistance, disagreement, argument and criticism,” (p. 373); and (2) critical conflicts,which are the “situations in which people face inner doubts that paralyze them in front of contradictory motivesunsolvable by the subject alone,” (p. 374). As we argued above, contradictions represent opportunities forICLS 2018 Proceedings1621© ISLScritical experimentation, so it follows that discursive manifestations of these contradictions point to potentialarenas of resistance and transgression for the participating artists and teachers.FindingsFrom the two cases presented here, enacting arts-integrated curricula required teachers and artists to both bringinto focus the inherent contradictions of public schooling while providing students the opportunity toexperiment with the conceptual and artistic tools employed in their curricula. This manifested in (at least) twodistinct ways: (1) by focusing creative activity around addressing potential critical conflicts ofcultural/historical divides, and (2) by expanding learning through experimenting with the conflict of educationalpurpose. The partnership at Sorenson Math and Science Academy (Sorenson; all names are pseudonyms)understood their project as a continuation of earlier confrontations between students and their local history,which challenged them to re-interpret contemporary issues of social justice through musical composition andchoral performance. The director of the A Capella Choir at Sorenson, Robert Arzt, described their curriculum asexploring the question of “What can we learn through the process of investigating unfamiliar cultures throughmusic?” Ultimately, they collectively chose to respond to former presidential candidate Gary Johnson’sinfamous question of “What is Aleppo?” By learning and singing traditional Arabic songs taught to them by anArabic musician, they could collectively resist that representation and powerfully rebuke the ignorance andantipathy towards refugees represented by that candidate. Confronting students with these critical conflicts ofcultural/historical divides while providing them with new tools to transform their position from feelingpowerless (e.g., not being able to vote) to having the agency to publicly resist allowed students to transformtheir performance into a display of solidarity with Syrian refugees. The partnership at McCrae ElementaryAcademy (McCrae) have gradually expanded the object of their curriculum, representing another way that artsintegration has developed students’ transformative agency. The artist of this AR partnership, José AlcidesRodriguez, described the progressive development of their curriculum, Children Communicating SocialActivism Through the Lens of Indigenous Art and Practices, by stating, “In the beginning … [we used art] as asymbol to communicate an idea … [Now we’re asking students] how can we use it now as a form for change?”The gradual integration of new artistic disciplines—here the creation of neirikas, artwork based on indigenousbeadwork—into the traditional curriculum by an artist with indigenous ancestry allowed the partnership toresolve the conflict of educational purpose by expanding the object of students’ learning from a basicexploration of symbolic representation to creating art that critically examines the problems troubling studentsoutside of the classroom. As a result of this expansion, 4th and 5th grade students researched and representedglobal and local issues that they publicly exhibited, challenging audiences to grapple with concerns such as hatecrimes, terrorism, dog fighting, and immigration.ConclusionThe critical and transgressive experimentation of the two AR partnerships here fundamentally involved CAPE’schallenge of re-/presenting students breadth of experiences within the cultural and historical constraints of atraditional schooling. These teacher-artist partnerships empower resistance within their classrooms by providingopportunities for students to develop and enact their transformative agency. The conceptual and practical toolsof artistic disciplines allow for students’ to expand classroom activity, confronting and resisting the normalizingpower that consistently marginalizes, censors, and dismisses them. By deliberately designing curricula thatexpose students to underlying contradictions inherent in their classroom situations, we can allow students toexercise their agency to resist the normalization of the world as it is and transform it into the new possibilitiesthey imagine and create.ReferencesEngeström, Y. & Sannino, A. (2011). Discursive manifestations of contradictions in organizational changeefforts: A methodological framework. Journal of Organizational Change Management, 24(3): 368387.Engeström, Y., Sannino, A. & Virkkunen, J. (2014). On the methodological demands of formative interventions.Mind, Culture & Activity, 21(2), 118-128.Sannino, A., Engeström, Y. & Lemos, M. (2016). Formative interventions for expansive learning andtransformative agency. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25(4), 599-633.The Politics of Learning Writing Collective. (2017). The learning sciences in a new era of U.S. nationalism.Cognition & Instruction, 35(2), 91-102.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1622© ISLS