Design Features for Computer-Supported Complex SystemsLearning and Teaching in High School Science ClassroomsSusan A. Yoon, University of Pennsylvania, yoonsa@gse.upenn.eduEmma Anderson, University of Pennsylvania, emmaa@gse.upenn.eduJessica Koehler-Yom, University of Pennsylvania, jkoehl@gse.upenn.eduEric Klopfer, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, klopfer@mit.eduJosh Sheldon, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, jsheldon@mit.eduDaniel Wendel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, djwendel@mit.eduIlana Schoenfeld, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ilanasch@mit.eduHal Scheintaub, Governor's Academy, hscheintaub@govsacademy.orgMurat Oztok, Lancaster University, oztokm@gmail.comChad Evans, University of Pennsylvania, echad@sas.upenn.eduAbstract: While research on teaching and learning about complex systems has achieved solidgrounding in the learning sciences, few educational studies have focused on articulatingdesign features for classroom implementation that can serve a modular purpose for buildingcurricular and instructional experiences. Furthermore, despite the fact that several studiesdescribe important roles for teachers in constructing successful classroom learningexperiences, only a few of them examine how teachers’ instructional practices, knowledge,and beliefs influence student learning outcomes and the extent to which teachers are interestedand willing to teach through complex systems approaches. Furthermore, we do not know whatsupports teachers themselves say that they need to teach about complex systems in theirclassrooms. In this study, we present a curriculum and instruction framework that outlineshow teaching and learning about complex systems in high school science classroom contextscan be done. We articulate the features of the framework and provide examples of how theframework is translated into practice. We follow with evidence from an exploratory studyconducted with 10 teachers and over 300 students aimed at understanding change in teachers’instructional practices; the extent to which students learned from the activities; what teachers’perceptions were in terms of utility and usability; and what other supports teachers needed.Keywords: Innovative Design Approach, Teaching, Science Education, Learning OutcomesIntroductionThe study of complex systems in natural and social sciences has become increasingly essential to understandingdisciplinary and interdisciplinary content and practices (The National Academies, 2009). The study of complexsystems is also featured prominently in the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) for K12 science in theU.S. Complex systems can be found in structures and behaviors in all aspects of our world. At the micro scale,an example of a complex system is a single fertilized egg developing to create differentiated cells thateventually become a human form. Macro-scale complex systems include businesses, cities, animal populations,and ecosystems. Although complex systems vary in their physical components, a common feature of allcomplex systems is the presence of multiple interconnected elements, parts, or individuals that communicate innonlinear ways. The interactions among the parts form a collective network of relationships that exhibitemergent properties not observable at subsystem levels. When perturbations occur, the network may selforganize in unpredictable ways, allowing new properties to emerge.While research on teaching and learning about complex systems has achieved solid grounding in thelearning sciences (Hmelo-Silver & Kafai, 2011), few educational studies have focused on articulating designfeatures for classroom implementation that can serve a modular purpose for building complex systems curricularand instructional experiences. Furthermore, despite the fact that several studies describe important roles forteachers in constructing successful classroom learning experiences (e.g., Perkins & Grotzer, 2005), only a fewof them examine how teachers’ instructional practices, knowledge, and beliefs influence student learningoutcomes (Yoon et al., 2013; 2015; Randler & Bogner, 2009) and the extent to which teachers are interested andwilling to teach through complex systems approaches. Furthermore, we do not know what supports teachersthemselves say that they need to teach about complex systems in their classrooms. Addressing these gaps willbe critical in the next few years in order to meet NGSS requirements.CSCL 2015 Proceedings102© ISLSIn this paper, we respond to these needs by presenting a curriculum and instruction framework thatoutlines how teaching and learning about complex systems in high school science classroom contexts can bedesigned and implemented. We articulate the features of the framework and provide examples of how theframework is translated into practice for classroom implementation and for professional development (PD). Wefollow with evidence from an exploratory study aimed at understanding: 1) To what extent teachers thought thePD was usable; 2) To what extent teachers’ instructional practices changed as a result of participating in the PDbased on the framework; and 3) To what extent students learned from these curriculum and instructionactivities. We also provide information in the discussion about what other supports teachers felt they needed.Background: Complex systems in science educationOver the last 15 years, about 65 empirical studies have appeared in journal articles on the topic of complexsystems in K12 education and of those, a large majority, have been geared toward science learning. Although anextensive review of the focus of these studies is beyond the scope of this paper, there are a number of themesthat emerge in the research base such as understanding how students reason about complex systems (Assaraf etal., 2013; Levy & Wilensky, 2008; Grotzer, 2012), pedagogical approaches to supporting learning (Yoon, 2008,Hmelo-Silver et al., 2000), computational tools to build complex systems understanding (Yoon, 2011, Klopferet al., 2009; Azevedo et al., 2005); and models for curriculum construction (Danish, 2014; Gobert & Clement,1999). Despite this prevalence, no studies exist that investigate how pedagogical approaches, computationaltools, and models for curriculum can work in the situated context of the science classroom where variables suchas ability to address content standards are primary concerns for teachers. Likewise, very few studies haveexamined the role of the teacher in influencing student-learning outcomes. In a quasi-experimental studycomparing two different instructional approaches to teaching complex ecological content, one study by Randlerand Bogner (2009) showed that the teacher’s teaching style had a strong impact on student academic learning.However, this study stands as a rare example of research investigating the teacher’s role and incidentally wasnot the focal goal of the study. In other science education research, we do know that teacher attitudes, beliefs,knowledge, and skills can significantly influence the success of an intervention and even whether anintervention is adopted (Jones & Carter, 2007; Wallace & Kang, 2004). Clearly, more research is needed thatincludes designs to incorporate classroom and teacher variables to understand how new reform programs likethe NGSS can work to improve science education in real classrooms.To address this need, we constructed a complex systems curriculum and instruction (C&I) framework,in which teacher knowledge of context variables and content standard demands factored prominently in thedesign along side tools and practices known to improve student complex systems understanding. There are 4major categories of the framework that are additionally aligned with the literature on needs and best practicesfor STEM teaching and learning. The first category is Curricular Relevance, which focuses on developing 21stcentury competencies (NRC, 2012), ensuring standards alignment (Desimone, 2009), and collaboration withteachers to promote teacher ownership (Ertmer et al., 2012, Mueller, 2008; Thompson et al., 2013). The secondcategory, Cognitively-Rich Pedagogies, involves pedagogies that address situated needs in individualclassrooms (Penuel et al., 2011), social construction of knowledge through collaboration and argumentation(Osborne, 2010), and constructionist learning by constructing models (Kafai, 2006). The third category, Toolsfor Teaching and Learning, builds knowledge with computational modeling tools (Epstein, 2008), teacherguides and student packets that provide scaffolds for learning (Quintana et al., 2004), and off-computerparticipatory simulations to support students’ understanding of modeling and complex systems (Colella, et al.,2000). The fourth category, Content Expertise, builds deeper content understanding in complex systems (Yoon,2008), biology (Lewis & Wood-Robinson, 2000), and computational thinking (NRC, 2010).Based on the framework, our project engages teachers and students in learning experiences that buildknowledge of scientific practices, complex systems, and biology using computational models. The project hasbuilt instructional sequences for five high school biology units – Genetics, Evolution, Ecology, the HumanBody, and Animal Systems. Participants use an agent-based modeling platform called StarLogo Nova thatcombines graphical blocks-based programming with a 3-D game-like interface. The curricular materials taketwo or three days to complete. Examples of curricular and instructional activities built on this framework arefound in Table 1.Following the construction of the tools and curricula, we trained teachers in summer and school yearPD workshops. We worked closely with teachers to understand implementation challenges and iterativelyredesigned project resources to meet their classroom needs. In the next section, we discuss the context of the PDunderpinned by the C&I framework, and provide evidence from an exploratory study that illustrates its impactin the classroom.CSCL 2015 Proceedings103© ISLSTable 1: BioGraph C&I framework categories and activitiesBioGraph CategoriesActivities/StrategiesCurricular relevanceCurricular emphasis on building 21st-century skills in problem solving, criticalthinking, and self-directed learning.Close alignment with content, practices, and crosscutting themes in the NGSS (e.g.,systems).Collaboration with teachers as research partners through continual feedback aboutchallenges in classroom implementation and collective problem solving to improvethe project and to promote optimal implementation. Peer sharing facilitated throughan online database where teachers post lesson plans and comments on implementationdetails.Cognitively-richConsideration of and response to situated teaching contexts such as high ESLpedagogiespopulations (e.g., generation of more visual aids to improve cognitive engagement).Curriculum and instructional strategies anchored in social constructivist pedagogies(e.g., students working in teams co-constructing ideas through argumentation).Using StarLogo blocks-based graphical programming language with a low-levellearning threshold, students learn to build simulations to construct understanding ofscientific phenomena.Tools for teaching andStudent interaction with models that are visual representations of scientific ideas.learningVisualization of dynamic processes of systems, such as self-organization andemergence, using StarLogo models. Visualization of system states at multiple scales.Student experiments using the models, collection and analysis of data, and drawingevidence-based conclusions.Easy-to-use teacher guides and student activity packs to promote teacher and studentautonomy. Teacher guides for adapting and extending practice.Off-computer participatory simulations to engage teachers and students physically insystems that provide additional sensory and cognitive input for learning.Content ExpertisePopular and academic literature about complex systems for teachers and students.Short movies, PowerPoint presentations, and detailed definition lists to developsystems understanding in the classroom.Student interactions with StarLogo models that explore biology content in detail.Some strategically selected content (e.g., evolution) to remediate known robustmisconceptions.Models set up to allow students to explore the program that executes the model withthe goal of developing skills related to computation, such as algorithmic thinking.Some models that require students to manipulate the program and construct their ownsystems.MethodologyContextIn order to ensure that the utility of the project’s resources could be optimally investigated, we also wanted totake care in constructing PD experiences that would support the efforts. To that end, we designed and conductedthe PD following professional judgments about what constitutes state of the art characteristics of high qualityPD: (a) aligned content; (b) active learning opportunities; (c) coherence with professional demands; (d) at least20 hours in duration and spread over a semester; and (e) collective participation of teachers from the sameschool, grade, or subject (Desimone, 2009; Garet, Porter, Desimone, Birman, & Yoon, 2001). Of these fivecharacteristics, we considered active learning to be particularly important. Due to the well-documented, steeplearning curve teachers experience in adopting new technologies in their classroom (Aldunate & Nussbaum,2013; Ertmer et al., 2012), we emphasized exposure to computers (Mueller et al., 2008) and extensive trainingon computers (Pierson, 2001). We also incorporated the other characteristics judged to be important for a qualityintervention. For example, we achieved coherence with professional demands by providing close teacherresearcher collaboration. We delivered 40 hours of face-to-face PD. We also focused on collective participationby working only with high school biology teachers and, in some cases, working with several teachers from theCSCL 2015 Proceedings104© ISLSsame school. Figure 3 provides the scope and sequence of professional development activities conducted in thesummer 2012 workshop. In this exploratory study, we were interested in understanding what teachers learnedand understood about the utility of the activities in terms of classroom practice and whether students’ learningimproved.Monday8:00 - 8:158:15 - 8:308:30 - 8:458:45 - 9:009:00 - 9:159:15 - 9:309:30 - 9:459:45 - 10:0010:00 - 10:1510:15 - 10:3010:30 - 10:4510:45 - 11:0011:00 - 11:1511:15 - 11:3011:30 - 11:4511:45 - 12:0012:00 - 12:1512:15 - 12:3012:30 - 12:4512:45 - 1:001:00 - 1:151:15 - 1:301:30 - 1:451:45 - 2:002:00 - 2:152:15 - 2:302:30 - 2:452:45 - 3:003:00 - 3:153:15 - 3:303:30 - 3:453:45 - 4:00TuesdayWednesdayThursdayFridayRoom Open - Snacks and CoffeeWelcome andParticipatory Sim - PaperCatchersComplexity Intro Videoand Complex SystemsMatrix with BioGraphExamplesDifferentiation Sessions (Teacher Presenter)Welcome andWelcome andWelcome andParticipatory Sim - Red Participatory Sim - Angles Participatory Sim - Kids asWhy Construct? WhyArgue?Why Model?Plan Admin Day andScale UpWelcome andParticipatory Sim Gamblers DilemmaCalendaring SessionResearch FindingsBREAKBuffet of Complex SystemsResources/Pedagogy andStarLogo Nova - Catching StarLogo Nova - Ecology Lesson Plan ConstructionFliesActivityLunchLunchArgumentation andCollaboration ResourcesLunch - Radix DemoWorking Groups Differentiation andAssessmentLunch - StatOnline Resource ForumLunchArgumentation andBioGraph Activity & NextBioGraph Activity andBioGraph Activity andCollaboration ResourcesGeneration ScienceNext Generation Science Next Generation Science Sharing of AssessmentStudent Assessment and Standards - EnzymesStandards - SugarStandards - Evolutionand Differentiation WorkData CollectionTransport (Argumentation)(Argumentation)(Argumentation)Further ComplexityParallel Session 1 ModelAssessment (WorkingAssessing BioGraphBuilding/ProgrammingGroup)/ Parallel Session 2Students' ArgumentationExtensions - Differentiated- Differentiation ofSkillsSession for TeachersLessons (Working Group)Exit Surveys and NextSteps Check ListCelebration!Daily Wrap-UpColor Coding KeyBluePedagogyGreenOrangeComplex SystemsArgumentationComputationThinking/ModelingBreak/LunchResearchWrap-Up/CelebrationPurpleRedTealWhiteFigure 1. Scope and sequence of professional development activities in the summer workshopParticipantsWe recruited 10 teachers from Boston area public schools– seven females and three males. The teachers camefrom a diverse set of schools. For example, the percent of students who were from minority race/ethnic groupsranged from 3 to 75; the percent who were eligible for free or reduced priced lunch ranged from 11 to 83; andthe percent who scored at the proficient or advanced level on the state standardized science test ranged from 54to 89. On average, the teachers had 7.7 years of teaching experience, with a range of 3 to 18 years. We collectedstudent data from a total of 352 students (mainly comprised of freshman biology students).Data collection and analysisWe conducted a mixed methods evaluation of the project implementation after the summer 2012 PD workshopand throughout the 2012 and 2013 school year. We collected surveys, interviews, and classroom observations ofstudents and teachers to investigate the research questions. First, to investigate teachers’ perceptions of theutility of project resources, we administered an 18-item Likert-scale and 8 short answer usability survey at theend of the summer workshop. Questions probed whether they believed the resources were useful to them,whether they would recommend the workshop to other colleagues, and whether they thought the PD wassuccessful. Simple means are reported to illustrate teachers’ perceptions of usability and interest in the project.To understand how teachers’ instructional practices changed, we used two data sources, preintervention and post-intervention surveys administered to students, which probed the extent to which theyparticipated in learning through computers and simulations, and student learning using scientific practices thataligned with the project goals. The survey encompassed 44 items on a 5-point Likert-scale that ranged from noparticipation (1) to a lot of participation (5). A repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was applied toCSCL 2015 Proceedings105© ISLSthe data to understand impact on instructional practices. We also administered year-end interviews with teachersto gather information about their perceptions of the project resources, how their knowledge and skills improved,to determine what aspects did or did not contribute to this improvement, and to understand how to redesignproject resources to help teachers further improve. The interviews lasted for 45 minutes and were qualitativelymined by the research team to probe for indicators of project impact.To determine the extent to which students learned while participating in the project, we administeredtwo surveys to students. The first was a 14-point multiple-choice test that measured biology content related tothe project. The second was two open-ended questions that provided scenarios about changes in biologicalcomplex systems. Students were asked to rationalize why the changes had occurred. Responses were scored ona scale of 1 (not complex) to 3 (completely complex) in four different categories of complex systemscomponents (e.g., emergence of new properties at different scales). Repeated measures ANOVAs were alsoconducted on the data. In selected classrooms, student focus group interviews were also held to collectinformation about what they thought about learning biology through project activities and tools. Although moreextensive mining of the interview response data is yet to be completed, we report on initial themes that emerged.ResultsEvidence that the PD was usable by teachersResponses on all 18 Likert-scale items ranged between 4 (agree) and 5 (strongly agree). For example, teachersfelt the workshop topics were relevant to the grades they taught (5); the information presented was useful tothem (4.9); the information could be put into practice immediately (4.6); instructional guides were useful to theirown learning (4.8); the exposure to agent-based modeling technology was useful to them (4.9); they would beable to use ideas about complex systems in their teaching (4.6); and they planned to share complex systemsideas with their colleagues (4.7). When asked whether they believed the PD was successful (and if so, why),teachers overwhelmingly responded positively referencing aspects of the PD they thought were particularlyimportant in their learning:“Ample instructional supplies and resources.”“Provision for teacher input and collaboration; great materials and instructional team.”“Practicing each activity and facilitation.”“I have used many simulations before but they don’t drive home the major ideas. TheStarLogo lessons, I feel do. Our hands-on activities were extremely helpful.”“I learned a lot and will be able to confidently implement the program because we ran throughand discussed them all, we talked a lot about…complex systems…”Evidence of teachers’ instructional practices and improved knowledge and skillsOn the survey that investigated students’ classroom experiences in the two main project factors, learningthrough computers and simulations (α = .872), and student learning using scientific practices (α = .739), studentpopulation responses indicated modest but significant gains in their classroom experiences. On the 5-point scale,responses showed an increase from 3.0 to 3.5 (p < .001) for learning through computers and simulations and 3.4to 3.6 (p < .001) for learning using scientific practices. In teacher interviews, teachers felt that theseinstructional changes did not come at the expense of covering their standard science curricula, as evidenced inthe following interview response from one teacher: “I feel like [with] the standards alignment…it was reallyeasy to substitute out something that was old with something that was new. That was very easy.”To understand how teachers’ knowledge and skills changed or improved, we asked teachers in theyear-end interviews to talk about which of the project’s curriculum and instruction components were the mostimportant for their biology students to learn from and which component they used the most in class and why.Teachers said that learning about how to use the visualization tools to help students learn the science contentwas important. For example, one teacher remarked, “It’s really hard for the kids to kind of visualize andunderstand…but a lot of them kind of had that aha or I get it now moment.” Other teachers discussed how theiruse of scientific practices, such as argumentation, changed. One teacher stated,So when they come to me, it’s the first time that they see it. And by now, I’ve got most kidsstating a claim, gathering evidence and understanding some difference between evidence andreasoning…and actually the thing that has helped the most this year on it, is that I amrequiring all answers to questions that I ask in that framework, even if the framework isn't thegreatest for the question, I am actually getting better answers from the students.CSCL 2015 Proceedings106© ISLSTeachers also talked about pedagogical benefits and how the project helped them to work withmodeling tools effectively:I loved the tools, the StarLogo for modeling and for visualization and simulation. It wasfantastic because…a lot of times…if you said here's StarLogo, I wouldn’t have had a clue onhow to develop any kind of plans or lessons or inquiry based activities. So to have them startoff the simulations and then to go backwards and do the modeling…[was great].Overall, teacher interviews unanimously demonstrated interest in the project for themselves and their students.They identified four main areas of benefit for student learning: (a) student-centered scientific investigations; (b)interaction with computer models; (c) development of evidence-based reasoning skills through argumentation;and (d) multiple resources for developing complex systems understanding (e.g., models).All 10 teachers have requested opportunities for continued involvement beyond the life of the grant,signaling strong support for the program. More concretely, in their interviews, they identified five affordancesof the project related to their own learning and engagement: (a) relevant and multiple resources to engage in realcontent learning and pedagogical training; (b) access to expert facilitation; (c) peer sharing and collaboration;(d) numerous opportunities to develop teaching skills through hands-on participation and practice; and (e) asense of identity and community aimed at reforming science education.Evidence that students showed learning gains in biology and complex systemsunderstandingFor the 14-point biology content test, student scores increased significantly from pre- to post-assessment—froma mean of 6.67 to 8.40 where F(1, 344) = 32.23, p < .001 and an effect size = .38 (Cohen’s d). Students’complex systems understanding measured through the two open-ended questions also showed positivesignificant growth moving from a mean of 1.48 to 1.61, where F(1, 350) = 96.03, p < .001 an effect size = .39(Cohen’s d). We do not know how much of this gain would have occurred in the absence of the interventionparticularly for the biology content test because we did not have a comparison group. We are also aware that theactual gains in their scores on both measures were relatively small. However, we believe that the moderatesignificant gains in effect sizes are encouraging results especially for complex systems understanding as thecurriculum was new to students and teachers.From student focus group interviews, several themes emerged that demonstrate the utility of the projectactivities and curricula to support the development of complex systems understanding. Almost all studentsmentioned the affordances of interactivity, repeatability, student-centeredness, and visualizations of thesimulations. The more interesting ideas in the interviews came in the form of students’ abilities to transferknowledge of complex systems to explain other phenomenon. For example, one student states:Well I think they’re trying to say everyone or every living thing has a part, and the partsinteract as we have like kind of a system. Everyone has their own initiative of what they aretrying to accomplish or do, or how they work. Then everything working together creates onething or not even just one thing. It has a lot of different effects in their own ways.Here the student makes inferences about the general nature of systems that she gleaned from herparticipation in the project’s collective learning activities. She later states:Well every time we did a lab it was like saying - the one about the lactose…you had one partthat started something, but connected to another part, and all of these parts connecting madeup the system that did one thing. Every part was programmed to move a certain thing or havethis one objective, but all combined they did one overall thing that wasn’t necessarily whateach part did.This student is articulating the complex systems ideas of emergence, self-organization, and scale,which are essential components of complex systems understanding.CSCL 2015 Proceedings107© ISLSDiscussionEducation has become ripe with policy, scholarship, and resources to support the study of complex systems. Forexample, all seven of the crosscutting concepts in the new NGSS reflect important aspects of complex systemssuch as Scale, and Structure and Function. This has raised challenges for educators who must follow the NGSSalongside other contextual and professional demands. Thus, understanding optimal methods for constructingeducational experiences is critical. Equally important in this effort is focusing on teacher change, their role inadopting these reforms, and how they can be further supported in the classroom.Although a good deal of research has been conducted in K12 science education on various complexsystems-related topics, surprisingly few frameworks and studies have considered teaching contexts and teachers.In this paper, we introduced a framework for teaching and learning about complex systems that addressed needsin designing approaches for classroom implementation and teacher change in addition to designing activities forstudent learning. Working closely in PD activities with our teachers, we gathered information about whethertheir instructional practices changed and investigated reasons for how and why they changed. The resultsindicated that teachers used more computers and simulations and also increased the use of scientific practices intheir instruction. They identified several affordances of the project’s design in supporting their own learning,which included relevant and multiple resources, peer sharing, and hands-on participation and practice. Studentlearning in both biology and complex systems content significantly improved and teachers collectively said thatproject resources were useful to them in their classroom practice. However, in interviews, teachers said that theythemselves learned about complex systems but acknowledged that they needed more time to learn how toreinforce the ideas in their lessons. Teachers discussed a similar need for more time to become pedagogicallyconfident about programming the StarLogo simulations and, for some teachers, fully implementing theargumentation process. We continued to work with teachers to develop more resources to help them teach inthese three areas. Teachers also shared their teaching strategies with each other in Saturday PD sessions duringthe school year. Teachers told us that these opportunities to continue practicing integrating the ideas into theirinstruction, to access more resources, and to learn from other teachers were invaluable to their growth.As we move forward in adopting and translating the NGSS into classroom experiences, the teacher’sknowledge, skills, and attitudes will be crucial to successful implementation. Working as research and designcollaborators with us, teachers provide invaluable feedback about their perceptions of the utility of the resourcesand the value added to instruction. Importantly, they provide essential information about how to improve thedesign based on their professional and contextual expertise, which we must incorporate into futureimplementation iterations if reforms are to take a hold in the science classroom. We believe that the significanceof this study lies not only in articulating design features that work in concert with each other to improve studentlearning and teacher instructional outcomes but also in examining teachers as the recipients of these complexsystems reforms which research has yet to seriously investigate apart from one or two studies (e.g., Randler &Bogner, 2009).ReferencesAinsworth, S., & Van Labeke, N. (2004). Multiple forms of dynamic representation. Learning and Instruction,14, 241-255.Assaraf, O. B., Dodick, J., & Tripto, J. (2013). High school students’ understanding of the human body system.Research in Science Education, 43, 33-56.Azevedo, R., Gromley, J.G., Winters, F.I., Moos, D.C., & Greene, J.A. (2005). Adaptive human scaffoldingfacilitates adolescents’ self-regulated learning with hypermedia. Instructional Science, 33, 381-412.Danish, J. (2014). Applying an activity theory lens to designing instruction for learning about the structure,behavior, and function of a honeybee system. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 23, 100-148.Desimone, L. (2009). Improving impact studies of teachers’ professional development: Toward betterconceptualizations and measures. Educational Researcher, 38(3), 181-199.Colella, V., Klopfer, E. & Resnick, M. (2001). Adventures in Modeling, Teachers College Press, New York.Epstein, J. (2008). 'Why Model?'. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 11(4)12.Ertmer, P.A., Ottenbreit-Leftwich, A.T., Sendurur, E., & Sendurur, P. (2012). Teacher beliefs and technologyintegration practices: A critical relationship. Computers and Education, 59, 423-435.Gobert, J.D., & Clement, J.C. (1999). Effects of student-generated diagrams versus student-generatedsummaries on conceptual understanding of causal and dynamic knowledge in plate tectonics. Journalof Research in Science Teaching, 36 (1), 39-53.Grotzer, T.A. (2012). Learning causality in a complex world: Understandings of consequence. Lanham, MD:Rowman Littlefield.CSCL 2015 Proceedings108© ISLSHegarty, M. (2004). Dynamic visualizations and learning: Getting to the difficult questions. Learning andInstruction, 14, 343-351. doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2004.06.007Hmelo, C. E., Holton, D., & Kolodner, J. L. (2000). Designing to learn about complex systems. The Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 9, 247–298.Hmelo-Silver, C., & Kafai, Y. (2011). Editor’s note. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20, 1-2.Lowe, R., & Ploetzner, R. (2004). Dynamic visualizations and learning. Learning and Instruction, 14, 235-240.Mueller, J., Wood, E., Willoughby, T., Ross, C., & Specht, J. (2008). Identifying discriminating variablesbetween teachers who fully integrate computers and teachers with limited integration. Computers &Education, 51, 1523-1537.Jacobson, M. (2001). Problem solving, cognition, and complex systems: Differences between experts andnovices. Complexity, 6(3), 41-49.Jones, G. & Carter, G. (2007). Science teacher attitudes and beliefs. In S.K. Abell & N.G. Lederman (Eds.),Handbook of Research on Science Education (pp. 1067-1104). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence ErlbaumAssociates.Klopfer, E., Scheintaub, H., Huang, W., Wendel, D., & Roque, R. (2009). The simulation cycle: combininggames, simulations, engineering and science using StarLogo TNG. E-Learning, 6(1), 71-96.Levy, S.T., & Wilensky, U. (2008). Inventing a “mid level” to make ends meet: Reasoning between the levels ofcomplexity. Cognition and Instruction, 26(1), 1-47.National Research Council. (2012). Education for Life and Work: Developing TransferableKnowledge and Skills in the 21st Century. Committee on Defining Deeper Learning and 21st Century Skills,James W. Pellegrino and Margaret L. Hilton, Editors. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.OECD (2011), Lessons from PISA for the United States, Strong Performers and Successful Reformers inEducation, OECD Publishing. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264096660-enPerkins, D.N., & Grotzer, T.A. (2005). Dimensions of causal understanding:the role of complex causal modelsin students’ understanding of science. Studies in Science Education, 41, 117-166.Pierson, M.E. (2001). Technology integration practice as a function of pedagogical expertise. Journal ofResearch on Technology in Education, 33(4), 413-430.Randler, C., & Bogner, F. (2007). Efficacy of two different instructional methods involving complex ecologicalcontent. International Journal of Science Mathematics Education, 7, 315-337.Schnotz, W., & Lowe, R. (2008). A unified view of learning from animated and static graphics. In R. Lowe &W. Schnotz (Eds.), Learning with animation: Research and design implications (pp. 304-356). NewYork: Cambridge University Press.The National Academies (2009). Keck Futures Initiative: Complex Systems: Task Group Summaries. TheNational Academies Press: Washington, D.C.Uttal, K., & O’Doherty, K. (2008). Comprehending and learning from ‘Visualizations’: A developmentalperspective. In J. Gilbert, M. Reiner, & M. Nakhleh (Eds.), Visualization: Theory and practice inscience education (pp. 53-72). Dordrecht: Springer.Thompson, J, Windschitl, M., & Braaten, M. (2013). Developing a theory of ambitious early-career teacherpractice. American Educational Research Journal, 50(3), 574-615.Vavra, K., Janjic-Watrich, V., Loerke, K., Phillips, L., Norris, S., & Macnab, J. (2011). Visualization in scienceeducation. Alberta Science Education Journal, 41(1), 22-30.Wallace, C. & Kang, N. (2004). An investigation of experienced secondary science teachers' beliefs aboutinquiry: An examination of competing belief sets. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(9),936-960.Yoon, S. (2008). An evolutionary approach to harnessing complex systems thinking in the science andtechnology classroom. International Journal of Science Education, 30(1), 1–32.Yoon, S. A. (2011). Using social network graphs as visualization tools to influence peer selection decisionmaking strategies to access information about complex socioscientific issues. Journal of the LearningSciences, 20(4), 549-588.Yoon, S., Koehler-Yom, J., Anderson, E., Lin, J., & Klopfer, E. (accepted). Using an adaptive expertise lens tounderstand the quality of teachers’ classroom implementation of computer-supported complex systemscurricula in high school science. Research in Science and Technology Education.Yoon, S., Klopfer, E., Wang, J., Sheldon, J., Wendel, D., Schoenfeld, I., Scheintaub, H., & Reider, D. (2013).Designing to improve biology understanding through complex systems in high school classrooms: Nosimple matter! In the proceedings of the Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, Madison,Wisconsin.CSCL 2015 Proceedings109© ISLS