Making Learning Journeys Visible:Towards Supporting Collective Reflection on Graduate AttributesRoberto Martinez-Maldonado, Theresa D. Anderson, Iván Silva Feraud and Simon Buckingham ShumRoberto.Martinez-Maldonado@uts.edu.au, Theresa.Anderson@uts.edu.au, Ivan.SilvaFeraud@uts.edu.au,Simon.BuckinghamShum@uts.edu.auConnected Intelligence Centre, University of Technology Sydney, AustraliaAbstract: Although some computer-based systems exist to facilitate the management ofcapstone projects, it is not really clear how learners can be supported to reflect on the connectionbetween their (past and ongoing) learning experiences, and the graduate attributes (GAs) theyare intended to develop. This paper proposes a technological infrastructure, and the epistemicand social scaffolding, for students to collectively reflect on how each of their learning productsgenerated across different units of study contribute to the development of their GAs, in light ofa final capstone project. We illustrate the feasibility of our approach through the authenticdeployment of the toolset in an immersive environment for supporting teams of final yearstudents to reflect on their GAs development.Introduction and related workCapstone projects and units of study are one common to higher education (HE) degrees across universities as theyprovide students the opportunity to demonstrate their capacity to integrate knowledge and skills acquired andapply them to real-world problems (Holdsworth et al., 2009). Capstones are commonly conducted in the finalyear of a degree to provide the culmination of theoretical and applied work to support learners in successfullyjoining an increasingly uncertain, evolving and competitive workforce (Dunlap, 2005). Thus, capstones oftenbecome critical for integrating previous learning (Fernandez, 2006), assessing progress (van Acker & Bailey,2011), and reflecting on the graduate attributes (GAs) development (Ras et al., 2007). GAs are a set of genericskills that universities define for developing work ready graduates by providing coherence across all the units ofstudy within a degree (Hager & Holland, 2007). A critical and productive activity identified by Hage and Holland(2007) to develop GAs is to induce learners to reflect on their previous learning experiences which can enablethem to make visible the tacit knowledge generated by (sometimes) unconscious actions during (apparentlyisolated) learning tasks, in light of the current practical work and learning context.Figure 1. Left: Participatory Timeline collaborative interface as a high-level view of learners’ posts acrossunits of study. Right: Tablet interface to see blog posts details and associate them to specific Gas.According to Learning Sciences and classic educational literature, reflection is multi-faceted. For example,reflecting on previous learning experiences allows the learner to revise or even change the interpretation of themeaning of those experiences (Mezirow, 1990). Reflecting on past learning experiences can also promotelearners’ complex sensemaking through the extraction and articulation of both the content and the skills that werebuilt, which can then be transferred to future situations if similar conditions are likely to be faced (Kolodner etal., 1998). Whilst some reflection is best done individually (Boud et al., 1985), reflecting as a social activity isalso enhanced, particularly when learning was facilitated in that social context (Bell & Davis, 2000). It is thus fairto say that it makes sense for capstone experiences to have a strong reflection component because learners areexpected to apply what they have previously learnt to contexts beyond the original situations in which learninghappened (Holdsworth, et al., 2009; Ras, et al., 2007). In fact, several tools and pedagogical approaches arecommonly put in place for encouraging learners to reflect in capstones, including keeping journals (Hmelo-Silver,ICLS 2018 Proceedings941© ISLS2004), creating wiki pages (Ras, et al., 2007), or writing reports (Holdsworth, wet al., 2009). However, whilstthese may work well for promoting individual reflection, it has been stated that more scaffolded mechanisms areneeded to ensure effective collective reflection (Hmelo-Silver, 2004). Similarly, there exist tools that support themapping of curriculum and the learning designs with GAs (Thompson, 2007), but these are often focused onmapping assessment tasks with GAs rather than focusing on promoting learners’ reflection. In sum, it is not clearhow students can reflect on the connection between their previous learning experiences and the development oftheir GAs, particularly in their final year, once they have passed through various units of study that sometimesmay appear disconnected from a learner point of view.In this paper, we describe our first steps towards providing the toolset and the epistemic scaffolding tomake learning evidence across units of study visible, interactive and traceable for promoting collective reflectionin terms of GA development. We present a fully functional prototype which was designed in close collaborationwith the coordination team of a university degree and deployed in an authentic final year capstone experience.The contribution of the paper is the rationale behind the design of the tool and its associated pedagogicalscaffolding. We illustrate the potential usefulness of the tool by briefly describing the preliminary experience ofa team of final year students reflecting retrospectively and prospectively on their GAs development, with the toolbeing deployed in a technology-rich immersive environment.Learning context and participatory consultationAlthough capstones are orchestrated differently in each HE degree, we decided to understand and define thereflection needs of learners in a specific learning context: a Master’s degree of Data Science offered by theUniversity of Technology Sydney (UTS). This is a 2-year full-time degree aimed at equipping graduates with anunderstanding of the potential of analytics to transform practice through industry experiences, real-world projectsand self-directed learning. The degree features two final year capstone units of study where learners are asked tobe involved in independent online work, mentoring, peer feedback and industry experience. A common practicein this degree is that learners are asked to keep a (WordPress) personal blog during their whole degree. Blogginghas been increasingly used in HE to facilitate student collaborative learning (Kuo et al., 2017), thus this is not anuncommon pedagogical practice. In this degree the learning designs of most units of study include variousblogging-based tasks. At the beginning of their enrolment, learners get access to an open peer-sourced WordPressmultisite platform where they can individually produce educational resources, generate academic reports,comment on each other’s pieces of work, or share reflections. The blogging platform is also intended to functionas a repository of community-knowledge; and as an environment for engaging peers and industry contacts toshowcase the development of the five GAs of this degree. Close consultation with the degree coordinator and theteam of teachers in charge of the final year capstone projects led to the identification of the followingconsiderations that the design of the reflection toolset and pedagogical scaffolding must consider:1. It is critical for learners to engage with peers while reflecting on past learning experiences given thehighly collaborative active participation that most units of study encourage.2. It is critical for learners to show how their key work supports the development of the GAs and, also togain awareness of the GAs that may be less developed.3. There is a need for learners to rapidly visualise and navigate through all the content they have generatedacross units of study to be more mindful about their learning journeys in light of the capstone experience.4. There is a need of a tangible final product of the reflection that learners can take away or share withothers.Toolset designAs a result of the design considerations listed above, we created a fully-functional prototype that we call theParticipatory Timeline which includes a collaborative and an individual interfaces (Figure 1, left and rightrespectively). The collaborative timeline highlights milestones or critical events recorded by the learners. In thiscase, it connects to the WordPress API to get all the content from specific learners’ blogs and displays themaccording to the time they were published. This way, learners can scroll and rapidly and visually navigate throughall the content they generated in the past years or months. Each blog is presented in the timeline as a container ofthe original title, text and keywords chosen by the learner. Learners can interact with this Participatory Timelinedirectly via a web browser on their personal computer or via a large screen for group exploration. Additionally,we designed the timeline to be also be displayed in an immersive facility located at UTS called the Data Arena(see Figure 2, left). This is a state of the art 360-degree immersive data visualisation facility that is purposely builtto allow groups of people to interact with data. It is a 10-meters of diameter cylindrical space where the timelinecan be displayed continuously around the learners. The space is also equipped with an omnitrack, optical motionICLS 2018 Proceedings942© ISLScapture system consisting of 12 infrared movement cameras. We took advantage of this facility to enhance theexploration of learners’ blogs by also designing an individual interface pictured in Figure 1 (right) that can beoperated from a tablet device. This tool allows learners to walk around the Data Arena space, each holding a tabletdevice, to explore a blog’s content in detail. Learners can select blog posts from a list automatically filteredaccording to their physical position in relation to the timeline. This is achieved by attaching infrared trackers tothe tablets that serve to track the learner’s position. In this way, learners interact with the timeline, initially, usingtheir body’s proximity in relation to the timeline (see Figure 2, right-above). Then, learners can tap on a specificblog to read the textual content, and look at the images, graphs and media they or other learners created. Theinterface allows them to tag each blog post according to the GAs that they consider that post contributes to. TheParticipatory Timeline can also run on an interactive tabletop placed at the middle of the Data Arena space (seeFigure 2, left). This tabletop version features a set of filters that can be used by learners to hide and show postsaccording to the GA tagging that they have performed using the tablet interface (see buttons at the left of Figure1, left).Epistemic design and authentic pilot studyThe teaching team designed a scaffolded reflection task within the final capstone unit of study for learners tocollaboratively reflect on how the learning activities performed as part of the degree (across units of study)matched the GAs they were intended to develop. Learners were asked to respond the following focus question:“How do the posts I/we have created in [the WordPress platform] during the previous year can serve as evidenceof my/our Graduate Attributes development?” This task was subdivided into three subtasks.Part 1- Exploration and gathering (5-10 min), learners were asked to individually hold one of thetablets and walk around the Data Arena to explore to identify the location of particular posts written by themselvesor others that can serve as evidence of GAs development as a preparation for the next part.Part 2 - Collective matching of GAs (20 min), learners were asked to work with the rest of the team todefine a strategy to specify what posts provide evidence of GAs development. For this, they had to explicitlyassociate the selected posts with specific GAs using the tablet tagging functionality (see Figure 1, right).Part 3- Collective reflective screen casting (20 min), learners were asked to develop a coherent storydemonstrating the development of their GAs over time. Then, learners were asked to highlight both the GAs thathave been strongly and weakly developed thus far, the actions that can be taken forward, and the potential roleand limitations of reflecting on the blog posts. The intended output is a collaborative screencast recorded at theData Arena using the interactive tabletop located at the centre of the learning space (see Figure 2, right-below).Authentic deployment exampleFigure 2. Left: The Participatory Timeline deployed in the Data Arena. Right-above: a learner interactingwith the timeline through his proximity to posts and the tablet. Right-below: a team of four learnersrecording a collective screencast.The prototype and the pedagogical practice are being deployed as part of the final capstone experience of theMaster degree mentioned above. We illustrate the potential usefulness of the system by showcasing thepreliminary experience of one team composed of four master students, who successfully completed the reflectiontask described above. For this session, the content from their four blog sites was loaded onto the ParticipatoryTimeline in the Data Arena. This preliminary exploration suggested that learners found it useful that the task wasscaffolded. In words of one of the learners, “scaffolding the task into three distinct phases guided us through agradual progression, giving me time to think before starting to discuss on how to match GAs with particularblogs”. Moreover, although the Data Arena space is intended to foster collaboration, actual collaboration occurredmostly at the tabletop. For example, while exploring the interface using the tablets, the team naturally split in two,ICLS 2018 Proceedings943© ISLSinteracting in pairs (e.g. see Figure 2, left), sometimes sharing one tablet to explore the same content. One of thelearners explained this as follows “the timeline allowed us to explore different blog posts. Doing the same in alarge screen would have forced all of us to comment on the same post at the same time as we did for recordingthe reflective screencast. In the timeline, each of us could decide to individually explore posts but also we couldkeep awareness of what others were doing, make comments and show things to others”. At the tabletop, learnersspent some time to reflect among themselves before pressing the record button to produce the final reflectionoutput. Learners agreed that this discussion was the “the core of the collaboration exercise” (as stated by onelearner) since it allowed them to reach common understanding of the state of each of their GAs developmentjourneys. Learners generated a collective screencast successfully after just one attempt. They expressed lots ofinterest in getting this as a digital artefact (see final output of this team in https://youtu.be/VuxKr7v1zL4) to makeit available to the wider community of students. Learners also appreciated the possibilities facilitated by theimmersive physical space, described by one student as follows: “being able to see the posts spread on a timelinewas fantastic, plus the interactivity via our body location, was great”. Overall, results of these preliminaryexplorations towards supporting learners to collectively reflect on their GAs development are encouraging. Theintention was nicely summed up by one of the learners as follows: “this exercise is good to understand how ourblogs reflect certain GAs. If I would be using only the current online system I wouldn’t have been able to connectblogs to the GAs properly”.Conclusion and future workMaking the connection between learning tasks and GAs is, in many cases, made explicit in the teacher’s design,but not necessarily easily grasped by learners in practice. The development of reflective and critical thinking skillsis vital for the current uncertain and evolving professional workforce. Thus, this work should be seen as an initialstep towards much work that needs to be done in this area. Future work in this line of research certainly includesexploring the strategies to scale up this approach. Currently, the Participatory Timeline can be accessible online24/7 via any device desktop, tablets, mobiles. The main challenge is how it can scale up to support other learningscenarios that may use additional sources of learning evidence beyond blogging. Current work is exploring howto integrate other sources of student’s learning outputs (e.g. concept maps, reports, presentations) and learners’media footprint (such as twitter, slack channels, etc).ReferencesBell, Philip, and Elizabeth A Davis. (2000). Designing Mildred: Scaffolding students’ reflection andargumentation using a cognitive software guide. Paper presented at the Fourth International Conferenceof the Learning Sciences, (pp. 142-149). Erlbaum Mahwah, NJ.Boud, David, Rosemary Keogh, and David Walker. (1985). Reflection. Turning experience into learning.Dunlap, Joanna C. (2005). Problem-based learning and self-efficacy: How a capstone course prepares studentsfor a profession. Educational Technology Research and Development, 53(1), 65-83.Fernandez, Nancy Page. (2006). Assessment matters—Integration, reflection, interpretation: Realizing the goalsof a general education capstone course. About Campus, 11(2), 23-26.Hager, Paul, and Susan Holland. (2007). Graduate attributes, learning and employability (Vol. 6): SpringerScience & Business Media.Hmelo-Silver, Cindy E. (2004). Problem-based learning: What and how do students learn? Educationalpsychology review, 16(3), 235-266.Holdsworth, Annie, Kim Watty, and Martin Davies. (2009). Developing capstone experiences: Centre for theStudy of Higher Education, University of Melbourne.Kolodner, Janet L, David Crismond, Jackie Gray, Jennifer Holbrook, and Sadhana Puntambekar. (1998). Learningby design from theory to practice. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the international conference ofthe learning sciences, (pp. 16-22).Kuo, Yu-Chun, Brian R Belland, and Yu-Tung Kuo. (2017). Learning through blogging: students’ perspectivesin collaborative blog-enhanced learning communities. Educational Technology & Society, 20(2), 37-50.Mezirow, Jack. (1990). How critical reflection triggers transformative learning. Fostering critical reflection inadulthood, 1, 20.Ras, Eric, Ralf Carbon, Björn Decker, and Jörg Rech. (2007). Experience management wikis for reflective practicein software capstone projects. IEEE Transactions on Education, 50(4), 312-320.Thompson, Darrall. (2007). Integrating graduate attributes with student self-assessment. Paper presented at theProceedings of the Connected 2007 International Conference on Design Education, (pp. 1-6).van Acker, Liz, and Janis Mary Bailey. (2011). Embedding graduate skills in capstone courses. Asian SocialScience, 7(4), 69.ICLS 2018 Proceedings944© ISLS