Iterative Curricular Design of Collaborative Infographics forScience Literacy in Informal Learning SpacesStephen Sommer, University of Colorado, Boulder, Stephen.Sommer@Colorado.eduCynthia Graville-Smith, Saint Louis University, cgravill@slu.eduJoseph Polman, University of Colorado, Boulder, Joseph.Polman@Colorado.eduLeighanna Hinojosa, University of Colorado, Boulder, Leighanna.Hinojosa@Colorado.eduAbstract: This short report describes the design and implementation of a two year, iterativecurriculum developed to promote science literacies through the creation of news infographicsin an informal learning environment. Paid, high school student interns were recruited to identifyan issue of personal and social relevance and create infographics that visually represented andcommunicated the science behind their topic. After several cycles of peer and editorial review,these infographics could be published in an online newsmagazine. Three cycles of datajournalism activity with distinct participation and activity structures are described, withconsiderations of the affordances and constraints of each cycle.Keywords: STEM literacy, data visualization, designed learning environments, informal learningspacesIntroduction and purposeThe central research question of this two-year study asks, “How can the collaborative critique and construction ofinfographics using cyberlearning technologies be organized around data journalism practices in learningcommunities to foster high school students’ science and data literacy?” After conducting background researchconsidering how experts make sense of published science infographics (Polman et al, 2015) our team designedand implemented two science infographic learning spaces for high school age students. The learning environmentwe concentrate our attention on here consisted of a small group of students (approximately ten) who wereemployed as student interns at a Mid-Western university in the Unites States. These high school interns were paidemployees tasked with designing, creating, submitting for review, editing, and ultimately publishing science newsinfographics of their own choosing. Over the two years that this data journalism internship occurred, we identifythree distinct cycles demarcated by specific lessons plans, expectations of students, technological scaffolding,instructor and editor involvement, and ultimately infographic artifacts published by the students. We concludedthat though each cycle has particular affordances and constraints, later cycles proved most effective at enablingstudents to thoroughly engage, digest, and make relevant complex scientific data through the creation ofpublishable infographics. This short article offers reflections on the iterative design and implementation of thiscurriculum, with some considerations for future directionsPerspective/Theoretical frameworkWe frame our review and analysis of the data journalism internship in consideration of a framework of“contextualizing science in life” (Polman, 2012). Each cycle of the intern infographic curriculum began withstudents making personal connections to science data in their own lives and expanded towards broader socialrelevance and communication of complex information to the public. The diverse backgrounds and priortrajectories of identification interns bring to the site greatly inform and validate this engagement (Polman, 2012).In this sense, student interns were positioned not just as learners, rather they were active practitioners andconveyors of complex science knowledge (Wenger, 1998). As these paid interns were treated as employees, theyentered into and helped define a community of practice (Lave and Wenger, 1991). Through their activeparticipation, independent work, and multiple cycles of peer feedback, student interns helped create and define aninformal space where they worked (Polman et al, 2014). These interns had the opportunity to increase theirstatistical literacy through the use of large scientific data sets (Hammerman, 2009).Methods and data sourcesOur method is an in depth case study of the high school data journalism internship that occurred 2012-2014.Primary data consist of lesson plans, research team meeting minutes, film and activity logs of student work time,student time sheets, multiple drafts and feedback of infographics produced, interviews with students andfacilitators, and final infographic products. While this data collected in the 2012-2014 period provides the primaryICLS 2016 Proceedings954© ISLSsources for the research and findings, we situate this information in consideration of the ongoing work currently(2015-2016) being continued by the research and development team, as much of the present trajectory is informedby the findings of the earlier period.ResultsWhile reports of prior and future cycles are presented elsewhere (Polman et al, 2014) this report highlights thesalient findings of a program designed specifically as an informal educational space for out of school studentinterns.At the start of this research, the extent with which the infographic internship had definitive stages wasunclear, nor had the internship facilitators determined a specific sequence of stages in advance. Only afterreviewing the evolving curriculum, student generated work, and facilitator objectives did our team recognize thatcertain emergent themes and design iterations of the science data journalism curriculum occurred in achronologically distinct pattern. Cycle 1 occurred March 2013-July 2013. The instructional components of thiscycle focused on infographic familiarity, literacy, and deconstruction. The ten participating interns were treatedas employees of the university and were under contract to be paid for their work only after the successful editorialreview and publication of an infographic. Instruction came in the form of explicit lessons, graphic designworkshops, and 1:1 student coaching. Students were invited to pick any science infographic topic that was ofpersonal relevance to them. As such, the student interns were personally invested in their projects, yet the researchtopics frequently lacked existing valid scientific research, accessible quantitative data, or trustworthy sources. SeeFigure 1 for an example.Figure 1. This infographic illustrates the theme of personal relevance in Cycle 1.The author of this infographic was considering using hair relaxer.In response to the success of incorporating personally relevant topics and the challenges regardingfinding data witnessed in Cycle 1, Cycle 2 (July 2013-January 2014) thematically focused on appropriate topicselection, utilizing data, and contextualizing scientific information. Most interns returned for Cycle 2 and fournew interns joined the project. In Cycle 2, an emphasis on data collection and analysis was paramount and designthat had some narrative flow was encouraged. Interns could still choose a topic, though they were required to drawdata specifically from scientific or academic journals. Facilitators of the project spent less time on directinstruction and focused more on appropriate framing of topics, 1:1 coaching, and project design. Peer to peer andeditor feedback of infographics occurred regularly prior to publication. Near the end of Cycle 2, a curriculumdesign chart was developed by the facilitators to capture the overall flow of the updated infographic creation cycle(see Figure 2).ICLS 2016 Proceedings955© ISLSFigure 2. Infographic Curriculum Chart, Cycle 2.Cycle 3 (January 2014-October 2014) had a more specific emphasis on quantitative information, datahygiene, scale, fair presentation of data, and telling a visual story to viewers of the infographic. In this iterationof the project, interns were still free to pick a specific topic of interest, though the topic needed to be within thebroad field of ‘agriculture.’ The design of this cycle continued to follow the curriculum diagram outlined in Cycle2. Facilitators placed an increased emphasis on design and presentation with outcome-oriented objectives relatedto publishing legitimate, usable, scientific scholarly artifacts to be made available to the public. As in the othercycles, final products would be published on an online science news magazine and infographic archive.Near the end of this research funding cycle the project was approved for extended and ongoing supportto continue the high school infographic internship. As facilitators of the field site move forward the key findingsregarding infographic literacy, data mining & analysis, topic selection, appropriate feedback, intended audience,and personal and social relevance will continue to inform the future cycles of curriculum design. These lessonsprovided a foundation for a week-long professional development in June 2015 for other educators to implementthese activities in their own classrooms and curricula. Our team continues to collaborate with a variety of teachersin formal and informal learning spaces to advance this work and consider iterative design principles to meet theneeds of a diverse range of students.Figure 3. This infographic illustrates the storyline approach with consideration of scale.ICLS 2016 Proceedings956© ISLSSignificanceThis study offers a contribution to educational scholarship regarding science literacy, the invitation for youngpeople to meaningfully engage with quantitative or statistical data, and the personal and social relevance ofscientific topics to young people. This infographic project engages multi-modal components of STEM byexploring science topics utilizing computer software technology, through iterative design stages to illustratescientific concepts and mathematical relations. Specifically, this research demonstrates the affordances andconstraints of various scaffolding and intervention in an out of school learning environment geared at scientificliteracy in young people through the design of infographics. These findings highlight specific practices andstrategies to engage a diverse range of students in scientifically meaningful discourse and invite them to identifywith science, at least in terms of life relevance. This report details specific strategies that work based on multipleiterations of evidence based practice and design. These strategies may be readily exported and tailored to othercontexts and learning environments. Further, this work provides groundwork for a future trajectory of similarcurricula with an increased focus on personal life relevance and daily engagement with science, offering multimedia outlets for student voice, accessibility and ownership of STEM data, and increased student agency throughscientific competencies. Such objectives are already in focus as our team advances this work in our next stage ofresearch and development, and has informed subsequent teacher trainings.ReferencesHammerman, J. K. L. (2009, April). Educating about statistical issues using large scientific data sets.Paper presented at the AERA Annual Meeting, San Diego, CA.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Polman, J. L. (2012). Trajectories of participation and identification in learning communities involvingdisciplinary practices. In D. Yun Dai, (Ed.), Design research on learning and thinking in educationalsettings: Enhancing intellectual growth and functioning (pp. 225-242). New York: Routledge.Polman, J. L., Gebre, E., and Graville Smith, C. (2014, March). Contextualizing science in life throughscience news infographic design and publication. Paper presented at the NARST Annual Meeting,Pittsburgh, PA.Polman, J. L., and Gebre, E. H. (2015). Towards critical appraisal of infographics as scientific inscriptions.Journal of Research in Science Teaching. doi: 10.1002/tea.21225Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. New York: CambridgeUniversity Press.ICLS 2016 Proceedings957© ISLSExploring African-American Middle-School Girls’ Perceptions ofThemselves as Game DesignersJakita O. Thomas, Rachelle Minor, O. Carlette Odemwingiejakita.owensby@gmail.com, rachellecelisse@gmail.com, oodemwi1@scmail.spelman.eduSpelman CollegeAbstract: Computational algorithmic thinking (CAT) is the ability to design, implement, andassess the implementation of algorithms to solve a range of problems. SupportingComputational Algorithmic Thinking (SCAT) is a longitudinal project that explores thedevelopment of CAT capabilities by guiding African-American middle school girls through theiterative game design cycle, resulting in a set of complex games around broad themes. Thispaper explores African-American middle school girls’ (called SCAT Scholars) perspectives oftheir SCAT experience and perceptions of themselves as game designers.IntroductionComputational algorithmic thinking (CAT) is the ability to design, implement, and assess the implementation ofalgorithms to solve a range of problems. CAT makes explicit a critical aspect of computational thinking throughits focus of understanding how learners identify and understand a problem, articulate an algorithm or set ofalgorithms in the form of a solution to the problem, and evaluate the solution based on some set of criteria. CATfocuses specifically on how the human, as computing agent, designs, implements, and assesses an algorithm (oran “abstraction of a step-by-step procedure for taking input and producing some desired output”) or set ofalgorithms to solve a problem. CAT is focused on the algorithms designed, adapted, implemented, and discardedby the human (as computing agent) on the journey toward choosing the “right” abstractions. (Wing, 2008;Thomas, 2008). CAT is an important scaffolded on-ramp as students develop more advanced CT capabilities andapply CT to solve problems that are more constrained and require greater and greater expertise. CAT lies at theheart of Computer Science, which is defined as “the study of algorithms” (Schneider & Gersting, 2010). CATembodies the ability to think critically and creatively to solve problems and has applicability in a range of areasfrom Computer Science to cooking to music (ITSTE-NETS, 2007; Polya, 1973; Wing, 2006; Wing, 2010).SCAT is a longitudinal between-subjects research project exploring how African-American middleschool girls develop CAT capabilities over time in the context of game design (Thomas, 2014). SCAT is also afree enrichment program designed to expose middle-school girls to game design. The goals are: 1) to explore thedevelopment of CAT capabilities over three years in African-American middle-school girls as they engage initerative game design, and 2) to increase the awareness of participants to the broad applicability of CAT across anumber of industries and career paths. Spanning three years, participants, called SCAT Scholars, develop CATcapabilities as they engage in the game design cycle to design more and more complex games. SCAT Scholarsbegin the program the summer prior to their 6th grade year and continue through their 8th grade year. They engagein 3 types of activities each year (called a SCAT Season): 1) a two-week intensive game design summerexperience; 2) twelve technical workshops where Scholars implement the games they have designed using visualand programming languages (e.g., SCRATCH, App Inventor) in preparation for submission to national gamedesign competitions (e.g., National STEM Video Game Challenge, Verizon Innovation App Challenge); and 3)field trips where Scholars learn about applications of CAT in different industries and careers. This paper aims toexplore the following research question: How does participating in SCAT impact Scholars’ perceptions ofthemselves as game designers? We begin to address our research question by examining the individual end-ofseason questionnaires collected over the course of two years (or Seasons) of the SCAT project.BackgroundThe iterative game design lifecycle involves several phases, which are also iterative (Fullerton, et. al, 2004).During brainstorming, Scholars generate many ideas for games and present those ideas. Once an idea is selected,paper-and-pencil drawings are created, called storyboards, that include demo artwork. Playtesting is next, whichinvolves bringing actual players from the target user group in and observing them as they play the game in realtime, getting feedback about the game experience to inform the design of the game (Fullerton, et. al., 2004;DiSalvo, et al., 2009). Next, Scholars create a playable physical prototype using paper-and-pencil and/or craftmaterials. Then, a rough software prototype is created which models some aspect(s) of core gameplay followedICLS 2016 Proceedings958© ISLSby more playtesting. Next comes creating the design document, which outlines every aspect of the game and howit will function followed by implementing the game with playtesting throughout implementation. Finally, qualityassurance testing is done with continued playtesting. At any point in the game design cycle, revisiting previousphases may be required.SCAT learning environmentThe facilitator plays a major role in the development of Scholars’ CAT capabilities in the SCAT learningenvironment as she serves first as the primary modeler and then as a just-in-time coach (Collins, Brown &Newman, 1989). In addition, the facilitator leads and supports discussions that help Scholars as they think throughtheir designs, helps them make connections across dyad experiences and problems as they design and implementtheir games, and models the kinds of questions Scholars should be asking themselves and their peers as theydevelop algorithms for their game designs, move through the iterative game design cycle, and reflect on their useof CAT (Koschmann, Kelson, Feltovich & Barrows, 1996). As Scholars work in small groups of two on theirgame designs, she walks from group to group asking them questions about their designs, helping them identifyproblems and issues, illustrating for them how to use the Design Notebook and other tools and resources providedto them to help them design their games, and serving as a sounding board for dyads as they design.Although the facilitator is a critical component to the SCAT learning environment, she cannot be withevery group or individual all the time. To help overcome that limitation and to help Scholars develop more expertCAT capabilities, the Design Notebook has been created to coach Scholars as they engage in CAT through gamedesign. The Design Notebook has been integrated into SCAT activities, affording Scholars multiple opportunitiesto develop CAT capabilities while working individually and collaboratively in small groups. The DesignNotebook contains paper-and-pencil based tools that coach groups and individuals in the ways cognitiveapprenticeship suggests (Collins, Brown & Newman 1989; Puntembekar & Kolodner, 1998) by using a system ofscaffolds (Owensby, 2006; Thomas, 2008). Each scaffold in the system supports groups and individuals in aparticular way and addresses a particular difficulty that learners may face when engaging in complex cognitiveskills, processes, and capabilities like designing an experiment, interpreting and applying the experiences ofexperts, or engaging in CAT (Owensby, 2006; Thomas, 2008). Given that Scholars will be able to move throughthe iterative game design cycle at their own pace, those Scholars or small groups who are further along in thegame design cycle scaffold dyads who are not as far along (Vygotsky, 1978; Roschelle, 1996; Owensby, 2006;Thomas, 2008; Palincsar & Brown, 1984). In addition, different Scholars bring different perspectives to the dyad,which contributes to greater understanding by the small group as they work.MethodsSetting and participantsThis research takes place at a small women’s liberal arts college in the Southeastern United States. Each Season(which runs from June or July through the following May), Scholars participate in the three activities describedearlier: a two-week summer experience, workshops, and field trips. This paper focuses on data collected acrossthe first two SCAT seasons, which ran from July 2013 – May 2014 and June 2014 – May 2015, respectively.Over these two years, we have worked with a total of twenty-three (23) African-American girls from their 6thgrade year (Season 1) through their 7th grade year. Each year, we work with twenty (20) Scholars. We had threenew Scholars from Season 1 to Season 2, representing a retention rate of eighty-five percent (85%). Of these 23SCAT Scholars, ninety-six percent (96%) had never used SCRATCH, and none of the Scholars had ever engagedin the game design cycle in this way to design novel games for social change.Data collection and analysisWe collected end-of-season questionnaire data at the end of Season 1 as well as Season 2 to explore our researchquestion. The end-of-season questionnaire was designed to provide insights into Scholars’ perspectives andfeelings about their SCAT experience, their understanding of CAT, their perceptions of themselves as gamedesigners, and the application of concepts or ideas learned in SCAT to other areas of their lives outside of SCAT.We performed content analysis on the questionnaire responses, identifying themes related to Scholars’ thoughtsabout the kinds of algorithms they designed during SCAT, what they liked and disliked about game design, theirperceptions of themselves as game designers, and their feelings about their SCAT experience. Three ratersanalyzed the questionnaire responses independently, identifying themes that emerged from the responses. Then,all of the themes identified independently were discussed and an agreed upon set of themes emerged from thediscussion. Then, the same three raters analyzed the responses again using the agreed upon set of themes. Interrater reliability was 87%.ICLS 2016 Proceedings959© ISLS