Revitalizing Japanese Lesson Study Through Shared ToolsEmbedded in Design-Based Implementation ResearchShinya Iikubo, CoREF, The University of Tokyo, iikubo@coref.u-tokyo.ac.jpMoegi Saito, CoREF, The University of Tokyo, saitomoegi@coref.u-tokyo.ac.jpHajime Shirouzu, CoREF, The University of Tokyo, shirouzu@coref.u-tokyo.ac.jpErika Atarashi, The University of Tokyo, aerika@p.u-tokyo.ac.jpAbstract: In order to tackle the persistent problem revealed in a Japanese learning sciencesproject, we attempted to identify an effective design for pre-lesson study workshops that supportsteachers to focus on students’ cognitive processes. A set of tools for simulating students’ learningprocesses enabled participant teachers to take learner-centered perspectives, which contributedto making their images of what and how the children will learn more concrete.IntroductionThis paper clarifies an effective scaffold for teachers to focus on students’ cognitive processes in creating andrevising their lesson plans. The context for this study is design-based implementation research (DBIR: Penuel etal., 2007) in a Japanese learning sciences project for promoting collaborative learning using a lesson frameworkknown as the Knowledge Constructive Jigsaw (KCJ: Miyake, 2013). Approximately 1,000 teachers of all subjectsfrom the 1st to the 12th grade in collaboration with 30 regional boards of education participate the project. Theproject has formed professional learning communities of teachers who share the KCJ method and its “lesson study”(Lewis, 2002) as a common tool (one feature of DBIR) in order to first, improve the quality of students’ learningas well as the teachers’ learning of “how students learn”, second, encourage networking among the teachercommunities, and third, to clarify how to support such improvement and networking in a sustainable way. Theproject revealed a persistent problem (another feature of DBIR), which is many teachers lack the habitual practiceof focusing on the cognitive processes of the students (i.e., “How will students make sense of this task and readthis material?”) when they develop lesson plans. Although Japanese “lesson study” is known to be an effectiveform of professional development (Lewis, 2002) in which teachers observe live classroom lessons, collect data,and collaboratively analyze such data, two trends do not successfully merge into scalable action research: onetrend focuses on what and how teacher should teach and the other focuses on what and how students learned.Faced with a scaling-up issue where researchers cannot directly help teachers explore students’ learning processes,we propose a set of scaffolding for teachers to constructively interact with one other at their local school in formingand testing hypotheses about student learning (how they will learn) in their own lessons. This small research wouldsuggest that additional but simple tools embedded in DBIR can contribute to DBIR of a higher quality.MethodsThis paper tests the hypothesis that a set of DBIR and its shared tools effectively support teachers to simulate howstudents will learn, and enable them to make their own hypotheses about students’ learning process in the lesson.Specifically, we created a tool which is a set of “simulation sheets” of students’ learning processes in the lessonfor a pre-lesson study and shared it with the above DBIR community. It is not easy for one teacher to have concreteimages of the diverse processes of students, to which multiple teachers with different points of view can makevast contributions, especially in the DBIR community which shares a common vision and instructional framework.We took three cases (see Table1) from a pre-lesson study workshop, which collected 37 teachers of amunicipal board of education. In this workshop, three designated teachers brought their lesson plans, each ofwhich was collaboratively scrutinized through a three-step process. In the preliminary step (45 min), the teachersexperienced a lesson as students to grasp an outline of the plan. In Step 1 (45 min), teachers anticipated thelearning processes of the best student and the poorest one in this lesson plan based on their experience as students:“What answers are they likely to write at the beginning of the lesson?” “What are they likely to talk about duringtheir discussions?” and “What are they likely to write after the lesson?” In Step 2 (45 min), they revised the lessonplan based on the simulation of Step 1. In both Step 1 and Step 2, the teachers use lesson design study sheets(shared tools), discuss the lesson plan in small groups, and present their findings to other groups.In order to show that the simulation of the students’ learning processes was properly done in Step 1, weanalyzed the presentations from each group, where the representatives of the groups gave summaries of theirgroup discussions in Step 1. We divided the reports by sentence and compiled the percentage of sentences with“a learner” or “learners” as the subject (learner-subject-sentences) in the number of sentences with subjects. Themore we find learner-subject-sentences in the reports, the more we can consider participants engaged in theICLS 2018 Proceedings1525© ISLSsimulation activities. Second, in order to show that revision from the students’ viewpoint also continued in Step2, we categorized the content of the presentations into four groups by combining two axes: Content (C) versuslesson design (LD), and learner-centered (LC) versus non-learner-centered (N-LC). We mostly focused on howteachers’ simulation can change from N-LC to LC.Results and discussionTable 1 shows the analytical results of Step 1 to demonstrate in what proportion the teachers used learner-subjectsentences. As shown in the table, the teachers used them in 76.5% out of 102 sentences. The results indicate thatthe teachers engaged in simulating students’ learning as we had expected. Table 2 shows the analytical results ofStep 2 to demonstrate in what proportion the teachers referred to the contents or lesson designs from a learnercentered perspective. As shown in the table, the teachers considered those perspectives in nearly 60% of theirutterances in every lesson. The results also indicate that the teachers engaged in pointing out the problems andmaking proposals based on their simulation of students’ learning.Table 1: Effect of Step 1: In how many sentences did the teachers refer to the learner(s) as the subject?Lesson Plan (Grade, Subject)Water in nature (G4, Science)Programing (G6, ICT)Speech technique (G9, English(ESL))Number of participants (and groups)17 (5)10 (3)10 (4)Learner-subject-sentences41(82.0%)18 (81.8%)19 (63.3%)Table 2: Effect of Step 2: In how many topics did the teachers refer to the learner(s) as the subject?Lesson PlanWater in natureProgramingSpeech techniqueNumber of topics171311C/LC643C/ N-LC224LD/LC634LD/N-LC340Proportion of LC70.6%53.8%63.6%Each teacher improved her or his own lesson plan after this pre-lesson study workshop for the teachingof their lessons. In addition, some participants brought those tools back to their schools and tried this new style oflesson study with their colleagues. These results indicate that the teachers perceived the simulation of students’learning processes to be new and useful. Even though our tools are very simple and easy to use, they workedbecause of the help of a shared context created and sustained through partnerships among university researchers,boards of education and the teachers themselves. Sharing context enabled everyone to share visions and imagesof learning goals, to identify the task of how to realize such vision and learning, and to utilize the instructionalframework as a means to solve the task. The framework, that is, the Knowledge Constructive Jigsaw, was simpleenough for teachers to simulate what would take place in each step of learning. Therefore, this scaffolding, inother words, shared tools embedded in design-based implementation research, enables lesson study to berevitalized as a whole. We would like to examine how this type of lesson study will contribute to teachers’reflection upon the lesson conducted (post-lesson study), and whether we can train teachers to be able to facilitatethese kinds of workshops instead of ourselves for further up-scaling.ReferencesLewis, C. (2002). Lesson study: A handbook of teacher-led instructional change. Philadelphia: Research for BetterSchools.Miyake, N. (2013). Case report 5: Knowledge construction with technology in Japanese classrooms (CoREF). InP. Kampylis, N. Law,Y. Punie (Eds.), ICT-enabled innovation for learning in Europe and Asia, 78-90,European Commission, Joint Research Centre.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Yamaguchi, R., & Gallagher, L. P. (2007). What makes professional developmenteffective? Strategies that foster curriculum implementation. American educational researchjournal, 44(4), 921-958.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI and Saitama Prefectural Board of Education. We would also liketo thank the children and teachers affiliated with the Iizuka-city Board of Education.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1526© ISLS