Developing a Library of Typical Problems During CollaborativeLearning in Online CoursesSebastian Strauß, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, sebastian.strauss@rub.deNikol Rummel, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, nikol.rummel@rub.deFilipa Stoyanova, Universität Duisburg-Essen, filipa.stoyanova@uni-due.deNicole Krämer, Universität Duisburg-Essen, nicole.kraemer@uni-due.deAbstract: Feelings of isolation and a lack of interactivity are among the reasons cited forstudent dropout in online learning settings like MOOCs. A possible solution is to offer MOOCparticipants the opportunity to engage in collaborative activities. However, small-groupcollaboration in MOOCS poses several challenges which may reduce the beneficial effects ofcollaboration and reduce participants’ satisfaction with both the collaboration process and thecourse. In this work-in-progress paper, we describe the development of a library of typicalproblems that may occur during online collaboration in asynchronous, text-based onlinesettings. The library covers the following aspects of collaboration: communication, jointinformation processing, coordination, and reciprocal interaction. The library was generated ina process by combining a top-down literature search and a bottom-up identification of typicalproblems in existing collaboration data. The library will be used as a basis for developingintelligent support for student collaboration in online courses.IntroductionLess than 10% of participants in massive open online courses (MOOCs) finish the course and earn a certificate(Khalil & Ebner, 2014). One reason for student attrition in these courses are feelings of social isolation whichresult from low participation and a lack of interaction between students (Khalil & Ebner, 2014). Research on therole of interactivity in online courses underlines the importance of student interaction for satisfaction with thecourse and for remaining in the course. Interaction between learners in an online course promotes a sense ofcommunity (Liu, Magjuka, Bonk, & Lee, 2007), increases students’ satisfaction with the course (Bernard et al.,2009) and reduces feelings of isolation (Khalil & Ebner, 2014), thus lowering the risk of dropout from thecourse. Hence, providing students with opportunities for interaction by implementing instructional designs suchas collaborative learning is a promising approach (Bernard et al., 2009). Indeed, the implementation of smallgroup collaboration is a prominent development in the design of e-learning courses (Rosé, Goldman, ZoltnersSherer, & Resnick, 2015). By interacting, learners can benefit from each other’s resources, be it cognitively byexchanging knowledge and thereby promoting learning, or socially by connecting with each other to buildrelationships or to give and receive help with problems concerning the course. Further, establishing meaningfulinteraction between students through collaborative learning aims at reducing feelings of isolation. However,simply providing students with tools for collaboration (e.g., discussion forums or shared text editors) does notautomatically lead to interaction between the learners (Kreijns, Kirschner, & Jochems, 2003). And even ifstudents interact, effective collaboration usually does not occur spontaneously (Rummel & Spada, 2005).However, collaborative learning settings not only face challenges resulting from the absence of productivecollaboration behavior, but also challenges that arise from unfavorable interaction processes. This potentiallyhinders the success of the collaboration and may lead to frustration. Hence, collaborative learning requiressupport that targets participation and effective interaction between learners, but also aims at reducingunfavorable interactions during collaboration. This work-in-progress paper describes the development of alibrary of typical problems that may occur during collaborative learning in online settings. Supporting students’collaboration regarding these problems allows collaborative learning arrangements to unfold their potential, thusreducing the risk of student frustration with the online course and ultimately reducing dropout from the course.MethodFollowing the procedure used by Meier, Spada, and Rummel (2007) for developing a rating scheme for theassessment of quality of collaborative problem solving, our library of typical problems was generated followingthree steps. In the first step, a top-down literature search was conducted to identify suboptimal interactionsbetween learners that may lead to process-losses and dissatisfaction with the collaboration process, therebylowering participation and increasing the risk of dropout. The process-dimensions presented by Meier et al.(2007) provided the starting point for the literature search using the databases Academic Search Premier,Google Scholar and Ovid. Next, additional literature was searched for the dimensions covered in Meier et al.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1045© ISLS(2007). The literature search then aimed at identifying further aspects that are crucial for the success ofcollaborative learning in online environments, or, alternatively, aspects that may impair the collaboration.Typical problems of collaborative learning were found in overview studies describing ineffective processesduring collaborative learning (e.g., Aggarwal & O'Brien, 2008), in studies reviewing several criteria forbeneficial interactions during (net-based) collaborative learning (e.g., Meier et al., 2007) and in studiesdescribing specific essential processes during collaborative learning (e.g., Baker, Hansen, Joiner, & Traum,1999). If a publication discussed typical problems, these problems were extracted and added to the library. If apublication provided a description of interactions that are beneficial for collaboration, then the absence of thedescribed behavior was added to the library (as the absence of beneficial interactions also constitutes aproblem). For each problem, a brief description of the ineffective behavior was added to the library.In the second step, a bottom-up approach was used to collect exemplary interactions for the problemsidentified during the previous step and to identify further problems that were not yet included. For this purpose,a small sample of logfiles from collaborative assignments was analyzed. This data was collected in a largeuniversity level online course (reported as Course 2 in Erdmann et al., 2017) In Moodle, each collaborativegroup was provided with a forum for communication and a shared text-editor (Etherpad) for working on thecollaborative assignments. Out of the 55 groups across all collaborative assignments, ten groups were randomlyselected for the analyses reported in this paper. Examples for the typical problems obtained in the first step wereidentified by manually surveying the logfiles for events matching the descriptions of the problems. Bothquantitative (e.g., amount of characters in forum or shared text) and qualitative (content of forum contributions)indicators were included in the examples. Additional problems were identified by analyzing the content of thediscussion forums. Problems were added to the library when learners expressed frustration with thecollaboration process (e.g., by stating that they found it unfair, if not all group members would contribute to thetask) or confusion about the current state of the collaboration process (e.g., by stating that it was difficult forthem to assess whether a step had already been completed). In total, two additional problems were added (seenext section).The third step was an iteration of the first step and included a literature search to theoretically groundthe observations from the second step. After finishing these three steps, three filters were applied to the librarywhich excluded problems as follows. (1) Because the library will be used for developing support for an onlinecourse which utilizes asynchronous, text-based communication, problems which target synchronouscollaboration were excluded. (2) As satisfaction with the collaboration process is a prerequisite for engagementand thus for interactive processes associated with learning, we focused on processes that we expect to have animpact on affective variables such as satisfaction with the course or satisfaction with the collaboration process.(3) Finally, because the library focuses on observable behavior, problems concerning attitudes were excluded.Examples for excluded problems are provided in Table 1.Result: Library of typical problems during online collaborative learningFollowing the procedure described above, eight typical problems were identified (see Table 1).Indiv.taskorient.(***)Reciproc.interact.CoordinationJoint inform.processingCom.Table 1: Library of typical problems during online collaboration.Process-dimensionMutual understandingFlow of conversation (*)Information poolingDecision making (**)Task divisionStructuring the problemsolving processTime managementEqual engagement of groupmembersIndividual task orientationTypical problems(1) Lack of feedback on forum posts (e.g., questions, suggestions)No explicit turn-taking during conversation(2) New/unshared information is introduced without reference to already sharedinformationThe group decides on an option before having evaluated all shared informationthat was contributed by the group members(3) Groups do not plan their problem solving process (collaboratively)(4) Groups are stuck in planning and neglect working on the task itself(5) Group members do not indicate their progress on the task(s)(6) Group members do not signal individual time constraints(7) Individual group members contribute nothing or very little to the group task(8) Individual group members ‘nag’ their peers to contribute their share of theworkGroup members do not think that it is worthwhile to contribute to thecollaboration(*) example for a process-dimension excluded by filter (1), (**) example for a process-dimension excluded by filter (2), (***) example for aprocess-dimension excluded by filter (3).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1046© ISLSRegarding communication, (1) the bottom-up analysis revealed situations where group members signaledfrustration when they contributed to the forum (e.g., asking a question), but did not receive an answer from theirpeers, or only after a long delay. However, timely responses foster a sense of community (Sung & Mayer,2012). Regarding joint information processing, (2) neglecting or failing to connect newly introducedinformation to information already shared in the group (elaboration, Webb, 1989) reduces the quality of theproblem solving process, which can in turn lead to the impression that the collaboration is ineffective or to theimpression that efforts previously made by other group members are not valued. Regarding coordination,suboptimal planning of the collaboration (Wittenbaum, Vaughan, & Stasser, 2002), in particular the (3) absenceof task division can decrease the group’s efficiency and make the problem solving process tedious. (4) If agroup invests a large amount of time into planning the collaboration less time is available for informationexchange and problem solving which often are the main objectives of the collaboration. This increases thepressure on the group and potentially harms the quality of the joint product. Therefore, a group shouldsimultaneously plan the collaboration and work on the task (Walther & Bunz, 2005). (5) The bottom-up analysisfurther revealed situations where individual group members contributed to the shared text but did notcommunicate their progress on the task to the other group members, hence creating obscurity and ambiguity,which violates Grice’s maxim of manner (Grice, 1975). The resulting lack of group awareness (Buder, 2011)appeared to make it difficult for the other group members to assess the state of the task and left them confusedwhether it was their turn to work on the task. (6) If students are not aware of their group members’ timeconstraints (e.g., when they plan to start working on the task and how much time they can allocate to it), theymay mistake a group member’s intended absence (e.g., due to a competing deadline) as lack of engagement(social loafing, Aggarwal & O'Brien, 2008). Regarding reciprocal interaction, that is, all group members areequally involved in the collaboration, a common problem during collaboration is that (7) some group membersinvest little effort in the joint product, while receiving the credit gained through the work of the remaining groupmembers (social loafing, Aggarwal & O'Brien, 2008). This may result in frustration or even decrease themotivation of the active group members to contribute any further (sucker-effect, Kerr, 1983). (8) If students‘nag’ their peers to make them contribute to the task, the group climate suffers and processes of collaborativedecision-making are impaired (Walther, 1996).Discussion and outlookIn this work-in-progress paper, we described the development of a library of typical problems which may occurduring asynchronous, computer-mediated, text-based collaboration settings in higher education. The library wasdeveloped using a top-down literature-search and a bottom-up analysis of existing collaboration data. While thetop-down approach ensures that the library encompasses a broad range of typical problems with a theoreticalfoundation, the bottom-up approach provides exemplary events for these problems and adds relevantphenomena. This library can be used to analyze interactions and detect suboptimal collaboration behaviorswhich can potentially impair the collaboration process, leading to low quality of the joint product anddissatisfaction with the collaboration process. Currently, the application of the library requires human coding ofcollaboration data. Supporting learners in large-scale online courses would require an automated analysis ofinteractions. This could be realized through the application of learning analytics. For example, the analysis ofaction sequences (e.g., categorizing forum contributions; Doberstein, Hecking, & Hoppe, 2017) can be used todetect extended coordination phases or a lack of group members signaling their progress. Furthermore, theanalysis of concepts and their interrelations within a text corpus (e.g., a forum discussion; Daems, Erkens,Malzahn, & Hoppe, 2014) can help to identify a lack of elaboration of newly introduced concepts. A limitationof the current library is the small sample size that was used for the bottom-up identification of typical problems.In order to provide further typical problems, more collaboration data need to be examined. Hence, our aim is toupdate and expand the library by repeating the three steps described above using collaboration data yet to becollected. A library grounded in both, theory and empirical data, would be a valuable basis for instance todevelop automated analysis of collaborative behavior in large online courses and to inform the detection ofunfavorable events. These automatic analyses may ultimately feed into adaptive support (e.g., in the form ofintelligent adaptive tutoring; Diziol, Walker, Rummel, & Koedinger, 2010).ReferencesAggarwal, P., & O'Brien, C. L. (2008). Social loafing on group projects. Journal of Marketing Education, 30(3),255–264.Baker, M., Hansen, T., Joiner, R., & Traum, D. (1999). The role of grounding in collaborative learning tasks. InP. Dillenbourg (Ed.), Advances in learning and instruction series. Collaborative learning. Cognitiveand computational approaches (pp. 31–63). Amsterdam: Pergamon.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1047© ISLSBernard, R. M., Abrami, P. C., Borokhovski, E., Wade, C. A., Tamim, R. M., Surkes, M. A., & Bethel, E. C.(2009). A meta-analysis of three types of interaction treatments in distance education. Review ofEducational Research, 79(3), 1243–1289.Buder, J. (2011). Group awareness tools for learning: Current and future directions. Computers in HumanBehavior, 27(3), 1114–1117.Daems, O., Erkens, M., Malzahn, N., & Hoppe, H. U. (2014). Using content analysis and domain ontologies tocheck learners’ understanding of science concepts. Journal of Computers in Education, 1, 113–131.Diziol, D., Walker, E., Rummel, N., & Koedinger, K. R. (2010). Using intelligent tutor technology to implementadaptive support for student collaboration. Educational Psychology Review, 22(1), 89–102.Doberstein, D., Hecking, T., & Hoppe, H. U. (2017). Sequence patterns in small group work within a largeonline course. Collaboration and technology: Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference[CRIWG] (pp. 104–117). Cham: Springer International Publishing.Erdmann, J., Rummel, N., Christmann, N., Elson, M., Hecking, T., Herrmann, T.,. . . Wichmann, A. (2017).Challenges in implementing small group collaboration in large online courses. Proceedings of the 12thInternational Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) – Making aDifference: Prioritizing Equity and Access in CSCL (Volume 2). Philadelphia, PA.Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics: Vol. 3.Speech acts (pp. 41–58). New York: Academic Press.Kerr, N. L. (1983). Motivation losses in small groups: A social dilemma analysis. Journal of Personality andSocial Psychology, 45(4), 819–828.Khalil, H., & Ebner, M. (2014). MOOCs completion rates and possible methods to improve retention - Aliterature review. Proceedings of World Conference on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia andTelecommunications, 1236–1244.Kreijns, K., Kirschner, P. A., & Jochems, W. (2003). Identifying the pitfalls for social interaction in computersupported collaborative learning environments: A review of the research. Computers in HumanBehavior, 19(3), 335–353.Liu, X., Magjuka, R. J., Bonk, C. J., & Lee, S.-h. (2007). Does sense of community matter? An examination ofparticipants' perceptions of building learning communities in online courses. Quarterly Review ofDistance Education, 8(1), 9–24.Meier, A., Spada, H., & Rummel, N. (2007). A rating scheme for assessing the quality of computer-supportedcollaboration processes. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2(1),63–86.Rosé, C., Goldman, P., Zoltners Sherer, J., & Resnick, L. B. (2015). Supportive technologies for groupdiscussion in MOOCs. Current Issues in Emerging eLearning. (Volume 2), Article 5. Retrieved fromhttp://scholarworks.umb.edu/ciee/vol2/iss1/5Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate: An instructional approach to promoting collaborativeproblem-solving in computer-mediated settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 201–241.Sung, E., & Mayer, R. E. (2012). Five facets of social presence in online distance education. Computers inHuman Behavior, 28(5), 1738–1747.Walther, J. B. (1996). Computer-Mediated Communication: Impersonal, interpersonal, and hyperpersonalinteraction. Communication Research, 23(1), 3–43.Walther, J. B., & Bunz, U. (2005). The rules of virtual groups: Trust, Liking, and Performance in ComputerMediated Communication. Journal of Communication, 55(4), 828–846.Webb, N. M. (1989). Peer interaction and learning in small groups. International Journal of EducationalResearch, 13(1), 21–39.Wittenbaum, G. M., Vaughan, S. I., & Stasser, G. (2002). Coordination in task-performing groups. In R. S.Tindale, L. Heath, J. Edwards, E. J. Posavac, F. B. Bryant, Y. Suarez-Balcazar,. . . J. Myers (Eds.),Theory and research on small groups (pp. 177–204). Boston, MA: Springer US.AcknowledgementsThe research reported in this paper was funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (grantnumber: 16DHL1012).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1048© ISLS