‘I Think It's Kind of Made Everybody a Little Closer:’ A VirtualPlatform Extending Parent Learning as Community of PracticeSusan K. Walker, University of Minnesota, skwalker@umn.eduAbstract: Analysis of interviews with parents in a program for families with young childrenrevealed evidence of Community of Practice domain knowledge and shared practice.Membership (inclusive of children and staff), relationship values, learning processes andcontext features were community elements experienced, and when using an online socialplatform. Online spaces for parents that complement offline community, continue a focus ontheir children, and that are ‘socially secure’ may foster engagement that extends learning.Keywords: Parenting, Community of Practice, Social Learning, Online CommunitiesParent learning as communitySociocultural perspectives on parenting recognize how domain knowledge is constructed through observationand mentorship of others, and through wider interactions with social settings, actors and systems (e.g., Marienau& Segal, 2007; Rogoff, 2003). Parenthood is also a life role that changes the conception of oneself (Azar, 2003).Shifts in identity that occur are also influenced by interactions in the parent’s social context. The Community ofPractice (CoP) framework (Wenger, 1998) is suitable to apply to parent social learning, particularly whenparents intentionally gather in practice groups (Campbell & Palm, 2018). Theoretically, relationships of mutualengagement as a community that bind parents together into a meaningful social entity would be constructive toimproving the quality of practice (Laluvein, 2008). And complementary online platforms that foster continuedcommunity engagement for parents would contribute to learning and relational benefits (Nieuwboer, Fukkink, &Hermanns, 2013). One such group on which to test the CoP perspective is Early Childhood Family Education(ECFE). Throughout Minnesota, school districts offer parents and young children (Birth to 5years) 2 hourweekly sessions in which they learn with other dyads, then separate into classes of parents or children.Continuous enrollment during early childhood years offers a context that promotes group identity. In 2017, asocial engagement platform designed with ECFE parents and staff was launched (Walker, 2017). Parentopia.orgis a closed platform that promotes class and site (multi-class) discussion, private messaging, and generalprogram information. ECFE’s method of parent learning through facilitated group interaction, and introductionof a novel platform for engagement offered the chance to investigate the presence of Community of Practiceelements in offline and online settings.The study engaged parents at an urban ECFE site in which the parentopia platform was collaborativelydesigned. Only a few parents in the current year had been involved in platform creation. The sample purposelyrepresented site families by class membership, ECFE experience (e.g., 6 were new to the program, 6 were intheir 3rd year) and demographics. Parents reported between 1 and 6 children (mean = 2.7, SD = 1.7). Parent ageranged from 20-57 (mean = 35.3, SD = 1.5). Twenty five in depth, semi-structured interviews explored parents’perceptions about participation in the program and use of the platform. Interviews were conducted by trainedresearch staff, then transcribed and open coded for sensitizing concepts related to domain, practice andcommunity aspects using Wenger’s (1998) definitions as a guide (LaRossa, 2005). Axial coding across all casesexamined dominant themes. This confirmed evidence of CoP learning and identified features characteristic ofthis learner population and context, and explored the potentially complementary nature of the online platform.Learning as Community of Practice offline and onlineTwo dominant themes in domain learning for ECFE parents who participated in the weekly program were 1)long term goals for their children (e.g., fostering the child to be his or her best self, nurturing a well-functioningcitizen) and 2) immediate topical concerns of childrearing (e.g., child health, safety, managing tantrums,technology exposure). Shared practice themes were 1) strategies that promote their child’s development and 2)self-care and development (e.g., to not ignore stress). Community themes (Table 1) included membership,relationship value, social learning processes, and context dimensions. Other parents as peer learners weredominant community members mentioned, yet parents’ own children, the staff and other site families figuredinto characterizations of community infrastructure. Parents expressed value in seeing their own children learn,were motivated to attend ECFE because of their children, and enjoyed expanding their network with parentswho were less familiar, yet who share the ECFE identity. Social learning processes involved sharing andICLS 2018 Proceedings1589© ISLSproblem solving (with peers), and observation (of children), both skillfully facilitated by professionals.Relationships provided parents with emotional and practical support, extended into other life spaces (e.g., theneighborhood, the child’s school), and helped reinforce the parenting identity. The learning context wasdescribed as one of safety, consistency, inclusion and democracy.Table 1. Community themes evident in ECFE participation and/or in engagement with ParentopiaThemesMembershipSocial learningprocessesRelationship valueContextECFE participationParentopia engagementOwn childrenClass parentsStaffParents in other classesMutual problem solvingSkilled facilitationDirected observationOwn childrenStaffClass adultsParents in other classesObservation of annotated imagesContinued class conversation1-1 contact with staff, parentsSupportive friendshipsDiverse perspectivesExtend into community, w/childShared identityTrusted, safe spaceSupportive toneDiverse perspectivesReduced isolationReinforce program, class identityPrivate, secure, safe spaceSupportive toneMost parents reported logging into parentopia, reading program information, viewing and/or creating posts inthe two months since launch; four had not revisited after account creation. Comments offered little on CoPdomain or practice dimensions, but related primarily to community (Table 1). Parents expressed joy at seeingimages of their children shared by staff, the opportunity to continue conversation or make 1-1 contact or post inclass or site wide forums for personalized problem-solving. Exposure to parents in site wide postings seensupported building connections and exposure to diverse perspectives. Parents appreciated the ‘socially secure’nature of the platform that maintained membership and the supportive tone of ECFE, and protected informationabout their children. They often compared their experiences with Facebook, which felt less hospitable.Though preliminary and limited by one sample, analysis from the voices of a diverse group of parentssuggests that a weekly program with other families can promote learning through Community of Practiceprinciples. Intentional design and implementation of a virtual platform to facilitate parent and staff connectivityand information sharing may extend CoP benefits for learning, identity and social support that promotecompetent parenting. A key lies in providing parents with online spaces that are secure, feel judgment free, areeasy to navigate, include staff and provide safe access to visual, annotated information about their children.ReferencesAzar, S. T. (2003). Adult development and parenthood: A social-cognitive perspective. In J. Demick & C.Andreoletti (Eds.), Handbook of adult development (pp. 391-415). New York: Springer.Campbell, D & Palm, G. (2018) Group parent education: Promoting parent learning and support. New York:Centgage.LaRossa, R. (2005). Grounded theory methods and qualitative family research. Journal of marriage andFamily, 67(4), 837-857.Laluvein, J. (2010). Parents, Teachers and the "Community of Practice."The Qualitative Report, 15(1), 176-195.Marienau, C. & Segal, J. (2006). Parents as developing adult learners. Child welfare, 85(5), 768-784.Nieuwboer, C. C., Fukkink, R. G., & Hermanns, J. M. A. (2013). Online programs as tools to improveparenting: A meta-analytic review. Children and Youth Services Review, 35(11), 1823-1829.Rogoff, B. (2003). The cultural nature of human development. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.Walker, S. (2017). Creating Parentopia: Design-based research to develop an interface for parent learningcommunities and networks. Proceedings of the 12th annual international conference on ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, Philadelphia, PA, June 22.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice Learning, Meaning and Identity, Cambridge University Press,Cambridge.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1590© ISLS