Professional Development for Secondary Science Teachers: AFaded Scaffolding Approach to Preparing Teachers to IntegrateComputingColby Tofel-Grehl, Kristin Searle, and David Feldoncolby.tg@usu.edu, kristin.searle@usu.edu, david.feldon@usu.eduUtah State UniversityAbstract: Though we often think of computing as a discrete discipline, computingcompetencies are integral to professional practices in STEM fields. The Next GenerationScience Standards demonstrate the importance of these disciplinary tools by directlyincorporating science, mathematics, and engineering with computing in grades K-12. To assistchildren with learning the knowledge and skills authentic to these disciplines, we need teacherswith appropriate content and pedagogical knowledge of computing. However, most K-12teachers have little to no computing background. This design-based research study exploreshow designing professional development (PD) with faded scaffolds and worked examples canfurther teacher training efforts to bring computing to core content classes. Forty-six teachersparticipated in summer PD opportunities that introduced them to electronic textiles as a vehiclefor integrating computing into their science classrooms. The professional and curriculumdevelopment processes evolved through an iterative design intended to build better scaffoldsfor teacher and student learning.As science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education focuses increasingly on engagingstudents with content in ways that align with the real-world practices of the disciplines, it is clear thatcomputational thinking and computing play major roles. For instance, the Next Generation Science Standards(NGSS) used in K-12 education in the United States identify computational thinking as one of eight key scienceand engineering practices. Further, evidence suggests that supporting students’ development of disciplinaryidentities across contexts is a promising approach to broadening participation in STEM fields (Allen & Eisenhart,2017; VanHorne & Bell, 2017). Accordingly, most research in the learning sciences has focused largely on howto design learning environments and activities to support students in developing these identities (Bell, Van Horne,& Cheng, 2017). Hands-on making activities that merge the physical and the digital have shown particular promisein terms of supporting students’ acquisition of disciplinary practices and identities by bringing together knowledgeand skills from multiple arenas of youths’ lives and providing for the investigation of real-world problems (TofelGrehl et al., 2017).By definition, making activities tend to be interest-driven, open-ended, and exploratory, lendingthemselves more frequently to out-of-school spaces or elective courses (Peppler et al., 2016; Sheridan et al., 2014).Given their promise for supporting youths’ disciplinary identities and, thus, their participation in STEM fields,we argue that making activities integrating computing need to move into the classroom in core content areas likemathematics and science. To do so, however, requires a teaching workforce prepared with sufficient content andpedagogical knowledge to integrate making activities. Such knowledge includes an understanding of the iterativedesign process and computing, as well as the ability to integrate them meaningfully into core K-12 content areas.Such practices are slowly appearing in preservice teacher preparation programs, but the vast majority of inserviceteachers lack such training. Further, inservice teachers have limited time to engage in professional development(PD) activities given the ongoing time demands of their classrooms. As a preliminary step towards identifyingand validating appropriate scaffolds to assist science teachers in developing computational content andpedagogical knowledge, this paper reports the results of a design-based research study on teacher professionaldevelopment integrating electronic textiles materials and computing in secondary science classrooms. We areguided by the following research question: How can we design professional learning environments to scaffoldmaking and computational thinking for classroom teachers with limited computing experience?E-textiles as a making medium for learning and engagementSocial perceptions that STEM professions are mostly the domain of Caucasian males, sometimes referred to as“locked clubhouses,” often discourage girls and underrepresented minorities when they make decisions aboutengaging in STEM activities (Malcolm & Malcolm-Piqueux, 2013; Margolis & Fisher, 2001). Numerousapproaches have attempted to broaden the participation of girls and underrepresented minorities in STEM,including mentorship, the design of more appealing activities (e.g. storytelling instead of programming; designingICLS 2018 Proceedings560© ISLSfor one’s community), and the use of novel tools (Calabrese Barton et al., 2017; Huffling et al., 2016; Kelleher &Pausch, 2007). Electronic textiles (e-textiles), which combine traditional aspects of fabric crafts with sewable,programmable electronic components, represent one such category of novel tools intended to disrupt stereotypesabout what STEM looks like and who can do it. The use of crafting frequently challenges conceptions of genderedstereotypes and engages more diverse socioeconomic and cultural groups (Kafai, Fields, & Searle, 2014).In contrast to learning about circuitry using conventional wires and breadboards, students working withe-textiles materials create circuits using conductive fibers or conductive Velcro, sensors for light, sound, andpressure, and actuators such as LEDs and speakers, combined with traditional aspects of fabric crafts like needles,thread, felt, and embroidery floss. Students sew circuits using these materials to produce wearable items (e.g. tshirts) with embedded computing for controlling the behavior of fabric artifacts. In so doing, they engage directlywith STEM content and skills through the design, prototyping, creation, and debugging of objects that are relevantto their interests and needs (Peppler & Bender, 2013; Vossoughi & Bevan, 2014). Because students personalizee-textiles designs to reflect their own aesthetic preferences, even within a specified project, no single designsolution is inherently correct; students may find many pathways to making their particular project functional.E-textile activities can promote learning by revealing the underlying structures and mechanisms ofcircuits in tangible and observable ways, because students must deliberately determine paths for conductive threadand the placement of components (LEDs, microprocessors, etc.) to build functioning circuits (Buechley, 2010).Through iterative development of design and testing of prototypes, e-textiles also engage students in debuggingactivities that are uncommon in existing curricula but essential skills in the fields of engineering and computing(Fields et al., 2012). For example, loose threads become short circuits, LEDs are incorrectly oriented relative tothe direction of current flow, or computer programs do not work as expected. Frequently there are combinationsof problems with circuitry, programming, and physical structure, forcing students to iteratively isolate and testmultiple potential problems before identifying solutions. Further, because materials are not prearranged (versusnails preconfigured on a breadboard), students conceptualize the circuit as a whole rather than focusing only onan arrangement of individual components.The growing body of research on e-textiles has shown that students not only learn science content aswell or in more meaningful ways (Tofel-Grehl et al., 2017), but also find ways to bridge home and schoolenvironments through e-textiles projects (Howell et al., 2016; Searle & Kafai, 2015). Given these positive results,efforts are underway to develop an e-textiles curricular unit for the Exploring Computer Science curriculum, apre-AP computer science course (Fields, Lui, & Kafai, 2017). Yet, we know that many schools do not offercomputer science, and among those that do not, many administrators cite a lack of qualified teachers and/or a needto focus on test-related subjects (Google & Gallup, 2016). As such, we focus on the challenge of preparinginservice teachers to incorporate e-textiles materials and activities into secondary science courses.Addressing challenges of bringing e-textiles to science classroomsIncorporating e-textiles projects into core content areas like science presents several challenges. First, the openended nature of the design endeavor necessitates a project-based learning approach that may not be familiar orcomfortable for many teachers. During preservice preparation, extensive training in such pedagogies isuncommon, and even when teachers do receive such training, their implementation is usually limited (Simmonset al., 1999). Second, the integration of science instruction with computing is often novel for teachers. Teachingintegrated STEM units, teachers can create learning environments that are more aligned with conditions outsideof school, breaking down the artificial boundaries of separate subjects and creating an experience that more closelymirrors professional practice in STEM disciplines—a major goal of the Next Generation Science Standards.Integrated STEM units can also help students form deeper understandings, see the “big picture,” make thecurriculum more aligned to students’ interests, and increase students’ motivation in school (Berlin, 1994; Czemiaket al., 1999). However, as with project-based learning, teachers do not usually receive training in strategies foreffective implementation (Mason, 1996). Third, while teachers at the high school level are usually well-versedin their science content knowledge, very few have received training in computational thinking, including specificprogramming skills (Epstein & Miller, 2011; Hargrave & Hsus, 2000). As such, they need additional training tosupport their students’ learning appropriately.To accommodate both the extent of training needed for teachers to be adequately prepared for animplementation of a high quality e-textiles curriculum and the limited opportunities available for professionaldevelopment, the design of such training requires attention to both effectiveness and efficiency. While learningoutcomes for more directed and more exploratory instructional strategies are often equivalent (e.g., Chase &Klahr, 2017; Klahr & Nigam, 2004; Likourezos & Kalyuga, 2017), the attainment of those outcomes typicallyoccurs more quickly under higher levels of instructional guidance. Thus, to accommodate the constraints onlearning time for inservice teachers, we adopted training strategies that engaged higher levels of explicitICLS 2018 Proceedings561© ISLSguidance—specifically a faded scaffolding approach.Faded scaffolding entails providing learners with supportive task structures and materials to guide theirearly learning endeavors. As they begin to master elements of the task, those supports are gradually withdrawnuntil learners are demonstrating successful use of the target knowledge without aid. One form of faded scaffoldingthat has a strong track record of success is the use of faded worked examples (Atkinson, Derry, Renkl, & Wortham,2000). In this model, a fully worked out example is provided to learners as a narrated or annotated demonstration,illustrating a successful performance. After the worked example has been studied or rehearsed, another isprovided that presents a partially completed task. Building on the previous model, the learners then perform thenecessary steps to complete the partial task. In successive examples, learners take on increasing levels ofautonomy by completing greater proportions of the constituent task elements without direct guidance, until theyare ultimately performing effectively without direct instructional support.The rationale for this approach is that learners can focus narrowly on specific elements of a task to masterthe necessary application of knowledge and skills in manageable pieces while maintaining an authentic wholetask context. By progressively expanding the scope of application for aspects of the larger task as they becomemore proficient, learners will neither be overwhelmed by the magnitude of a complex task, nor will they riskfloundering unproductively (Renkl & Atkinson, 2003). Given the inherent complexity of managing both newcontent and new pedagogical strategies (Feldon, 2007), we designed professional development materialsaccording to this model, asking teachers to begin working through fully developed curricular materials andgradually take on greater independence and creativity in crafting with e-textiles and coding the microprocessors.MethodsThe iterative development of PD detailed in this study had two primary goals: (1) the design of a professionallearning environment to scaffold making skills and strategies and (2) the development of teachers’ pedagogicalskills such that they could integrate computational thinking in their classrooms using e-textiles materials. Theseefforts were mindful that many inservice teachers not only have limited computing experience, but also may haverelevant gaps in their core content knowledge. Using a design-based research (DBR) approach, we focus ondesigning and implementing professional development using faded scaffolding to prepare teachers for integratingcomputing and STEM content in the context of their standards-driven, public school classrooms. DBR isparticularly useful for helping us to understand the underlying reasons why something is happening, the conditionsunder which a particular type of learning or interaction can take place, and the ways in which an individual’s mindinteracts with the environment and any available tools. Most importantly, DBR sees interventions that changefeatures of environments, activities or tools as part of the process to be studied. It is both prospective and reflective,meaning that designs are initially implemented based upon some hypothesized learning mechanism and means ofsupporting it through a particular design or design feature (Cobb et al., 2003). Later, as the design is implemented,new features emerge as salient and both design and implementation may be refined, resulting in iterative cyclesof design, implementation, analysis, redesign, reimplementation, and analysis.ParticipantsOver three of implementations of the professional development workshop, 108 teachers participated. Teacherscame from 9 school districts across three states of the intermountain Western United States. For the initial (pilot)implementation of the PD workshop, eleven teachers from three districts in two states participated. In the secondworkshop, 35 teachers participated from across three states and represented eight districts. In the thirdimplementation of the professional development workshop, we had 72 teachers from 17 districts participate. Ofthose 72 teachers, 10 were returning master teachers from the second professional development workshop. Theremaining 62 participated for the first time. Teachers’ schools were located in rural or suburban districts. Districtswere selected for participation based on population demographics; we sought to include teachers from highly ruralspaces with high percentages of students on free and reduced lunch. Participants’ years of teaching experienceranged from 2 years to over 40.Data collectionQualitative data and analysisObservations were conducted at each of the professional development workshops by experienced PD providersand documented via written and/or audio field notes. Workshops were also video and audio recorded; portions ofthose workshops were identified for transcription. Interviews were conducted with all participating teachers in thepilot workshop and 12 teachers at the first full implementation of the workshop. In full implementation,interviewees were selected based on the research team’s best guess about how they would adopt the curricularICLS 2018 Proceedings562© ISLSmaterials from the PD in their classrooms. We sought to interview teachers whom we thought were likely torepresent the full spectrum from high to low levels of implementation. Within this group, we also sought a rangeof teaching experiences and diversity by race, ethnicity, and gender. In addition to teacher participant interviews,one member of the research team interviewed members of the PD team to identify challenges from the providerperspective. Initial coding was completed using broad categories such as areas of confusion, areas requiringfurther practices, and areas missing needed supports.A grounded theory (Lincoln & Guba, 1995) framework was used to establish trending patterns withinboth the observed responses to the professional development as well as teacher interviews. Differences betweenareas of challenges were discussed between research team members until consensus was achieved as the correctproblem isolation and the best method of scaffolding that issue going forward.Quantitative data and analysisPrior to and directly after completing the professional development workshop, teachers completed a contentknowledge test that intended to capture possible gaps in teacher knowledge about circuitry (DIRECT;Determining and Interpreting Resistive Electric Circuits Concepts Test; Engelhardt & Beichner, 2004).Teachers’ pre- and post-tests were scored based on the percentage of correct responses.Overview of design and iterative development strategyWe began by developing an e-textiles curriculum based on a somewhat established progression of e-textilesprojects from the literature (Buechley & Qiu, 2013; Kafai et al., 2014). Further, because most microprocessorsdesigned for sewing e-textiles projects, including the LilyPad Arduino used in the curriculum, run on the Arduinoprogramming language, we assumed that teachers would learn Arduino (Buechley & Eisenberg, 2008). We thentested our suppositions about an appropriately scaffolded curriculum and professional learning experience forsecondary science teachers through successive cycles of implementation, analysis, and redesign, spanning asmaller pilot and two years of full implementation. To document the design process, we provided participants ineach professional development workshop with hard copies of the curriculum and asked them to take notes on whatworked and what was confusing. At the end of each implementation cycle, we examined these notes alongsideour own observations, field notes, and debriefing sessions and made appropriate changes to the curriculum priorto the next implementation. Taken together, these data sources helped us to understand where learning wasappropriately scaffolded for teachers and where more support was needed. We reflected these changes in how thePD was implemented during the next design cycle and in the curriculum itself.Our initial development of the curriculum and PD, informed by a panel of master teachers who reviewedand critiqued it, struggled with two challenges. Firstly, all parties were concerned with the length of time sewableprojects would take. For both in class instruction and the professional development workshop, concerns revolvedaround how to provide teachers and students enough content knowledge in addition to basic training incomputational concepts and practices, as well as crafting time, while still being mindful of the constraints of theschool day. Master panel teachers reported that they only allocate 1-2.5 weeks to teach electricity and energy.In addition, having teachers take a five-day professional development workshop caused concern.Because our target PD population was middle school and high school science teachers, we decided to streamlinethe science content sections of the PD and focus more of our time on coding and crafting with the teachers. Ourpilot PD workshop ran 24 total hours with approximately 3 hours on content, 12 hours on constructing anddesigning the projects, and 9 hours on coding. In the initial professional development, we began by having teachersmake paper circuit greeting cards, then made simple circuit bracelets with a snap switch, had teachers “hack” theirbracelets, and finally made a temperature sensing lunchbox. Of all these activities, we view the “bracelet hack”(Searle, Tofel-Grehl, & Allan, 2016) as the most crucial and it has remained a mainstay of our professionaldevelopment model and classroom implementations.The “bracelet hack” is intended to better scaffold the teachers’ ability to modify code by segregatingquestions about functional circuitry from questions about whether or not code was written correctly. Usingalligator clips, participants attach a microprocessor to a completed, functional snap switch bracelet project. Byensuring functional circuitry, the hack allows teachers to engage with code earlier in the instructional sequencewithout imposing a need to split attention between coding and crafting (i.e., avoiding the need to determinewhether a malfunction was the result of a short circuit or a coding error).Findings: data-driven, iterative PD developmentAfter completing the pilot workshop, our team met to discuss the challenges and mechanisms we could engage toimprove our model (see Table 1 for overview). We identified two areas of challenge. Firstly, we noted both fromour conversations with teachers and from their pre-test scores that teachers lacked sufficient content knowledgeICLS 2018 Proceedings563© ISLSto engage the projects most successfully. Several teachers indicated during their conversations with PD providersduring the construction time of the workshop that they did not feel like they knew the content on the pre-test; asone teacher stated, “I think I got a zero. Please don’t judge me for that.” Another commented, “I have a physicsdegree, and I couldn’t answer those questions. I wonder how my kids will do.” Specifically, we found teacherslacked knowledge of circuit types, as well as an understanding of electron transfer and how batteries store energy.To address these issues we added time to subsequent implementations of the PD workshop to bolster thetime focused on scientific content knowledge. We also moved away from the aesthetically pleasing paper circuitproject of making a greeting card to having ready-made templates of the various types of circuits to facilitateteachers’ rapid prototyping of various circuits and learning about resistance and polarity more concretely. Wealso increased the amount of time spent on content from 3 hours to 4.5 hours.Table 1: Summary of data-driven iterative PD developmentPD set upPilot Year:1Teacher Participated indistrict PD on e-textilesYear 1 PD 1:11 teachers3.5 day PDFollow up supportYear 1 PD 2:46 teachers4 day PDFollow up supportChallengesDesign process was personalized buttime consuming.Modifications to Address ChallengesUsed the deep work with teacher 1 as basisfor training PD design.Content knowledge weaknessFailure to engage follow-up helpDifficulty in beginning to read codeDifficulty Understanding codingcomponentsContinued content knowledge weaknessTeacherAdded Content knowledge training to PDCommenting code worksheetsIntroduced Coding SandwichAdded more scaffolded classroom instructionfor content knowledge-demosThe second area of challenge we identified from the pilot PD workshop was that teachers struggled toread even the most basic of code. Despite focused instruction from a computer scientist with extensiveundergraduate teaching experience, there appeared to be a literacy gap between reading the code andunderstanding what it meant. While teachers could read the words, within the context of the code they had littleidea what the syntax and words meant. Teachers reported feeling overwhelmed by simply looking at the code. Asone teacher noted, “this looks like a foreign language, except a foreign language at least uses the same punctuationand sentence structure.” Teachers struggled with reading more than a few words of code before reporting andbeing observed to be overloaded (e.g., putting head on table or closing the code file). We realized we needed tobegin at a much more basic place than the typical undergraduate introduction to computing; we hypothesized thatbecause our teacher population was older than the digital natives that populate undergraduate classes, we neededto introduce teachers more slowly to looking at and reading code. Thus, we developed a system of code readingand commenting that allowed teachers to engage the code more slowly through the use of faded scaffolds.To do this in the second implementation (Year One PD in Table 1), we used the Arduino Blink code firstas a group and discussed it together, much in the way a teacher might diagram a sentence in a grammar lesson.Then, we talked with teachers about the existing comments and what they might mean. In pairs, teachers rewrotethe comments in their own words. Finally, they worked in pairs to comment new lines of code based on theunderstandings they had developed in their earlier practice.We also saw teachers struggle with understanding just how specific they needed to be with what theyasked a computer to do. The teachers in the first professional development workshop, with the exception of onewho had copious CS experience, did not understand conceptually how code works to provide instructions to thecomputer. To help facilitate teachers’ understanding of how code works and why it needs to be specific, weengaged teachers in the process of “coding” one of the PD staff to make a sandwich. Teachers quickly learnedthat when they said, “open the mayo,” the PD provider would use a knife to saw open the bottle rather than twistoff the top. Teachers learned that specificity of directions is essential in computing and that each part of the codeperforms a very specific job.These scaffolds added an additional two hours of support for teachers to learn coding with the hope thatearlier engagement with a more scaffolded approach would facilitate better outcomes for teachers. More broadly,in teaching teachers who have never read code how to comprehend and teach the content, we have found a fadedscaffolding approach that emphasizes the importance of tracing, commenting, and explaining code as a means fordeveloping understanding (Lopez et al., 2008; Murphy et al., 2012; Teague & Lister, 2014) to be most effective.ICLS 2018 Proceedings564© ISLSUpon completion of the second workshop, we found that while coding outcomes were better, teachersstill needed more support in understanding the physics around electricity. Therefore, we built 15-minute contentacquisition podcast (CAP) videos (Kennedy et al., 2014) that we shared and discussed as part of the PD in its thirditeration. We coupled these CAP videos with classroom demonstrations that allowed teachers to see activities theycould use in their own instruction as worked examples. These scaffolds added an additional 2 hours ofprofessional development time focused on content.We also noted that teachers were still struggling with commenting and modifying code. Instead ofproceeding with teaching variables and set up, we created two worksheets that provided teachers with fadingworked examples of commenting and modifying code, respectively. We developed the worksheets with the intentof providing the teachers tools to document their attempts at modification and commenting. These worksheetsallowed teachers to track their efforts over the course of the workshop. The modification worksheet was relativelysimple. Using a T-chart design, it provided a framework for teachers to document what their coding goal was(what they wanted the lights to do) on one side and what modifications they made to the code on the other. Thefirst line of the T-chart was filled in with an example for them; this example was discussed and attempted as awhole group during the PD to provide a fully worked example. The commenting worksheet also proved relativelysimple; on the left side was the code pulled from Arduino and on the right were blank lines for teachers to fill intheir own comments. Within this process, we modeled reading a line of code and writing a comment that explainedwhat it meant. After working through a set of lines of code and commenting them as a larger group, we assignedthe next ten lines of code for the teachers to comment in pairs. We checked in with the pairs and found that nearlyall teachers were now capable of commenting the code with reasonable levels of accuracy. With these worksheets,the teachers ended up trying many more modifications and became more facile at knowing which pieces of codewere needed to replicate for their specified goal.After developing the professional development workshop over multiple iterations, we have found it mostsuccessful to use a three-stage faded scaffold to introduce teachers to the reading and commenting of code. In thefirst stage, teachers receive a piece of code for a “basic blink” program, which turns an LED on and off in onesecond increments, with the entirety of the comments included. The professional development leaders read anddiscuss the code, explicating what each line does and what the comments tell us about the code. Teachers thenattempt to use the “basic blink” code with a completed project, in our case their bracelets, and modify it to makethe lights blink in different sequences or frequencies. At that point, professional development leaders walk theteachers through the process of modifying the comments on the provided code so that their comments now matchthe modifications they have made. In the second stage, teachers receive the entire code and comments for the setup section of the code. They must then comment the lines of code that do not have comments. Answers andcomments are checked for correctness and accuracy. In the final stage of the training, teachers receive a sectionof code and are asked to comment every line. Teacher ability and comprehension are checked a final time beforeteachers begin learning the next process—writing code for themselves.The process of developing integrated scaffolds for teachers across science and computing can provecomplex and arduous. However, the value of building teacher trainings and materials in this way are multifaceted.By working with teachers in this way core skills and practices across STEM disciplines are integrated in authenticways. It also provides teachers a model of successful strategies and instructional practices they can implement intheir classrooms. By engaging teachers in learning through faded scaffolds and worked examples we can influencetheir use of those same instructional support strategies in their classrooms.DiscussionWithin the context of teacher knowledge there were several cogent trends distilled from the data. First, weobserved multiple knowledge gaps related to teacher content knowledge around circuits and electricity. Despitebeing secondary teachers holding degrees in relevant content areas, teachers often lacked the knowledge to makehands-on projects involving circuits successfully. In addition to a lack of science content knowledge, teachers alsolacked computing knowledge. While this was expected, we were surprised to find that the level of content standardfor introductory computer science at the undergraduate level far surpassed teachers’ comfort levels.In thinking about efforts to support teachers with the myriad of challenges they face in classrooms,researchers and professional development providers must be mindful of several things. First, it is important tomanage teacher learning in a fashion that teachers feel supported and secure in moving from the role of teacherto learner. While we may argue that the roles of teacher and learner ought be intertwined, many educators’ selfconcept as teachers involve the belief that they need to be an expert and knowledge giver. For teachers, beingable to correctly answer student questions is not just an issue of pride, but an issue of identity. Another issue forconsideration is managing the amount of learning and load with which teachers engage during professionaldevelopment. Such PD often asks teachers to learn new pedagogical skills, curricular content, and disciplinaryICLS 2018 Proceedings565© ISLSapproaches. This quantity of information imposes a highly taxing load on teachers that can leave them frustratedand insufficiently prepared to adopt new approaches to integrated learning effectively within their classrooms. Byengaging teachers in professional development that was constructed to scaffold learning using fading workedexamples, teachers are provided multiple advantages in their professional learning. In addition to benefitting theirown learning, those same scaffolds and examples can serve as meaningful tools for their students during classroominstruction.By using faded scaffolds and worked examples in teacher training, we were able to provide teacherstraining on a complex yet manageable set of interrelated projects that incorporate STEM practices along withclassroom science content. As we integrate the content and the practices for teachers in their own trainings, futurework can explore the way teachers engage and model this integration process in their own instructional practices.ReferencesAllen, C.D. & Eisenhart, M. (2017). Fighting for desired versions of a future self: How young women negotiatedSTEM-related identities in the discursive landscape of educational opportunity. Journal of the LearningSciences, 26(3), 407-436.Atkinson, R. K., Derry, S. J., Renkl, A., & Wortham, D. W. (2000). Learning from examples: Instructionalprinciples from the worked examples research. Review of Educational Research, 70, 181–214.Bell, P., Van Horne, K. & Cheng, B.H. (2017). Special issue: Designing learning environments for equitabledisciplinary identification. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 26, 367-375.Berlin, D. (1994). The integration of science and mathematics education: Highlights from the NSF/SSMAWingspread Conference plenary papers. School Science and Mathematics, 94, 32-35.Buechley, L. (2010). Questioning invisibility. Computer 43(4), 84–86.Buechley, L., & Eisenberg, M. (2008). The LilyPad Arduino: Toward wearable engineering for everyone. IEEEPervasive, 7, 12-15.Buechley, L. & Qiu, K. (2013). Sew electric. Cambridge, MA: HLT Press.Calabrese Barton, A., Tan, E., & Greenberg, D. (2017). The Makerspace movement: Sites of possibilities forequitable opportunities to engage underrepresented youth in STEM. Teachers College Record, 119, 144.Chase, C., & Klahr, D. (2017). Invention versus direct instruction: For some content, it’s a tie. Journal of ScienceEducational and Technology, 26, 582-596.Cobb, P., Confrey, J., diSessa, A., Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educational research.Educational Researcher, 32, 9-13.Czemiak, C., Weber, W., Sandmann, A., & Ahern, J. (1999). A literature review of science and mathematicsintegration. School Science and Mathematics, 99, 421-430.Epstein, D., & Miller, R. (2011). Slow off the mark: Elementary school teachers and the crisis in science,technology, engineering, and math education. Washington, DC: Center for American Progress.Feldon, D. F. (2007). Cognitive load and classroom teaching: The double-edged sword of automaticity.Educational Psychologist, 42, 123-137.Fields, D.A., Kafai, Y.B., Nakajima, T., & Goode, J. (2017). Teaching practices for making e-textiles in highschool computing classrooms. In, Proceedings of FabLearn ’17. Palo Alto, CA: Association forComputing Machinery.Fields, D. A., Lui, D. A., & Kafai, Y. B. (2017). Teaching computational thinking with e-textiles: High schoolteachers’ contextualizing strategies in Exploring Computer Science. In S. C. Kong, J. Sheldon, & K. Y.Li (Eds.), Conference proceedings of the International Conference on Computational ThinkingEducation 2017 (pp. 67-72). Hong Kong: The Education University of Hong Kong.Google, Inc. & Gallup, Inc. (2016). Trends in the state of computer science in U.S. K-12 schools. Retrieved fromhttp://goo.gl/j291EO.Hargrave, C. P., & Hsus, Y. (2000). Survey of instructional technology courses for preservice teachers. Journalof Technology and Teacher Education, 8, 303-314.Howell, J., Tofel-Grehl, C., Fields., D., & Duchamp. G. (2016). Sewing in science class: A case study of theimpact of e-textiles in motivating students in 8th grade science. In C. Williams-Pierce (Ed.), Teacherpioneers: Visions from the edge of the map. Pittsburgh, PA: ETC Press.Huffling, L., Benavides, A., Ash, M., Germuth, A., Matthews, C., & Carlone, B. (2016). Promoting equitableaccess to STEM in a summer herpetology fieldwork program. The Science Teacher, 84, 62-63.Kafai, Y. B., Fields, D. A., & Searle, K. A. (2012). Making learning visible: Connecting crafts, circuitry & codingin e-textile designs. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp.188-195). Sydney, Australia.ICLS 2018 Proceedings566© ISLSKafai, Y. B. Fields, D. A., & Searle, K. A. (2014). Electronic textiles as disruptive designs in schools: Supportingand challenging maker activities for learning. Harvard Educational Review, 84, 532-556Kafai, Y. B., Lee, E., Searle, K., Fields, D., Kaplan, E., & Lui, D. (2014). A crafts-oriented approach to computingin high school: Introducing computational concepts, practices, and perspectives with electronic textiles.ACM Transactions on Computing Education, 14(1).Kelleher, C. (2008). Using storytelling to introduce girls to computer programming. In Y.B. Kafai, C. Heeter, J.Kennedy, M.J., Kellems, R.O., Thomas, C.N., & Newton, J.R. (2014). Using content acquisition podcasts todeliver core content to preservice teacher candidates. Intervention in School and Clinic, 50, 163-168.Klahr, D., & Nigam, M. (2004). The equivalence o learning paths in early science instruction: Effects of directinstruction and discovery learning. Psychological Science, 15, 661-667.Likourezos, V., & Kalyuga, S. (2017). Instruction-first and problem-solving-first approaches: Alternativepathways to learning complex tasks. Instructional Science, 45, 195-219.Lincoln Y., & Guba, E. (1985). Naturalistic Inquiry. Newbury Park, CA: SAGE Publications.Lopez, M., Whalley, J., Robbins, P., & Lister, R. (2008). Relationships between reading, tracing, and writingskills in introductory programming. ICER ’08 Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop onComputing Education Research (pp. 101-112). Sydney, Australia.Malcolm, S. M., & Malcolm-Piquex, L. E. (2013). Critical mass revisited: Learning lessons from research ondiversity in STEM fields. Educational Researcher, 42, 176-178.Margolis, J. & Fisher, A. (2002). Unlocking the clubhouse. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Mason, T. (1996). Integrated curricula: Potential and problems. Journal of Teacher Education, 47, 263-270.Murphy, L., Fitzgerald, S., Lister, R., & McCauley, R. (2012). Ability to ‘explain in plain English’ linked toproficiency in computer-based programming. ICER ’12 Proceedings of the Eighth InternationalWorkshop on Computing Education Research (pp. 111-118). Sydney, Australia.Peppler, K., Halverson, E., & Kafai, Y. (Eds.). (2016). Makeology: Makerspaces as leanring environments. NewYork: Routledge.Peppler, K., & Bender, S. (2013). Maker movement spreads innovation one project at a time. Pi Delta Kappan,95(3), 22-27.Renkl, A., & Atkinson, R. (2003). Structuring the transition from example study to problem solving in cognitiveskill acquisition: A cognitive load perspective. Educational Psychologist, 38, 15-22.Searle, K. A., Tofel-Grehl, C., & Allan, V. (2016). The e-textiles bracelet hack. In, Proceedings of FabLearn ’16(pp. 107-110). Palo Alto, CA: Association for Computing Machinery.Searle, K. A. & Kafai, Y. B. (2015). Culturally responsive making with American Indian girls: Bridging theidentity gap in crafting and computing with electronic textiles. In Proceedings of the Third Conferenceon Gender and Information Technology (Gender IT ’15) (pp. 9-16). Philadelphia, PA: ACM.Sheridan, K., Halverson, E., Litts, B. K., Brahms, L., Owens, T., & Priebe-Jacobs, L. (2014). Learning in theMaking: A comparative case study of three makerspaces. Harvard Educational Review, 84, 505-531.Simmons, P. E., Emory, A., Carter, T., Coker, T., Finnegan, B., et al. (1999). Beginning teachers: Beliefs andclassroom actions. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 36, 930-954.Teague, D., & Lister, R. (2014). Blinded by their plight: Tracing and the preoperational programmer. In B. duBoulay, & J. Good (Eds.), Proceedings of the Psychology of Programming Interest Group AnnualConference (pp. 53-64). Cambridge, England: Darwin College.Tofel-Grehl, C., Fields, D., Searle, K., Maahs-Fladung, C., Feldon, D., Gu, G., & Sun, C. (2017). Electrifyingengagement in middle school science class: improving student interest through e-textiles. Journal ofScience Education and Technology, 1-12.Van Horne, K. & Bell, P. (2017). Youth disciplinary identification during participation in contemporary projectbased science investigations in school. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 26 (3), 437-476.Vossoughi, S. & Bevan, B. (2014). Making and tinkering: A review of the literature. Washington, DC:Commissioned paper by the Committee on Successful Out-of-School STEM Learning. Retrieved fromhttp://sites.nationalacademies.org/DBASSE/BOSE/CurrentProjects/DBASSE_086842AcknowledgmentsThis study was made possible by a grant from the National Science Foundation (award #1542801). Any opinions,findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do notnecessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. Special thanks go to Yasmin Kafai, KyliePeppler, Archie Holmes, Helen Hu, and Gloria Townsend for their support and mentorship in bringing the manyfacets of this project together.ICLS 2018 Proceedings567© ISLS