Examining Tensions Among Youth, Adults, and Curriculum asCo-Designers in 4-H STEM Learning Through Design ProgramsSteven M. Worker, University of California, Davis, smworker@ucdavis.eduCynthia Carter Ching, University of California, Davis, ccching@ucdavis.eduAbstract: This research study explored the relationships between three types of co-designers in4-H STEM learning through design programs: youth participants, volunteer educators, and thecurriculum. Each co-designer was involved in a process of planning and making in order toaccomplish a goal to satisfy requirements subject to constraints. The enactment of the learningenvironment revealed tensions between the co-designers evidenced in participation structures(negotiated between the curriculum and educators); abstract versus concrete approaches(between the educators and youth); and tensions amongst youth peers while engaging in smallgroup design teams (between curriculum and youth).Keywords: design-based science learning, making & tinkering, pedagogy, volunteer educatorsIntroductionThere is a recognized need for learning environments that support open-ended problem solving and encourageyoung people’s motivation to learn science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Making andtinkering (M&T) have gained interest for their potential to spark, sustain, and deepen young people’s participationin STEM (Gutwill, Hido & Sindorf, 2015). M&T practices, related to pedagogical strategies from project-basedlearning (PBL) (e.g., Barron et al., 1998), and design-based science learning, help foster problem solving,creativity, and ownership; support youth in developing dispositions as designers (and makers); and promoteSTEM learning (Kolodner et al., 2003; Roth, 2001). M&T and design-based science learning relies on pedagogicalapproaches that emphasize planning, designing, and making shareable artifacts through multiple iterations ofdesign, testing, and failure (Mehalik, Doppelt, & Schunn, 2008). Through these iterative and emergent practices,participants ultimately create shareable artifacts serving as external representations of knowledge (Puente, vanEijck, & Jochems, 2012). Artifacts become concrete objects of talk available for critique and reflection (Roth,1996). Research on instructional approaches integrating engineering design with science inquiry originated fromwork in schools (e.g., Learning-by-Design, Kolodner et al., 2003) and is related to M&T approaches often situatedin out-of-school contexts (e.g., Honey & Kanter, 2013).Research has often described idealized potential in M&T environments; for example, looking at levelingpower dynamics between students and teachers (Schwartz, DiGiacomo, & Gutiérrez, 2015) or highlighting thepotential of M&T to be more responsive to students’ needs and thus, having potential to address inequity in STEMeducation (Vossoughi, Escude, Kong, & Hooper, 2013). There has been less research on pedagogy, and even lesson the role of the curriculum (the sequence of facilitated activities), in shaping the learning environment forproductive youth learning. One fruitful line of inquiry may be to study these spaces “in the wild,” that is, in settingsnot organized or implemented by the researcher or by an experienced teacher. The dynamic nature of a learningenvironment, as well as the negotiations between actors, is messy, and greatly influences affordances forparticipation and learning. As such, multiple actors and artifacts shape the emergent nature of activities andsequences in the learning environment. We define “designer” as an actor in the learning environment exerting asubstantial influence over the learning process: youth participants, educator, and curriculum.M&T spaces abound in out-of-school time (OST). OST has been advanced as a space that nurtures youthinterest, ownership, and learning of STEM (NRC, 2009). Many OST programs are organized by adult volunteers,offering youth voluntary participation and choice, and engaging youth over an extended period (McLaughlin,2000). These volunteer educators often lack competence or confidence in implementing STEM education andmust respond to structural constraints (e.g., voluntary participation, frequent absences, wide range of ages,organizational priorities). OST may help shed light on pedagogy employed thus clarifying tensions among majorco-designers as the learning environment is co-constructed and how that, in turn, expands and/or limitsopportunities for youth to learn and develop.Theoretical points of referenceWe employed sociocultural theory to make meaning of data and understand participants’ values and meaningsthey ascribed to tools, practices, and expectations. Sociocultural theory places culture as a core concept in learningand posits that learning, development, and culture have a complex, intertwined relationship that contributes to aICLS 2016 Proceedings322© ISLSchild’s capacity and agency to function in the world (Rogoff, 2003). Sociocultural perspectives typically employparticipation as a metaphor to describe their intertwined nature of learning and development (Sfard, 1998). Ourresearch, using a sociocultural approach (e.g., Lave & Wenger, 1991), focused on instances signaling deepeningforms of participation and indicators of learning broader than standard-based definitions.MethodsThe purpose of the study was to describe the co-construction of learning environments by volunteer educators andyouth in a naturalistic setting. The research questions addressed by this study were:1. What are the pedagogical strategies employed by volunteer educators?2. How do these teaching strategies influence youth (i) engagement in design practices, (ii) learning ofSTEM, (iii) strengthening tool competencies, (iv) manifestations of learning dispositions, and (v)development of psychological ownership?By inquiring into these research questions, we sought to identify places of tension which revealed divergent goalsand expectations between participants.Research contextThe research context was three 4-H educational robotics programs, emphasizing STEM education, organized byadult volunteer educators in Alameda, Santa Clara, and Solano Counties, California. The decentralized nature ofthe 4-H organization, and its reliance on volunteer educators, affords educators freedom and authority to designtheir own program goals, lesson plans, and make adjustments throughout the year. There are few educationalstandards for 4-H educational programming, although there are curricula available to aid volunteers in sequencingcontent and facilitating with experiential pedagogy. In this study, educators employed the 4-H Junk DrawerRobotics (JDR) curriculum (Mahacek, Worker, & Mahacek, 2011). This written curriculum targeted middleschool youth with a sequence of “messing about” science inquiry activities followed by engineering designchallenges. Design activities invited youth to design, build, and test artifacts using common items (e.g., paperclips,rubber bands, craft sticks, tubing and syringes). The design challenges were framed in a non-competitiveatmosphere encouraging youth to experiment and tinker with multiple solution pathways. While the domain wasrobotics, the curriculum has more in common with tinkering with its emphasis on learning through messing aboutwith common materials. There were no pre-packaged kits (e.g., VEX, LEGO) and no computer programming.Data collection and analysesThis research project relied on naturalist and qualitative multiple-case study methodology relying on participantobservations and video clips, interviews with educators (Seidman, 2013), and focus groups with youth (Krueger& Casey, 2015). Data collection took place between 2014-2015 at three sites: Santa Clara, male educator andseven youth (three male, four female; between 11-16 years old) which met two-hours twice per month (sixmeetings); Solano, three educators (one male, two female) and eight youth (all male, between 10-12 years old)which met for an hour once per month (7 meetings); and Alameda, male educator and seven youth (3 male, 4female; between 9-15 years old) which met for an hour once per month (six meetings). The final data corpusconsisted of 17 field notes (with 139 minutes of video and 846 photographs), seven educator interviews (5individuals; 273 minutes), three youth focus groups and two individual interviews (130 minutes). Data analyseswas oriented by an inductive and comparative process beginning during field work in the form of analytical noteswhere we noted questions, emerging patterns, and themes (Merriam & Tisdell, 2016). Field notes were delimitedusing markers to segment data for deeper analysis. Analysis of focus group and interview data followed asystematic process of abstraction, delineating the transcripts using the same markers. This process of analyzingfield notes separately from the individual data supported triangulation as we sought to identity concurrence andinconsistencies in educator’s narrative from participant observations.FindingsThe unfolding of these 4-H learning environments was a complex progression involving interaction, negotiation,and contestation between three types of co-designers: the youth participants, the volunteer educator, and thecurriculum. We identified these as designers because each was involved in a process of planning and making inorder to accomplish a goal to satisfy requirements subject to constraints (the definition of design).Designer: Youth participants. Youth-as-designers, in a traditional sense, saw them designing, building,and testing physical artifacts where they learned through an iterative design process (as intended by thecurriculum). Youth were functioning in the role argued for by DiGiacomo and Gutiérrez (2014): “children shouldbe the designers, rather than consumer, of the artifacts with which they interact” (p. 729). The learningICLS 2016 Proceedings323© ISLSenvironment, as influenced by the other two co-designers, afforded opportunities for learning STEM content;strengthening tool competency; manifest learning dispositions: resilience, reciprocity, and playfulness (threeimportant learning dispositions outlined by Carr & Claxton, 2002); and developing psychological ownership.Youth were also autonomous agents in the learning environment, where they decided with whom and how tointeract with the materials, tools, peers, and adult educators while working in teams to design, construct, test, andredesign an artifact to fulfill pre-specified design requirements; i.e., some youth decided not to return in futuremeetings while others decided how they participated (e.g., “primary building”, “peripheral member”).Designer: Adult volunteer educators. Educators were also designers, though their design goals differedfrom youth – they were designers of the learning environment with a goal to support youth learning. Educatorsworked within structural constraints, such as fluctuating attendance and the need to make activities fun, alongwith their own values and expectations for STEM education. The design work of the educator took place beforeand during the meetings. The practices of educators included selecting and adapting curriculum activities;facilitating an activity including allocating time for participation structures; framing and orienting youth toconcepts and practices through varying pedagogical techniques- information transfer, autonomy support,metacognitive support, emotional coaching, and running interference. The participation structures and associatedpedagogical techniques served to open and/or close avenues for youth to learn.Designer: The curriculum. The curriculum was also a co-designer in the learning environment, with itsinteractions taking place both in real time by shaping interactions through its youth notebook and facilitator guideand through remote collaboration with the curriculum developer. The developer designed an intentional sequenceof activities, including suggested participation structures and pedagogical techniques (learning activities, groupsharing and reflection, and design & build), to generate expected learning goals for youth. The design work of thecurriculum developer included responding to future ideas of activity requirements and constraints, completed longbefore the educator and youth came together. This idea has theoretical basis; the curriculum, a social and historicalobject, was a cultural tool “designed to foster collaboration and interaction in thinking among people participatingin shared activity at a distance” (Rogoff, 2003, p. 274).There were points of alignment between the design work of the three co-designers as well as areas oftension. In this paper, we share three examples that illuminate areas of tension between the co-designers: educatorsand curriculum; educators and youth; and curriculum and youth.Participation structures: Tensions between the curriculum and educatorThe type and sequence of activities, as well as the pedagogy, afford and/or constrain youth participation andlearning. Youth were engaged in open-ended design practices, with opportunities for problem solving throughfailure and persistence (i.e., to manifest resiliency, playfulness, and reciprocity) are important in supporting thedevelopment of ownership, tool competency, and STEM content. Two co-designers were concerned with the typeand sequence of activities to promote youth learning – the curriculum and the educator - however, at times, therewere tensions between their solution pathways.We employed participation structures as an analytical lens, in line with sociocultural theory, to describepatterns of activity, the allocation of time, and corresponding interactional norms (see Jordan & Henderson, 1995).From the data analysis, we identified six discrete participation structures: lecture (educator-led explanation ofscience or engineering ideas), demonstration (educator-led demonstration of a concept, tool, device, or artifact),learning activity (an educational activity facilitated by the adult with youth having “hands-on” time withmanipulatives), group sharing and reflection (educator-facilitated group time where youth shared their artifactand received feedback from the adult and peers), scripted build (youth followed the educator’s instructions onassembling an artifact), and design and build (time for youth to design and build an artifact).We calculated the amount of time spent in each participation structure over time by site (See Figure 1)using timestamped field notes. The allocation of time varied by site with Solano dedicating the most time (81%)to design and build, Santa Clara with the next most frequent design and build (46%), and Alameda with the leasttime in design and build (12%) but more time for scripted build (31%) and learning activities (33%). OnlyAlameda offered scripted builds and allocated the most time in lecture (22%). Santa Clara spent more time ingroup sharing and reflection (22%) than any other site. There was a stark contrast between sites in the allocationof time (e.g., Solano with much more design and build and Alameda with significantly less).The tension was evident in the use of participation structures themselves. The 4-H Junk Drawer Roboticscurriculum only included three of the six participation structures – learning activity, sharing and reflection, anddesign and build – and did not include instructions for or recommend the lecture, demonstration, or scripted build.These three participation structures originated from the educators themselves. Interviews revealed that educatorsused the curriculum primarily as a legitimizer that this could be an appropriate 4-H program but then during theproject as one of many resources to structure and sequence the learning activities.ICLS 2016 Proceedings324© ISLSHowever, all educators went “off book” for avariety of reasons, resulting in variation inhow youth participated. At the same time,educators were dealing with pragmatic andstructural constraints for which thecurriculum did not attend. Educators wereoften adapting to structural constraints suchas voluntary participation, by ensuringmeetings were fun. The 4-H program, likemany other community-based youthprograms, is voluntary where youth havefreedom and flexibility to participate.Sawyer (Alameda): Because thisstill has to be fun. As much as I loveteaching engineering and beingexciting about this stuff we’redoing, if it’s not fun the kids won’tbe back. I’m not there to entertainthem per say. [The project] has to bemoving and keep going. If we arespending a lot of time reading booksor not doing anything, then the kidswill get bored and they won’t comeback to the next class. (Interview,10/13/2014)Sawyer recognized that while he wantedyouth to learn engineering, he had to ensuremeetings were fun for the youth, because ifthey were not, youth may not return. Thenature and definition of “fun” was seen asoffering hands-on activities. The term handson, however, was utilized in different waysby educators. One meaning focused ontinkering in service of reinforcingengineering learning while another meaningemphasized tinkering as a learning goal initself. This reflects another reason fordivergence between curriculum andeducators, that the educator’s goals, interests,and values shaped their instructional practicewith some spending more time in activitiesthey thought valuable and in which they hadan interest.Robin (Solano): I’m a hands-onlearner. … some of today’s youthare the same way. They’re not –they have to do it to physically learnit, and that’s how I am. So I like totinker and play with stuff.(Interview, 6/22/2015)Robin stated that she valued hands-on designFigure 1. Time in participation structures by site.experience for its value in the service oftinkering. Further discussion with Robin revealed connections between her valuing hands-on learning and thegoals she had for learning: having youth learn to be creative and developing a tinker mindset. This value was seenICLS 2016 Proceedings325© ISLSin the allocation of time at the Solano site in design and build (81%), which was much more time than the othertwo sites.Educators’ competence and confidence in engineering were related to their approach structuring thesessions with an indication of an inverse relationship where competence and confidence in engineering wereinversely related to pedagogies emphasizing metacognition and autonomy support and more information transferapproaches. In other words, educators who identified as professional engineers, who had been enculturated toprofessional engineering fields, were observed employing more information transfer pedagogical strategies.Eugene (Santa Clara): I wanted to teach them something specific ... So it just naturallyevolved and at the last meeting, I think the feedback from the kids wanted less talking,which is ok. We’ll try to accommodate that. But I think there was a lot of learning thathappened through that process. (Interview, 4/2/2014)Further in the interview, Eugene reiterated his belief that youth needed engineering fundamentals, information,and concepts before they could successfully start building. He believed this approach produced better learningoutcomes, but he recognized youth preference for more hands-on open build time.The significance of this discussion is in how participation structures afford and/or constrain youthparticipation and learning. Data revealed that three participation structures – lecture, demonstration, and scriptedbuild – primarily afforded STEM content learning and tool competency. The other three participation structures– learning activity, sharing and reflection, and design & build – afforded a broader range of learning. Learningactivities were not about engaging in design practices or building, but rather, becoming familiar with a STEMconcept though youth were observed manifesting a playful disposition, showing creative behavior in response totheir peers and the educator. Group sharing and reflection was always in relation to something youth had built,and hence, served as evidence that youth had engaged in design practices, improved their tool competency,manifested dispositions (resilience, reciprocity, and/or playfulness), and developed a sense of psychologicalownership. Scripted build was focused on youth following instructions to build the same artifact. Youth hadopportunities to use tools - soldering irons, heat guns, and multimeters - to make something. An importantdistinction in tool competency between design & build and scripted build was that in the former, youth hadfreedom to choose when to use a particular tool, whereas in the later, there was an ordered sequence. We oftenobserved youth using tools that we thought were not best suited for a material modification, and yet, this autonomyafforded youth opportunities to grow their tool competency, by using tools, learning how tools functioned, whattheir limitations were, all in the service of building a shareable artifact. During design and build, youth engagedin design practices where they generated ideas to meet the challenge (design) and then built and tested prototypes(build). This process afforded opportunities for youth to manifest resilience as they encountered challenges andfailures, to contribute to each other (reciprocity), and be playful and experimental. Youth had opportunities tostrengthen their tool competency and develop a sense of psychological ownership for their artifact.Abstract or concrete approaches: Tensions between educator and youthThere has been longstanding friction between the developmental value of abstract/formal reasoning compared toconcrete approaches (described as “bricolage” by Turkle & Papert, 1990). Those advancing making and tinkeringcommonly maintain the value of hands-on tinkering to promote creativity and motivation. M&T may contributeto a more supportive environment to integrate thinking and acting where participants make, explore, test, build,and redesign through cycles of iteration. However, school-based norms often find themselves weaved into out-ofschool environments, and many of the educators in this study espoused abstract learning goals including thefundamentals of engineering, writing specifications (engineering notebooks), and transferring these principles toother areas in their lives. Across the study sites, I observed tension between educators’ emphasis on learningactivities to engage in more formal planning while youth preferred thinkering – a metaphor used by Roth (1996)to describe the “integral activity that had mental, material, practical, and social aspects” (p. 147).The tension was observed through the educator’s learning goals and emphasis on the planning aspects ofdesign while youth expressed their desire for “less talking” and more “building.” For example, youth were askedto draw their designs on paper before beginning to build with the materials. This approach represented both thecurriculum and educators’ values of abstract thinking, namely, dividing the process into discrete components: firstyouth develop a representation of the artifact and then they handle materials and use tools to build the artifact. Forexample, at the Solano site, youth were asked to draw, individually, a gripper to be added to their group’s arm.During group sharing, three youth had drawn devices using materials not available; one with “Dr. Octopus arms”,another with tongs to pick up the world, and a third with large metal claws. Two youth drew and shared designsincorporating with materials at-hand; one with a gripper using hydraulics while another with plate-like grippers.These two youth recognized constraints of materials which demonstrated awareness of design realities andICLS 2016 Proceedings326© ISLSmaterial properties. The excerpts highlight a shortcoming of abstract representation, namely, that when asked todraw a design, these youth engaged in playful and creative thinking – which does have a place in learning – notlimited by the properties of materials. However, their designs were not feasible or indicative of materialsconstraints. Furthermore, the process of developing a representation did not attend to the types of tools or theprocesses youth would need in order to complete their artifact. Had youth been able to use materials to think andact, their designs would have been naturally self-limiting due to the constraints of the materials’ propertiesthemselves. Youth engaging in tinkering with materials are naturally constrained by the materials and tools.Abstract representations can be fanciful and limitless, cultivating creativity, but tinkering with materials can befrustrating, promoting resiliency and persistence. In the context of a program emphasizing design practices,important learning concepts include constraints of materials which require analyzing trade-offs in design.In focus groups, youth expressed a preference for tinkering and building. One youth summed his feelingsfor his least favorite activities: when “we did not get to build stuff” (Gordon in Alameda, 5-3-2015) In SantaClara, youth preferred more build projects and less of the educator lecturing and demonstrating. One youthprovided a response to the educator’s question around “what would make this project more fun?”Jason (Youth):Make your things at the beginning a little more shorter.Eugene (Educator): Make my what things?Jason (Youth):The presentations, since I’m pretty sure some of us were gettingbored. …Eugene (Educator): Ok. Yep, I agree. I agree. I felt sort of like that. I like at the end youspent a lot of time building. But I think in the very beginning if Ididn’t talk a lot it would be difficult for you, in my mind, to startworking. Now, the last few sessions, I think we did a lot morebuilding. And I think that was a lot of fun, I agree. Absolutely.(Field Note Santa Clara, 3/26/2015)Tensions were evident when educators front loaded content (like Eugene in the excerpt) or had youthdraw designs before building- all around having youth work it out in their heads before they did it with their hands.Educators’ learning goals were a factor in allocation of time between participation structures and their pedagogicalstrategies. There was a contrast between more information transfer oriented participation structures (lecture,demonstration) and those affording more metacognitive and autonomy functions. The former was seen as“talking” and mostly focused on abstract concepts while the later involved youth tinkering and build time. Valuingabstract reasoning in this space served to reinforce school-based norms, something that may limit opportunitiesfor the very thing those advocating for M&T value- creativity, open-ended problem solving, and shifting of powerbalances between teachers and students.A primary builder: Tensions between youth and the curriculumProviding opportunities for collaborative work has become something of a standard for project-based learningutilizing a peer-support social organization model. This is often rationalized as a reflection of professional practice(Puente et al., 2012), providing peer scaffolding (Rogoff, 2003), or tapping into other benefits of collaborativelearning (Cohen, 1994), yet success has been found to depend on the quality of interaction (Barron, 2003). TheJunk Drawer Robotics curriculum advanced small group learning wherein youth would work in small groups toshare, design, and build together. Curriculum activities instructed educators to split youth into groups of two tofour. The social organization recommended by the curriculum was implemented by educators at two of the threesites, however, the educator at Santa Clara had youth build individual projects.Teamwork, advanced by the curriculum, and facilitated by the educator (at least at two sites), revealedanother tension, evident when one youth spent more hands-on time with the artifact than their team members,making more modifications to the artifact without asking or explaining to team members, issuing instructions toteam members, and acting as the spokesperson when sharing the team’s artifact. This occurred even thougheducators often verbalized their values: “You guys need to work as a team” (Joyce in Solano, 11/5/2014).We labeled a young person fulfilling this informal role the “primary builder” to designate the youth whocontrolled the team’s artifact. The primary builder did not attempt to include other team members and was notreceptive to their ideas; in essence, the primary builder controlled the artifact and excluded teammates. There wereconflicts between group members, often disagreements around design decisions, especially in the earlier meetings,however, as meetings progressed, and a primary builder was established, there were fewer arguments evident,almost as though the primary builder had established themselves as the boss. The primary builder phenomenonICLS 2016 Proceedings327© ISLSwas not without frustration on the part of other members. This example from the last meeting of the projectillustrates discontent for not being able to be more involved.Steven (Researcher):Greg (Youth):What was your least favorite activity?It might be the fact that I was just sitting around just handingsupplies to Jack while he built the whole thing. He basicallybuilt the whole thing. I just fastened everything ...Steven (Researcher):Tell me more about that.Greg (Youth):He was the mastermind of the whole thing. … So he gets mostof the credit for that. About maybe 75 percent credit for that.(Focus Group Solano, 4/1/2015)As quoted above, Greg’s least favorite experience was not being as involved in the building of the artifact as herecognized that Jack did most of the work. This experience was echoed by other youth who did not serve as aprimary builder in their respective groups. These other group members were often not included in significantdesign practices, yet continued to serve in legitimate, though peripheral, roles. For example, many of theseperipheral members created a flag which may have been a way of signaling “this is mine, I contributed” evenwhen the youth did not contribute to design of the primary artifact.This is an insight into the tension evident between the curriculum’s emphasis on collaborative work andthis not happening in practice, even with prompting (though not scaffolding) from the educator. The hazard of aprimary builder is in how it limits opportunities for other youth to engage in design practices, use tools, manifestdispositions, and develop ownership. Peripheral team members were not able to engage as fully in the designprocess, did not tinker as often, did not think through design decisions as often, and did not use as many tools.This certainly has consequences for the quality of learning afforded to peripheral team members. It also hasdisadvantages to the primary builder. Verbalizing design ideas with teammates facilitates communication,including conflicts, disagreements, and arguments, all of which may contribute to the generation of newperspectives and ideas.Conclusions and implicationsA particularly salient point illuminated by this paper is in how OST volunteer educators have to adapt tothe structural constraints of their respective settings. In interviews, educators spoke frequently regarding voluntaryparticipation in relation to their pedagogical practice, that is, having to consider that youth can “vote with theirfeet” (voluntary participation). Educators’ recognized that while they wanted youth to learn engineeringprinciples, they had to ensure meetings were fun, because if they were not, youth may not return. The nature anddefinition of fun was understood as offering hands-on activities; one educator was very emphatic – Sawyer: “Flatout, hands on.” (Interview, Alameda, 10/13/2014). Maintaining youth engagement and interest was often seen asso crucial, that volunteer educators felt they had to make compromises in order to maintain the fun. A consequenceare unplanned activities, like the Alameda scripted build, that preserved hands-on activities but at the expense ofaffording youth agency and opportunities to engage in design practices, strengthen tool competencies, exhibitresiliency, or improve feelings of ownership. These adaptations can also result in new and innovative activities,like a full-sized teeter-totter in Alameda. This activity could not have been included in a curriculum because ofexpense, technical knowledge to assemble, and space constraints, yet the educator’s interest and passion prevailed,coupled with the flexibility provided by institutional context, and youth got to experience the concept of lever(and pivot point, fulcrum, torque) through a novel whole-body experience. In summary, in OST spaces, volunteereducators bring with them their own notions about effective teaching, their own interest and values, and throughtheir pedagogical strategies, afford and constrain opportunities for youth to participate and learn.M&T spaces, emphasizing design practices, may indeed hold idealized potential to “engender new typesof participation structures where students and teachers can learn and become in practice, together” (DiGiacomo& Gutiérrez, 2014, p. 736). The results of this study, however, show how complex and problematic the levelingof power between teacher (and curriculum) and students may be in OST environments. Redefining relationshipsmay be possible, but it is not necessarily a virtue of M&T in and of itself, but rather in the complex relationshipsand dynamic negotiations between co-designers. Studying teaching practices “in the wild,” in settings facilitatedby educators with varying competencies, illuminated the complex negotiations between three co-designers –youth, volunteer educators, and the curriculum – which explored questions about who can and does decide thenature of the activity structures.This study contributes to our growing understanding of STEM learning through design in out-of-schooltime by illuminating tensions among major co-designers and how that, in turn, afforded and/or constrainedICLS 2016 Proceedings328© ISLSopportunities for youth to learn and develop. These co-actors were not without conflict, thus suggesting that thesespaces and pedagogies do not exemplify STEM learning on their own, but neither do they preclude practices thatdeepen young people's interest and motivation for STEM learning.ReferencesBarron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307-359.Barron, B.J.S., Schwartz, D.L., Vye, N.J., Moore, A., Petrosino, A., Zech, L., & Bransford, J.D. (1998). Doingwith understanding: Lessons from research on problem- and project-based learning, Journal of theLearning Sciences, 7(3-4), 271-311.Carr, M., & Claxton, G. (2002). Tracking the development of learning dispositions. Assessment in education:Principles, policy & practice, 91(1), 9-37.Cohen, E.G. (1994). Restructuring the classroom: Conditions for productive small groups. Review of EducationalResearch, 64(1), 1-35.DiGiacomo, D.K., & Gutiérrez, K.D. (2014). Learning and becoming in an after school program: The relationshipas a tool for equity within the practices of making and tinkering. In J.L. Poman et al. (Eds.), Learningand Becoming in Practice: The International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) 2014 (Vol. 2,pp. 729-736). Boulder, CO: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Gutwill, J.P., Hido, N. & Sindorf, L. (2015). Research to practice: Observing learning in tinkering activities.Curator: The Museum Journal, 58(2), 151-168.Honey, M. & Kanter, D.E. (2013). Design, make, play. New York: Routledge.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4(1), 39-103.Kolodner, J.L., Camp, P.J., Crismond, D., Fase, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J, Puntambekar, S., & Ryan, M. (2003).Problem-based learning meets case-based reasoning in the middle-school science classroom: Puttinglearning by design into practice. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(4), 495-547.Krueger, R.A. & Casey, M.A. (2015). Focus groups: A practical guide for applied research (5th Ed.). ThousandOaks, CA: Sage.Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge UniversityPress.Mahacek, R., Worker, S., & Mahacek, A. (2011). Junk drawer robotics curriculum. Chevy Chase, MD: National4-H Council.McLaughlin, M.W. (2000). Community counts: How youth organizations matter for youth development.Washington, DC: Public Education Network.Mehalik, M.M., Doppelt, Y., & Schunn, C.D. (2008). Middle-school science through design-based learning versusscripted inquiry. Journal of Engineering Education, 97(1), 71-85.Merriam, S.B., & Tisdell, E.J. (2016). Qualitative research: A guide to design and implementation (4th Ed.). SanFrancisco: Jossey-Bass.National Research Council. (2009). Learning science in informal environments. The National Academies Press.Puente, S.M.G., van Eijck, M., & Jochems, W. (2012). A sampled literature review of design-based learningapproaches: A search for key characteristics. International Journal of Technology and Design Education,23(3), 717-732.Rogoff, B. (2003). The cultural nature of human development. Oxford University Press.Roth, W-M. (1996). Art and artifact of children’s designing: A situated cognition perspective. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 5(2), 129-166.Roth, W-M. (2001). Learning science through technological design. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,38(7), 768-790.Schwartz, L.H., DiGiacomo, D., & Gutiérrez, K.D. (2015). Designing “contexts for tinkerability” withundergraduates and children within the El Pueblo Magico social design experiment. InternationalJournal for Research on Extended Education, 3(1), 94-113.Seidman, I. (2013). Interviewing as qualitative research: A guide for researchers in education and the socialsciences (4th Ed.). New York: Teachers College Press.Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one. Educational Researcher,27(2), 4-13.Turkle, S., & Papert, S. (1990). Epistemological pluralism: Styles and voices within the computer culture. Signs,16(1), 128-157.Vossoughi, S., Escude, M., Kong, F., & Hooper, P. (2013). Tinkering, learning & equity in the after-school setting.Paper presented at the FabLearn Conference, Stanford, CA.ICLS 2016 Proceedings329© ISLS