A New Facet: Building Multifaceted Engineering IdentityJordan O. James, Vanessa Svihla, Chen Qiu, and Abhaya Datye,ndnplanner@gmail.com, vsvihla@unm.edu, cqiu19@unm.edu, datye@unm.eduUniversity of New MexicoAbstract: We redesigned a first-year course to support diverse students to develop a sense ofbelonging and professional identity in engineering. We collected student work (N=104) andinterviewed a subset (n=8). Students cited altruism, family, camaraderie, work ethic, andenjoying science and mathematics. They positioned themselves as problem solvers capable ofthe hard work ahead. Students began to take up professional engineering identities withoutsacrificing prior identifies.Major issues, significance, and theoretical frameworkWithout understanding students’ perceptions and ways their past experiences might be relevant to engineeringdesign, we remain limited in our ability to design learning experiences that entice them to take up engineeringidentities, without sacrificing who they are. This view of identity as multifaceted directs us to consider how wemight jointly add new identities while preserving existing ones (Tracy & Trethewey, 2005). We argue that notexplicitly supporting students to maintain their other identities risks homogenizing them. In line with argumentsabout culturally sustaining pedagogies (Paris & Alim, 2014), we argue that this diversity in identity is key tosupporting students to become creative designers capable of tackling grand challenges. Building on students’funds of knowledge supports diverse student participation and development in engineering (Mejia, Drake, &Wilson-Lopez, 2015), positioning them as designers defining and solving problems in their communities. Thispositioning matters because identity and learning are intertwined, with changes in one altering opportunities inthe other (Holland, Lachicotte, Skinner, & Cain, 1998).MethodsWe sought to investigate a research question: How might a first-year design course shape diverse students’perceptions of what it means to be an engineer and support such students to bridge or build new facets of theiridentities without sacrificing existing identities? The course was a first-year 1-credit chemical engineeringcourse at a Hispanic-serving, very high research university. The students reflected the diversity of our state, witha majority of them from groups underrepresented in engineering. Many of them worked, supported families, andcame from low-income communities. Across four design-based research iterations, we completely redesignedthe course from its original format, which consisted primarily of faculty giving guest lectures. We developeddesign challenges that would build on students everyday experiences. For instance, the acid mine drainagechallenge tasked students with developing a prevention or emergency response system and a communityengagement strategy to aid a rural community whose water is contaminated by an abandoned mine, a topicmade relevant by current events in our state. Students completed activities intended to engage them more deeplyin the departmental culture and broader chemical engineering community. While this provided an experiencemany found interesting because they had so many choices, they did not connect this to their own pastexperiences. We therefore added a professional engineering identity letter to make this connection. Dataincluded student work and interviews on students’ perceptions of what an engineer does, how the first-year classwas preparing them and how their groups functioned on design challenges. All questions were semi-structuredand aimed to elicit information about their funds of knowledge, group dynamics and engineering designprocesses. We also collected student work in the form of professional engineering identity letters. Wetranscribed the interviews and used open coding.Results and discussionBroadly, students cited designing, problem solving, altruism, family, community, work ethic, and enjoyingscience and mathematics across both data sources. A majority of the students opted to address the letters to theirfuture selves, at a time when they were considering leaving engineering. They reminded their future selves oftheir work ethic, and that “You are ok with making mistakes, fixing them, and trying again.” Nearly 80% ofstudents cited altruism, and approximately 70% cited a long-term passion for or ability in STEM.Many students expressed a love of STEM and having STEM ability. They connected these todesigning, problem solving, and being able to help people or the environment by creating “solutions for realworld problems.” Students reflected on their shift from pure science to engineering. Jill explained how a highICLS 2018 Proceedings1427© ISLSschool job fostered a sense of altruism, which led her to a career pathway in medicine, which then because ofher passion for STEM, led her to engineering. Similarly, Lamont explained that he loved science and math, andin our class he “found out that I could use [his] new love to help many people across the globe.”Students were aware that the path ahead would challenge them. Jill explained that the designchallenges were “difficult, and it is much more of what an engineer actually does especially in the industry. […]I feel like this class—these design challenges are really representative of what you actually do in real life.” Jillviewed the design challenges as providing an opportunity to not just learn about engineering, but to alsoexperience it first hand. Some expressed surprise at finding such community within an engineering department.Easton explained that he initially expected engineering to be individualistic, and based on this, he wasn’t surethat engineering would be a good fit; because he developed connections with other students, he came to seeengineering as a good fit. By engaging students in the design challenges from the beginning, we were able toshift their perceptions of what it means to be an engineer.While some students cited having family members who are engineers and how this shaped theirmotivation for pursuing engineering, many are the first in their families to attend college and have not had muchinteraction with engineers. Such students referenced family in complex ways. For instance, several studentsconnected their experiences growing up in a community or family of limited means with their desire to helpothers as an engineer, a stance we reinforced in positioning students from rural communities as experts in theacid mine drainage challenge. Maya explained the acid mine challenge “impacted my life because our job notonly creates new things but helps others. I was able to relate to the struggle of not having clean water since myparents would tell me stories that they too had to drink from dirty rivers. […] The aspiration of helping peopleand coming from a humble family will make you succeed.” This helped Maya “realize that I do have a purposein this career.” We argue that students like Maya have great potential, particularly if they are supported to viewtheir life experiences as not only permissible, but relevant in solving design problems.Conclusions and implicationsStudents explained how their backgrounds, family and friends played an important role in choosing engineeringas their degree program, but also the role it played in their desire to build camaraderie with engineering peers inthe program. The students shared how these identities influenced their everyday learning. Our analysis revealeda pervasive reported belief that engineering would allow them to leverage their interests and abilities in STEMto solve problems. Unlike the stereotypical view of engineers motivated by money or pursuit of knowledge, ourstudents commonly expressed a strong sense of altruism, and this was commonly connected to their experiencesgrowing up in the face of struggles. By engaging diverse students in engineering design challenges andencouraging them to connect to the department, we are helping to correct misperceptions they bring aboutengineering. By also explicitly positioning them as having assets that are derived from their diverse experiencesand that matter in solving design problems, we have helped them feel like they belong in engineering. As wecontinue to refine our curriculum, we will build on these findings, supporting our students to maintainmultifaceted identities while adding new engineering facets.ReferencesHolland, D., Lachicotte, W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds. Cambridge,MA: Harvard University Press.Mejia, J. A., Drake, D., & Wilson-Lopez, A. (2015). Changes in Latino/a Adolescents’ Engineering Selfefficacy and Perceptions of Engineering After Addressing Authentic Engineering Design ChallengesProceedings of American Society for Engineering Education Annual Conference (pp. 1-14). Seattle,WA: ASEE.Paris, D., & Alim, H. S. (2014). What are we seeking to sustain through culturally sustaining pedagogy? Alovingcritiqueforward.HarvardEducationalReview,84(1),85-100.doi:10.17763/haer.84.1.982l873k2ht16m77Tracy, S. J., & Trethewey, A. (2005). Fracturing the Real‐Self↔ Fake‐Self Dichotomy: Moving Toward“Crystallized” Organizational Discourses and Identities. Communication Theory, 15(2), 168-195.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. EEC#1544233.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1428© ISLS