BioSCANN: A Collaborative Learning Platform That ScaffoldsScientific Inquiry in the Context of Interrupted Case StudiesLeslie Schneider, Jessica Henry, and Berri JacqueLeslie.schneider@tufts.edu, Jessica.henry@tufts.edu, berri.jacque@tufts.eduTufts UniversityAbstract: We present BioSCANN, a collaborative learning platform that scaffolds scientificinquiry in the context of Interrupted Case Studies. This technology-enhanced curriculumengages students by integrating experimental design and career awareness in the context of drugdiscovery. It supports teacher orchestration of scientific argumentation and builds studentconceptual understandings, career awareness, and self-efficacy. Preliminary results from sixclassrooms will be presented, providing insights into facilitating learning and career awarenessboth with and without technology.Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education has experienced a shift away from thememorization of facts, figures, and procedures toward engaging students in more authentic science practices andscientific argumentation. In response to this challenge, scholars have advanced the methods of collaborativeproblem-based learning (PBL) as a pedagogical framework to increase student understanding of science and longterm retention of content, as well as to improve their critical thinking skills, metacognition, willingness to assumedifficult tasks, persistence, motivation, and transfer of learning to new situations (Fortus, Krajcik, Dershimer,Marx & Mamlok-Naaman, 2005; Kolodner et al., 2003; Strobel & van Barneveld, 2009). In our own prior research(Jacque, 2015), we have advanced a more structured model of case-based learning using interrupted case studies(ICS) that scaffold evidence-based argumentation from scientific data given in piecemeal, building riskassessment skills critical for 21st-century health literacy in high school biology classrooms. By structuring casesinto a clear progression, we provide “interruption points” that allow teams of students to stay in sync and giveteachers an opportunity for planned or spontaneous whole-class discussions. This format also allows teachersmultiple opportunities to pose questions, review student responses, and to use those responses to address studentconceptions and to model answering questions appropriately (Herreid, 2005).The ICS approach can be challenging for teachers and to address this we have developed a web-basedinteractive learning environment called BioSCANN that scaffolds ICS-based learning scenarios that engage highschool students in collaborative scientific inquiry and argumentation. The BioSCANN technology environmentcan be used to author a unique workflow for an ICS that allows students to progress through set points ofreflection. At each step in the ICS, students use the Question-Method-Data-Conclusion framework to assess theirscientific argumentation. Students document their thinking and work in BioSCANN’s collective knowledge spaceand use this to discuss and debate issues. After making a decision based on data, the team then elects the next pathto take, allowing for a choose-your-own-adventure, game-like feel that inspires ownership. In this way,BioSCANN responds to the challenges of enacting ICS by: (1) allowing for multidirectional decision making –in which students can choose their own path of inquiry; (2) providing distinct content to each group to encourageclassroom discourse; (3) utilizing interactive technologies for group decision-making and reporting to the class;(4) creating a common data and results archive that supports teacher facilitation of scientific argumentation (SA).BioSCANN provides scaffolding that mimics the step-by-step iteration of scientific discovery and practices, whileproviding instructors with opportunities to manage discourse.In its current iteration, the BioSCANN curriculum is a five-day experience in which high school studentsare placed in teams that each play a distinct role as a member of a drug discovery team (animal care technician,financial consultant, research scientist, and medicinal chemist). The curriculum challenges students to worktogether in groups to design a new drug to combat HIV.The BioSCANN web platform facilitates the three phases of the ICS process: Exploration: Studentgroups use career-relevant information (roles) in the context of the specialized experimental methods and dataand are asked to solve the challenge of the day. Each group has only a small piece of the data needed to reach acomprehensive class-wide conclusion. In this phase, the teacher takes on the role of 'guide at the side’. Discourse:The entire class then coheres as a knowledge community to critique, debate and revise explanations, and makedecisions guided by the teacher. In this phase the teacher takes on the role of 'mentor at the center,' orchestratingclass-wide student discourse while, modeling the process of SA. Synthesis: Students then utilize evidence (data),to draw conclusions and explanations to select the next step they will take as a design team. In this phase, theteacher reprises their 'guide at the side' role as students return to their groups to synthesize findings and ideas andICLS 2018 Proceedings1489© ISLSto formulate the questions that will form the foundation of the next iteration of the three phases of the ICS. Inshort, BioSCANN acts as a scaffold for scientific argumentation via ICS and is a tool to facilitate the community’sinquiry process.The major research goals of this project are to better understand a) how to engage a broad range ofstudents in STEM-cognate careers and 2) to increase their skills in data interpretation and evidence-based problemsolving. In the first year of the project, we worked towards this goal by adapting a measure of career interest andgoal setting, Social Cognitive Career Theory (SCCT), provided to us by Dr. Robert Lent, one of the scholars whocreated the theory. This new tool measures Self Efficacy (SE), Outcome Expectations (OE), Interests, and CareerGoals, with the addition of items that target bioscience career awareness and awareness of education and trainingpathways for bioscience careers. We used a similar process to develop an instrument to measure correspondingfactors in teacher participants. For example, we believe that how a teacher perceives their student’s capacity mightcorrelate with student’s self-perceptionWe administered the SCCT instrument as a pre- and post-test with a sample of 19 high school studentswho participated in a summer 2017 pilot. Knowing that the student participant’s in the pilot are self-selected, wealso compared their responses to a group of age-matched high-school students who did not participate in the pilot.We found that in all cases, the pilot participants reported significantly higher SE, OE, and Interest than thecomparison group (unpaired t test, p = SE <.0001, OE 0.0002, Internest 0.003). This is expected given the selfselecting nature of recruitment for the pilot study. Importantly, we did not see a significant difference betweenthe pre-tests scoring of Goals of the pilot student participants and the comparison group (unpaired t test, p = .83).However, there was an increase in pre-to post Goals following participation in the pilot (paired t test p = .039).When looking at items from the new construct - Bioscience Career Awareness (CA), we saw the most dramaticpatterns and effects. Students showed significant gains in pre-post awareness of a number of other biosciencecareers and an increase in their overall awareness as well (paired t test, p = <.001).This poster is directly related to the conference theme of “exploring learning in real-world settings in aninterdisciplinary manner in order to understand how learning may be facilitated both with and withouttechnology” by showcasing impacts on students participating in BioSCANN. Our development of BioSCANNhas not only highlighted the challenges of such pedagogical technology environments, it has also revealed vitalnew opportunities for engaging teachers in the orchestration of a classroom learning community. Therefore, itwill unpack the role of technology in providing students with instructional “scaffolding” and a set of toolsthat promote team-based discourse and knowledge building that resemble the iterative nature of scientificdiscovery and practices. We will also address a key challenge when using this approach: there is a danger thatthe teacher's role will be subsumed by ensuring that the technology functions smoothly and students are staying“on task.” Moreover, from classroom evaluations of BioSCANN we have come to recognize that much of theunderlying pedagogy of ICS is hidden from teachers - implicit within the technology environment. Thus, teachersmay not fully exploit the ICS format as they guide the exploration, discourse and synthesis phases of the ICS.ReferencesFortus, D., Krajcik, J., Dershimer, R. C., Marx, R. W., & Mamlok‐Naaman, R. (2005). Design‐based science andreal‐world problem‐solving. International Journal of Science Education, 27(7), 855-879.Herreid, C. F. (2005). The interrupted case method. Journal of College Science Teaching, 35(2), 4-5.Jacque, B., Malanson, K., Bateman, K., Akeson, B., Cail, A., Doss, C., . . . Roundtree, E. (2013). The GreatDiseases Project: A partnership between Tufts Medical School and the Boston public schools. AcademicMedicine: Journal of the Association of American Medical Colleges, 88(5), 620.Jacque, B., Koch-Weser, S., Faux, R., & Meiri, K. (2015). Addressing health literacy challenges with a cuttingedge infectious disease curriculum for the high school biology classroom. Health Education & Behavior,43(1), 43-53.Kolodner, J. L., Camp, P. J., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., … & Ryan, M. (2003). Problembased learning meets case-based reasoning in the middle-school science classroom: Putting learning bydesign (tm) into practice. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(4), 495-547.Lent, Robert, Brown, Steven B., Hackett, Gail (August 1994). “Toward a Unifying Social Cognitive Theory ofCareer and Academic Interest, Choice, and Performance”. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 45, 79-122.Slotta, J. D. (2010). Evolving the classrooms of the future: The interplay of pedagogy, technology and community.In K. Mäkitalo-Siegl, F. Kaplan, J. Zottmann & F. Fischer (Eds.). Classroom of the Future. Orchestratingcollaborative spaces, pp. 215-242. Rotterdam: Sense.Strobel, J., & Van Barneveld, A. *(2009). When is PBL more effectie? A meta-synthesis of meta analysescomparing PBL to conventional classrooms. Interdisciplinary Journal of Problem-based Learning, 3, 4.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1490© ISLS