Identifying Methods to Induce Productive Confusion for ImprovingPerformance in PhysicsJeremiah Sullins, Katie Console, Rebecca Denton, and Clayton Henrichsonjsullins@harding.edu, kfinch1@harding.edu, rdenton1@harding.edu, chenrichson@harding.eduHarding UniversityAbstract: A gap currently exists in the literature regarding how to most effectively harness thepower of confusion in learning. In order to address this gap, the present study sought to explorewhich methods of confusion induction are most beneficial for deep learning. Results revealedthat Breakdown Scenarios were the most effective confusion induction technique compared toa lecture-based format. Additionally, significant interactions were discovered betweenBreakdown Scenarios and certain individual difference measures.IntroductionThe current study sought to demonstrate the most effective ways to induce the impasses that lead to productiveconfusion which in turn result in significant learning gains. The reason that we focused on confusion is becauseresearch has suggested that confusion is both prevalent in and important to learning (Craig et al., 2004; D’Mello& Graesser, 2011; D’Mello, Lehman, Pekrun & Graesser, 2014). According to these theories, confusion istriggered when learners are confronted with information that is inconsistent with existing knowledge and learnersare unsure about how to proceed. These events that trigger impasses place learners in a state of cognitivedisequilibrium, which is ostensibly associated with heightened physiological arousal and more intense thought aslearners attempt to resolve impasses.ProceduresFollowing the informed consent, participants completed the following tests: Achievement Goal Questionnaire andthe Attributional Complexity Scale. After the completion of the tests of individual differences, participantscompleted the pretest (counterbalanced with the posttest). Because the study was a laboratory-based randomizedexperimental trial, participants were randomly assignment to one of four levels of our independent variable (i.e.,induction of desirable confusion): 1) Breakdown Scenarios 2) Deep Questions 3) Intra-testing, and 4) Controlto determine impact on students' learning. In all sessions, participants watched pre-recorded “tutoring/contentdelivery”. Physics was the content domain used in all conditions. The physics content scripts were developed bya physics professor at the university where the research was conducted. In the Breakdown Scenario condition,participants were presented a scenario that does not work as expected. The participants were then asked to explainthe rationale (i.e., the physics principle) for why the scenario was not working. In the Deep Questions condition,participants were given questions that could only be answered by having a conceptual understanding of thematerial being covered. The questions were classified as deep according to an existing question taxonomy(Graesser & Person, 1994). The Intra-testing condition required students to complete a mathematically basedphysics problem. The control condition was an information delivery of the content.ResultsInitial data analysis revealed the largest differences between the Breakdown Scenarios condition and the Controlcondition. Because of this, Deep Questions and Intra-testing were removed from subsequent analyses. Resultsrevealed that participants in the Breakdown Scenarios (M = 2.55) learned significantly more from pretest toposttest compared to participants in the Control condition (M = .83), t (55) = 2.316, p = .024, d = .63. Additionally,a significant pairwise comparison was discovered between Condition and Attributional Complexity. Morespecifically, participants with high Attributional Complexity in the Breakdown condition (M = 3.00) hadsignificantly higher pretest to posttest change scores compared to those with high attributional complexity in theControl condition (M = .941), p = .03. Results revealed multiple significant pairwise comparisons betweenCondition and Goal Orientation. Participants in the Breakdown Scenario with Performance Approach GoalOrientation (M = 4.60) learned significant more than participants in the Control with Performance Approach GoalOrientation (M = .917), p = .019.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1585© ISLSPERCENT INCREASECondition by Goal Orientation40%30%Mast. App.20%Mast. Avd.Perf. App.10%Perf. Avd.0%BreakdownControlFigure 1. Learning gains for condition by goal orientation interaction.PERCENT INCREASECondition by Attributional Complexity30%20%10%0%HighLowBreakdownControlFigure 2. Learning gains for the condition by attributional complexity interaction.Scholarly significanceAdding to the body of research on emotions and learning, results suggest that Breakdown Scenarios were the mosteffective method to induce an impasse which in turn led to the highest learning gains compared to lecture basedinformation delivery. It is the opinion of the authors that the reason for the lack of significant learning taking placein the remaining conditions was due to the presence of frustration or hopeless confusion rather than a state ofproductive confusion. Frustration occurs when an individual experiences repeated failures and is stuck. Persistent(or hopeless) confusion occurs when conflict resolution fails and an individual is unable to restore equilibrium.The learners in the Breakdown Scenarios were most likely to engage in conflict resolution given the nature of thedifferent interventions. This conflict resolution required the learners in the Breakdown Scenarios to stop, think,effortfully deliberate, problem solve, and revise their existing mental models which in turn led to a deeperunderstanding and retention of the physics content being delivered. Educators need to think about confusion inlearning as an elastic slingshot. It has the potential to propel some learners into higher altitudes of understanding.However, pull too tight and the elastic breaks resulting in negligible or negative learning gains.ReferencesCraig, S. D., Graesser, A. C., Sullins, J. & Gholson, B. (2004). Affect and learning: An exploratory look into therole of affect in learning. Journal of Educational Media, 29, 241-250.D’Mello, S. K., & Graesser, A. C. (2011). The half-life of cognitive-affective states during complex learning.Cognition and Emotion, 25(7), 1299-1308.D'Mello, S. K., Lehman, B. A., Pekrun, R., & Graesser, A. C. (2014). Confusion can be beneficial for learning,Learning & Instruction, 29(1), 153-170.Graesser, A. C., & Person, N.K. (1994). Question asking during tutoring. American Educational ResearchJournal, 31, 104-137.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1586© ISLS