Assessment in a Digital Age:Rethinking Multimodal Artefacts in Higher EducationAmani Bell, The University of Sydney, amani.bell@sydney.edu.auJen Scott Curwood, The University of Sydney, js.curwood@sydney.edu.auJen Ross, University of Edinburgh, jen.ross@ed.ac.ukAbstract: Higher education institutions increasingly expect students to work effectively andcritically with multiple modes, semiotic resources, and digital tools. However, assessmentpractices are often insufficient to capture how the complex, collaborative nature ofmultimodal artefacts represents disciplinary knowledge. Drawing on theories and practicesrelated multimodality, mobility, and place, this study offers insight into the design andassessment of students’ digitally mediated work.IntroductionDigital assignments are increasingly part of the landscape of higher education, with educators in manydisciplines seeking to scaffold students’ competence and engagement with social, visual, interactive, andmultimodal representations. However, assessment rubrics for such assignments have not always kept pace:teachers may be consciously or unconsciously working with “a paradigm of assessment rooted in a print-basedtheoretic culture” (Curwood, 2012, p. 232). Consequently, technical and compositional assessment criteria donot always address the richness and complexity of multimodal work. Without criteria that can account for thiscomplexity, instruction, feedforward, and feedback cannot fully support students to develop theircommunicative capacities for future work in digital spaces.This poster describes work in progress from a collaborative project between members of the Centre forResearch into Learning and Innovation (The University of Sydney, Australia) and the Centre for Research inDigital Education (University of Edinburgh, UK). The aim of the research is to develop new insights into thenature of digital assignments and methodologies for their design and assessment, drawing on theories of placebased learning, mobility, and multimodality. The project addresses the following research questions:1. How can theories of mobilities and place-based learning inform research into and assessment ofmultimodal student work?2. How do university students use assessment criteria for self and peer assessment of multimodal work?3. How do teachers in higher education effectively design and assess students’ multimodal work?Theoretical framework and literature reviewMultimodality and multimodal composition: From theory to practiceLearning in a digital age involves the creation and assessment of multiple, multimodal, and multifaceted textualrepresentations. Informed by theories of multimodality and place-based learning, the construction of multimodaltexts includes decisions related to the presence, absence, and co-occurrence of alphabetic print with visual,audio, tactile, gestural, and spatial representations (Cope & Kalantzis, 2009). Whilst learning and literacy arestill grounded in decoding, comprehension, and production, the modalities within which they occur extend farbeyond written language. As Curwood (2012) notes, a focus on the meanings of multimodal student texts hasbeen a central emphasis of work in this area, but there is still a need for more nuanced understanding of the“complex ways in which technical skills, composition elements, modes, and meaning interact” (p. 242). Greaterattention to materiality, including artefacts (Pahl & Rowsell, 2011), movement (Leander & Vasudevan, 2009),and place (Ruitenberg, 2005) enriches this understanding, and we argue that the inclusion of multimodalcompositions in formal learning environments needs to consider how the conceptualisation, design, andassessment of such texts shape teaching and learning.Innovative digital assessment within higher educationHigher education institutions around the world are increasingly incorporating digital tools, spaces, and resourcesto support teaching and learning, and prepare graduates to work with technology, engage with multimodalartefacts, and be leaders within their respective fields (Adams Becker, Cummins, Davis, Freeman, Hall,Giesinger, &Ananthanarayanan, 2017), including in assessment tasks. Many teachers in higher education areseeking new approaches to incorporating technology into disciplinary learning, assessing collaborative, digitallyICLS 2018 Proceedings1713© ISLSmediated work, and facilitating student learning across modes, tools, and semiotic resources. With assessment,grade descriptors, rubrics, and exemplars are commonly used to increase the transparency of assessmentstandards and assist students to develop assessment literacy, yet we argue that teachers and students alike mustengage in meaning making with assessment expectations and standards. We suggest that teachers within highereducation need to consider how to create a dialogue with students around assessments.MethodologyOver two semesters in 2017 and 2018, this project analysed, in depth, the creation and assessment of work inundergraduate classes at the University of Sydney with 130 total students. The instructions given to studentswere to work in pairs to create a three-minute film about their “Australian cultural experience”, includingstructured narrative, interviews, cinematic elements, and a reflective account of the process. The initial stage ofthe research involved analysing existing processes and assignments, conducting interview and focus groups withstudents, interviews with tutors, and developing an assessment framework that uses multimodal and place-basedanalysis to understand student learning. Through the development of an innovative multimodal assessmentframework, we are redesigning, implementing, and analysing a new rubric in relation to the task, andcomparatively studying students’ developing understanding of multimodality and course content.Emergent findingsIn this section of our poster, we focus on the nature of the assignment rubric and how tutors and students engagewith this, drawing on our preliminary analysis of interviews, artefacts, and assessment guidance. The rubric forthis multimodal assignment – a three-minute film – carefully breaks down the different elements the students areexpected to include in their assignment, under the headings of ‘cultural narrative experience’, ‘cinematicelements’, and ‘collaboration’, with three categories for each criterion (‘does not meet’, ‘meets’ and ‘exceeds’).The criteria can usefully be characterised as an act of ‘decomposition’ (Bateman 2012, p.18) – where a holisticview of the multimodal artefact is broken down to focus on specific features or compositional elements (forexample use of lighting, diegetic and non-diegetic sound, and transitions).The tutor described an iterative process for assessing student work that aligns with the rubric but alsoattempts to achieve this holistic view. First, he watched all videos without making notes, so as to focus onoverall impressions and affective aspects. On the second viewing, the tutor took notes according the rubric andallocated a mark to each film. On the final viewing, he made some adjustments to the marks and comments asneeded. The question of what can be contained within the rubric and what, by necessity, goes beyond it in thesetypes of assessments, is central. The rubric guided students in the use of discipline-specific vocabulary andhighlighted the importance of collaboration in reflecting on the meaning of Australian culture and representingit within a multimodal composition, yet students also felt that it ‘left a lot of room for interpretation’.The next phase of the project will explore how this assignment rubric and support for students aroundthe assignment can capture more nuanced elements, including how compositional choices build or createtensions with the narrative, how to use multimodal elements to critique oversimplification of cultural meanings,and how to construct multimodal arguments. This revised rubric will then be implemented in the subsequentsemester to gain insight into how multimodal composition can be effectively assessed within higher education.ReferencesAdams Becker, S., Cummins, M., Davis, A., Freeman, A., Hall Giesinger, C., and Ananthanarayanan, V.(2017). NMC Horizon Report: 2017 higher education edition. Austin, TX: The New Media Consortium.Bateman, J. (2012). The decomposability of semiotic modes. In K. O’Halloran and B. Smith (Eds.), Multimodalstudies: Exploring issues and domains. New York: Routledge.Cope, B. & Kalantzis, M. (2009). A grammar of multimodality. International Journal of Learning, 16 (2), 361425.Curwood, J.S. (2012). Cultural shifts, multimodal representations, and assessment practices: A case study. ELearning and Digital Media, 9(2), 232-244.Leander, K. M., & Vasudevan, L. (2009). Multimodality and mobile culture. In C. Jewitt (Ed.), Handbook ofmultimodal analysis (pp. 127-139). New York, NY: Routledge.Pahl, K.H. & Rowsell, J. (2011). Artifactual critical literacy: A new perspective for literacy education. BerkeleyReview of Education, 2(2), 129-151.Ruitenberg, C. (2005). Deconstructing the experience of the local: Toward a radical pedagogy of place.Philosophy of Education Archive, 2005, 212-220.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1714© ISLS