Critique Processes in Digital JournalismJessie Nixon, University of Wisconsin Madison, nixon3@wisc.eduAbstract: Youth who participate in online communities such as DeviantArt and Scratchbenefit from a lively, voluntary critique practice, which is often absent from classroompractices. However, face-to-face participatory cultures can mirror the kind of practices foundin these online spaces. My research suggests that youth who participate in digital journalismengage in peer critique on a regular, ongoing basis; that youth use peer feedback from bothnovice and mentors to transform their understanding of digital journalism; and thatrecognition of an authentic, engaged audience can create organic critique opportunities.Keywords: digital journalism, critique, feedback, digital media productionMajor issues addressedAny brief visit to sites such as DeviantArt demonstrates that critique is a lively voluntary process in onlineparticipatory cultures (Jenkins et al., 2007). In online participatory cultures, youth members of communitiessuch as Scratch (Fields et al., 2013) and fan-fiction sites (Black, 2005; Magnifico, Curwood, & Lamar, 2015),regularly participate in organic critique and collaborative problem solving with like-minded peers as they feelthat their contributions matter (Jenkins et al., 2007). However, when critique processes are moved to theclassroom, critique is often teacher driven through carefully crafted peer review questions that encourage youthto respond as they believe their teachers would want to hear (DePardo & Freedman, 1988; Ball, 2013). Thisreduces critique to a list of narrow topics, or feedback, and minimizes the amount of time youth spendconducting careful analysis.Critique is not an easy task to teach, nor is it an easy task to learn. Critique requires moments ofinteraction where an author freely shares his or her draft with peers and discusses its ability to match theauthor’s vision. While feedback occurs constantly during production, critique requires a level of analysis onlypossible with an understanding of the author’s intent. This process becomes more complex when reviewers areasked to analyze digital texts that combine image, audio, and textual features into a single product. Perhaps forthis reason, little has been written about critique practices of digital texts inside and outside of the classroom.Ball (2012) argues that critique processes are highly contextual and that criteria for assessing digital texts shouldbe organically created with youth for each unique project. With this in mind, my case study explores thepossibilities of critique in an unique interest driven face-to-face participatory culture where youth engage invideo journalism production. The unique nature of digital journalism requires composing skills (coming up witha good story, characters); journalism skills (interviewing, ethics); video production skills (lighting, cameraangles); and video editing skills. This complex process opens up numerous opportunities for collaboration andcritique.My work explores two research questions:•Why do youth participate in critique while producing digital journalism?•How do youth use feedback from the critique practice to revise their work?Significance of the workMy study adds to current research on digital production providing a clearer understanding of youth digitalcritique processes. My study challenges traditional notions of peer review found in composition courses whichsuggests that critique is something that happens on a single peer review day and proposes that critique occursregularly throughout the production process. Moreover, while previous research suggests that most composersrecognize the complexity of audience throughout the composition process (Halverson & Magnifico, 2013), mywork demonstrates how this recognition can drive critique. This conclusion has important implications fordigital media educators who wish to create authentic opportunities for critique.Theoretical approachMy work is grounded in the understanding that composition is a socially constructed activity (Brandt, 1990;Dyson, 1995; Nystrand, 1986). Just as Bakhtin (1981) argues that writing is an interaction between an individualand the social world, I recognize that youths’ knowledge about writing is shaped by the socio-politicallandscape of the classroom; conversations with their peers; and interactions with educators. Moreover, as youthICLS 2018 Proceedings1049© ISLScompose texts, they integrate their own perceptions and perspectives on a given topic as language is neverneutral, but about “giving and getting different perspectives on experience” (Gee, 2001, p. 716). Critique,therefore, is a process whereby peers read a text with their own perspective and offer their own way of viewingthe world. As active members of a participatory culture (Jenkins et al., 2007), I seek to understand the catalyststhat inspire feedback and critique to occur, the extent to which youth seek out critique from their peers, theextent to which youth listen to their peers’ perspectives throughout the composition process, how theseperspectives mesh with their own perspectives, and then how this dialogic nature plays out as youth revise theirwork.Methodological approachI worked as a participant observer in a digital media course serving youth ages 15-18 for the length of oneproduction cycle. Observations and field notes were key to understanding the ongoing critique practice thatoccurred regularly. I coded my field notes noting the impetus for critique (teacher initiated, author initiated,audience initiated); the moments of critique (pre-production, filming, editing, and post production); and thetopics discussed during critique (cohesion of ideas, creating a clear message, and recognition of audience).I collected storyboards, rough cuts, and final cuts of videos to determine the extent to which youthincorporated their peers’ feedback. I conducted bidirectional artifact analysis, which combines narrativeanalysis, discourse analysis, and artifact analysis and allows researchers to move bidirectionally, “from finalproduct backward and from initial idea forward” (Halverson & Magnifico, 2013, p. 406). I explored therelationship between students’ final artifacts and their drafts to determine how and when students incorporatedelements of critique into their final products.Major findingsThe digital media course resembled participatory cultures found outside of school in that students were offeredlow barriers to artistic expression and civic engagement. In addition, students were intrinsically motivatedthrough a common interest in creating digital journalism about student culture. Each week, youth worked insmall groups to create video segments which were then combined to form their Friday video announcements, acomic and often satiric look at high school culture. This set up quickly created a community built on support,collaboration, and investment in one another’s creative work. As youth recognized that the success of the videoannouncements rested not only in their unique segment but also on the collective episode they came to adapttheir production practices. The collaborative goal of creating a successful and engaging program made feedbacka regular occurrence.Feedback catalystsThroughout the production process, youth engaged in teacher initiated, author initiated, and audience initiatedfeedback processes from both experts and peers.Table 1: Catalysts for Peer Feedback in Digital Journalism ProductionCatalyst For PeerFeedbackMoments of feedbackTeacher initiated1.2.3.Pitching stories to classmates during pre-productionViewing rough cuts of videos with classmates prior to final editingUsing self assessment rubrics post productionAuthor initiated1.2.Requesting group feedback throughout the planning processSoliciting input from group members and experts throughout the filmingprocessInviting feedback from all group members and experts with iMovie or FinalCut Pro knowledge during editing process3.Audience initiatedICLS 2018 Proceedings1.Offering feedback during chance encounters throughout the filming andediting process1050© ISLSThe teacher initiated feedback process occurred pre-production through story pitches; during production whileviewing rough cuts; and postproduction with self-assessments. Author initiated and audience initiated peerfeedback took place more regularly yet most often informally through group conversations. While authorsregularly sought feedback from their group, they also sought out expert classmates based on their knowledge ofsoftware and their reputation for using tools in innovative and creative ways. As youth became morecomfortable with the discourse of digital journalism, their roles wove back and forth between learning andmentoring. For example, one group was made up of five students, two of whom had extensive prior experiencewith Final Cut Pro. In the first two weeks, the two experts started off driving the revision choices whilepositioning themselves in front of the computer. After a week of watching and learning from the experts, novicestudents’ feedback increased and they started taking control of the mouse when they wanted to demonstratetheir vision to the rest of the group.Critique practicesWhile students regularly provided feedback to their group members regarding topics such as visual, audio, andediting choices, in depth critique most often occurred when tied to audience considerations. Students showedkeen attention to helping one another create segments with clear messages and visions that would hold theirpeers’ attention. This often came into play as many groups sought to create parodies of popular series or recreatepopular YouTube sensations. In particular, one group of three young producers sought to mimic a popularYouTube vlogger, but feared that their peers wouldn’t recognize the connection with the original. Theyregularly presented drafts of their videos to the peers in the classroom to better understand whether their largerpeer audience would understand their larger vision.Youth also regularly worked together to revise their segments so that their teacher, who served as theexecutive producer and represented the larger voice of the faculty, would allow their segments to be shownduring the Friday video announcements. Through this analysis, youth recognized two audiences: their peers andthe faculty at their school. They navigated the complexities of composing for two audiences through organicpeer critique practices.Using peer feedback for revisionEarly bidirectional artifact analysis suggests that youth revised their work constantly throughout the composingprocess using expert and peer feedback, picking and choosing when to use feedback in its entirety, when to usesuggestions as a guide to ask for peer assistance and additional critique, and when to ignore the feedback. Onegroup questioning the best method to provide viewers with supplemental information solicited teacher feedback,feedback from other groups, and talked through the options as a group coming up with a new solution thatincorporated elements of feedback from several sources. Interestingly, their choices were not made by whetheror not the feedback was from an expert, novice, or mentor, but whether the suggestions fit with the largermessage they wanted to convey in their final product.ReferencesBakhtin, M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: Four essays. Austin: University of Texas Press.Ball, C. (2012). Assessing scholarly multimedia: A rhetorical genre studies approach. TechnicalCommunications Quarterly, 21, 61-77.Ball, C. (2013). Adapting editorial peer review of webtexts for classroom use. Writing & Pedagogy, 5, 301-316.Black, R. (2005). Access and affiliation: The literacy and composition practices of English-language learners inan online fanfiction community. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 49(2), 118-128.Brandt, D. (1990). Literacy as involvement: The act of writers, readers, and texts. Carbondale, IL: SouthernIllinois University Press.DePardo, A. & Freedman, S. W. (1988). Peer response groups in the writing classroom: Theoretic foundationsand new directions. Review of Educational Research, 58(2): 119–149.Fields, D., Giang, M., & Kafai, Y. (2013). Understanding collaborative practices in the Scratch onlinecommunity: Patterns of participation among youth designers. Proceedings from CSCL 2013.Fields, D., Pantic, K., & Kafai, Y. B. (2015). “I have a tutorial for this”: The language of online peer support inthe Scratch programming community. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference onInteraction Design and Children (IDC '15) (pp. 229-238). NY: Association for Computing Machinery.Gee, J. (2001). Reading as situated language: A sociocognitive perspective. Journal of Adolescent & AdultLiteracy, 44(8), 714-725.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1051© ISLSHalverson, E. & Magnifico, A. (2013). Bidirectional artifact analysis: A method for analyzing digitallymediated creative processes. In R. Luckin, S. Puntambekar, P. Goodyear, B. L. Grabowski, J.Underwood, and N. Winters (Eds.), Handbook of Design in Educational Technology (Chapter 37).London: Taylor & Francis.Jenkins, H., Purushotma, R., Clinton, K., Weigel, M., & Robison, A. (2007). Confronting the challenges ofparticipatory culture: Media education for the 21st century. The MacArthur Foundation.Magnifico, M., Curwood, J., & Lammer, J. (2015). Words on the screen: broadening analysis of interactionsamong fanfiction writers and reviewers. Literacy, 49(3), 158-166.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1052© ISLS