Exploring Multimodal Scaffolds Supporting Middle SchoolStudents’ Construction of Causal-Mechanistic ScientificExplanationsNitasha Mathayas and David E. Brownmathaya2@illinois.edu, debrown@illinois.eduUniversity of Illinois at Urbana-ChampaignAbstract: Computer simulations help students visualize abstract scientific concepts. Yet theireffectiveness depends upon the kinds of supports students receive. In this study, we explore theverbal and gestural supports we provided to students as they viewed a computer model ofmolecular conduction and constructed causal-mechanistic explanations for heat transfer. Usinga complex systems and embodied approach to students’ conceptions, we conducted a crosscomparison case study of four students’ experiences with the simulation. By comparing studentswith richer scaffolding interactions to those with weaker scaffolds, we found that directingstudent attention towards causal elements in the simulation along with requesting them togesture about the function of those elements helped students develop sophisticated explanations.We describe these cases and reveal ways these scaffolds can and cannot be enacted with thesimulation. Implications for instruction and future work are described.IntroductionIn the United States, constructing causal explanations is one of the eight essential practices listed by the NextGeneration Science Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013). Computer simulations can help students to visualizehidden and unobservable elements underlying several physical phenomena, such as the motion of air moleculescausing pressure or the function of light rays in the working of mirrors, the formation of shadows, and in theoccurrence of seasons. Moreover, with technological advancements providing immersive experiences for learning(Lindgren & Johnson-Glenberg, 2013), students can partake in abstract scientific concepts in embodied wayswhere they can physically enact the behaviors of unobservable elements (e.g. Johnson-Glenberg, Birchfield,Tolentino, & Koziupa, 2014). However, the effectiveness of a simulation depends upon several factors such asthe kinds of support provided to learners, the design features of the simulation, and the role of the teacher inguiding students through the simulation (Smetana & Bell, 2012). Hence while immersive technologies continueto advance into the educational sphere, understanding the role of facilitation with and without technology is stilla priority. In this sense, our work is aligned with the goals of this conference where we are developing gestureaugmented computer simulations that support the construction of causal-mechanistic explanations (Braaten &Windschitl, 2011), while also examining how we can facilitate conceptual engagement using these simulations.Our research is part of a design-based research project developing gesture-enhanced simulations aboutheat transfer, air pressure, and the causes of the seasons over the course of four years. In the first year, we exploredhow students engaged with a mouse-controlled computer simulation that depicted a molecular model of heattransfer. We observed how students naturally gestured during their explanations and we explored different wayswe scaffolded (Wood, Bruner, & Ross, 1976) the development of these explanations. The analysis of this datawas then used to develop gestures that supported students’ scientific explanations in the successive years where agesture-enhanced simulation was used. In this paper, we focus on different ways we supported student interactionswith the mouse-controlled computer simulation, and we examine how our interactions with students helped themuse relevant ideas from the simulation to construct scientific explanations of heat transfer. Our research questionsare: (1) Did students’ explanations improve after they interacted with the computer simulation? And (2) How doesmultimodal (i.e. verbal and gestural) scaffolding influence student construction of causal-mechanisticexplanations?Theoretical orientationStudents’ conceptions in scienceBrown (2014) has proposed that knowledge is a complex system composed of a large number of knowledgeelements that are dynamically interacting with one another. Conceptions are structures that emerge from thedynamics of this system, and stable conceptions are robust structures that persist through changes in the system.There is also mounting evidence that scientific concepts are grounded in embodied schemas (Amin, Smith, &Wiser, 2014). Our sensorimotor perceptions inform and intuitively guide conceptual development. ThisICLS 2018 Proceedings56© ISLSperspective implies that learning is a dynamic, evolutionary and nonlinear process where conceptual structuresare embedded in larger knowledge systems involving both perceptual and mental states.Embodied cognitionResearch in cognitive science, MRI scanning, and psychology has shown that human cognition has deep roots insensorimotor processing (Wilson, 2002). Barsalou (2008) described cognition as grounded in “simulations,situated action, and on occasion, bodily states” (Barsalou, 2008, p. 619), in which the brain’s modal system forperception (e.g. vision, audition), action (e.g. movement) and emotion are involved in the formation of a mentalsimulation. In addition, Smith (2005) described cognition as a complex dynamic system where “intelligenceemerges in the interaction of an organism with an environment and as a result of sensory motor activity” (Smith,2005, p. 278). Consequently, conceptions are hypothetical entities representing stable states of a dynamic system.These stabilities emerge from the dynamic coupling of the body with the environment, and stable states gainresilience when corporal modalities are synergistically linked with each other and with the physical eventexperienced at that moment in time.Applying ideas from both domains, we think of students’ explanations as dynamic constructions in whichprior knowledge and sensorimotor experiences contribute to the dynamic formation of a conception. Forinstructors supporting students during their active construction of mechanistic explanations, scaffolding thataddresses embodied resources and integrates multimodal representations can be particularly fruitful in fosteringstable scientific conceptions. However, this perspective does not explain what scaffolds look like in instruction,or how, and when they should be implemented. Taking Wood, Bruner, and Ross’s (1976) notions of scaffoldingfunctions as a guiding principle for this study, we conducted a preliminary investigation about the role thatscaffolding played when we facilitated students’ use of gestures and a computer simulation while constructingcausal-mechanistic explanations. We identify these scaffolding moves in this paper and describe the multimodalnature of these scaffolds.MethodsFor this study, we conducted a collective case study (Creswell, 2013) using select student interactions with thecomputer simulation. In this method, multiple cases are examined to better understand the phenomenon or event.While there is redundant information across the cases, this redundancy is either used to draw more compellingarguments (Barone, 2011), or it is used to investigate the nuances between cases that leads to a betterunderstanding of the phenomenon. We applied the latter meaning in our work, where we examined four studentsto better understand how scaffolding interactions in some cases led to complete causal-mechanistic explanations,while other interactions led to partial explanations. In the following subsections, we describe the context of thestudy and how our cases were selected.ContextIn the first year of the larger project, the team of researchers interviewed 36 middle school students (grades 6 to8) from the surrounding public schools of a large Midwestern University in USA about their understanding ofthree scientific phenomena: thermal conduction, air pressure, and the cause of seasons. Of these, 24 students (15boys and 9 girls) were interviewed on the topic of thermal conduction. The interviews were designed to be semistructured with three general phases: before, during, and after viewing a computer simulation depicting amolecular model of thermal conduction. Following are details of the conductive heat transfer interviews.Interview structurePhase 1The interviewer introduced a silver spoon partially immersed in a cup of hot water and let the student experienceheat transferring along the handle of the spoon. The student was then prompted for an explanation of how thehandle of the spoon got warm even though it was not in contact with the hot water. In cases where students werenot thinking of a molecular model of the spoon, the interviewer suggested that they consider a zoomed-in view ofthe spoon. Hence, the first phase of the interview involved exploring students’ initial explanatory ideas of heattransfer.Phase 2The interviewer showed students a simulation depicting two blocks of molecules vibrating at differenttemperatures (Figure 1a). The purpose of showing this was to prompt students to think in terms of dynamicmolecular structures of solids at different temperatures, and to understand that molecules vibrate more at highertemperatures. The second part of the simulation depicted these blocks connected to each other through a bar ofICLS 2018 Proceedings57© ISLSmolecules (Figure 1b). This simulation started out with the left block of molecules at a higher temperature thanthe right block, but when played, vibrating molecules on the left side collided with adjacent molecules in the barprompting them to collide into their neighbors causing a chain reaction of molecular collisions to spread to theright block of molecules. This made the right block of molecules vibrate more making the temperature gauge onthe right rise until the system achieved equilibrium. In this phase, the interviewer was prepared with prompts toguide the development of causal-mechanistic explanations. These prompts involved helping students connectrepresentations of temperature with molecules, asking for predictions before the simulation was played, promptingstudents to use their hands to represent the movement of molecules, and making connections between thesimulation and the spoon. In this exploratory phase, the interviewers added other forms of questions that theythought would help students. These explorations are included in the analysis of this study.(a)(b)Figure 1. (a) Blocks of molecules at different temperatures. (b) Blocks linked through a thin bar of molecules.Phase 3The interviewer closed the simulations and asked again how the handle of the spoon got warm. After studentsattempted their first explanation, the interviewer explored different prompts to help students recall importantfeatures from the simulation including gestures they had previously used, and then had them reexplain thephenomenon using their new tools.AnalysisEach interview was video recorded and edited to include the screen capture of the computer simulation used inthe interview. These edited videos were then transcribed and used for analysis. First, we segmented each studentinterview based upon scaffolding prompts included in our interview protocol. These moves are: asking forpredictions (IP), testing the phenomenon (TRY), suggesting molecules (MG), requesting a drawing (DRAW),showing simulation Figure 1a. (S1), showing simulation Figure 1b. (S2), requesting for an explanation postsimulation (Post-Sim), requesting to show what you mean (SHOW), requesting to show how the phenomenonoccurs (SHOW:X), using hands to represent a part (SHOW:PART) of the phenomenon, reifying student(SHOW:ST) gesture, and prompting student to use the interviewer’s (SHOW:INT) gesture. When the intervieweremployed one of these scaffolds, we marked this time in the transcript as the start of a new segment. While mostof the scaffolds were used sequentially in each student interview, some scaffolds were more flexible (such asSHOW) and were used at different times, while some (such as DRAW) were not used at all. Thus, each student’sinterview is composed of the three phases described previously, but is a unique sequence of segments within thephases.Next, we constructed a target causal-mechanistic explanation of heat transferring through the spoon,parsed this explanation into six main explanatory elements (Mathayas, Brown, & Lindgren, 2016), and then codedinterviews for the presence of these elements. Interrater agreement for this coding was 91.8 percent. Finally, weorganized the codes into a scoring scheme that emphasized increasing causal power of an explanation using acombination of the elements. The description of each score is in Table 1. A Wilcoxon’s signed ranks test wasapplied to check for significant differences in scores before and after the intervention. These scores were alsotraced over the course of a student’s interview to create charts depicting their evolving explanations. By the endof this process, we had 23 Explanatory Expression Charts that depicted each student’s evolving explanations aboutheat transfer in a spoon (one student’s interview was incomplete and was left out). Based on the results from thisanalysis, we selected cases for a closer inspection of scaffolding described next.Table 1. Scoring schemeScoreLevel of target explanation the student communicatedICLS 2018 Proceedings58© ISLS123456The spoon has moleculesMolecules of the spoon are in a rigid-structure and are position-dynamicAll of the above and molecules can interact and influence one anotherAll of the above and molecules wiggle more at a higher temperatureAll of the above and faster wiggling molecules collide with slower wiggling molecules making them move more.All of the above explained as a chain reaction along the length of the spoonFindingsThe Wilcoxon’s signed ranks test revealed that students’ Post-Simulation Scores were significantly higher thanPre-Simulation Scores (Z = 171, p < 0.001, W = 0.783). We also conducted this test to check for the effect of thesimulation and found that During Simulation Scores were significantly higher than Pre-Simulation Scores (Z =185.5, p < 0.001, W = 0.661). Therefore, in response to our first research question, students’ causal mechanisticexplanations improved after using the simulation. However, we noticed that half the students obtained a full scorein the post-simulation phase, while the other half reached a score of four or below. Therefore, to respond to oursecond research question, we selected four students that were representative of this division. On taking a closerlook at student scores, we noticed that there were similar forms of unplanned moves that interviewers used thatwere not captured in the charts, but these questions were asked in different ways for these four students. Thus,these students were selected for a cross case comparison study driven by the theoretical orientation of conceptionsas dynamically emergent structures with embodied sources. The student transcript, drawing, video recording,coding, and graphs were all used to analyze the interactions.We now report on our analysis of Andrew, Eric, Irene, and John (all names are pseudonyms). Andrewand Irene gave a full causal mechanistic explanation by the end of their interviews, whereas Eric and John gavepartial mechanistic explanations. We begin with Andrew who had the richest scaffolding with the interviewerfollowed by Eric, who had the least scaffolding of the four. We then visit Irene, who had a variation of Andrew’sinteraction, and then John who had a lesser level of scaffolding compared to Irene. As we move through eachfocal student in this section, we begin with a brief description of each student’s growth on the charts. The focalstudent description will introduce their explanations and then delve into their responses to interviewer promptswhile interacting with the simulation. Each focal student description will conclude with a summary of the mainscaffolds used in that interaction.Andrew – Full explanation, rich and varied interventionFigure 2a represents Andrew’s evolving explanations while viewing the simulation. While he was scored lowbefore he watched the simulation, there is considerable growth depicted in the graph around when he watched thesecond half of the simulation (Figure 1b). Before viewing the simulation, Andrew attributed heat transfer to asubstance flowing through the spoon. He expressed this idea in a drawing where heat molecules travelled over thelength of the spoon. However, when he watched the simulation, he expressed this notion of travelling againalthough the molecules in the simulation do not physically travel. The interviewer intervened at this point byreplaying the second half of the simulation with a new question. An excerpt is shared below. These transcripts arepartially edited to include relevant interactions, and the speaker’s gestures are included in parenthesis.Interviewer:Now remember that scientists think of temperature as how fast the molecules wiggle(raises both hands as fists and wiggles them), and so thinking about just the moleculesthemselves wiggling, how does that fast wiggling over here, on the left, make thesemolecules (points to molecules on the right of the simulation) wiggle fast?Andrew:It's almost like, it's like a chain reaction. So, like the wiggling there (points to thehotter block of molecules on the left of the simulation). They're wiggling, they'rebumping into each other, which makes them bump into that (points to the connectingbar) and travels all the way over to the handle side. (uses right hand to chop the airthree times while moving to his right).Interviewer:Andrew:Okay. Can you show how that works?Um, let me think about it, so…I don’t know how to show it.Interviewer:Can you maybe use your hands to represent the molecules and show how themolecules on the left make the molecules on the right wiggle faster?Andrew:So, what's happening is this hand is the molecules on the left (opens left hand up).and this is just going to be the spoon part (opens the right hand up next to the leftICLS 2018 Proceedings59© ISLSwith finger wiggling). So, they bump into each other (bumps both hands together),so this side (indicates left hand) is just bumping, they're all bumping into each other(wiggles fingers and touches them) and then since the spoon part is right there(indicates right hand) it bumps into those molecules here (bumps left hand’s fingersinto the right), which then if I move over (shifts both hands a little to his right), this(left hand) becomes the middle and that becomes the left (right hand) bumps into thatside, making them keep wiggling (circles index fingers around each other).In figure 2a this interaction occurred from where Andrew scored a 6 at S2 up to SHOW:PART. On examiningthis interaction from an instructional perspective, we see the interviewer making multiple pedagogical moves.First, he directly instructed Andrew about the relationship between molecular movement and temperature. Hereferred to the scientist’s notion of temperature to give his statement more authority. However, this instructionwas meant to remind Andrew of information they had already established at S1, thus we do not consider this moveas didactic, but a way to return Andrew’s conceptual trajectory towards target concepts he established during S1.The second move was to refocus Andrew’s attention to the wiggling of a single molecule. The interviewerachieved this using both speech and gestures, and thus redirected Andrew away from flow-like mechanisms toparticulate mechanisms. Third, we see a causal question targeting molecules and their agency in effectingmovement in other molecules. By asking “how does the wiggling on the left, make the molecules on the rightwiggle more?” we see the interviewer leveraging the current focus on wiggling molecules into thinking aboutcauses and effects. Andrew responded by using the simulation to build a causal explanation. However, thisinteraction does not end there, the interviewer executed two more moves related to the use of gestures. The firstrequest was to use gestures generally to describe a chain reaction, but with Andrew expressing his struggle, theinterviewer then grounded the question in the motion of molecules by specifying that Andrew gesture about themotion of molecules. This appeared to be fruitful for Andrew, who then described a chain reaction of collisionsin both speech and gestures. In terms of our theoretical lens, we think this move helped reinforce Andrew’s currentthinking beyond what would have occurred had he merely stated it. Since he used both speech and gesturessynergistically to describe the molecular collisions, we think that the interviewer’s move was perfectly timed tohelp synthesize the new perspective Andrew had taken.Summarizing this interaction, we see five scaffolds occurring in this interaction which are: 1) providingdirect instruction about mutually established facts, 2) refocusing student attention to the movement of molecules,3) causal questioning, 4) request to gesture to explain, and 5) request to represent molecules with hands to explain.We now consider these moves in the interactions that other students experienced.(a)(b)Figure 2. (a) Andrew’s scores in response to interviewer scaffolding. (b) Eric’s scores in response to interviewerscaffolding.Eric- Partial explanation, minimal interventionEric’s scores while watching the computer simulation (Figure 2b) appear unchanged across his interview.He expressed a molecular description of heat before watching the simulation, but he was scored for apartial explanation because he did not attribute causation to molecular collisions but to friction. As hewatched the first part of the simulation, his explanation changed into a description of heat as moleculesvibrating faster. Next, Eric needed to realize how molecular vibrations made the other molecules move.However, here we share what occurred when the interviewer used only planned scaffolding moves.Interviewer: What I'm going to do is pause this for a moment, and I am going to connect these(clicks on connecting bar on the simulation), imagine that this is like, if this wasthe bowl part of the spoon on the left and if this was the handle part that now weICLS 2018 Proceedings60© ISLShave more metal of the handle connecting them. So, what do you think you'regoing to see now when I hit play?Eric:The left are there vibrating, and they also go through the metal until it will gothrough the metal until it reaches the right.In this segment, we see that the interviewer followed the prompts from the interview protocol where he established the link between molecular representation and the silver spoon and asked for a prediction. In response, we find that Eric’s prediction is a partial explanation that he maintained after he watched the simulation, and again post-intervention. Even when the interviewer played the simulation for him, he repeated his response, clearly not seeing the molecules influencing the movement of other molecules in the simulation. We think that Eric’s prediction influenced what he noticed in the simulation and thus prevented him from noticing collisions. In terms of scaffolding, the interviewer’s moves directed Eric to use the simulation as a source for confirming his conception. No other prompts were used to direct him to use the simulation as a resource for constructing a new explanation.We think that this case provides a useful baseline for considering the effects of the other scaffolds. For example,viewing these prompts in contrast to the scaffolding Andrew received, we find that none of the five moves usedwith Andrew were used here. The two moves used here were 1) to establish the link to the spoon and 2) to ask for a prediction. Andrew received these two moves as well, but developed significantly with the other five moves.Thus, we are even more convinced of the need to focus student attention to single molecules moving, and to cuestudents to think causally.Irene – Full explanation, partial and multiple interventionsWe turn to Irene to further investigate these scaffolds. We see that she did not achieve a full score during thesimulation, but she did so after more interactions with the interviewer post-simulation. Since these scaffolds weresimilar in form to Andrew’s questions we share her interview to explore how these scaffolds were enacted in adifferent way for her. On examining the interaction with the simulation playing, Irene was asked to describe whatshe noticed. Once again, she did not notice molecular collisions, but she noticed increased wiggling and thechanges in the temperature gauges. At this point, the interviewer intervened with a question resembling one ofAndrew’s questions.Interviewer:So maybe look at one of the molecules over here (points to the left block ofmolecules) and try to see, what do you think is making these molecules over here(wiggles the mouse pointer over the right block of molecule) start to move faster?Irene:This side (points to the left block) is like pushing them (shifts index fingersideways a few times towards the right block) to the other side so like this sidecan start to move (points to the right side).This is a new conceptual observation for Irene that we think was triggered by the interviewer’s question. In thiscase we see that the interviewer refocused Irene’s attention towards a single molecule. He then followed up bydirecting her attention to the causal agency of molecules by asking her “What is making these start to movefaster?”. We get a more causal-mechanistic response from Irene where she attributes molecular pushing as thecause of more movement. However, unlike Andrew, no further moves were made to reinforce this revelation, andgiven that her post simulation explanation is only partially complete, this idea was apparently not fully taken upby Irene. However, on looking beyond the simulation, we noticed the interviewer followed up on her explanationby requesting that she gesture about molecules in two ways. In the first way (marked as SHOW:INT in Figure 3a)the interviewer asked her to close her fist to embody a molecule and asked her the causal question regardingtemperature, i.e. “Show me how the hot part makes the cold part hot?”. Irene responded to this question bydescribing how dipping her hand in hot water made it hot, and she described increased molecular movement dueto heat. Then the interviewer made a second request (marked as SHOW:PART in Figure 3a) and used his fists torepresent molecules with one side wiggling faster than the other, and asking her specifically to describe using herhands how the cold molecules moved faster as the hot molecules bumped into them. Irene adopted this gestureand represented two molecules, one hand as a faster wiggling molecule bumping into a stationery colder molecule,while attributing causation to the movement by stating that “the warm molecule goes and hits the cold molecules,and they both move at the same time”.In summary, four scaffolds occurred in this interaction. 1) refocusing student attention to the movementof a single molecule, 2) causal questioning, 3) request to gesture to explain, and 4) request to represent moleculeswith hands to explain. Comparing this to Andrew, we see that all four were used in his interaction as well. Thus,ICLS 2018 Proceedings61© ISLSwe see an increased value in providing students context-specific gestures (such as a wiggling fist to represent amolecule) and cueing the mechanism through the use of their fists as important embodied resources that canstrengthen their understanding of the molecular mechanisms. Next, we consider these moves again with John.(a)(b)Figure 3. (a) Irene’s scores in response to interviewer scaffolding. (b) John’s scores in response to interviewerscaffolding.John-Partial explanation, partial interventionWe bring up this final case to share the nuances of scaffolding that appeared to resemble the previous cases butdid not lead to similar results. In John’s case, the interviewer maintained focus on molecules but performed thesemoves before she played the simulation. We share a segment of this interaction where John is asked for aprediction before viewing the simulation.Interviewer:What do you think would happen once I connected a bar of molecules in themiddle over here? Between the hot and the cold?John:I think that all of the hot would get stuck on each of the cold eventually heat it up.(indicates the left block moving towards the right block).Interviewer:But you said that heat was also the moving molecules so, are the molecules doinganything to each other?John:No. It's just the heat because when there is no heat it stays still. So, when there isheat added, the molecules move. So once the hot part of the molecules touch thecold one, it will eventually move the molecules.Interviewer:John:(plays simulation and John watches it intently).So, like I said. Um, kind of. Like that side (points to the left block) is moving alot more. But, they are kind of getting, slower and slower (shifts hand along theconnecting bar). But, the heat is also touching this (points to the right block),which is kind of rising there (points to the right thermometer) which is alsomoving it.In this interaction, we see evidence of a few familiar moves. First, much like in Eric’s case, the interviewer asked John to make a prediction. He responded by claiming that when the blocks touched, heat would transfer over to the cooler side. Then, the interviewer reminded him of the movement of molecules,a fact they had established at S1, and directed John’s attention to them by asking the causal question “are the molecules doing anything to each other?”. However, John merely claimed that they would wigglethe same way he had observed during S1. Thus, the interviewer used three scaffolds in this segment. 1)To ask for a prediction, 2) to refocus student attention to the movement of molecules, and the 3) to ask a causal question. These scaffolds are the same moves that were used with Andrew and Irene with the difference being that John was not asked to gesture. However, on examining this case, we think that these three scaffolds did not appear to be asked at the right time. In Andrew’s and Irene’s case, these moves were asked with reference to events occurring in the simulation. They were not questions investigating thestudent’s conceptions. On the other hand, in John’s case, these questions were directed at his current conception which was that heat is a substance that travels through the molecules making them wiggle more. Therefore, much like Eric, John was not directed to use the simulation as a constructive resource fordeveloping an explanation. It seemed to be used as a resource to confirm his current explanation.DiscussionICLS 2018 Proceedings62© ISLSWhen we review how we facilitated student interactions with a computer simulation, we noted seven uniquescaffolds asked across these students. They are 1) establishing the link to the spoon, 2) asking for a prediction, 3)refocusing student attention to the movement of molecules, 4) causal questioning, 5) providing direct instructionabout mutually established facts, 6) requesting for gestures to explain, and 7) requesting to represent moleculeswith hands to explain. Andrew was asked all seven questions, followed by Irene who was asked six. John wasasked three of these questions while Eric was asked two. However, we do not think that a higher amount ofscaffolding led to sophisticated student explanations. These cases revealed that these moves are time and contextdependent, and that changing the order of questions did not lead to better explanations. For example, John wasasked causally about molecules, just like Irene. However, since his questions were asked before the simulationwas played, they did not have the same effect for him as it did for Irene. Moreover, we found that requests forgestures were productive for Andrew and Irene where not only did they ground the molecular motion in gestures,but they reified the causality of molecular collisions by helping students reflect on their ideas after viewing thesimulation. This work shows how scaffolding interactions with science simulations by synergistically usingverbal, visual, and gestural resources can lead to sophisticated causal explanations. While successful scienceenvironments benefit from synergistic scaffolding (Reiser & Tabak, 2014), creating the right balance requirescareful and timely synthesis using multiple representations and modalities. We have shown how causal questionsand gestures contribute to this synergy. Future work can examine this work in other scientific practices as well aswith new immersive technologies.ReferencesAmin, T. G., Smith, C. L., & Wiser, M. (2014). Student conceptions and conceptual change. In N. G. Lederman& S. K. Abell (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Science Education (Vol. 2), 57-81. New York, NY:Routledge.Barone, D. (2011). Case study research. In N. Duke & M. Malette (Eds.). Literacy research methodologies (pp.7-27). New York: Guilford.Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 617-645.Braaten, M. & Windschitl M. (2011). Working toward a stronger conceptualization of scientific explanations forscience education. Science Education, 95(4), 639-669.Brown D. E. (2014). Students’ conceptions as dynamically emergent structures. Science & Education, 23(7),1463-1483.Creswell, J. W. (2013). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five approaches. Los Angeles:Sage Publications Inc.Johnson-Glenberg, M. C., Birchfield, D. A., Tolentino, L., & Koziupa, T. (2014). Collaborative embodiedlearning in mixed reality motion-capture environments: Two science studies. Journal of EducationalPsychology, 106(1), 86.Lindgren, R. & Johnson-Glenberg, M. (2013). Emboldened by embodiment: Six precepts for research onembodied learning and mixed reality. Educational Researcher, 42(8), 445-452.Mathayas, N., Brown, D. E., & Lindgren, R. (2016, June). Exploring middle school students’ sense making of acomputer simulation about thermal conduction. Poster presented at the International Conference of theLearning Sciences: Transforming Learning, Empowering Learners, Singapore.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Reiser, B. J., & Tabak, I. (2014). Scaffolding. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learningsciences (2nd ed., pp. 44-62). New York: Cambridge University Press.Smetana, L. K., & Bell, R. L. (2012). Computer simulations to support science instruction and learning: A criticalreview of the literature. International Journal of Science Education, 34(9), 1337-1370.Smith, L. B. (2005). Cognition as a dynamic system: Principles from embodiment. Developmental Review, 25,278-298.Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(4), 625-636.Wood, D., Bruner, J. S., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child Psychologyand Child Psychiatry, 17, 89-100.AcknowledgmentsMany thanks to Robert E. Wallon and Robb Lindgren for their conversations throughout this process. Thismaterial is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under grant no. DUE-1432424. Anyopinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors anddo not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.ICLS 2018 Proceedings63© ISLS