Developing Assessment Tasks to Promote Student Sensemaking ofPhenomena and Flexible ThinkingEmily C. Miller, University of Wisconsin-Madison, emilycatherine329@gmail.comSusan Codere, CREATE for STEM, Michigan State University, Krajcik@msu.eduJoseph Krajcik, CREATE for STEM, Michigan State University, coderesu@msu.eduAbstract: The knowledge-in-use perspective states that useable knowledge allows for problemsolving, explaining real-world phenomena, and constructing new ideas. We developedassessment tasks that measure students’ capacity to solicit and select from an array of thedimensions of scientific knowledge to make sense of an unfamiliar phenomenon. Evidence ofknowledge-in-use includes depth of usable knowledge; flexibility in applying various ideas; anda robust community perspective. Our work shows that assessments can measure growth inknowledge-in-use.Problem and objectiveKnowledge-in-use (Pellegrino & Hilton, 2012) focuses on building and refining knowledge, solving problems,investigating the natural world and learning more when needed and results in deeper, more sophisticatedknowledge. The knowledge-in-use perspective reflects an increased awareness by learning scientists, scienceeducators and policymakers of the proficiencies learners will need as global citizens. (National Research Council,2012; Finnish National Board of Education, 2015). They will need to use and apply knowledge in novel ways tosolve the current and emerging challenges facing our world (OECD, 2016)Designing assessments that can measure knowledge-in-use is a formidable task, and the field continuesto struggle with how to construct assessments that challenge students to solve problems and makes sense ofphenomena. Assessments that align with this perspective must engage learners in a complex phenomenon, similarto those learners experience in daily life, and assess students’ capacity to apply multiple practices and ideas asaffordances for sensemaking. In this research, we developed and used assessments that allow students to usemultiple ideas and practices as tools to make sense of unfamiliar phenomena by promoting flexible thinking anddeveloping alternative explanations for these phenomena. For flexible thinking, students need to access andevaluate all of the ideas that they may use to make sense of the phenomenon. Our research questions include: 1)How can we design assessment tasks that measure students’ flexible use of knowledge to solicit and select froman array of the dimensions of scientific knowledge to make sense of an unfamiliar phenomenon or solve problems?2) How can we gather information to measure students’ capacity to engage in socially-situated practice ofconsidering and weighing possible alternatives for making sense of the phenomenon under study?This research presents one systematic method and related analysis for designing and evaluatingassessments that will engage learners in making sense of unfamiliar and complex phenomena. The tasks engagestudents in the figuring out process of using multiple ideas and practices to make sense of phenomena as well asgauge their depth and flexibility of knowledge, and connections to science as a social endeavor developed by andfor communities. We present related questions of teaching practices that develop knowledge-in-use.Theoretical frameworkOur approach stems from social constructivist theory that purports that sensemaking is an ongoing dialogue andas such, incorporating assessment elements that reflect the context-rich processes of learning allows for a moreaccurate portrayal of the figuring out process and of developing science competencies (Lave & Wenger, 1991).Thus building assessments that require a multiplicity of approaches to making sense of a phenomenon moreauthentically aligns with the language and activities of sensemaking. These assessments provide more access tounderrepresented groups who draw from diverse intellectual resources (Ladson-Billings, 2006).Methodology and analysisOur work is situated in upper elementary project-based learning environments in the third year of the MultipleLiteracies in Project-based Learning Project (ML-PBL; (Krajcik, Palincsar, & Miller, 2015). In this paper, wereport on data from a third grade project focusing on adaptation, ecology, climate, and extinction. The work forthis paper took place during SY2016-17 and SY2017-18. Our method for assessment development uses aniterative design-based research process. Our methods for designing tasks have three main objectives: 1)elaboration and synthesis of unit learning goals to develop enduring understandings and affordances, 2) creationof performance tasks and performances based on related phenomena and the enduring understanding, and 3)ICLS 2018 Proceedings1381© ISLStesting and redesign of tasks to provide evidence of student learning. Evidence that students have developedknowledge-in-use includes depth of knowledge of affordances; flexibility in applying an array of key scientificideas and practices; and a robust community perspective in which students make explicit connections to their localenvironment or social community.The data for this study stem from pre- and post-unit assessments of the Grade 3 ML-PBL Unit: Why doI see so many squirrels but I can’t find any stegosauruses? We used rubrics to score student responses. Weanalyzed the pre- and post-unit assessments of 80 students from four teachers and schools for depth, flexibilityand application of community resources.Major findingsOur analysis suggests that students can demonstrate knowledge-in-use as evidenced by full application andflexible use of science knowledge to make sense of complex phenomena. Learners’ depth of knowledge, flexibleuse of affordances and robust community perspective increased over time in a majority of cases, but in someclasses more than others, as well as across students with varying degrees of affordance. We found that studentsdeveloped more sophisticated models and explanations in the post- than the pre-assessment, even for thosestudents who did not show growth in flexible thinking. Students who grew in flexible thinking also developedsophistication of ideas.Discussion and significanceAssessment and “what we can measure” informs instruction. We keep this in mind as we develop assessmenttasks that are aligned to socially meaningful context-rich project-based learning environments. We integrate ideasfrom the practice world of scientists, and the knowledge-in-use perspective to inform teachers about whatevidences of students learning we care about. Based on our findings, questions emerged such as why someclassrooms fostered more growth than others in knowledge-in-use, and which instructional practices and contextspromote such development. We wonder about the relationship between richness of sensemaking discourse andthe development of knowledge-in-use. Our hope is that we not only use unit assessments to gather understandingof what students know, but also an understanding that learning is inseparable from what students can perform inthe PBL socially-situated context with a multiplicity of perspectives and community-grounded motivators for thescience learning (Gee, 2010). Our work demonstrates that assessments can elicit depth of student knowledge,flexibility in thinking, and community perspective.ReferencesFinnish National Board of Education (FNBE) (2015). National Core Curriculum for General Upper SecondarySchools 2015. Helsinki: Finnish National Board of Education (FNBE).Gee, J. P. (2010). A situated-sociocultural approach to literacy and technology. The new literacies: Multipleperspectives on research and practice (pp. 165-193). Guilford Publications.Krajcik, J.S., Palincsar, A., Miller, E., (2015). Multiple Literacies in Project-Based Learning, Lucas EducationResearch, a division of the George Lucas Educational Foundation.Ladson-Billings, G. (2006). Yes, but how do we do it? Practicing culturally relevant pedagogy. In J. Landsman& C.W. Lewis (Eds.), White teachers/diverse classrooms: A guide to building inclusive schools, promotinghigh expectations and eliminating racism (pp. 29–42). Sterling, VA: Stylus Publishers.Lave , J. , & Wenger , E. (1991). Situated learning: legitimate peripheral participation. New York: CambridgeUniversity Press.National Research Council (NRC). (2012). A framework for K - 12 science education: Practices, crosscuttingconcepts, and core ideas. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.OECD (2016), PISA 2015 Assessment and analytical framework: Science, reading, mathematic and financialliteracy. Paris: OECD Publishing.Pellegrino, J. W., & Hilton, M. L. (Eds.). (2012). Education for life and work: Developing transferable knowledgeand skills in the 21st century. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.AcknowledgementsThis work was funded by the Lucas Education Research, a division of the George Lucas Educational Foundation,APP# 13987. The ideas and opinions expressed in the paper are those of the authors.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1382© ISLS