From Computational Thinking to Computational Action:Understanding Changes in Computational Identity throughApp Inventor and the Internet of ThingsMike Tissenbaum, Mark Sherman, Josh Sheldon, and Hal Abelsonmiketissenbaum@gmail.com, shermanm@mit.edu, jsheldon@mit.edu, hal@mit.eduMassachusetts Institute of TechnologyAbstract: This paper advocates for a shift from teaching and assessing computational thinkingtowards one of computational action, which instead emphasizes learners’ ability to developcomputational artifacts that can impact their daily lives. We also discuss the importance ofdeveloping computational identity and digital empowerment as central to computational action.In order to understand how to support the development of computational identities and digitalempowerment, we examined a group of students (ages 15-19) engaged in a 5-week summercamp that combined MIT’s App Inventor and the Internet of Things (IoT). Results showed thatparticipants significantly improved their ability to use IoT for meaningful impact in theirworlds, and to develop IoT solutions to common problems in their everyday lives.IntroductionIn education, there has been a groundswell of research attempting to understand what it means for learners to“think computationally” (NAS, 2010). For many researchers, computational thinking has an epistemological goal,focusing on learners’ understanding of the nuanced elements of computation, including type checking, aliasing,modularization, loops, parallelism, operators, and data handling (NAS, 2010). Focusing on the means ofcomputing, rather than the process and ends, is one of the most persistent challenges of math and science education(Flegg et al., 2012), and risks reducing computing to something that feels irrelevant to learners’ daily lives. Inresponse, we argue that there is a need to move beyond computational thinking as the goal of computing education,to a perspective of computational action. Computational action emphasizes learners’ ability to developcomputational artifacts that impact their own lives and communities. By providing low-barrier means for studentsto design and implement solutions to personally relevant problems, we can help them develop their computationalidentities (i.e., being capable of creating meaningful change in their lives using computation and recognizing theirplace in the larger computing community) and their sense of digital empowerment (i.e., opportunities to put thatidentity into action) (Tissenbaum, Sheldon, Soep, Lee, 2017). With the growing ubiquity of mobile technologies,we have a unique opportunity to address this challenge by moving computation off of the computer and into theirdaily lives. Going one step further, the proliferation of the Internet of Things (IoT) has embedded computationinto everyday objects that connect with each other, and opens up new opportunities for people to computationallyconnect with their surroundings.This paper describes one strand of research that seeks to understand how a summer camp that combinedblocks-based mobile app development using MIT’s App Inventor (appinventor.mit.edu) with Arduino-Based IoTdevices promoted students’ computational action. To this end, two research questions drove this work: 1) Howdid the summer camp change students’ perceptions of their role with smartphones and IoT?; 2) How did the campsupport students’ ability to develop computational solutions to personally relevant problems?Below, we discuss the theoretical background for this work, the computational tools used, the structureof the summer camp, our findings from pre- post-surveys, and implications for computational action.MethodsParticipants and settingThis study took place over five two-hour sessions as part of a summer camp with an organization that aims tosupport underrepresented youth (mainly K-12 students) to develop STEM literacy. In total, 23 students took partin the camp, composed of 12 female and 11 male students. The participants ranged in age from 14 to 19 (meanage 15.9). The sessions were held at an East Coast university as part of the camp’s regular activities. Members ofthe research team served as instructors for each of the five sessions.Intervention designThis study employed a design-based approach that built upon previous iterations of an App Inventor + IoT camp.In the first session of the summer camp, participants were introduced to the App Inventor authoring environmentICLS 2018 Proceedings1657© ISLSand were given two introductory tutorials. In the second session, they were introduced to the IoT functionality ofApp Inventor. Next, the participants were split up into groups of two or three, and each group was given anotherIoT + App Inventor element to learn. In session three, students were placed into groups of three to four tocollaboratively pinpoint a challenge in their everyday lives and then design a solution using IoT + App Inventor.The students were given the entire fourth and half of the fifth session to work on their. During the fifth session,the students presented their work to the rest of the camp, as well as a larger audience of academics andtechnologists.Data collectionFor the purposes of this study, we focused on three questions, each of which was on the pre- and post-surveys: 1)“How could the way you use smartphones impact your life?”; 2) “How could the way you use the Internet ofThings impact your life?”; and 3) “How might you develop a system in your home that helps you monitor andtake care of your pet(s)?” To assess changes in participants’ thinking, we developed a set of rubrics to score thethree pre-post survey questions. The rubrics for Questions 1 and 2 aimed to understand changes in students’development of computational identities and digital empowerment. The third question aimed to assess changes instudents’ ability to engage in basic design thinking around a problem using IoT. Interrater reliability wasestablished between the lead researcher and another researcher well versed in the platform and domain.Findings and discussionFor the first question (use of smartphone in their lives), changes were not significant between the pre-test (M=1.24,SD=0.83) and post-test (M=1.41, SD=0.94); t(16)=-0.58, p = 0.283. For the second question (use of Internet ofThings), changes were significant between the pre-test (M=0.82, SD=0.88) and post-test (M= 1.71, SD= 0.96);t(16)=-2.75, p = .0049. The significant change in scores on Q2 revealed that participants developed more nuancein their understanding of the role that IoT can play in their world. More importantly, it also revealed an improvedawareness of participants’ ability to use IoT to solve problems in their lives. While changes in Q1 (use ofsmartphones) were not significant, the overall results showed positive change from pre- (M=1.24) to post-survey(M.1.41). This may be influenced by students already having strongly entrenched notions of what a smartphonecan do in their daily lives, as compared to IoT. For the third question (develop a system to monitor and take careof your pet), changes were significant at between the pre- (M=1.17, SD= 1.015) and post-surveys (M=1.88,SD=1.219); t(16)= -1.84, p = .0379. These gains seem to indicate that the enacted curriculum helped students todevelop approaches for articulating computational solutions to everyday problems. When we examined theparticipants’ answers individually, 8 of the 17 respondents got a perfect score on Q3 in the post-test, as comparedto only 3 in the pre-test. In many cases, students transitioned from vague descriptions (“I could create a systemthat would feed my animals and clean out their cages daily”) in their pre-test answers, to more detailed andactionable solutions (“You can use a light sensor to sense if the light in a room turns too dark, sync your phoneand be able to turn on the lights for them if you aren't home”).The findings above indicate several interesting aspects about the enacted curriculum and its focus oncomputational action. The overall shift in students’ perceptions of their own roles as producers, rather thanconsumers of digital technologies is encouraging. This is particularly true in the context of students who aretraditionally underrepresented in computing and STEM disciplines (Pinkard et al., 2017). The results of this study,especially regarding the change in the participants’ perceptions of the role of the Internet of Things and theirability to create with it, lay important groundwork for supporting students in the development of theircomputational identities. The results of the third question show how curricula that engage students in authenticopportunities to construct personally meaningful computational artifacts can help students to articulate morecomplex and complete computational solutions to other everyday problems.ReferencesFlegg, J., Mallet, D., & Lupton, M. (2012). Students' perceptions of the relevance of mathematics inengineering. Intl. Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology, 43(6), 717-732.National Academies of Science. (2010). Report of a workshop on the scope and nature of computational thinking.Washington DC: National Academies Press.Pinkard, N., Erete, S., Martin, C. K., & McKinney de Royston, M. (2017). Digital Youth Divas: ExploringNarrative-Driven Curriculum to Spark Middle School Girls’ Interest in ComputationalActivities. Journal of the Learning Sciences, (just-accepted).Tissenbaum, M., Sheldon, J., Seop, L., Lee, C., (2017, April). Critical Computational Empowerment: EngagingYouth as Shapers of the Digital Future. IEEE Global Engineering Education Conference, Greece.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1658© ISLS