Influence of Perceptions of Past Collaborative Experiences onQuality of Pre-service Collaboration and OutcomesDenise Brown and Michelle Jordandenisembrown@asu.edu, michelle.e.jordan@asu.eduArizona State UniversityAbstract: This qualitative interpretive study used content and discourse analysis to examinepre-service teachers’ (N=24) perceptions of past collaborative experiences influenced currentcollaborations. Analysis identified pre-service perceptions of past collaboration as either aflexible orientation or inflexible orientation toward collaboration. The flexible orientation tocollaboration supported higher quality interactions and collaborative outcomes than theinflexible orientation.IntroductionProfessional teachers often work collaboratively in various settings with multiple colleagues on improvinginstruction (Gellert, 2008). Such collaboration is associated with positive outcomes for teachers and students(Vescio, Ross, & Adams, 2008). Thus, pre-service teachers need to learn and practice collaborative interactionsemployed by teachers (Dobber et al., 2014). The quality of collaboration and outcomes may be influenced bybeliefs and perceptions about the significance or effectiveness of collaboration (Khosa & Volet, 2014). Preservice teachers may have only vague ideas of how teachers collaborate, and their expressed beliefs may notmatch actual in-service practices. Furthermore, teacher education typically affords little reflection or assessmentof collaboration with peers (Ruys, Van Keer & Aelterman, 2010).The current study is part of a larger program of research that takes a social metacognitive perspectiveon pre-service collaboration (Molenaar, Sleegers, & van Boxtel, 2014). In a previous mixed methods study, preservice teachers were distinguished in terms of whether they held only simple beliefs that professional teacherscooperatively share expertise, ideas, resources, and planning, or held expanded beliefs that professionalcollaboration also includes collective assessment, analysis and evaluation (Brown & Jordan, 2017). Studentswith expanded beliefs collaborated through higher quality interactions that included collective development andevaluation. The current qualitative study builds on these results, by examining pre-service perceptions of pastcollaborative experiences and how perceptions influenced the quality of collaborative interactions. Our tworesearch questions were: (RQ1) What are pre-service teachers’ perceptions of their previous collaborativeexperiences? and (RQ2) How do pre-service teachers’ perceptions of their previous collaborative experiencesinfluence the quality of interactions during design and delivery of a collaborative instructional project?MethodsParticipants were first-semester pre-service students (N= 24) collaborating in four-member groups across fivesessions to design and implement instruction for classmates. Using a qualitative interpretive design (Miles,Huberman & Saldana, 2014), data was collected from written-reflections on students’ past collaborativeexperiences, semi-structured interviews, and audio-video observations of collaborative work sessions. Qualityof the instructional projects was evaluated through independent ordinal ranking of the projects by bothresearchers.To understand how students perceived past collaborative experiences (RQ1), we applied contentanalysis to students’ written reflections and the semi-structured interviews. To interpret the extent to whichstudents’ perspectives of past collaborations influenced the quality of their current collaborative interaction(RQ2), we applied conversational discourse analysis (Jordan & Daniel, 2010) and interaction analysis (Jordan &Henderson, 1995) to the audio-video recorded observations. The quality of collaborative interaction wasexamined first by individuals, and then by group as a collective. We used the framework of heedful interrelatingto operationalize the quality of collaborative interactions among group members. Heedful interrelating,developed by organizational theorists Weick and Roberts (1993), describes individual and group interactions incollective tasks focusing on the quality of three types of actions: representing, contributing, and, subordinating.Further, we drew on Jordan and Daniels (2010) coding scheme for discourse markers indicating heedfulinterrelating to code transcripts of groups’ interactions before comparing the quality of interaction acrossindividuals and groups. Finally, all analyses were compared to the ordinal ranking of groups’ collaborativeinstruction, which was independently coded by both researchers.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1633© ISLSResultsContent analysis indicated perceptions of previous collaborative experiences supported either flexibleorientation to collaboration or inflexible orientation to collaboration (RQ1). The flexible orientation describedcollaboration as a dynamic experience requiring their own careful, attentive and integrative efforts toward thegroup and the project, and as improving with practice and experience. In contrast, students with an inflexibleorientation described collaboration as a static experience in which their effects exerted minimal influence ongroup interactions or product, and expected their experiences to remain similar and unchanging over time.Conversational discourse and interaction analyses indicated that students’ orientation towardcollaboration influenced the quality of their interactions during the collaborative project (RQ2). During allphases of collaboration, students with a flexible orientation to collaboration interacted with higher quality andgreater variety, depth and richness in their talk. Students with an inflexible orientation used fewer and lowerquality interactions, and less descriptive or explicit talk. Group members with a flexible orientation attemptedto integrate their interactions with the group and the current state of the project, and support their group mates’efforts to do the same. In contrast students with an inflexible orientation were less likely to attempt to integratewith the group. Some contributed very little, while others over-contributed monopolizing group work sessions.Group members with a flexible orientation more carefully considered topic ideas, pedagogic strategies for topicinstruction, and probed for depth of comprehension of both content and pedagogy. In contrast, students with aninflexible orientation less deeply considered topic ideas or pedagogic strategies using few details and often useddescribed topics or pedagogy as “thing” or “it.” Finally, collaborative groups with more members having aflexible orientation created and implemented higher quality collaborative instructional projects than did groupscomposed solely of members with an inflexible orientation.DiscussionThis research contributes an important step toward understanding factors that influence the quality of preservice collaboration. The study suggests that students’ orientation toward collaboration influenced the qualityof individual interactions, and therefore, the quality of group interaction and collaborative outcomes. Betterunderstandings of pre-service perspectives of teacher collaboration and the beginning and end of teacherpreparation can inform preparation programs.Future research should continue to explore factors that impact the quality of pre-service interaction asthey learn to collaborate. Studies might include examining changes in students’ perspectives on the quality oftheir collaboration across the phases of a task, and comparing student-reported to researcher-observed quality ofinteraction as it relates to collaborative instruction. Implications for educational practice includes support of preservice collaborative programs and continued exploration of how to best address student needs in collaborativeprocesses as they prepare for their critical careers.ReferencesBrown, D. & Jordan, M. (2017). Is the quality of pre-service teachers’ collaborative interactions influenced bytheir belief about in-service collaboration? Presented at the SCIPIE conference, Las Vegas, NV.Dobber, M., Akkerman, S.F., Verloop, N., & Vermunt, J.D. (2014). Regulating collaboration in teachereducation. Research Papers in Education, 29(1), 69-92. doi:10.1080/02671522. 2012.7Jordan, M., & Daniel, S. (2010). Heedful interrelating in the academic discourse of collaborative groups.Journal of Classroom Interaction, 45(2), 4-19.Khosa, D. K., & Volet, S. E. (2014). Productive group engagement in cognitive activity and metacogntiveregulation during collaborative learning. Metacognition and Learning. doi:10.1007/s11409-014-9117-zMiles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldana, J. (2014). Qualitative data analysis. Los Angeles, CA: Sage.Molenaar, I., Sleegers, P., & van Boxtel, C. (2014). Metacognitive scaffolding during collaborative learning.Metacognition and Learning. doi: 9:309–332 DOI 10.1007/s11409-014-9118-yRuys, L., Van Keer, H., & Aelterman, A. (2010). Collaborative learning and preservice teacher educationEducational Studies, 36(5), 537–553.Turner, J. C., Warzon, K. B., & Christensen, A. (2011). Motivating mathematics learning: Changes in teachers'practices and beliefs during a nine-month collaboration. AERJ, 48, 718–762.Vescio, V., Ross, D. & A. Adams (2008). A review of research on the impact of professional learningcommunities on teaching practice and student learning. Teaching and Teacher Education, 24, 80–91.Weick, K.E. & Roberts, K.H. (1993). Collective minding in organizations: heedful interrelating on flight decks.Administrative Science Quarterly, 38, 357–381.doi:10.2307/239337ICLS 2018 Proceedings1634© ISLS