“Choose Your Own Adventure”:Responsive Curricular Choices in Elementary ScienceJennifer Richards, University of Washington, jrich14@uw.eduJessica Thompson, University of Washington, jjthomps@uw.eduAbstract: The complexity and dynamism of learning raises important considerations aboutthe role and design of curricula, and how teachers interact with curricula. In this study, weexplored elementary teachers’ participation with a curricular mini-unit in science that invitedthem to choose among possible next steps, selecting experiments that would responsivelybuild on student thinking. We coded 41 written segments of teachers’ reasoning about theirselected next steps to document varied resources that teachers used in making curricularchoices. In the vast majority of segments, we found that teachers drew on student ideas andinterests as resources for determining next steps. We also identified four clusters of resourcesthat represent different ways of interacting with students’ contributions, with implications forresponsiveness, learning, and equity.Keywords: teacher noticing and responsiveness, curriculum, elementary science, resourcesLines of scholarship across fields, including educational philosophy (e.g., Dewey, 1915/1966), psychology (e.g.,Vygotsky, 1978), and the learning sciences (e.g., Rosebery, Ogonowski, DiSchino, & Warren, 2010), depictlearning as a complex, dynamic process of situated meaning-making. Meanings that emerge through localizedinteractions of learners and environments may be patterned in some ways but are also often idiosyncratic(Hammer & Sikorski, 2015), as they emerge from the specific experiences, understandings, motivations, andcontextual details in play.Such complexity raises important issues about curricula and how curricula are used in and acrossclassrooms. Curricula in which the content and sequence of lessons is fully prespecified, even in researchgrounded ways, may not support the meaning that unfolds in a given classroom and the authentic engagement oflearners in meaning-making (Dewey, 1938/1997). However, it would be untenable for teachers to createemergent curricula that are fully responsive to students’ contributions, both pragmatically and systemically aseducational systems need shared foundations from which to build.This paper explores teachers’ use of a curricular mini-unit that defines content to be learned but ishighly adaptable to students’ hypotheses. As part of an elementary teacher professional learning experience inscience, we designed a mini-unit of instruction with a “choose your own adventure” component, invitingteachers to choose among possible next steps based on what they noticed in student thinking (Sherin, Jacobs, &Philipp, 2011) and what might forward students’ meaning-making in relation to a focal scientific phenomenon.This invitation represented a substantial shift for teachers from “following” a scripted, activity-oriented sciencecurriculum to “participation with” the mini-unit (Remillard, 2005). Thus, in this study, we ask the followingexploratory question: How do elementary teachers employ varied resources (personal, social, conventional) inmaking responsive curricular choices in science? In particular, we attend to how and to what degree teachersworked with students’ ideas and questions as resources for curricular choices, given findings from studies ofteacher noticing and responsiveness, which we turn to next.Conceptual frameworkTeacher noticing and responsivenessA growing body of research attends to the ways in which teachers notice and are responsive to student thinking,in support of meaning-making (e.g., Robertson, Scherr, & Hammer, 2016; Sherin, Jacobs, & Philipp, 2011).While studies show that teachers can notice and respond to student thinking in practice from early in theircareers, they also highlight substantial variability in teachers’ practices of doing so as systems of schoolingcommonly draw attention elsewhere (Sherin & van Es, 2009; Thompson, Windschitl, & Braaten, 2013). Further,responding in ways that actively build on students’ contributions and advance learning can be especiallychallenging (Harris, Phillips, & Penuel, 2012). These findings suggest that a critical area to both understand andsupport is teachers’ determination of next steps that build on the work students have started within theirclassrooms.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1017© ISLSResources in and for instructionTo explore how teachers determine next steps in this study, we draw on the construct of resources and theirsituated use in instructional contexts (Cohen, Raudenbush, & Ball, 2002; Stroupe, 2016). Defined as “physicaland intellectual commodities that teachers use” (Stroupe, p. 51) to inform and shape their practice, resourcesmay be wide-ranging and include things like teachers’ own instructional aims and knowledge (what Cohen et al.refer to as “personal” resources), ideas and expectations from colleagues and broader institutions (“social”resources), and more “conventional” resources like materials or time. Investigating which resources teachersrecruit or recognize and how they coordinate such resources enables us to develop multifaceted, situatedaccounts of teachers’ curricular choices, with particular attention to how teachers work with students’contributions as influential social resources in conjunction with other resources.Study contextData for the study come from K-2 teachers’ participation in a blended (partly in-person, partly online) LearningLab on scientific modeling with young students. We organized the Lab around a four-lesson mini-unit in whichstudents create and revise scientific models of why a puddle on the grass disappears over time. For Lesson 3 inthe mini-unit, we provide multiple options for experiments that teachers may choose among, with tableshighlighting how particular experiments may address common questions or support specific conceptual insights;teachers may also devise their own approach to forward students’ meaning-making. We collaboratively examinestudents’ models from teachers’ classrooms as part of the Lab as well and consider implications for Lesson 3.Data and methodologyWe focused on online reflective posts as our primary data source, in which teachers were asked to shareartifacts, insights about student thinking, and instructional considerations that arose as they taught the mini-unit.Specifically, we examined K-2 teachers’ posts about Lessons 2 and 3 in the mini-unit for explicit reasoningrelated to next steps and selected segments in which such reasoning was evident (e.g., “I chose to do the HowDoes Water Soak Into The Ground experiment because…”). This selection process garnered 41 selectedsegments across 28 teachers.To characterize the resources teachers employed in making curricular choices, we engaged in multiplerounds of inductive coding and refinement (Corbin & Strauss, 2008), guided conceptually by Cohen et al.’s(2002) broad categories of personal, social, and conventional resources. This iterative process resulted in thepreliminary scheme depicted in Table 1, which we used to code all selected segments. Segments were givenmultiple codes (e.g., “Deepening understanding” and “Adding ideas”) if evident in the teacher’s reasoning.Table 1: Preliminary coding scheme for resources employed in curricular choicesCategoryCodePersonalDeepening understandingDescriptionDescribes aim of extending student understanding of processes,how and why things occurClarifying conceptsDescribes aim of clarifying student understanding of particularconceptsTesting ideasDescribes aim of testing or “proving” student ideasExploring ideasDescribes aim of exploring or investigating student ideasAdding ideasDescribes aim of adding ideas that students have not consideredInclusivenessDescribes aim of addressing multiple ideas or contributionsExpansive content knowledge1 Uses content understanding beyond that built into unitSocialStudent ideasCites specific ideas students raise(Subcodes include common, less common, and individual)Student interestsCites what students are focused on or want to pursueMissing componentsNotes what is missing from students (e.g., particular ideas,deeper understandings of how or why things occur)Colleagues’ contributionsCites discussions with or feedback from colleaguesConventional Classroom artifactsCites artifacts like class model“Zoom-in”Mentions “zoom-in” (a way to show unobservables on models)External materialsDescribes use of materials or supplies beyond that built into unitLogisticsDiscusses feasibility or timeICLS 2018 Proceedings1018© ISLSFindingsOverall trends in resource use across segmentsIn terms of our focus on working with student contributions as resources for curricular choices, a notable trendis that 27 (of 41) segments explicitly referred to student ideas in discussing next steps (e.g., “[student] posed theidea that heat causes evaporation, after disagreeing with the picture of a magnet next to the sun, saying it can’tpull the water… we developed ideas about how to investigate the claim”). Seven additional segments referred tostudent interests, including directions students wanted to pursue or questions they had. Taken together, thismeans that 83% of segments cited students’ contributions as social resources in play.Other overall trends included infrequent citing of colleagues’ contributions (5 segments, 12%) andlogistics considerations (4 segments, 10%).Clusters represent different ways of interacting with students’ contributionsAdditionally, we saw that some resources tended to cluster together. Looking across our coding, we identifiedfour patterns that seemed to represent different ways of working with students’ contributions, with differentimplications for curricular choices.Cluster 1: Exploring what students are interested in (10 segments)Segments in this cluster described exploring or investigating student interests or ideas, including questions thatstudents raised. Frequent codes included exploring ideas (personal), student ideas and student interests (social),and classroom artifacts (conventional). The example below shows what the reasoning in this cluster soundedlike, as a teacher considered how to move forward in relation to the class’s model (which had multiplenumbered ideas):In terms of what kids would like to do, the most popular ideas are number 4, looking at howdoes the sun dry the puddle or what happens there. The other one is how the roots drink thewater… And so I’m just going to think a little bit about which one seems to make the mostsense to be able to do in class.In this segment, the teacher cited specific ideas students would like to pursue from the model and indicated thatshe planned to explore one of the proposed ideas. A common consideration was which ideas were most“popular” or “interesting” among students.Cluster 2: Deepening students’ understanding of ideas (7 segments)A different cluster emphasized deepening students’ understanding of the processes and causes underlying theideas they raised, combining codes for deepening understanding and expansive content knowledge (personal),student ideas and missing components (social), and several conventional resources, including zoom-ins. In suchsegments, teachers tended to identify both an idea students raised (e.g., “my group talked about the water couldhave ‘went underground’ and ‘soaked into the grass’) and a way the idea could be pressed deeper (e.g., “theyweren’t quite sure why or how”), describing their selected next step as a way to deepen understanding. Teachersexhibiting this reasoning often selected experiments that provided observable evidence of how processesoccurred.Cluster 3: Clarifying common and/or individual (mis)understandings (6 segments)The clarifying (mis)understandings cluster focused on specific ideas from students that teachers felt requiredclarification or rectification. Here, the emphasis was not on missing components as above, but rather onclarifying concepts (personal) in relation to common and/or individual student ideas (social) as seen in thefollowing example: “Many replied that the sun was most like the sponge because it ‘sucks the water up.’ Weneed to clarify the evaporation process, so I plan to do the kettle experiment.”Cluster 4: Inclusively pursuing multiple ideas (5 segments)Finally, several segments depicted teachers planning to do several experiments to address multiple ideas in playin their classrooms, including less common ideas. Codes here included inclusiveness (personal), student ideasand student interests (social), and external materials (conventional) as teachers sought to support additionalideas (e.g., “I think I’m going to try to find information about storm water management for ‘the water goes intothe drain’”).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1019© ISLSDiscussionWhile we know that teachers frequently make curricular choices or adaptations in practice, we know less aboutthe varied resources they draw on in doing so and how the dynamics change when they are explicitly invited todo so in relation to student meaning-making. This study contributes to our growing understanding of howteachers may “participate with” curricula (Remillard, 2005) and make responsive choices in science teaching.We found that teachers drew on students’ contributions as resources for curricular choices across 83%of coded segments – a high proportion, given the variability seen in teachers’ attention in prior studies whenthey were asked to focus on student thinking (e.g., Sherin & van Es, 2009). This finding sparks questions ofwhy. For instance, one conjecture is that the Lab’s focus on scientific modeling, and specifically the notion ofstudents as creators and editors of models over time, provided a cohesive context or frame within which to buildon student thinking. Moving forward, we intend to explore this conjecture as well as whether particularcurricular supports or Lab activities were especially useful for teachers, which can inform the design of futureprofessional learning opportunities.Additionally, this study identified four primary ways that teachers worked with students’ contributionsin determining instructional next steps. While one of the identified clusters (Cluster 3, clarifying(mis)understandings) reflects a more traditional emphasis on correcting students’ ideas, the other three clustersrepresent different approaches to responsively building on students’ contributions. However, we believe that theapproaches may have diverse affordances for advancing particular forms of learning (Harris, Phillips, & Penuel,2012) and equity across perspectives and participants in the classroom community. For example, Cluster 2’semphasis on deepening understanding may advance students’ learning of the hows and whys of specificprocesses, but may also limit how many and whose ideas are elevated for consideration. Future studies couldexplore the prevalence and fluidity of these approaches to being responsive to student thinking and theirimplications for learning and equity.Endnotes(1) We recognize that varied kinds of content knowledge are likely involved in teachers’ choices, but such resources arelargely tacit or underdetermined in their posts. Here, we highlight use of “expansive” content knowledge that clearlyextends beyond content discussed in the curriculum.ReferencesCohen, D. K., Raudenbush, S. W., & Ball, D. L. (2003). Resources, instruction, and research. EducationalEvaluation and Policy Analysis, 25(2), 119-142.Corbin, J., & Strauss, A. (2008). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developinggrounded theory (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.Dewey, J. (1966). Democracy and education. New York: Free Press. (Original work published 1915)Dewey, J. (1997). Experience and education. New York: Touchstone. (Original work published 1938)Hammer, D., & Sikorski, T. R. (2015). Implications of complexity for research on learning progressions.Science Education, 99(3), 424-431.Harris, C. J., Phillips, R. S., & Penuel, W. R. (2012). Examining teachers’ instructional moves aimed atdeveloping students’ ideas and questions in learner-centered science classrooms. Journal of ScienceTeacher Education, 23(7), 769-788.Remillard, J. T. (2005). Examining key concepts in research on teachers’ use of mathematics curricula. Reviewof Educational Research, 75(2), 211-246.Robertson, A. D., Scherr, R. E., & Hammer, D. (2016). Responsive teaching in science and mathematics. NewYork: Routledge.Rosebery, A. S., Ogonowski, M., DiSchino, M., & Warren, B. (2010). “The coat traps all your body heat”:Heterogeneity as fundamental to learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(3), 322-357.Sherin, M. G., Jacobs, V. R., & Philipp, R. A. (2011). Mathematics teacher noticing: Seeing through teachers’eyes. New York: Routledge.Sherin, M. G., & van Es, E. A. (2009). Effects of video club participation on teachers’ professional vision.Journal of Teacher Education, 60(1), 20-37.Stroupe, D. (2016). Beginning teachers' use of resources to enact and learn from ambitious instruction.Cognition and Instruction, 34(1), 51-77.Thompson, J., Windschitl, M., & Braaten, M. (2013). Developing a theory of ambitious early-career teacherpractice. American Educational Research Journal, 50(3), 574-615.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1020© ISLS