Sketching a Pathway Through Design Worlds: MultimodalCommunication in a Fifth-Grade Collaborative EngineeringProjectMichelle E. Jordan, Arizona State University, michelle.e.jordan@asu.eduJamie M. Collins, University of New Mexico, jamiemae.collins@gmail.comAbstract: This qualitative case study sought to understand how disciplinary literacy practicesassociated with engineering design were used to facilitate communication among the four fifthgrade members of one collaborative learning group engaged in brainstorming initial designideas for a remote-controlled, paddle-propelled robotic watercraft. Specifically, we focused onunderstanding how sketching was used by group members and for what purposes. Analysis ofnine student-generated sketches and discourse during the team’s first work session suggestedthat sketching was “mixed and mashed” with other literacy acts to create design worlds,facilitate deep learning, and navigate pathways towards engineering goals.IntroductionThe purpose of this study was to understand the role of disciplinary literacy practices to facilitate communicationin engineering design work by investigating the ways fifth-grade students use sketches and sketching to constructknowledge, identify with the domain, and navigate pathways towards collaborative engineering goals (Lemke,2000; Wilson, Smith, & Householder, 2014). Building on the first author’s previous analyses of students’interweaving of virtual and print-based texts when designing physical artifacts (Jordan, 2014), we zoom in onsketches and sketching to investigate the roles that “mixing and mashing” (Jewitt, 2006) of texts play inelementary teams’ design processes. Specifically, we focus on one fifth-grade team’s creation of and uses forsketches while engaged in collaborative efforts to design, build, and program a remote-controlled paddleboat andachieve assignment objectives.Current understanding of communication practices within engineering design contexts is limited,particularly for middle grade learners. Yet, communication is an integral part of the design process. Understandinghow young adolescents learn to engage in collaborative engineering design practices entails understandingcommunication processes by which group members come to co-create design projects. In science and engineeringcontexts, successful communication usually entails the creation and use of multiple and multimodal literacypractices. Thus, understanding communication in learners’ design practices requires understanding how they useliteracy practices to engage in collaborative interaction during design project work.Here, we examine the intertextual and multimodal relationships within collaborative interaction in anengineering learning context where learners had time and space to take up positions as drivers of creative productsand robust learning. In doing so, we situate disciplinary learning of engineering design practices in the widercontext of multiliteracies learning and design pedagogy.Multiliteracies communication landscape: Design pedagogiesThe communication contexts of the 21st century are rapidly evolving and increasingly diverse, shaping and beingshaped by new literacy requirements (Cope & Kalantzis, 2009); engineering design contexts are no exception. AsSiegel (2006) noted, “our social, cultural, and economic worlds now require facility with texts and practicesinvolving the full range of representational modes” (p. 65). The current (and seemingly future) communicationlandscape and attendant literacy practices are increasingly multimodal as technological advances continuallymerge with new communicative affordances, generating a need for learners to develop communicativecompetencies in translating, transforming, and coordinating ideas across representational modes (Kress, 2010;Lemke, 2000). Additionally, professional, civic, and social participation norms have evolved toward moreinformal, self-directed structures. Thus, young learners need to engage in learning experiences that help themdevelop capacities for participating in cultures of “flexibility, creativity, innovation, and initiative” (Cope &Kalantzis, 2009, p. 133), i.e., design pedagogy. Collaborative design projects offer one such experience.Design pedagogy requires attending to helping students learn to engage in design processes. To do so,they must acquire what Pendleton-Julian and Brown (2011) called design literacy as a “new instinct” to meet theeducational needs of the 21st century. Design literacy entails the capacity to rapidly reiterate potential solutionsin problem-solving settings, expand on brief specifications of problem, cope with the intensely public and personalexperience of critique by understanding critique as a mechanism for linking thought and action, and orchestrateambiguity that is inherent to design processes. Such processes are communication rich.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1010© ISLSDesign is communication-rich activity; communication plays critical roles in engineering designendeavors (NRC, 2011). Communication among team members is widely recognized as a fundamental aspect ofdesign (Darling & Dannels, 2003; Sonnenwald, 1996). Learning to design requires learning to cope withcommunication challenges associated with collaboration (Jordan & Babrow, 2013, Jordan & McDaniel, 2014).Furthermore, design entails not only communication with people, but also “conversation with materials” (Schoen,1992). Such communication is multimodal in that it entails translating among representations, particularly throughsketching (Geisler & Lewis, 2000; Stevens, Johri, & O’Connor, 2014). Sketching fills a disciplinary need tocommunicate in more dimensions to decipher design worlds (Schoen, 1992).MethodsThe setting for this study was a regular fifth-grade class in a suburban school district in the southwest US. The 24ethnically and academically diverse students in the class included 15 girls and 9 boys. Students engaged in threecollaborative engineering challenges across the school year, working in three-to-four-member groups andchanging membership for each project. The project that was the focus on this study was the third and final and theonly design project of the school year. Students were first instructed to individually identify an environmentalproblem and to brainstorm ideas for addressing that problem through a robotic product. Each student brainstormedin an individual design journal before being assigned to one of six collaborative teams. The focal group whosecommunication was the object of analysis was comprised of four members, Ida, Bobby, Derrick, and Roy. Theanalysis described here focuses on data associated with Day 1 of the 14-day project, a conceptual-only session inwhich prototyping with physical materials took place only in students’ imaginations. By the end of the day thisteam had decided to make a robotic boat to heat and cool a swimming pool and collect debris in a net, combiningsimilar ideas Roy and Derrick had brainstormed separately.Data sources included the video recording and transcript of the group’s first hour-long work session (Day1 of a 14-session project). Photographs of sketches and other artifacts also informed our interpretations. First, wesequentially analyzed the sketches themselves. Following Cardella, Atman, and Adams (2006), we noted the typeof representation of each sketch (creating a new sketch, continuing a sketch, returning to add to a sketch afterengaging in a different activity), perspective or vantage point (side, front, back, aerial, underneath, inside, outside),the modes present (e.g., text, numbers, icons, images), and the degree to which it was technical or narrative (usinga scale from 1 to 4). We catalogued each image’s basic components (number of structures present, connectionsamong structures, details, relationship between structures, and the incorporation of technical components), andthe extent to which context was envisioned. Following in the analytic path of Lewis (2000), we matched sketchesto their in-context use to understand the interplay between the characteristics of sketches and the processes andfunctions of sketching practices. We identified which group members initiated and contributed to each sketch andwhen they were created in the sequence of design decisions that unfolded across the work session. We also triedto discern for what purposes they were created.We then analyzed discourse from the collaborative work session in which the sketches and othermultimodal texts were created and used in order to understand what ideas team members took up, how they tookthem up and to what effect. We drew from methods of mediated discourse analysis (Scollon, 2001) to understandthe “cultural learning and social effects” to learners “actions with materials” as meditational means, tools withwhich individuals participate in social practices (e.g., designing, negotiating, sketching) using material resources(e.g., paper, pencil) to craft communicative messages. Through analysis of the discourse surrounding acts ofsketching in conjunction with the transformation of sketches, we interpreted what was being designed, what ideaswere created, kept, or discarded along the way, how sketching influenced members thinking about their designpurpose and constraints, and how it supported and shaped communication.FindingsThe four members of this fifth-grade engineering design group engaged in rich communicative work in theirpursuit of a design goal; various acts of literacies were integral to that process. Throughout the design process,students mixed and mashed fragmented and partial literacy acts to build pathways between independent andcollaborative conceptions of their complex design worlds. No single literacy or text was powerful enough tosustain the evolution of a design project. The evolving engineering design world required students to work throughthe challenges of understanding their own perspectives as well as their peers’ perspectives.Before the group was even formed, three of its members had created a total of four sketches betweenthem as they responded to their teacher’s instructions to brainstorm possible design product ideas in theirindividual design journals. Bobby sketched a “trash picker-upper”, his only idea. Ida sketched a “water consumer”and a “bag recycler”, but did not sketch her other idea, a crane operated trash picker upper. Roy sketched a poolheater-cooler with a scoop and a net to clean the pool as a nod to the design specification’s call for the product toICLS 2016 Proceedings1011© ISLSaddress an environmental problem. Of these initial sketches, Roy’s was the most technical, the most complex inits depiction of the relationships among structural elements, and the only one to label parts. Bobby’s sketch wasthe only one to include contextual features to help indicate the function of the product and the only one to includetwo frames to indicate the behavior of the product (i.e., one depicting the arms crushing trash, the other depictingthe arms throwing trash into a receptacle). Derrick was the only group member who did not sketch duringindividual idea generation, choosing instead to create a list of possible design products. Among Derrick’s manyideas was an octopus-shaped robot that heats a swimming pool. Once the group was formed, this was the first ideato be shared with the group: “Like, say this is the NXT; it'll be outside the pool and it'll be an octopus floating.”This was followed quickly by Roy’s exclamation:Mine is like the same idea almost! … but instead of just heating the pool, it has a like a heaterand a cooler and when it was really hot outside it would cool it and whenever it's cold outsideit would heat it for you. But not only will it do that, but it'll have an environmental cause too. Italso has a net and a little scooper, so it can pick up trash.Noteworthy is the different manners in which Derrick and Roy presented their ideas, with Derrick concentratingon structures and aesthetics, and Roy integrating explanation of structures with behaviors and functions of hisrobot. We hypothesize that Roy’s integration and elaboration may have something to do with the elaboratedthinking he engaged in through sketching his idea. Although Bobby and Ida shared four additional ideas in quicksuccession, Roy’s suggestion in talk turn 81 to combine his and Derrick’s ideas was tentatively taken up, perhapsdriven by Roy’s suggestion that they “draw a sketch of what it would look like if we combined them.”Over the next 50 minutes, the team created a total of nine more sketches, five were solo-authored by Roy,two were solo-authored by Derrick, and two were collective products of the three boys. Both of Derrick’s sketcheswere more narrative than Roy’s, both focused on aesthetic and contextualizing elements of a highly personifieddesign in with the octopus shape of the structure and its facial features figured prominently. Roy’s sketches tookon more personification elements and more contextualizing elements across time. It is perhaps important that thetwo primary sketchers were Roy and Derrick, who were also the co-originators of the pool heater-cooler idea.Perhaps their authorship carried authority that made sketching those ideas their domain.The evolution of the team’s design ideas was captured in these sketches and these same ideas werereflected also in the group’s talk. However, additional ideas were introduced in talk but were not captured thesketches. This is because the use of meditational means and materials varied among the four students. AlthoughBobby did not initiate any sketches and only contributed to two collective sketches, he nonetheless contributedsubstantive design ideas. The same can be said of Ida, though she did not sketch anything after being assigned toher group. Three shared aspects of Ida and Bobby’s contributions are noteworthy. One is that both Ida and Bobbychose to contribute design ideas using a combination of verbal description, gesture, and manipulation of physicalobjects to represent structural elements of design ideas (e.g., pencils, books) rather than to depict ideas in sketches.The result of this choice was that their ideas were more ephemeral than the ideas depicted in sketches, and few ofthose ideas made it into the sketches initiated by Roy and Derrick. Another shared aspect of their contributionswas that both modified elements of their own original designs for trash picker uppers, morphing them to apply tothe pool cleaner robot the group decided to pursue. Ida proposed a crane to transport collected trash to shore andBobby proposed a swinging arm to haul in the net. Bringing these ideas forward into the collaborative design wasperhaps a way to integrate their thinking even though the group had not selected their designs. Finally, Ida andBobby’s contributions had the shared quality of persistence. Bobby was repeatedly adamant that the robot mustinclude a net big enough to engulf the bottom of the robot. This idea was eventually incorporated in two sketchesand carried forward. Ida was adamant about the need to identify materials and technical elements of the design.Although she did not sketch herself, she used other’s sketches as vehicles to question what structures would bemade of and how they would work. In this way she contributed substantively to the evolution of the team’s designby focusing attention on important design decisions.The final sketch created during this team’s first work session was the only one not initiated by one of thegroup members. The teacher instead, initiated it following a quick check-in meeting in which team membersexplained their idea. This sketch, collectively drawn by the three boys, was the neatest among the collection andhad the most labeled structures. However, there was little to suggest what materials elements are made of, andmany of the elements depicted are aesthetic rather than functional (octopus legs, eyes, mouth, nose). Clear effortswere made to depict relationships among structural elements. Yet, no new design elements were added beyondthose in former sketches. Essentially, the teacher initiation of a formal sketch curtailed design ideation.Conclusions and implicationsICLS 2016 Proceedings1012© ISLSIn the complex space of collaborative engineering design, projects, learners develop multimodal representationsof their own design world to engage and co-construct the evolving design world of their collaborative team.Encountering communication challenges, the collaborators in the group observed here reached for self-generatedsketches as well as self-generated uses of sketches in order to persist through the design problem. Sketches wereintegral meditational tools used to communicate with each other and with the design work. In the process ofmeeting communication challenges team members generated these multimodal resources, working to create theirown texts in order to develop understandings, refine ideas, and move their design work forward. Studentsgenerated sketches to communicate their design ideas to themselves, advocate for their own ideas, collect designideas together, and take their work to the next step on a pathway through the design world they were creating.Learners were doing rich communicative work in the pursuit of a design goal and literacy acts are integralto making that happen. Learners used sketching to facilitate communication with their group members, and withthe evolving design. As they negotiated communication challenges in their created design worlds, they interactedwith objects available in the environment, using them to, among other things, generate sketches in service ofshaping the social and material design worlds they were collectively creating. Sketching served as more than ajust design tool; it served as a social glue within the students’ co-constructed design world, supportingcommunication that gave way to collaborative pathways moving the design process forward.ReferencesCardella, M., Atman, J. C., & Adams, R. S. (2006). Mapping between design activities and externalrepresentations for engineering student designers. Design Studies, 27, 5-24.Cope, B. & Kalantzis, M. (2009). Multiliteracies: New literacies, new Learning. Pedagogies: An internationalJournal, 4(3), 164-195.Darling, A. L., & Dannels, D. P. (2003). A report on the role of oral communication in the workplace.Communication Education, 52, 1-16. doi:10.1080/03634520302457Geisler, C., & Lewis, B. (2000). Talking to texts and sketches: The function of written and graphic mediation inengineering design. Business Communication Quarterly, 63(2), 110–116.Jewitt, C. (2006). Technology, literacy and learning: A multimodal approach. London: Routledge.Jordan, M. E. (2014). Interweaving the digital and physical worlds in collaborative project-based learningexperiences. In D. J. Loveless, B. Griffith, M. Berci, E. Ortlieb, & P. Sullivan (Eds.), Academicknowledge construction and multimodal curriculum development (pp. 266-284). Hershey, PA: IGIGlobal.Jordan, M. E. & Babrow, A. S. (2013). Communication in creative collaborations: The challenges of uncertaintyand desire related to task, identity, and relational goals. Communication Education, 62(2), 105-126. doi:10.1080/03634523.2013.769612Jordan, M. E. & McDaniel, R. (2014). Managing uncertainty during collaborative problem solving in elementaryschool teams: The role of peer influence in robotics engineering activity. Journal of the LearningSciences, 23(4), 490-536. doi: 10.1080/10508406.2014.896254Kleinsmann, M., Valkenburg, R. & Buijs, J. A. (2007). What do(n’t) actors in collaborative design understandeach other? Codesign, 3(3), 59-73. doi: 10.1080/15710880601170875Kress, G. (2010). Mulitmodality: A social semiotic approach to contemporary communication. London:Routledge.Lemke, J. (2000). Multimedia literacy demands of the scientific curriculum. Linguistics and Education, 10(3),247-271.Lewis, B. (2000). Talking to texts and sketches: The function of written and graphic mediation in engineeringdesign. Business Communication Quarterly, 63(2), 110–116. doi:10.1177/108056990006300212.Pendleton-Julian, A. & Brown, J. S. (2011). Design unbound: Evolving design literacy pathways of efficacy. Draftmanuscript, Charleston, SC.Schoen, D. (1992). Designing as reflective conversation with the materials of a design situation. Knowledge-BasedSystems Journal, 5(1), 3-14.Sonnenwald, D. H. (1996). Communication roles that support collaboration during the design process. DesignStudies, 17(3), 277-301. doi:10.1016/0142-694X(96)0002-6.Scollon, R. (2001). Mediated discourse: The nexus of practice. London: Routledge.Siegel, M. (2006). Rereading the signs. Language Arts, 84(1), 65-77.Stevens, R., Johri, A., & O’Connor, K. (2014). Professional engineering work. In B. Olds and A. Johri (Eds.),Cambridge handbook of engineering education research (pp. 119-138). Cambridge University Press.Wilson, A. A., Smith, E., & Householder, D. L. (2014). Using disciplinary literacies to enhance adolescents’engineering design activity. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 57(8), 676-686.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1013© ISLS