Is Scrolling Disrupting While Reading?Katherine Brady, Sun Joo Cho, Gayathri Narasimham, Douglas Fisher, and Amanda Goodwinkatherine.a.brady@vanderbilt.edu, sj.cho@vanderbilt.edu, gayathri.narasimham@vanderbilt.edu,douglas.h.fisher@vanderbilt.edu, amanda.goodwin@vanderbilt.eduVanderbilt UniversityAbstract: The relationship between scrolling and comprehension has been studied a few timesby comparing readers who read in an environment with scrolling to those who read in anenvironment without scrolling. However, the amount of scrolling done by subjects who had theoption to scroll has not been linked to comprehension before. In this paper, we investigate therelationship between how often participants scroll and comprehension. We find that participantswho have no preference between paper and digital reading tools do worse when they scroll, butthere is no relationship between scrolling and comprehension for other students.IntroductionAs we enter the digital era, it is important to understand how design choices in digital reading environments affectcomprehension. In this study, we examine how scrolling, the most popular method of reading long text passageson digital devices, correlates with comprehension. Previous research has found some evidence suggesting thatscrolling is worse for comprehension than paging. Research comparing reading on paper to reading on digitaldevices found that there is no significant difference when the stimuli fits on one screen, but students do worse ondigital devices when the stimuli takes up more than one screen (Kim & Huynh, 2008; Singer & Alexander, 2017).Other research suggests comprehension is better for digital readers using a paging interface than those using ascrolling interface (Piolat, Roussey, & Thunin, 1997; Sanchez & Wiley, 2009). These findings are in line withresearch that shows we use spatial markers to remember what we have read (Baccino, 1994; Rothkopf, 1971;Weger & Inhoff, 2007). When these spatial markers move, as happens while scrolling, readers cannot rememberwhat they read as well, or find previously read passages as quickly.This study is the first to examine how scrolling frequency is linked to comprehension. If scrolling hurtscomprehension, then learners who scroll frequently while reading should perform worse on an open book quizthan those who move the text less often. We recorded the screens of 381 5th to 8th graders in the United Stateswhile they read a passage on a laptop and then took an open book test. Scrolling was measured by pulling out aframe from each participant’s recording every 0.1 seconds. If the text moved between two frames, that transitionwas counted as a scroll. We found that students who had no preference between digital and paper readingperformed worse when they scrolled frequently, but scrolling had no effect on the learning of other students. Wehypothesize that learners who have a medium preference have developed that preference through exposure to bothmediums, and are more likely to have strategies for scrolling.BackgroundIn the most recent synthesis of comparisons between digital and paper reading, Singer and Alexander (2017)conducted a survey of 15 studies occurring between 2001 and 2017 that compared digital and paper reading fortexts of different lengths. Seven of these studies used a stimulus which was 500 words or more, and eight used atext which was under 500 words for their stimulus. Singer and Alexander found that the eight studies which usedshorter texts either noted there was no difference in comprehension between digital and paper reading, or foundthat digital reading was better for comprehension. In contrast, six of the seven papers which used longer textsfound that students comprehended better in the paper condition. The one exception exclusively studied secondlanguage learners and noted that the dictionary lookup functionality in the digital condition was popular. Singerand Alexander hypothesized that the reason digital readers consistently did worse than paper readers oncomprehension tests for long passages but not short passages is that the most popular method of navigating longtext on the computer screen, scrolling, negatively affects reading comprehension. This hypothesis is supported bya 1997 study that compared scrolling and paging as methods of interacting with digital text. The 1997 study foundthat the summaries written by undergraduates who paged through a digital document were more coherent thanthose assigned to navigate the same document with scrolling (Piolat et al., 1997). Part of these results may beexplained by the poor user experience of scrolling in many applications in 1997. A study of 10 computer scientistsin 1997 found that scrolling mechanisms were very slow and users reported being annoyed that to scroll they hadto click on a small scroll bar and that the display did not refresh fast enough to show them their position whilethey were scrolling (O’Hara & Sellen, 1997).ICLS 2018 Proceedings152© ISLSMore recent studies suggest there are some negative effects from scrolling, but they are not as strong asthose Piolat et al. found in 1997. In 2007, a study of Swedish participants found that those who had to use a mousepointer to scroll while reading reported more stress and mental fatigue than those who had to use the keyboardarrows to page through the document (Wästlund, 2007). However, there was no difference in how those whonavigated by scrolling and those who navigated by paging performed on comprehension exams after reading. In2009, a study of American undergraduates found that among students who were either less familiar with thesubject matter of the stimuli or less familiar with reading webpages, comprehension test scores were higher if theyclicked through digital pages than if they scrolled while reading (Sanchez & Wiley, 2009). For students familiarwith the stimuli or familiar with reading webpages, there was no difference between navigating by scrolling andnavigating by paging. A 2011 study of Polish adults found that participants who paged through paragraphs andthose who scrolled through the document performed equally in a recall test, but those assigned to the scrollingcondition took longer to read the document (Kłyszejko et al., 2011).Together these studies suggest the impact of scrolling on reading processes and comprehension may bedecreasing as the user experience improves and familiarity with scrolling increases. The question we explore inthis study is whether scrolling in today’s digital age would impact reading or whether perhaps familiarity withthis process has reached a point where it no longer influences comprehension and memory. Additionally, each ofthe studies above compared the occurrence of scrolling to a different behavior (i.e., page turning or clickingthrough pages). This assumes all scrolling behaviors are similar and have a similar impact on reading. Becausereaders vary in how they scroll, our study examines the quantity and directionality of scrolling as it relates tocomprehension.One of the reasons scrolling may affect reading, is that semantic memory of text is linked to spatialmemory. This was discovered by studies like Rothkopf’s 1971 experiment, which found that substantive memoryof sub-passages in a document was directly related to incidental information about the spatial location of the subpassage (i.e. which page it was on; Rothkopf, 1971). More recent studies report similar findings, suggesting thearrival of digital age has not changed readers’ reliance on spatial mapping of content. A study of French speakersin 1994 found that after reading a sentence on a computer, subjects could accurately point to where on the screeneach word in the sentence had been displayed (Baccino, 1994). In 2007, Wegner and Inhoff used an eye trackerduring a reading session (Weger & Inhoff, 2007). They asked readers to look at words they had just read andfound that subjects’ eyes immediately found the words on the screen without needing to re-read the passage. Theseexperiments show that without the support of spatial mapping, the cognitive load on readers is increased. Sincetext in a scrolled document doesn’t have a fixed position like text on a page, readers who scroll more may performworse on comprehension tests because they are forced to remember content rather than map content. In contrast,readers who scroll fewer times, like those who only scroll when they must access additional text, may have alighter cognitive load because they may still be able to map content onto space.The question remains, though, as to whether readers’ increased familiarity and quantity of digital readingexperiences have changed how they spatially map content in digital text. For example, a digital reader may havedeveloped compensatory strategies for dealing with the fluid nature of digital texts. Accustomed to scrolling, areader may map content onto other content, which also moves, like an image or heading providing a constantlocation in relation to the other content in the text even as scrolling occurs. This may provide a similar decreasein cognitive load as mapping content on space within a physical page. Additionally, it may mitigate the negativeimpacts of scrolling found in earlier studies of digital reading.All this assumes, though, increased familiarity with digital reading behaviors like scrolling, which havegained a lot of popularity since the late 90s. A study of 15 German university students in 2010 found that mostparticipants preferred to read a small area of the screen and scroll the text they were reading into that area toreading the whole screen and then scrolling to the text (Buscher, 2010). When questioned about their web readingbehavior, experienced users have reported that they use scrolling to move distracting ads off their screen whilereading webpages (Hillesund, 2010). Perhaps the biggest proof that user interfaces for digital text are improvingand gaining popularity is that more users are opting to read long forms of text on digital devices instead of printingthem compared to readers from a decade ago (Freund, Kopak, & O’Brien, 2016).In this paper, we wish to investigate scrolling in today’s digital era. We examine variability of scrollingbehaviors and whether scrolling impacts reading comprehension or is an equivalent form of navigation. Weconjecture that if scrolling creates more of a cognitive load, then learners who scroll more will perform worse oncomprehension and recall tests than learners who scroll the text a whole screen’s worth only when they must.There have been a few studies which counted the number of times a participant scrolled, but to the bestof our knowledge, none have been conducted on the scale described here and none have tied the total amount ofscrolling to performance. For example, in 2001, six American academics were recorded searching through 561documents to find which contained relevant information for a search query (Kelly & Belkin, 2001). ResearchersICLS 2018 Proceedings153© ISLSrecorded how often users scrolled in each document by recording the number of times they clicked on the scrollbar. They found that there was no difference between the number of times users scrolled when viewing relevantdocuments and the number of times they scrolled while viewing irrelevant documents. In 2016, Freund et al.recorded the screens of 41 Canadian participants and counted the number of times they scrolled to the bottom tocheck the length of the article they were reading (Freund et al., 2016). Readers checked the length of the documentthey were reading more often when the stimulus was a typical webpage with distracting advertisements andpictures than when it was stripped of extraneous content. This suggests scrolling behaviors differ, but does notlink such behaviors to comprehension, which is the goal of the current study.MethodWe recorded the screens of middle schoolers while they read a website. We then used a computer program tocalculate when they scrolled, and checked the results of the program against our own intuition by looking atvisualizations of students at the far ends of the spectrum and summary statistics such as the average length of astudent’s scroll. Once scrolling was calculated for all participants, we linked it to comprehension using a statisticalmodel which took other factors such as prior knowledge into account.Experimental setupOur participants were 381 fifth to eighth graders (N=87 fifth graders, 78 sixth graders, 83 seventh graders, and132 eighth graders) who were learning in the classrooms of 11 teachers across 3 schools in an urban district in theSoutheastern United States. Eighth graders were oversampled because the stimulus was a passage designed for8th graders by the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP). We received demographic data on 369of the participants from the school board. Two hundred and nine (56%) of the students were female. 165 wereWhite, 157 were Black, 34 were Hispanic, 12 were Asian and 1 was an American Indian. According to the 2010census, our sample had about 12% more Blacks and less Whites than the town’s distribution, but otherwisematched city-wide demographics. There were 87 students noted as economically disadvantaged and 66 spoke alanguage other than English at home.All students did a mix of digital and paper reading as part of their regular classwork according to theirteachers, though no classroom used one-to-one digital devices in class. All digital reading was recorded byiMotions (IMotions A/S, 2016). The recording contained an estimate of where the participant was looking alignedwith the digital content being viewed, but we only used the screen recording for this study. For the content, wedivided an NAEP passage (https://www.nationsreportcard.gov/reading_2011/testyourself_g8_passage_ann.aspx)into two parts with the dividing point chosen due to the natural end of a section. Therefore, the first part had 434words and the second part had 674 words. Each participant read one part on paper and one part on a laptop withthe order of the reading randomly assigned. Students were interviewed individually in a quiet classroom in theirschool. We measured student familiarity with the topic and preferences regarding digital and paper reading toolsusing a pre-test. After reading both sections, they took an open book post-test in which most of the questionsreferred to specific sentences or paragraphs in the stimuli.When students started the digital reading, the researcher showed them how to use the highlighting,dictionary lookup and touch screen tools which were available in the digital environment. We did this becausethese tools change enough between devices and platforms that it was unlikely all students were already familiarwith the tools we used, though their mechanisms were the same as similar tools found in PDF viewers.Calculating scrollingWe developed a computer program to analyze the screen recording video. Note that both passages were too longto fit on a single screen, and therefore participants were required to scroll down to see the full content. Todetermine number of scrolls, the program pulled out frames from the video every 0.1 seconds and used imageprocessing to figure out where each line of text was relative to the top and bottom of the screen as well as whichlines were present in a frame. This information was used to calculate how far down the page a participant hadscrolled and whether they had zoomed into the screen. To calculate scrolling, we listed the frames in the orderthey appeared in the video. If the text moved more than half a line’s height between one frame and the next, thatcounted as a scroll. We used a cutoff above zero because the image processing was occasionally off by a fewpixels. This method worked for 378 of the 381 students we gathered data on. The screen capture program crashedfor two of the students, and for one student the image processing algorithm was unable to identify the text in theframes due to the student highlighting all the text on the screen. The code for this program can be found athttps://github.com/kbrady/eye-tracker-pipeline.In addition to the total number of scrolls, we also calculated how many scrolls went up versus down onthe page. We theorized that scrolling up to possibly review the document would have a different relationship withICLS 2018 Proceedings154© ISLScomprehension than scrolling down. One hundred and forty-one students (37%) never scrolled up after theexperimenter showed them how to scroll and 241 (64%) had less than five frame transitions in which they scrolledup. For perspective, the medium number of frame transitions in which a student scrolled down after the instructorgave them control of the computer was 14. This meant that for most participants, the number of timeframes theyscrolled down and the total number in which they scrolled ended up either being the same or very close.Since the laptop used to display the text was a touch screen, a lot of participants opted to zoom in to seethe text or picture better (109 of the 378 students we got data for zoomed in at least once). If the zoom level ontwo consecutive frames was not the same, we did not count that pair as a scroll even if the text moved vertically.Due to the sensitivity in multiple directions of touch screen interface, it was very easy for students to accidentallyscroll while zooming. For this reason, we felt it was best not to count text movement during a zoom as a scroll.Figure 1. The median student measured by scrolling while reading the second section.Visualizing scrollingWe checked that the scrolling measured by the computer program matched our own intuition of how much usersscrolled while reading by visualizing each participant’s scrolling. This allowed us to see the scroll positionsdetected by the computer, compare them to the screen recording, and quickly check whether the ranking ofparticipants by number of scrolls made sense. An example visualization is shown in Figure 1. This image showsthe median student measured by number of scrolls while reading the second part. The image on the left shows thevertical position of the screen plotted against the time since the session began. The three outtakes on the rightside show what the student’s screen looked like during three sequences when it was stable. The top outtake showswhat the student saw from 48 seconds after the session started to 2 minutes and 25 seconds. The middle panelshows what the student saw from 2 minutes and 26 seconds in to 2 minutes and 52 seconds. This outtakecorresponds to the shaded area above the 2:47 tick in the graph on the left. The final outtake shows what was onthe student’s screen from 2 minutes and 53 seconds after the session started to 3 minutes and 48 seconds after thesession started.The x-axis in the graph is used for time. In general, students did not zoom in enough to cut off thehorizontal sides of the screen, so they could see the full horizontal width of the text (as shown in the outtakes tothe right in Figure 1). Thus, the shaded area in the graph only represents the vertical position of the screen. Weoverlaid the plot on a stitched together picture of the whole document so we could see which parts of the documentwere visible to the student at each time point during their reading session.Figure 2 shows the same visualization applied to the students who scrolled the most and the least duringthe second part. The frequent movement of the blue band in 2.a shows that the student scrolled quite a bit, whilethe stability of the blue band in 2.b shows that the student only scrolled in one short burst a little over 7 minutesinto the session. Visualizing scrolling in this way also allowed us to see certain macro behaviors. For example,the thin blue downward spikes in the first minute of Figure 1 and Figure 2.a show that the screen was moved downand up very quickly shortly after the page loaded. This was the period in which the researcher showed theparticipant how to use the tools in the digital environment, including scrolling and zooming on the touch screen.ICLS 2018 Proceedings155© ISLSAnother macro behavior is reviewing the document, which is shown after 3:30 in Figure 2.a. We believe trainingthe computer program to recognize and classify these behaviors would allow us to gain further insights into howstudents scroll while learning.2.a. The maximum scroller2.b. The minimum scrollerFigure 2. Examples of students scrolling while reading the second section.We also wanted to check whether students who scrolled more, scrolled shorter lengths than their peers.As shown in Figure 2, students on the far ends of the distribution seemed to support this theory, but we did nothave time to look through the visualizations for all students. Therefore, we plotted the average length of adownward scroll for each condition against the number of times a student scrolled. As shown in Figure 3, therewas a relationship between the number of times a reader scrolled and the average length of a scroll, with thosewho scrolled less often making longer scrolls.Figure 3. Average length of a downward scroll in pixels plotted against the number of times a student scrolledwhile reading the first section.ICLS 2018 Proceedings156© ISLSStatistical modelsWe linked scrolling to post-test results (i.e., comprehension) using generalized linear mixed models. Each modelwas fit using the Laplace approximation for maximum likelihood. The model took pre-test scores, grade level,section read digitally, reading modality preferences and ethnicity into account as covariates. In addition to directlytesting whether the number of times a subject scrolled had a relationship with comprehension, we considered theeffects of holding these variables controlled. There were eight students who did not have a complete post-test andtherefore had to be left out of the model. With the three students whose video recordings could not be processed,this limited the final model to 370 participants.ResultsAmong students who had no preference between reading digitally versus on paper, we found a significant negativerelationship between scrolling down and comprehension, controlling for the other covariates in the model. Thisgroup represented 39% of the subjects and was larger than either the set of students who said they preferredreading on paper (24%) or the set who said they preferred to read on digital devices (37%). The students withouta preference between digital and paper were disproportionately likely to be non-white, but otherwise seemeddemographically equivalent to the rest of the class. We did not find any other relationships between scrolling andcomprehension.There was no relationship between scrolling and pre-test scores, reading aptitude or ethnicity. Thefrequency with which students scrolled roughly corresponded to how much they liked digital environments.Students who preferred reading on digital devices scrolled more than their peers, followed by students who likedboth digital and paper reading.On average, we found that students who scrolled through the shorter section had 27.5 tenth of secondtimeframes in which they scrolled and students scrolling through the longer passage had 42.7. It seems that about11 timeframes (1.1 seconds worth) per student are due to the researcher showing them how to scroll at thebeginning of the session. If we exclude scrolls in the first minute, the average drops to 16.9 for the shorter sectionand 31.6 for the longer section. There was a wide range of scrolling behaviors in both conditions. The standarddeviation was 19.6 timeframes for the short passage and 29.1 timeframes for the longer passage, with very longtails to the right in both cases.As you might expect, the amount of time a student spent reading the digital text was positively correlatedto how much they scrolled. This correlation was not so strong that we believe scrolling to be an approximation oftime, nor did dividing the number of times a person scrolled by the time they spent reading produce differentresults in our analysis. On average students scrolled once every 14 seconds, but most scrolled more often thanthat (the median was a scroll every 10.5 seconds).We also found a correlation between the number of times a student scrolled up and the number of timesthey scrolled down. This relationship is shown in Figure 4. Initially we thought this might be occurring becausetoo many frames when the screen was still were being classified as scrolls due to bugs in the image processingalgorithm. To check this hypothesis, we tried only counting scrolls in which the text moved at least a full lineinstead of half a line. Using this larger cutoff resulted in some students being labeled as scrolling much less. Whenwe visualized those students, we found that there were many cases where we did not agree that the student hadscrolled less than their peers. However, even with the higher cutoff there was a strong relationship between thenumber of times a student scrolled up and the number of times they scrolled down.Figure 4. Number of upward scrolls plotted against number of downward scrollsICLS 2018 Proceedings157© ISLSDiscussionPreferring text to be available in both paper and digital editions is not unusual among adults. A survey of NewZealand college students found that 49.7% preferred that their textbooks be available in both print and online(Traut & Toland, 2014). However, many of the reasons cited by adults for preferring materials in two formatssuch as reading the digital one on the train and the paper one at home and saving money by reading mostly onlineand printing critical passages do not apply to middle schoolers. We therefore conjecture that the two fifths of oursubjects who did not have a preference between digital and print reading may have not had a chance to develop apreference due to not getting as much exposure to each environment as their peers.If this conjecture is correct, then it would mean our results line up with Sanchez and Wiley’s (2009) andsupport the hypothesis that negative effects from scrolling go away as students get more experience scrolling. Itis notable that among this population, only down scrolling had a negative relationship with comprehension, notscrolling up. This supports the spatial hypothesis as an explanation of why scrolling is bad for some students.Frequently scrolling down allows the reader to only read the top line of the screen and thus erase spatial ques suchas position on the screen which might have helped their memory. Scrolling up indicates that a learner took theopportunity to review or checked the length of the text, neither of which would impact their spatial memory.One way of adding spatial cues while reading from a screen is to move text by a page at a time so thatthe spatial cues of the screen are re-introduced. Another method would be to train readers to use other spatialmarkers like text headings and pictures to orient the text they are currently reading in a space which is notdependent on the current placement of the screen. It is notable that learners who prefer to read from paper scrollless than their peers, suggesting they are employing the first strategy and learners who prefer to read digitallyscroll more than their peers, suggesting they are using the latter strategy. Learners without a preference may stillbe using the screen position to remember what they have read but not adapting their scrolling behavioraccordingly. Thus, in this group, those who scroll more are not comprehending the text as well. Training theselearners to either scroll less often or pick up on spatial cues like headers and pictures might improve theircomprehension.Historians of printed books have noted that our modern method of reading printed books is only a fewcenturies old. Sixteenth century English bibles were littered with indices and concordance lists which encourageddiscontinuous reading much like the links on Wikipedia sites today (Hillesund, 2010). Annotations and diariesfrom the era confirm that many readers did take a discontinuous approach to reading their Bibles. In theintervening centuries, long form printed text meant to be read from beginning to end has become popular andmethods of reading it efficiently have been developed. As more educational tools move online, it becomes morenecessary to train students in practices which will help their digital literacy, which may not be the same as thebest practices for reading on paper. This may include introducing them to alternative navigation techniques ordifferent ways of viewing space.Future workWe do not know why there is such a strong relationship between the frequency of downward scrolling and thefrequency of upward scrolling. This suggests the metrics for scrolling in this paper are overly broad and a systemwhich could recognize and categorize macro behaviors such as reviewing and checking length would get a betterpicture of how readers use navigation. Both the statistics we gathered and the visualizations of student scrollingshowed in Figures 1 and 2 demonstrate that there is a lot of variance in how middle schoolers navigate scrollabletext. In particular, we would like to know whether students who prefer reading digitally employ differentnavigation strategies than those who prefer paper or do not have a preference. The differences in scrolling amountswe observed between these groups suggest that they are employing different strategies.ReferencesBaccino, T. (1994). Spatial Coding and Discourse Models During Text Reading. Language and CognitiveProcess, 9(2), 143–155. http://doi.org/10.1080/01690969408402114Buscher, G. (2010). Eye Tracking Analysis of Preferred Reading Regions on the Screen. In CHI’10 ExtendedAbstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 3307–3312). Atlanta: ACM.Freund, L., Kopak, R., & O’Brien, H. (2016). The effects of textual environment on reading comprehension:Implications for searching as learning. Journal of Information Science, 42(1), 79–93.http://doi.org/10.1177/0165551515614472Hillesund, T. (2010). Digital reading spaces: How expert readers handle books, the Web and electronic paper.First Monday, 15, 1–19. http://doi.org/10.5210/fm.v15i4.2762ICLS 2018 Proceedings158© ISLSIMotions A/S. (2016). iMotions Biometric Research Platform 6.3. Copenhagen, Denmark.Kelly, D., & Belkin, N. J. (2001). Reading time, scrolling and interaction: exploring implicit sources of userpreferences for relevance feedback. Proceedings of the 24th Annual International ACM SIGIR ConferenceonResearchandDevelopmentinInformationRetrieval,(558),408–409.http://doi.org/10.1145/383952.384045Kim, D.-H., & Huynh, H. (2008). Computer-based and paper-and-pencil administration mode effects on astatewide end-of-course English test. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 68(4), 554–570.http://doi.org/10.1177/0013164407310132Kłyszejko, Z., Soluch, T., Wieczorek, A., Chmiel, K., Sarzyńska, J., & Szóstek, A. (2011). The influence of textvisualization on the screen on eye movements and information processing. In Proceedings of theConference: Interfejs użytkownika - Kansei w praktyce, Warszawa (pp. 113–120).O’Hara, K., & Sellen, A. (1997). A Comparison of Reading Paper and On-Line Documents. In Proceedings ofCHI ’97, Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 335–342). Atlanta, Georgia, U.S.A.http://doi.org/10.1145/258549.258787Piolat, A., Roussey, J.-Y., & Thunin, O. (1997). Effects of screen presentation on text reading and revising.International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 47(4), 565–589. http://doi.org/10.1006/ijhc.1997.0145Rothkopf, E. Z. (1971). Incidental memory for location of information in text. Journal of Verbal Learning andVerbal Behavior, 10(6), 608–613. http://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5371(71)80066-XSanchez, C. a., & Wiley, J. (2009). To Scroll or Not to Scroll: Scrolling, Working Memory Capacity, andComprehendingComplexTexts.HumanFactors,51(5),730–738.http://doi.org/10.1177/0018720809352788Singer, L. M., & Alexander, P. A. (2017). Reading on Paper and Digitally: What the Past Decades of EmpiricalResearch Reveal. Review of Educational Research, 1–35. http://doi.org/10.3102/0034654317722961Traut, L., & Toland, J. (2014). Online vs . Printed Course Materials : Student Preferences and Influential factors.In ICIS2014 SIGGreen Workshop. Retrieved from https://siggreen.wikispaces.com/Accepted+PapersWästlund, E. (2007). Experimental Studies of Human-Computer Interaction: Working memory and mentalworkload in complex cognition. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2004.02.007Weger, U. W., & Inhoff, A. W. (2007). Long-range regressions to previously read words are guided by spatialand verbal memory. Memory & Cognition, 35(6), 1293–1306.AcknowledgmentsThis work was completed with the support of an interdisciplinary grant from Vanderbilt University (AmandaGoodwin is the primary investigator).ICLS 2018 Proceedings159© ISLS