Is Small Group Collaboration Beneficial in Large Scale OnlineCourses? An Investigation of Factors Influencing Satisfactionand Performance in GroupMOOCsElias Kyewski, University of Duisburg-Essen, elias.kyewski@uni-due.deNicole C. Krämer, University of Duisburg-Essen, nicole.kraemer@uni-due.deNina Christmann, Ruhr-University Bochum, christmann@iaw.ruhr-uni-bochum.deMalte Elson, Ruhr-University Bochum, malte.elson@rub.deJulia Erdmann, Ruhr-University Bochum, julia.erdmann@rub.deTobias Hecking, University of Duisburg-Essen, hecking@collide.infoThomas Herrmann, Ruhr-University Bochum, herrmann@iaw.ruhr-uni-bochum.deH. Ulrich Hoppe, University of Duisburg-Essen, hoppe@collide.infoNikol Rummel, Ruhr-University Bochum, nikol.rummel@rub.deAstrid Wichmann, Ruhr-University Bochum, astrid.wichmann@rub.deAbstract: The paper analyzes students’ experience within a large scale e-learning course ina higher education setting. During the course students worked on successive assignmentsindividually or in groups of three students in an alternating fashion. Captured data includestudents’ platform behavior (login, resource accesses, e.g., literature access, video access, activedays, completed quizzes, resource coverage), students’ final course grade as well as learningpreferences, intrinsic motivation and satisfaction assessed via questionnaire. Results reveal thatof those variables the satisfaction with the collaborative tasks is merely related to students’overall course evaluation.Keywords: MOOC, e-learning, collaborationIntroductionMassive open online courses (MOOCs) support a “large-scale interactive participation” (Conole, 2013, p. 6) andhave received more and more attention from the academic community (Khalil & Ebner, 2014). These onlinecourses attempt to create interactivity between the participants by means of offering discussion forums (Conole,2013) and increasingly also by incorporating collaborative tasks which are seen as an opportunity for participantsto engage with the course and the learning material. Further, it was demonstrated that interactivity, (e.g.,discussion forums) is related to higher academic performance (Anderson, Huttenlocher, Kleinberg, & Lescovec,2014). In MOOCs collaboration between students typically takes place in a plenary discussion forum. Thoughthese discussion forums allow interaction, only a small proportion of students take advantage of it (Kizilcec,Schneider, Cohen, & McFarland, 2014). A subcategory of MOOCs that makes particular use of this aspect isgroupMOOCs “where the focus is on collaboration in small groups“ (Conole, 2013, p. 9). Small-group learningtasks can be beneficial as they can support task processing and problem solving (Ku, Tseng, & Akarasriworn,2013). Additionally, it has been shown in several studies that collaborative tasks give rise to higher levels ofsatisfaction of students’ learning process (Bolinger, 2004), and that students are more satisfied with their onlinecourse if they perceived higher levels of collaborative learning (So & Brush, 2008). This can be seen as especiallyimportant because satisfaction increases students’ motivation to participate (Bolinger, 2004). However, there arecertainly also problems with regard to group work. Roberts and McInnerney (2007) summarized the seven mostcommon problems and highlighted students’ general antipathy towards group work. Well-known phenomena ingroup work include problems like social loafing and free-riding (e.g., Piezon & Donaldson, 2005).The goal of the study was to determine the possible influence of group tasks and individual task-relatedsatisfaction on overall course evaluation and performance. In order to understand which aspects are related tostudents’ general satisfaction with the course as well as to their general performance in the course we firstconducted an explorative analysis. The goal was to analyze how students’ learning preferences (cooperative,individualistic, competitive), prior intrinsic motivation, as well as specific behavior during the course (literatureaccess, active days, video access, completed quizzes and resource coverage) were related to individually perceivedsatisfaction and overall performance as assessed via the final course grade.On the basis of these prior considerations, we formulated the following research questions:ICLS 2016 Proceedings918© ISLSRQ1: Are intrinsic motivation, learning preferences and behavior on the online platform (literatureaccess, active days, video access, completed quizzes and resource coverage) related to coursesatisfaction?RQ2: Are intrinsic motivation, learning preferences and behavior on the online platform related to thefinal course grade?In accordance with the assumption that a beneficial perception of collaboration and satisfaction with thecourse are correlated positively we derived the following hypothesis:H1: The satisfaction with a collaborative task is positively related to students’ overall course satisfaction.As stated by Anderson and colleges (2014) interactivity (e.g., discussion forums) is related to higheracademic performance and collaboration can foster academic engagement (Wentzel & Watkins, 2002). Therefore,we hypothesized that:H2: The satisfaction with a collaborative task is related to students’ final course grade.Additionally, we strived to understand whether the learning preferences with regard to collaborationaffect the satisfaction with the collaborative task as well as moderate the relation of satisfaction with the grouptask and overall course evaluation:H3: Learning preference for collaborative learning is positively related to the satisfaction with thecollaborative task.H4: The individual learning preference for collaborative learning moderates the relation of satisfactionwith the group task and overall course evaluation.MethodsThis study was conducted during an online seminar at the University of Duisburg-Essen and Ruhr-UniversityBochum over a period of one semester. Students of different study programs (and faculties) participated in thiscourse. We chose Moodle as our platform, which is commonly used by universities and designed to supportteaching as well as learning. This platform delivers a large number of learner-centric tools and collaborativelearning environments. Furthermore, to facilitate typical MOOC features, our Moodle platform was customizedby adaptation and configuration of a collection of existing tools for individual and collaborative learning.Before participation in the course students were asked to provide informed consent to the usage of theirbehavioral data logged by the platform for research purposes (157 or 90.2% students agreed). The students’ logfiles contained timestamped information about the login, resource accesses, e.g., literature access, video access,completed quizzes, and participation in questionnaires. The recorded actions of each type were counted for eachweek of the course. Further measures i.e., active days and resource coverage (subset of course material that astudent has actually used) in the corresponding week were calculated. Based on the personal platform ID of everysingle student, it was possible to assign log files to surveys thereby providing the opportunity to analyze relationsbetween self-reported data and process measures.In a time period from week 6 to 10 students completed two collaborative and two individual tasks. Inboth tasks students should submit a text regarding a case scenario that was based on a weekly topic regardingcomputer-mediated communication (e.g., social interdependence theory). In the collaborative task students had todiscuss theoretical aspects, their ideas, and their final submission in a forum with 2-3 fellow students whereasstudents of the individual task had no opportunity to discuss their ideas. Subjective satisfaction with the type ofthe task was surveyed, however, only data from two weeks (9 and 10) could be used due to a database error.Students participated in several online questionnaires. Students were asked about the completed task andwhether they preferred to complete the task collaboratively or individually. The questionnaire consisted of 12 adhoc items on a 7-point Likert scale (ranging from 1 = strongly disagree to 7 = strongly agree). With an exploratoryfactor analysis using Horn procedure (Fabrigar, Wegener, MacCallum, & Strahan, 1999) two factors weredetermined. Factor 1 consisted of 9 items indicating liking group work (e.g., “I liked to work on this task withothers”) with an internal consistency of .93 (Cronbach’s α). Factor 2 consisted of 3 items indicating exhaustion(e.g., “Working with others was exhausting”; Cronbach’s α = .74).We assessed intrinsic motivation of the students at the beginning of the course using 5 items from theacademic self-regulation questionnaire (SRQ-A) by Müller, Hanfstingl, and Andreitz (2007) ranging from 1 =strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree (e.g., “I am learning in this online lecture because I find it fun”; Cronbach’sα = .88).Further, we employed Johnson and Norem-Hebeisen’s (1979) measure of cooperative (7 items, e.g., “Ilike to help other students learn”; Cronbach’s α = .86), competitive (8 items, e.g., “I like to do better work thanICLS 2016 Proceedings919© ISLS