Drawing for Learning from Dynamic Visualizations in ScienceMike Stieff, University of Illinois-Chicago, mstieff@uic.eduKatharina Scheiter, Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien, k.scheiter@iwm-tuebingen.deShaaron Ainsworth, University of Nottingham, Shaaron.Ainsworth@nottingham.ac.ukClaudia Bohrmann-Linde, University of Tübingen, Claudia.Bohrmann-Linde@uni-tuebingen.deMax Schall, University of Tübingen, max-fabian.schall@student.uni-tuebingen.deAbstract: This paper examines the efficacy of drawing for supporting learning from digitalmedia, such as dynamic visualizations. Extant research on the efficacy of drawing forpromoting learning from dynamic visualizations is contradictory. The discrepancy in thesefindings has been attributed to the differences between drawing and dynamic visualizations.While dynamic visualizations emphasize spatiotemporal transformations, drawing emphasizesstatic spatiotemporal structures. Thus, drawing may impede learning from a dynamicvisualization when the target learning objective relates to dynamism as it may bias the learnerto focus on structure at the expense of transformation. Here, we present our developingfindings that drawing provides an effective learning scaffold for learning from dynamicvisualizations more so than self-explanation prompts, and that drawing biases learners toattend to fewer spatiotemporal structures.IntroductionThere has been an increased emphasis on supporting science learning with drawing activities, despite relativelylittle evidence that drawing is generally an effective learning scaffold when deployed in the science classroom.While several studies (for a review see Van Meter & Firetto, 2013) have shown that drawing can effectivelysupport learning from text, it is not clear that drawing produces the same benefits with other instructionalmaterials. Although it has been argued that drawing is likely to improve learning from dynamic visualizations(e.g., Ainsworth et al., 2011), the empirical evidence demonstrating a reliable effect of drawing remainsoutstanding. Some early studies have reported evidence that drawing improves learning from animations(Mason, Lowe, & Tornatora, 2013; Zhang & Linn, 2011) and simulations (Stieff, 2011); however, Plötzner andFillisch (2017) recently demonstrated no significant benefit of drawing for learning from a complex animation.In contrast to prior claims, these authors argue that dynamic visualizations emphasize complexspatiotemporal transformations (i.e., changes among spatial relationships), but drawing emphasizes theconstruction of a static representation that highlights spatiotemporal structures (i.e., geometric entities).Because of the different emphasis of drawing and dynamic visualizations, they suggest that drawing may onlyimprove learning from dynamic visualizations of simple physical systems that focus on spatiotemporalstructures. Although the results of this study suggest that drawing biases learners to attend to static features, thatwork did not include a complex, interactive visualization, nor did the researchers contrast drawing with analternative scaffold. Here, we compare the efficacy of drawing with and without a dynamic visualization with ahighly interactive visualization that enriches the verbal learning material and a study design that included anactive comparison group to investigate whether drawing selectively biases learners to focus on transformations.Present studyThe present study examines whether learning from dynamic visualizations is improved by constructingdrawings while reading a science text with a complementary visualization. Half of the sample populationinteracted with a dynamic visualization about chemical equilibrium from The Connected Chemistry Curriculum(Stieff et al., 2012) while reading. To identify the interactive benefit of drawing and visualization, these groupswere further divided into two groups that either made self-explanation summaries or self-explanation drawings.Our comparison of interest is the interaction between the two factors: does drawing improve learningfrom a visualization as much as it improves learning from a science text but not as much as summarizing? Basedon prior research from learning with texts that demonstrate a positive effect of drawing, we predicted thatdrawing would improve learning from the dynamic visualization as much as it improved learning from the textonly. Because the visualizations used in this study were highly interactive (i.e., students were directed tomanipulate system variables and observe system results), we also predicted that students who constructdrawings while learning (with text alone or visualizations) would construct more conceptually accuratedrawings that depicted spatiotemporal transformations relevant to the chemical system under study.ICLS 2018 Proceedings937© ISLSParticipants127 students from a mid-sized research-extensive university in Germany participated on a voluntary basis forpayment (12€). Students were recruited from a range of liberal arts majors including science and non-sciencefields. Data from 7 participants were excluded because they did not finish the procedure within the allotted time.MaterialsAll participants received an instructional text on chemical equilibrium with five main ideas: the concept ofdynamic chemical equilibrium, LeChatelier’s Principle, the effect of pressure, temperature, and concentration onthe equilibrium position of a reaction. The text was taken from a popular US secondary chemistry textbook(Holt, 2002) and translated into German by a native speaker. The 1875-word text was presented with noaccompanying figures and had a Flesch-Kinkaid readability score of 44 on the German readability scale.In addition to the text, one half of the participants were provided with an interactive simulation fromThe Connected Chemistry Curriculum (Stieff et al., 2012). The simulation presented a reversible chemicalreaction at equilibrium. Participants could interact with the simulation to alter the system temperature, pressure,and reactant concentration. The simulation would respond to any manipulation of these parameters with aprobabilistic model that restored the system to dynamic equilibrium and a new equilibrium position. The displayincluded not only a dynamic visualization of particle interactions, but dynamic plots of concentration over time.Embedded within the instructional text were five self-explanation tasks that asked students to explainin their own words the main idea of each section of the text related to the five main ideas. One half of theparticipants received directions to provide a self-explanation in the format of a written summary and the otherhalf received directions to instead make a sketch for their self-explanation. Participants who received thesupporting simulation were instructed to interact with the simulation immediately before generating each selfexplanation (drawing or summary) to help them better understand the main idea of the text; participants withoutthe visualization were encouraged to reflect on what they read to respond to the question.MeasuresChemistry prior knowledgeTo control for individual differences in chemistry knowledge, prior knowledge of chemistry was measured witha subset of 10 relevant items of the Chemistry Concepts Inventory, which has been found to be a valid andreliable measure of general chemistry knowledge acquired in secondary education (Barbera, 2013).Learning outcomesLearning outcomes were assessed with a summative achievement assessment from The Connected ChemistryCurriculum. The 14-item instrument assessed participants’ declarative knowledge related to chemicalequilibrium, models of dynamic chemical systems, and ability to predict how chemical systems would respondto external stressors (Cronbach’s alpha = .85).ProcedureParticipants were tested in groups of up to six, and were randomly assigned to one of four conditions (i.e., textsummary, text-sketch, text+visualization-summary, text+visualization-sketch). Each participant workedindividually at a private desk with provided paper, a pen, and a computer, if necessary.Participants first completed a demographic questionnaire before completing the Paper Folding Test (3min.), the reading comprehension test (4 min.), and the chemistry prior knowledge test (10 min.). Following thethree tests, participants were allotted 45 minutes to complete the learning phase in which they read the text,completed the self-explanation tasks, and interacted with the visualization, if required. Participants wereallowed to work through the material at their own pace and were stopped at 45 minutes.ResultsPerformance on all measures was determined by calculating and norming the number of correct responses oneach measure. The average time to complete the learning phase was 40 minutes and the average number of taskscompleted was 4.7. We observed no statistical difference in completion time or the number of completed tasksbetween groups. After completing the learning phase, the learning outcomes measure was administered with a20-minute time limit. No differences in reading comprehension or spatial ability between groups was observed.We qualitatively analyzed the five self-explanation tasks with three binary codes: (1) accuratelyrepresents the relevant main idea, (2) references spatiotemporal structures (e.g., particle composition), 3)represents spatiotemporal transformations (e.g., dynamic system changes). Figure 1 illustrates the application ofICLS 2018 Proceedings938© ISLSthe coding scheme with drawings from two participants. The sketch on the left demonstrates a particle-levelrepresentation where the learner has used geometric shapes to demonstrate (inaccurately) changes in particleidentity but does not represent how the system changes with increased pressure. The sketch on the rightdemonstrates a particle-level representation and accurately illustrates how the depicted system would respond toincreased pressure with two images that depict the entire system before and after pressure is applied.Figure 1. Two sketches from participants illustrating the effect of pressure on dynamic chemical equilibrium.Does drawing improve learning from dynamic visualizations relative to summarizing?Post-test achievement was compared with a 2 (text v. text+visualization) x 2 (summary v. sketch) ANCOVAwhile controlling for prior knowledge. Prior knowledge significantly correlated with learning outcome, F(1,120)= 5.26, p = .02, η p 2 = .05. Although a difference was trending, we observed no main-effect of media, F(1,120) =3.13, p = .07. As seen in Figure 2, average student performance was higher in the two conditions with sketchingscaffolds than those with summarizing scaffolds. No significant interaction was present in the model, F < 1.Figure 2. Mean accuracy on post-test assessment of the learning material.How do learners’ self-explanations differ between scaffolds embedded in the learning material?We analyzed qualitative differences in the participants’ self-explanations using three independent 2 (text v.text+visualization) x 2 (summary v. sketch) ANCOVAs, controlling for prior knowledge. First, we analyzed theself-explanations for an accurate depiction of each main idea. We observed no significant differences betweenscaffold types or learning media and no interaction (all Fs < 1). Second, we analyzed the self-explanations forreferences to spatiotemporal transformations, such as changes to the system state. We observed that referencesto transformation information differed significantly between conditions. We observed a main-effect of scaffold(F(1,120) = 6.04, p = .015, η p 2 = .05) but no main-effect of learning media or interaction (F < 1). As seen inFigure 3, average occurrences of transformation information were higher with summarizing scaffolds than withsketching scaffolds for both types of media. Third, we analyzed the self-explanations for representations ofspatiotemporal structures, such as particle composition. We found that references to structural informationdiffered by scaffold, F(1,120) = 50.0, p < .001, η p 2 = .30 and by learning media (F(1,120) = 7.51, p = .007) anda trending interaction, (F(1,120) = 3.56, p = .06). As seen in Figure 3, the average occurrence of structuralinformation was greater with summarizing scaffolds than with sketching scaffolds and greater in text onlyconditions. The trending interaction suggests that participants who had access to a visualization were muchmore likely to focus on structural information when they made summaries than when they made sketches.ICLS 2018 Proceedings939© ISLSFigure 3. Relative occurrence of each qualitative code in self-explanations during the learning phase.Discussion and conclusionsWhile evidence is increasing that dynamic visualizations benefit learning, it is unclear whether this benefit ismoderated by the act of drawing. Here, we tested the prediction of Plötzner and Fillisch (2017) by analyzing thecontent of student-generated representations. We aimed to identify whether drawing supports learning from avisualization and whether drawing biases learners to focus on static features of a visualization. We found thatsketching better supports learning from a visualization relative to summarizing. In contrast to prior work, weobserved learners represent concepts equally well verbally and pictorially, yet emphasize structural informationwhen learning without a visualization. Understanding whether and how drawing supports learning remains animportant target of educational research to support the incorporation of drawing into curriculum reforms. Here,our preliminary analysis suggests that drawing can yield improvements in learning about systems-levelprocesses in science contexts and may improve learning from complex visualizations of those processes.ReferencesAinsworth, S. E., Prain, V., & Tytler, R. (2011). Drawing to learn in science. Science, 333, 1096-1097.Barbera, J. (2013). A psychometric analysis of the chemical concepts inventory. Journal of ChemicalEducation, 90(5), 546-553.Carter, C. S., LaRussa, M. A., & Bodner, G. M. (1987). A study of two measures of spatial ability as predictorsof success in different levels of general chemistry. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 24(7),645-657.Holt, Rinehart, & Winston Staff. (2002). Modern chemistry (1st ed.). Austin, TX: Holt McDougal.Mason, L., Lowe, R. K., & Tornatora. M. (2013). Self-generated drawings for supporting comprehension of acomplex animation. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 38, 211-224.Plötzner, R., & Fillisch, B. (2017). Not the silver bullet: Learner-generated drawings make it difficult tounderstand broader spatiotemporal structures in complex animations. Learning & Instruction, 47, 1324.Van Meter, P., & Firetto, C. M. (2013). Cognitive model of drawing construction: learning through theconstruction of drawings. In G. Schraw, M. McCrudden, & D. Robinson (Eds.), Learning throughvisual displays (pp. 247-280). Scottsdale, AZ: Information Age Publishing.Zhang, H. Z., & Linn, M. C. (2011). Can generating representations enhance learning with dynamicvisualizations? Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 48, 1177-1198.AcknowledgmentsThe Alexander von Humboldt Foundation and the Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien supported this study.ICLS 2018 Proceedings940© ISLS