Fostering Sustained Knowledge Building through MetadiscourseAided by the Idea Thread MapperJianwei Zhang, Mei-Hwa Chen, Dan Tao, Yanqing Sun, Jiyeon Lee, Darlene Judsonjzhang1@albany.edu, mchen@albany.edu, dtao@albany.edu, ysun@albany.edu, edujyl@gmail.com,djudson1@gmail.comUniversity at AlbanyAbstract: This study was conducted in two Grade 5/6 classrooms that studied electricity overa three-month period using Knowledge Forum. Classroom A used Idea Thread Mapper(ITM)—a timeline-based collective discourse mapping tool—to engage in ongoingmetadiscourse to review collective advances and gaps. Classroom B did not engage in thisreflective practice until near the end of the inquiry. The results show that members of class Ahad more comprehensive and coherent awareness of the various inquiry themes discussed bytheir community focusing on deep conceptualization of electricity. Informed by the reflectiveawareness, classroom A also engaged in more active and connected online discourse toaddress deepening issues and develop coherent explanations across different lines of inquiry.Keywords: metadiscourse, Idea Thread Mapper, knowledge building, collective responsibilityIntroductionEducation to cultivate creative knowledge practices needs to support a progressive, collective trajectory ofinquiry sustained over a long term for productive effects (Engle, 2006; Hakkarainen, 2003; Zhang et al., 2014).Students engage in sustained inquiry and knowledge building discourse: They contribute diverse ideas toongoing conversations and collectively advance the ideas through constructive criticisms, mutual build-on, andprogressive problem solving, with new and deeper challenges identified as their understanding advances(Bereiter, 2002). To enable a progressive, collective trajectory of inquiry, classrooms need to give student ideasa public representation, as part of collective knowledge (Bereiter, 2002). Various collaborative environmentshave been created to give student ideas an extended social life beyond segmented tasks and activities, so theideas can be continually revisited, improved, and built upon by community members for deeper understanding.Despite the above potential support, current online environments lack effective means to represent collectiveknowledge growing in extended discourse. With ideas distributed across individual postings and responses overtime, it is hard for students to understand the conceptual landscape and trajectories of their collective work,causing short-threaded discourse that lacks connected deepening moves (Hewitt, 2001; Suthers et al., 2008).This research explores classroom designs to foster sustained knowledge building using the Idea ThreadMapper (ITM), a timeline-based collective discourse-mapping tool created by our team to make collectivetrajectories in online discourse visible for ongoing reflection (see Figure 1 for a map of idea threads).First ITMsessionSecond ITMsessionFigure 1. A map of idea threads created by a Grade 5/6 classroom studying electricityCSCL 2015 Proceedings166© ISLSITM Interoperates with Knowledge Forum (Scardamalia, 2002) and potentially other platforms forcollaborative knowledge building. In these online environments, students contribute and build on one another’sideas in interactive discourse, with ideas presented in distributed postings (e.g. notes) and build-on responses.Beyond these micro-level representations, we introduced “idea threads” or “inquiry threads” (Zhang et al., 2007)as a larger, emergent unit of ideas in online discourse. Each idea thread is composed of a sequence of discourseentries (possibly involving several build-on trees) contributed by a subset of the members of a community toaddress a shared problem or discourse topic, such as batteries and other topics in Figure 1. ITM allows studentsto define focal problem-based topics and select important discourse entries addressing each topic. The discourseentries in each idea thread are displayed on a timeline with the authors and build-on connections identified. Theknowledge progress in each idea thread is further made transparent by students through co-authoring a “Journeyof Thinking” synthesis aided by a set of scaffolds (e.g., We want to understand, We used to think…we nowunderstand…, We need to do more). Idea threads and thread-based syntheses are co-editable by members of theclassroom, with each version recorded for later review. The collective knowledge of the community in a wholeinquiry is further represented as clusters of idea threads (Figure 1) that address interrelated problems throughconnected efforts of the members. In Figure 1, each colored stripe represents an idea thread extending from thefirst till the last note contributed addressing its focal problem/topic. Each square represents a note. A blue linebetween two notes represents a build-on link. A dotted vertical line shows notes shared between differentthreads discussing interrelated issues. By examining this cluster of idea threads, students can reflect on theircontributions, cross-thread connections, and weak areas that need deeper work.Sustained knowledge building requires students to take on collective responsibility for progressivelydefining what they need to further understand as their collective understanding advances (Scardamalia, 2002).Students face the challenge to enact collective regulation of long-term knowledge building: to construct sharedgoals, formulate plans of actions, monitor collective progress and engagement, and adapt collaborativeprocesses to optimize members’ contribution to achieving their shared outcomes (Järvelä & Hadwin, 2013;Zhang et al., 2009). ITM-based designs support students’ collective regulation of long-term knowledge buildingthrough metadiscourse: metacognitive conversations about the ongoing inquiry and discourse focusing on highlevel decision making, including collective goal formulation, progress review, and co-planning (Zhang et al.,2009, 2014). Such metadiscourse is critical to knowledge building, but it is rarely observed in inquiry-basedsettings (Scardamalia, 2002; van Aalst, 2009). ITM-based metadiscourse is organized to support talk-organizingand talk-evaluating functions (cf. Vande Kopple, 1985): to frame and review ongoing discourse contributionsbased on shared focuses and goals, to monitor progress in each unfolding lines of inquiry, to synthesize insightsand identify gaps and deeper actions. Through metadiscourse, students generate high-level reflectiverepresentations of their ongoing discourse to guide sustained inquiry and coherent discourse.The current study is part of a multi-year design-based research to understand the operation ofmetadiscourse and its role in helping students co-monitor and advance their collective knowledge. In the firstiteration, we conducted a set of studies in a Grade 3 and two Grade 5/6 classrooms. The results elaborated theprocess and benefits of ITM-aided metadiscourse, which helped fostering student awareness of collectiveprogress beyond individual focuses and informing sustained and connected discourse to address deepeningquestions, leading to sophisticated explanations of complex issues (Zhang et al, 2013, 2014). However, thesefindings were generated through exploratory studies without cross-condition comparison. Also, the ITM-aidedmetadiscourse was implemented as a single classroom session. Further expansions need to organize it as aformative, ongoing effort while enabling easy connections between ITM-aided metadiscourse and ongoingonline discourse. The current study, as the second iteration, aims to address these needs. Our research questionasks: In what ways does such ongoing metadiscourse help students to monitor diverse inquiry themes evolvingin their community’s discourse and formulate connected, progressive discourse for deep understanding?MethodClassroom contexts and implementationThis study was carried out in two Grade 5/6 classrooms, with 21 students in classroom A and 22 in B. The twoclasses were taught by two experienced teachers, respectively, each having multiple years of experience withfacilitating inquiry. Students in each classroom investigated electricity over a 12-week period with two sciencelessons each week. Their work integrated whole class knowledge building conversations, individual andcooperative reading, student-directed experiments and observations, and so forth. Major ideas, questions, andfindings were contributed to Knowledge Forum for continual discourse online. For cross-classroom comparison,the design of ITM-aided metadiscourse and reflection was implemented as an ongoing effort in Class Abeginning from the third week of the electricity inquiry; such reflection was only systematically implemented inCSCL 2015 Proceedings167© ISLSClass B in the final phase of the inquiry in Week 9. This time-lag design allowed us to conduct detailed dataanalysis of Class A to elaborate the ongoing process of ITM-aided metadiscourse while enabling crossclassroom comparisons to examine the impact of ITM-aided metadiscourse on student knowledge building. Theknowledge building work unfolded as a continuous process; for the purpose of data analysis, we identified threephases, as elaborated below.Phase 1 (weeks 1-3), as the baselineThis phase extended from week 1 to 3 till Class A implemented its first ITM reflection session. Examiningstudent interaction in this phase when ITM was not yet used in either classroom provided the baseline data aboutstudent knowledge building facilitated by the two teachers. In both classrooms students began their electricityinquiry with hands-on explorations of static electricity, circuit and conductors, and magnets. They discussedtheir findings in small groups and further shared their questions and ideas through whole class knowledgebuilding conversations. Extending their face-to-face interactions, students wrote and built on one another’s notesin Knowledge Forum to discuss their ideas, observations, and questions.Phase 2 (weeks 4-8), as the focus of the data analysis and comparisonThis phase extended from Class A’s first ITM reflection session to its second ITM session till Class Bconducted its only ITM session. Comparing student engagement in this phase between classroom A and Bhelped to examine the impact of ITM reflection on sustained knowledge building. By the end of the third week,students in class A had created 89 notes in their Knowledge Forum view. They conducted the first ITM sessionto review collective progress. The whole class made an initial pass to co-review their Knowledge Forum view(discourse space) projected on a screen to identify high-potential “juicy topics” that had been discussed.Students were then given a printout of their Knowledge Forum view, which served as a bridging artifact tosupport metadiscourse about their online written discourse. They worked in small groups to identify noteclusters that discussed various topics, marking different clusters using different colors. The whole class thenconvened to discuss the topics identified, leading to the creation of a collective list of eight “juicy topics”highlighting problems related to batteries, static electricity, magnetism, electrons, atoms, voltage & charge,energy sources, and light. The students then formed into topic-based voluntary groups, each of whichconstructed an idea thread for a topic using ITM. Members of each group decided keywords to be used to searchfor related Knowledge Forum notes and found and selected the notes that addressed the focal topic. This sessionwas concluded with a whole class conversation to examine the map of idea threads (see Figure 1 till the firstITM session) and reflect on community-wide advancement, cross-theme connections, and weak areas. Studentsrealized that the different idea threads all have connections with electrical charges carried by electrons andprotons. This fundamental understanding was later diffused to the inquiry and discourse about a wide range ofspecific topics such as static electricity, batteries, lightning, and so forth. With deeper inquiry and discoursecarried out in the subsequent three weeks, students in class A conducted the second ITM reflection session inwhich they updated each idea thread by including new Knowledge Forum notes addressing the deeper issues(see the threads extended after the first ITM session in Figure 1). Consolidating their reflection, students furtherworked as small groups to create a “Journey of Thinking” synthesis for each idea thread using a set of scaffoldsthat highlighted problems of understanding, collective progress, and deeper issues.Phase 3 (week 9-12), final research and presentationsFollowing similar procedures, students in class B implemented ITM-aided reflection to review their onlinediscourse as idea threads and authored Journeys of thinking syntheses to summarize their advances and deeperissues. In the rest of the inquiry, students in both classrooms concentrated on classroom-based inquiry tounderstand the deep issues identified through ITM reflection and preparing final presentations to share newknowledge about these issues. With these efforts mostly enacted as face-to-face activities, students contributeda limited number of notes online in this phase. Therefore, we did not conduct statistical analysis for this phase.Data analysisVideo analysis of the ITM-aided metadiscourse is reported in Zhang et al. (2015), which elaborates theprocesses of metadiscourse for ongoing regulation of knowledge building: to formulate shared focuses and goalsas emergent from diverse discourse input; to review contributions, advances, and deeper issues in each line ofwork focusing on a high-potential topic; to examine clusters of idea threads and synthesize community-wideadvances, connections, and challenges, and to plan deeper efforts as individuals and spontaneous groups toaddress the community’s needs. The analyses in this paper focus on the role of metadiscourse to help studentsmonitor diverse evolving themes of inquiry and formulate connected deepening discourse.CSCL 2015 Proceedings168© ISLSContent analysis of individual portfolio summariesTo examine students’ reflective awareness and understanding of the various inquiry themes in theircommunity’s discourse space, we asked each student in classroom A and B to summarize what they had learnedaround the midpoint of the inquiry (after class A’s first ITM session). Each student’s summary was codedthrough content analysis (Chi, 1997). Specifically, two analysts first read the online discourse and observationnotes of the two classrooms to identify various topics of inquiry mentioned in relation to the topics specified inthe curriculum guidelines. They shared the identified topics and merged similar or closely related topics (e.g.atoms and electrons), with a final list of ten topics created (e.g. batteries, static electricity, voltage and charge,atoms). A primary coder then read each portfolio summary to identify utterances related to each of the focaltopics. The ideas related to each focal topic were further coded based on epistemic complexity and scientificsophistication using coding schemes validated through our previous studies (Zhang et al., 2007). Scientificsophistication examines the extent to which students’ ideas align with a scientific framework of electricity basedon a four-point scale: 1 - pre-scientific, 2 - hybrid, 3 - basically scientific, and 4 - scientific. Epistemiccomplexity indicates students’ efforts to produce not only descriptions of the material world, but also theoreticalexplanations and articulation of hidden mechanisms, which are central to the goal of science (Salmon, 1984). Afive-point scale (1- topic term only, 2 - unelaborated facts, 3 – elaborated facts, 4 – unelaborated explanations,and 5 - elaborated explanations) was used to code ideas about each topic. Considering these two scales asordered and continuous, we assessed the inter-rater reliability using Pearson correlation, which was found to be0.88 for epistemic complexity and 0.89 for scientific sophistication between two independent coders.Beyond student understanding of each individual topic, we analyzed the level of coherence inexplaining different topics focusing on the nature of electricity. Borges and Horizonte (1999) identifiedincreasingly complicated mental models about how electricity works: a general conception of electricity as theflow of energy often found among young students, a more informed conception focusing on positive andnegative charges, a deeper explanation of the charges based on the movement of electrically charged particles,and the most complicated understanding of electricity as a field phenomenon. Deeper conceptualizations favormore coherent understanding of seemingly different topics that share the same mechanisms. In light of thesemental models of electricity, we created a coding scheme (see Table 1) to categorize each student’s explanationsacross topics such as electric circuits, conductors, batteries, current, and charges. Table 1 does not includeelectricity as a field phenomenon (category 4) because none of the students showed this understanding that is farbeyond the level of Grade 5/6. Two raters independently coded 21 portfolio summaries resulting in an inter-rateragreement of 95.24% (Cohen’s Kappa = 0.97 for this category-based coding).Table 1: Progressively more complicated explanations of how electric circuits workCategory0. No explanation1. Electricity as flow ofenergy2. Electricity as positiveand negativecharges/currents3. Electricity asmovement of electricallycharged particlesDescriptionBasic facts or terms only, without explanations about how electric circuits work.Students describe batteries as the source of energy that provides electricity.Electricity flows through wires/conductors to the light bulb.Students explain the flow of electricity in terms of positive and negative charges orcurrents. For electricity to flow, the wires need to connect both positive andnegative terminals of the battery towards the bulb to form a closed circuit.Students mention positive and negative charges and further understand them interms of the movement of electrically charged particles including protons andelectrons. Battery is seen as an active source of electricity by means of chemicalreaction enabling the movement of electrically charged particles.Quantitative analysis of student contribution and interaction in the online discourseUsing the analytic toolkit underlying Knowledge Forum, we retrieved quantitative data about student notecontributions and build-on links in each phase of the inquiry. Comparing the level of contribution andinteractivity between the two classrooms especially for Phase 2 helped us to gauge the benefits of ITMreflection in sustaining active and connected knowledge building discourse.Qualitative tracing of idea improvement in each idea thread as related to students’ final presentationsTo understand the specific ways in which ITM-aided metadiscourse fostered coherent efforts of sustainedknowledge building, we qualitatively analyzed the online discourse in the idea threads organized by students inclassroom A in comparison to the online discourse of classroom B. Following inquiry thread analysis (Zhang etal., 2007), we used each idea thread topic defined by students as a “tracer” to trace interactive ideas andCSCL 2015 Proceedings169© ISLSquestions contributed to the online discourse over time before and after the ITM reflection sessions in relation tothe classroom inquiry activities observed. For each idea thread, two researchers co-read the notes in achronological sequence to develop an overall sense of visible idea-advancing changes. They further identifiednew questions and ideas in the online discourse before the first ITM reflection session, during ITM reflection inthe ITM Journey of Thinking synthesis, in the online discourse after the first ITM reflection, as well as instudents’ final presentations sharing deeper knowledge about each topic. The ideas and questions werecompared between the different phases of inquiry and linked across different idea threads to identify salientidea-advancing patterns by which students went beyond the existent information in their community to developmore advanced concepts and frame unfolding trajectories and directions to guide coherent contributions.ResultsContent analysis of student summariesThe content analysis of student summaries examined student awareness of the inquiry topics addressed by theircommunity and their understanding of each topic based on epistemic complexity and scientific sophistication.Through ITM-aided reflection, students in classroom A were able to summarize more topics of inquiry aboutelectricity (M = 5.89, SD =1.63) than students in classroom B (M = 4.65, SD =1.18) (F (1.37) = 7.51, p = .009).Specifically, classroom A had many more students summarizing understandings of abstract topics such aselectrical charges and atoms (including electrons). The average scientific rating of students’ ideas in bothclassrooms was between “3 - basically scientific” and “4 – scientific” without significant difference (p > .05).Students in classroom A articulated understandings of the various topics at a higher level of epistemiccomplexity (M = 3.94, SD = .58) than those in classroom B (M = 3.49, SD = .53) to explain the mechanisms,processes, reasons, and relationships beyond factual descriptions (F (1,36) = 6.51, p = .015).We further coded the coherent explanations of students across specific topics based on progressivelyadvanced models about how electricity works (Figure 2). The proportions of students coded for the differentcategories of explanations (see Table 1) differ significantly between the two classrooms (X2 = 16.03, df = 3, p =.001). Classroom A had higher percentages of students giving advanced explanations that conceive electricity asnegative and positive charges (category 2) carried by electrically charged particles (category 3). On the contrary,a majority of students in classroom B explained electric circuits at a general level as energy flow from thebattery to the light bulb (category 1).%Figure 2. Percentages of students giving different explanations of electricityQuantitative analysis of student contribution and interaction in online discourseTo gauge student contribution and interactivity in online discourse, we analyzed the number of notes contributedby each student and the percentage of notes in build-on links. Table 2 shows these two measures for eachclassroom in Phase 1 before ITM use and in Phase 2 after class A started its use of ITM (before class B usedITM). In Phase 1, students in class A contributed more notes to the online discourse in Knowledge Forum thanthose in classroom B (F (1,41) = 4.59, p = .038). There was no significant difference in the percentage of noteswith build-on links (p >.10). These measures of note contribution and linking (build-on) in this phase wereincluded as covariates in the analysis of variance of students’ note contribution and linking in Phase 2. Informedby their ITM-aided reflection on their collective knowledge advances, gaps, and connections, students in class Awrote a significantly larger number of notes in Phase 2 than class B (F(1, 40) = 6.34, p = .016). A significanteffect was observed for the covariate of student contribution rate in Phase 1 (F(1, 40) = 4.08, p = .05).Classroom A in Phase 2 also had a significantly higher percentage of notes with build-on links than classroom B(F (1, 40) = 6.29, p = .016), with a significant effect observed for students’ note linking percentages in Phase 1as a covariant (F (1, 43) = 4.45, p = .041). These results demonstrate that the ITM-aided reflection helped classA to sustain more active and connected knowledge building discourse.CSCL 2015 Proceedings170© ISLSTable 2: Contributions to the online knowledge building discourse (means and standard deviations)ClassroomA: ITM Use afterWeek 3B: ITM Use Delayedtill after Week 8Phase 1: Week 1-3Notes written perstudent4.86 (2.61)3.32 (2.01)37.19 (33.27)Phase 2: Week 4-8Notes written per % of notes linkedstudent3.57 (3.16)35.00 (34.00)40.23 (29.87)1.36 (0.67)% of notes linked15.00 (22.90)Qualitative tracing of idea improvement across the idea threadsDeepening the quantitative analysis, we conducted qualitative tracing of each idea thread to identify salient ideaadvancing patterns by which the community went beyond existent contributions of individual students todevelop advanced concepts and frame unfolding trajectories and directions of inquiry.Conceptual “rise-above” and abstractionAs a primary pattern, students developed their idea trajectories by identifying emergent conceptual constructs asshared objects of inquiry to generate increasingly powerful explanations. The whole inquiry initiative beganwith student hands-on exploration of batteries, light bulbs, magnets, and static electricity. Students theninteracted online to discuss initial observations, questions, and ideas, which became the starters of the ideathreads about batteries, static electricity, energy sources, and magnets. Sustaining inquiry in these idea threads,students searched for conceptual explanations of the empirical facts that they had observed. Abstract conceptualconstructs developed later became objects of inquiry in their own right, leading to the emergence of idea threadsinvestigating electric charges, electrons, and atoms. For example, students’ initial explanation about howbatteries work assumed that there would be “mini batteries” inside the batteries to generate energy. Thisexplanation was replaced with better theories, such as: “protons and electrons are…two parts of the battery” thatcarry positive and negative charges and that there are “a lot of chemical reactions” inside the battery. Interestemerged among the students to understand electrons, atomic structure and protons, and positive and negativecharges. Similarly, students’ online discourse on fabrics that cause static electricity came across the concepts ofnegative and positive charges. In the first ITM reflection session, students explicitly identified such abstractconcepts as electric charges and voltage, atoms, and electrons as core topics of inquiry in their community.Through examining their map of idea threads (Figure 1), students noticed deep connections between theseconcepts and all the other idea thread topics and identified electrons, atoms, and charges/voltage as the areas thatneeded deeper exploration. Core questions were raised in the Journey of Thinking syntheses regarding thesetopics, such as: What makes electrons move? What is the connection between atoms and energy? How doatomic bombs work? These areas and questions of inquiry became the focus of the subsequent work. As Figure1 show, the idea threads about charges/voltage, atoms, and electrons involved the most intensive discourse afterthe first ITM reflection in mid-October. Deep understandings were shared in students’ final presentations thatexplained atomic structure and how positively and negatively charged particles interact.Progressive deepeningStudents further deepened and sustained their trajectories of inquiry by identifying productive deepeningquestions as progressive goals in each line of work for specialized investigation. Students in classroom Agenerated a diverse set of questions through initial hands-on explorations that caught their deep interest. On thebasis of these initial specific questions, ITM-aided metadiscourse further fostered students’ efforts to formulatedeeper questions in light of major conceptual constructs emerged from their discourse, such as electrons andelectric charges. ITM’s feature of Journey of Thinking scaffolded student efforts to generate progressivelydeeper questions in light of their advanced understandings. Before class A’s first ITM reflection, 38.55% of thenotes contained questions, with 15.66% of the notes raising general wonderment questions focusing on broadissues (e.g. what powers a battery?) and 22.89% raising idea-deepening and elaborating questions (e.g. why isn'tthe iron attracted to the other side of the magnet?). The ITM-aided metadiscourse and reflection explicitlyencouraged students to review their progressive questions and ideas in each idea thread and co-author Journeyof Thinking syntheses. When co-authoring the Journey of Thinking synthesis for an idea thread as a group, thestudents discussed their existing questions and summarize the most important ideas learned (e.g. “magnetsproduce an invisible magnetic field …”). They further selectively highlighted deeper questions to be addressedin each focal area (“we need to understand how magnets relate to electricity”). These deeper questionshighlighted for different idea threads were later written on a piece of chart paper as a collective list of problemsCSCL 2015 Proceedings171© ISLSfor their community. Students then formed into voluntary specialized teams to conduct focused research toaddress these issues. They authored individual and collaborative notes in Knowledge Forum to share findingswhile identifying even deeper questions. Among the notes written by class A in Phase 2 after its first ITMsession, 36.84% raised questions, including 5.26% raising general wonderment questions and 31.58%addressing more specific, idea-deepening and elaborating questions (e.g. why are some metals magnetic andsome not? ) These showed more active deepening moves than class B that only had 22.22% of notes raisingquestions in Phase 2.Conceptual connection and diffusionAs students worked on deepening questions and ideas in each area, they monitored cross-thread connections toadvance the community’s common ground understandings. Students engaged in reflective conversations toreview connections across different idea thread themes, leading to the insight that “everything is connected…electrons are part of atoms and electrons have charge, and so charge is connected to atoms through electrons.”This insight in cross-thread connections was further developed and reflected in the Journey of Thinkingsyntheses authored by student groups. When synthesizing “big ideas” in each idea thread, students mentionedelectron movement in six out of the eight idea threads: “Everything is made of atoms. The atoms are made outof protons, neutrons, and electrons.” “Electrons have a negative charge. It's always electrons that transfer ontoyour body when you rub your foot on the carpet.” “Electrons moving create energy.” The understanding ofelectrical charges in terms of the movement of electrons and protons was used to enrich the discourse across allthe idea threads after the first ITM session, with 12.28% of class A’s notes in Phase 2 (compared to 1.38% inclass B) building cross-topic connections. Important insights were generated, including: “Electrons are theessence of charge. Atoms are the root of everything having to do with electricity.” “Whenever you charge onething positively, you are always charging the other object negatively. It's because the electrons move from oneto the other.” Atom (including electron) was the most frequently mentioned topic in the individual portfoliosummaries, with 21 of the 22 students summarizing understandings related to this topic.DiscussionThrough ITM-aided metadiscourse, students in classroom A demonstrated more comprehensive awareness andcoherent understanding of the emergent inquiry themes of their community. The iterative processes to reviewthe ongoing knowledge building discourse for shared high-interest focuses, identify related contributions, andsynthesize insights and challenges helped the members monitor the unfolding lines of inquiry focusing on coreissues about electricity. This finding is consistent with the findings of our first iteration in this design-basedresearch, showing that ITM-aided metadiscourse and reflection helped bring more themes of communal inquiryto the attention of the community members (Zhang et al., 2013). In a knowledge building community thatencourages diverse expertise, each student needs to conduct focused (specialized) inquiry with peers to addressa few of their communal topics while developing an awareness of the advances of the whole community beyondtheir own work (Zhang et al., 2007). ITM-aided metadiscourse helps students to address this need throughcollectively monitoring the unfolding lines of inquiry of their whole community, leading to broadenedawareness of various inquiry themes and, more importantly, reflective understanding of cross-themeconnections focusing on core conceptualizations (Figure 2).With reflective awareness of the various lines of work in their community, students in classroom Aengaged in more sustained and connected knowledge-building discourse online in the second phase of theinquiry. They contributed more notes to address deeper issues identified for each line of work, and their noteshad more build-on links than those created by classroom B (Table 2). These results are also congruent with ourprevious findings suggesting an increased level of connectedness in the online discourse resulted from ITMaided reflection (Chen et al., 2013). The ITM-aided metadiscourse to review collective advances, challenges andconnections has the potential to help sustain productive online discourse among students, which, in currentpractice, often lacks active connected contributions and deepening moves (Guzdial et al., 2001). As thequalitative tracing of idea threads suggests, the ITM-aided metadiscourse and reflection could enhance studentsefforts to continually go beyond existent contributions to “rise above” toward high-level conceptualizations, togenerate deepening questions, and to build conceptual connection across different lines of inquiry. The inquiryprocess initially focused on concrete and tangible aspects of electricity, which needed to be explained usinghigher-level conceptual structures. The ITM-aided metadiscourse to review core topics of inquiry from theexisting distributed discourse helped the students to explicitly define abstract concepts, such as electric chargesand voltage, atoms, and electrons, as shared goals of research in their community, leading to intentional andintensive contributions to these areas. Through the ongoing metadiscourse and reflection, students furtheridentified deeper questions and issues as informed by their updated understanding, which brought forthCSCL 2015 Proceedings172© ISLSdeepening goals for progressive problem solving (Bereiter, 2002). These deepening goals served to guideindividual and collaborative efforts to address these questions. The core concepts of electric charges andelectrons were diffused to understanding different topics (static electricity, batteries).In conclusion, the collective metadiscourse supported by ITM serves to represent and guide collectiveinquiry trajectories in extended knowledge building discourse. To better support reflective metadiscourse aboutunfolding threads of ideas, we are creating automated analysis to ease idea thread review and further makeproductive idea threads sharable across communities that learn from and build on one other’s progress.ReferencesBereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Borges, A. T., & Horizonte, B. (1999). Mental models of electricity. International Journal of ScienceEducation, 21(1), 95-117.Chen, M.-H., Zhang, J. & Lee, J. (2013). Making collective progress visible for sustained knowledgebuilding. In N. Rummel, M., Kapur, M. Nathan, & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), CSCL 2013 ConferenceProceedings Volume 1 (pp.81-88). International Society of the Learning Sciences.Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analysis of verbal data: A practical guide. Journal of the LearningSciences, 6, 271-315.Engle, R. A. (2006). Framing interactions to foster generative learning: A situative explanation of transfer in acommunity of learners classroom. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(4), 451-498.Guzdial, M., Rick, J., & Kehoe, C. (2001). Beyond adoption to invention: Teacher-created collaborativeactivities in higher education. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10(3), 265-279.Hakkarainen, K. (2003). Progressive inquiry in a computer-supported biology class. Journal of Research inScience Teaching, 40(10), 1072-1088.Hewitt, J. (2001). Beyond threaded discourse. International Journal of Educational Telecommunications, 7(3),207-221.Järvelä, S., & Hadwin, A. F. (2013). New frontiers: regulating learning in CSCL. Educational Psychologist,48(1), 25-39.Salmon, W. C. (1984). Scientific explanations and the causal structure of the world. Princeton, NJ: PrincetonUniversity Press.Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith(Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago, IL: Open Court.Suthers, D., Vatrapu, R., Medina, R., Joseph, S., & Dwyer, N. (2008). Beyond threaded discussion:Representational guidance in asynchronous collaborative learning environments. Computers andEducation, 50, 1103-1127.van Aalst, J. (2009) Distinguishing knowledge-sharing, knowledge-construction, and knowledge-creationdiscourses. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4 (3), 259-287.Vande Kopple, W. J. (1985). Some exploratory discourse on metadiscourse. College Composition andCommunication, 36, 82-93.Zhang, J., Chen, M.-H., Chen, J., & Mico, T. F. (2013). Computer-supported metadiscourse to foster collectiveprogress in knowledge-building communities. In N. Rummel, M., Kapur, M. Nathan, & S.Puntambekar (Eds.), CSCL 2013 Conference Proceedings Volume 2 (pp.197-200). InternationalSociety of the Learning Sciences.Zhang, J., Lee, J., & Chen, J. (2014). Deepening inquiry about human body systems through computersupported collective metadiscourse. Annual Meeting of American Educational Research Association,Philadelphia, PA.Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Lamon, M., Messina, R., & Reeve, R. (2007). Socio-cognitive dynamics ofknowledge building in 9- and 10-year-olds. Educational Technology Research and Development, 55,117–145.Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., & Messina, R. (2009). Designs for collective cognitive responsibility inknowledge building communities. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18, 7–44.Zhang, J., Tao, D., Sun, Y., Chen, M-H., Peebles, B., & Naqvi, S. (2015). Metadiscourse on collectiveknowledge progress to inform sustained knowledge-building discourse. Annual Meeting of AmericanEducational Research Association, Chicago, IL.AcknowledgmentsThis research was sponsored by the National Science Foundation (IIS #1122573, IIS #1441479). We would liketo thank the students and teachers at the Dr. Jackman Institute of Child Study in Toronto for their creative work.CSCL 2015 Proceedings173© ISLS