From Theory to Practice: How Pre-service Science Teachers Learnto Become Social Justice EducatorsJarod Kawasaki, Kathryn M. Anderson-Levitt, Lindsey Nenadal, Nadine Tanio, Josephine Pham, Claudia Diera,and Annamarie Francoisjkawasaki@ucla.edu, kandersonlevitt@ucla.edu, lnenadal@ucla.edu, ntanio@ucla.edu,josephine.h.pham@gmail.com, cdiera@ucla.edu, francois@gseis.ucla.eduUniversity of California, Los AngelesAbstract: There is a movement within teacher education programs to prepare social justiceeducators equipped to disrupt systemic oppression and inequity. While studies have looked athow programs prepare teachers to teach for social justice, they tend to focus on teachers’beliefs and few examine teacher education programs as a whole. Urban teacher residencyprograms have emerged as hybrid spaces addressing the disconnect between campus coursesand field experiences, attempting to support teachers applying theory to practice. This studyfollows a cohort of pre-service science teachers in an urban teacher residency program overthe course of their 18-month teacher preparation program. We analyzed written artifactscollected throughout the year to examine the evolution of their definitions of and practicesrelated to social justice. We present two contrasting case studies to highlight their divergentlearning pathways and the specific residency program experiences that influenced theirlearning.IntroductionHow to effectively prepare the next generation of teachers with the knowledge, skills, and abilities to improvestudent learning and outcomes is a hotly contested policy issue. The stakes are particularly high for students inurban communities who have been historically underserved, impoverished, or marginalized, and the assignmentof teachers with poor and/or limited training continues to be the norm (Goldhaber, Lavery, & Theobold, 2015).Deficit thinking continues to dominate the discourse for students in urban communities (Liou, Marsh, & AntropGonzález, 2017, Ullucci & Howard, 2015). There is a movement to disrupt this deficit discourse within teachereducation programs and to “prepare a teaching force capable of producing equitable learning opportunities andoutcomes for diverse students in the context of enduring inequalities” (Cochran-Smith, Villegas, Abrams,Chavez-Moreno, Mills, & Stern, 2015, p. 114). Yet, teaching for social justice is a phrase that novice teachersmay not know what it means (Lee, 2011), or may equate it with multicultural education (Mills & Ballantyne,2016). In this paper, we examine an urban teacher residency context where the term social justice was usedregularly and deliberately, but where even so the meaning could be difficult to nail down. We pay closeattention to the voices of the pre-service teachers as they struggled with the concept and worked to put it intopractice. We analyzed written artifacts, collected over the 18-month urban residency program, from secondarypre-service science teachers to understand how their participation in the residency program challenged,supported, and shaped the evolution of their complex understanding of what it means to practice social justiceeducation.We draw upon the work of Jurow, Tracy, Hotchkiss, and Kirshner (2012), which calls attention to andvalues the idea that pre-service teachers begin teacher preparation programs with different histories andexperiences and thus respond differently to theories and pedagogies taught in university coursework. We viewlearning to become a social justice educator in the same manner, as an issue of teacher learning where thesituated nature of learning shapes teachers’ historically and culturally informed interpretations of theories andpedagogies emphasized in university coursework and applied in their student teaching placements. We use theidea of situated sensemaking (Rosebury & Puttick, 1998) to trace teachers’ experiences in the residencyprogram and examine their sensemaking as they 1) engage deeply with theories and pedagogies of social justice,2) use tools and resources to facilitate making sense of these theories and pedagogies, and 3) enact and revisetheir practice relative to student experiences and responses.MethodsThis study asks two questions. What are pre-service teachers’ ideas about what it means to be a social justiceeducator? How do pre-service teachers’ experiences in an urban teacher residency program influence their ideasover time? In answering these questions, we aim to examine how pre-service teachers wrestled withunderstanding theories of social justice emphasized in the residency program and, more importantly, examineICLS 2018 Proceedings713© ISLShow they enact those theories into their own teaching practice. Such an understanding will call attention tosalient features of teacher education programs that promote teacher learning around issues of social justice andoffer practical examples of how teachers make sense of theories of social justice relative to their teaching inurban science classrooms.Study contextInspiring Minds Through a Professional Alliance of Teachers (IMPACT) is an urban teacher residency programhoused in the UCLA teacher education program. IMPACT prepares about 50 new secondary mathematics,secondary science, and elementary teachers each year. It situates pre-service teachers’ learning from universitycoursework in the context of mentors’ classrooms in small autonomous schools and urban communities. Withinthis program, secondary pre-service teachers are matched with a mentor and begin their student teaching on thefirst day of school and continue with the same mentor until the final day of school. Teachers spend three and ahalf days in the field and take courses during the remaining day and a half. The residency program employs agradual release of responsibility model (Fisher & Frey, 2013), where teachers observe during the first fewmonths of their student teaching, co-plan and co-teach during the next few months, and eventually takeresponsibility for two teaching periods from their mentor for the remaining months of the school year. After oneyear of coursework and student teaching, pre-service teachers obtain their preliminary teaching credential andfind a teaching position within the program’s partner local education agency (i.e., Los Angeles Unified SchoolDistrict). During this second year, teachers continue taking courses in IMPACT towards the completion of amaster’s in education degree.The mission of both the UCLA teacher education program and IMPACT is to prepare teachers with thecommitment, capacity, and resilience to work in the most underserved communities. The program works todevelop teachers’ capacity to challenge deficit thinking around the academic achievement of students fromhistorically marginalized communities through humanizing pedagogy that involves respecting students throughan asset-based teaching approach (Bartolome, 1994). Yosso (2005) defines this asset-based approach as a callfor social justice teachers to use the knowledge and assets of students, families and their communities to informtheir classroom teaching. By doing so, teachers dive deeply into what it means to be a social justice educator byreflecting on their multiple identities in relation to privilege and power. By understanding their positionality(i.e., reflecting on their own experiences relative to the experiences of their students), teachers form a deeperunderstanding around why practices that value students’ voices, experiences, and histories are necessary forenacting humanizing pedagogy (Takacs, 2003). That is, teachers come to realize that in order to meet the needsof students in underserved communities, their students’ voices, histories, and experiences must shape the waythey approach their own teaching.University coursework for this residency program is organized around a program developed teachingand learning framework that positions social justice values as the foundation for rigorous science teaching (seeNava, Park, Dockterman, Kawasaki, Schweig, Quartz, & Martinez, 2018). The framework contains four coredimensions of teaching quality with eleven aspects of teacher classroom practice. Briefly, the four coredimensions are: 1) teaching with academic rigor, 2) promoting content discourse, 3) ensuring equitable access tocontent, and 4) building a positive classroom ecology. Our own work has shown how this framework hassupported novice teachers’ development of an asset-based perspective of social justice (Kawasaki, Nava, &Francois, 2017) and encouraged teachers to come together as professional learning communities to providefeedback and promote productive content discourse (Nava, Park, & Kawasaki, 2015). Teachers also engage in ayearlong social foundations course that provides them with opportunities to wrestle with the historical andcultural factors (e.g., unequal distribution of power, addressing one’s own power and privilege) that contributeto systemic inequity and oppression (Philip, 2013). These courses are intentionally designed to provide teacherswith opportunities to reflect on how these theories and pedagogies translate into everyday teaching practice. Tofurther encourage productive discourse, secondary math and science teachers take classes together as a cohort,which enables them to support each other’s thinking about social justice in their student teaching placements. Incombination with extensive field experiences in some of the most underserved schools and communities in thenation, these experiences create a fertile place for teachers to develop their ideas about what being a socialjustice educator means and how to enact that on a daily basis with their students.Participants, data sources and analysisIn total, the secondary residency cohort included eight science and eight math teacher candidates. For this paper,we focused on the eight science pre-service teachers because we had complete data for each of them and felt thatmapping these teachers’ journeys through the program might provide some insight into how they conceptualizedICLS 2018 Proceedings714© ISLSsocial justice oriented science teaching and inform any programmatic refinements that might be needed tosupport their development. We analyzed five specific artifacts collected within the residency program: 1)statements of purpose from entrance applications, 2) quarterly reflections assigned before teachers’ individualmeetings with their faculty advisor, 3) philosophy of teaching papers written in the winter quarter, 4)community inquiry project reflections in the spring quarter, and 5) inquiry projects completed in the subsequentfall for their Master’s in Education. These documents gave us multiple data points across an 18-month period inwhich teachers shared their ideas about what it meant to be a social justice educator. For example, teachers wereasked to describe why they were interested in becoming a social justice educator, or in the case of the reflectionsand papers, how their ideas of being a social justice educator had changed over the past academic quarter.To understand how teachers conceptualized social justice at the beginning and at the end of theprogram, the first step in our analysis was to examine the application statements and the Master’s inquiryprojects. Responses were analyzed thematically, by grouping similarly worded responses together and labelingthem. These labeled groups were constructed independently by a researcher and then discussed and revised by aresearch team. The next step was to examine the quarterly written reflections and mid-year assignments (i.e.,community inquiry project reflection, philosophy of teaching paper) to understand teachers’ experiences in theresidency program (e.g., coursework, readings, student teaching) and how those influenced their evolving ideasabout social justice. In these written reflections and artifacts, we used the approach from Rosebury and Puttick(1998), in which we looked for language that related to the theories and pedagogies discussed in universitycoursework (e.g., course readings, language from the program’s teaching and learning framework), the tools andresources made available to teachers (e.g., meetings with faculty advisors, discussions with cohort members),and how they related these ideas to student experiences (e.g., student teaching placement, discussions aboutstudents with their mentor). This allowed us to develop contrasting case studies to highlight the different waysthat teachers made sense of their experiences in the residency program. In this paper, we highlight thesensemaking journeys of two teachers in the residency program, Cheryl and Nancy. We chose these twoteachers to showcase because while both teachers were from communities of color and grew up in upper middleclass neighborhoods, their experiences in the program represent the sensemaking divergence that can happendespite being in the same cohort, taking the same classes, and having similar experiences in their studentteaching contexts. We place high value in this divergence because it honors the varying starting points, journeys,and ending points for teachers who are committed to becoming social justice educators.FindingsWe present these analyses through two contrasting case studies. The first, Cheryl, makes sense of herdevelopment as a social justice educator through a clear orientation towards learning about her students andembedding their stories into her lessons. Eventually her journey through the program leads to her root out deficitthinking by recognizing her own assumptions, privilege, and upbringing in relationship to the drasticallydifferent urban context where her students live and attend school. Then we share about Nancy, whose journeybegins with a struggle to understand how to assimilate social justice into her everyday teaching and eventuallycomes to understand how the notion of being a good science teacher is an enactment of social justice. We beginwith Cheryl.Learning about students and examining positionalityCheryl, a child of immigrants from Korea, grew up in a comfortable suburban environment. She spent a summeras a volunteer in rural Nicaragua and it was there that she discovered that for many, attending college wasconsidered a luxury, and where she recognized that the same was true for many young people in the UnitedStates. “I want to fight against these inequalities,” she wrote in her application. She came to the residencyprogram with a commitment to help students see themselves as “stewards of this planet” and a broad goal offighting inequality. Early passion for protecting the environment had given her the desire to “teach …environmental science, to transform students’ attitudes towards education, and to inspire them to be responsible,contributing members of society and of the world” (application statement). Cheryl’s student teaching placementwas at a large public comprehensive neighborhood school with a student population that was 91% Latino, 7%African American, 94% socioeconomically disadvantaged, 31% English language learners, and 14% studentswith disabilities. During her student teaching year, 18% of students scored proficient or advanced in statestandardized science assessment.As mentioned, Cheryl came to the residency program with a broad goal of fighting inequality. Afterbeginning the program, she developed a much more personalized understanding of social justice that centeredon cultural relevance, relationships with students, and fighting her own deficit thinking. In her first reflection,ICLS 2018 Proceedings715© ISLSshe drew upon the summer social foundations course as she described how her vision for social justice wasevolving.I thought that there was a universal approach to being the best teacher, whether working in ahigh or low SES community. I’m learning that is not really the case. Teaching has to cater tothe exact audience and students learn in different ways, but my teaching goal has evolvedfrom a universal learning method. From ED406 [social foundations course] I learned that thebest way of learning is influenced by their culture and environment (end of summerreflection).Cheryl’s first course in the residency program immediately shifted her thinking about social justice as she cameto the realization that getting to know students’ interests and experiences (i.e., “culture and environment”)matter for student learning. The social foundations course introduced Cheryl to new ideas that moved herthinking away from a universal teaching approach to one that values the knowledge and ideas that students bringto the classroom.During the fall quarter of her student teaching placement, Cheryl had transitioned from observing toco-planning and co-teaching with her mentor. In her fall reflection, she described how she approached herlesson planning by considering students’ interests and experiences.My vision for social justice is changing every day. I think about what my lessons mean for thekids. My first thought after writing out my lesson plans are “why should the students care”?This question requires me to think about how my lesson reaches the students and how thelesson culturally speaks to them (end of fall quarter reflection).Cheryl’s earnest effort to design her lessons relative to students’ experiences and to think about how they mightrespond during class instruction was influenced by her desire to enact the theories she learned in the summerinto her fall student teaching responsibilities.During the winter, Cheryl attached a theoretical label to her evolving understanding of embeddingstudents’ experiences and interests into her lesson planning.Culturally Responsive Teaching (CRT) begins with me truly getting to know thestudents…view[ing] the student as who they are both at home and at school…taking to anaccount of the student’s cultural background, their families, and their academicpotential…The holistic cultural knowledge of a student can only become useful when theteacher activates that knowledge within the curriculum…An analysis of the student’shousehold can greatly impact the teaching of a social justice educator (philosophy of teachingpaper, winter quarter).As she was exposed to new ideas and theories in her coursework and experiences with students in her studentteaching placement, her understanding of social justice became more complex. Into the winter quarter, Cheryl’sunderstanding of social justice expanded beyond just getting to know students’ interests and experiences toinclude understanding their culture, home, and histories.Cheryl enacted this expanded understanding of social justice in her community inquiry project, whereshe organized a schoolwide basketball tournament. She described how this tournament was an opportunity tobuild community within the school by removing behavior or academic restrictions on who could participate toreach as much of the student body as possible. She reflected on this experience as another way to buildmeaningful relationships with students.I want to take my experiences from the community inquiry project to enhance myrelationships within the school community…I hope to expand further than formal interviewswith administrators and families. I would like to have both formal and informal meetings withcommunity members. Through these meetings, I hope to gain understanding to thecommunity’s needs. I would like to work with community members on a project thatcommunity members feel is pertinent to the community’s needs (community inquiry projectreflection, spring quarter).Her desire to get to know her students expanded to an interest to understand the needs within the community.ICLS 2018 Proceedings716© ISLSFinally, in her first teaching assignment as teacher of record, Cheryl’s understanding of the importanceof understanding her students’ interests, histories, and experiences relative to her own (i.e., positionality)became concrete as she came to intimately know her students and their community. She described this learningin her Master’s inquiry project.The first lesson I learned as a first-year teacher in an urban environment was that theenvironment I grew up in was very different from my students. The streets I grew up on wereisolated from any commercial areas. They were filled with parks, homes, swimming pools,and any kind of nature that could fill in the gaps. The streets my students know are beautifuland colorful in a very different way. Their streets are covered in artistic murals with colorfuland vintage urban buildings…I need to continue to examine my own identity as well asengage in discussions that help me to get to know my students more… I had to learn to cometo terms with this difference in our childhood environments. Not only were our childhoodenvironments physically different, but I realized that the teaching styles I grew up with thatworked for me may not necessarily work for my students (Master’s inquiry project, fallquarter, year 2).Cheryl seemed to be faced with the stark discrepancies between her own experiences and the experiences of herstudents. Rather than take a deficit perspective on the features and experiences that her students’ communitylacked, she found new beauty and value in these differences. Cheryl’s willingness to consider other teachingapproaches given this new perspective depicts the intersection of social justice theories and practice, whereCheryl’s approach to teaching is being influenced by the theories emphasized in her coursework (e.g., seecommunity cultural wealth, Yosso, 2005). The residency program gave Cheryl the means to develop her ownvision of social justice education in response to her sensemaking journey through readings from universitycoursework, interactions with students, and other experiences in the residency program. Where she had initiallyfocused broadly on global citizenship, her ideas became more complex and involved into self-critical thinkingabout classroom practice relative to her students’ interests, experiences, histories, cultures and families.Social justice educators enact rigorous science teachingNancy, a child of immigrants from Iran and Egypt, grew up in an affluent community. Her draw towardsteaching came from volunteering with a mentorship program for a local urban high school during her collegeyears. She eventually took on a leadership position within the group and attributes this experience as her mostvaluable lesson on education, that “there are very real and systematic barriers to education that create unequalaccess to it, and that all comes with historical, political, economic and racial baggage” (application statement).Her commitment was solidified as she drew connections between her own experiences with microaggressionsand racism as a Muslim and the struggles with systemic inequity and oppression of the African Americanstudents she mentored. Nancy came to the residency program wanting to “empower my students to thinkcritically…to realize their ability to transform their communities through their own education” (applicationstatement). Nancy’s student teaching placement was a large environmental and science policy magnet schoolwith a student population that was 70% Latino, 24% Asian, 1% African American, 70% socioeconomicallydisadvantaged, 17% English language learners, and 15% students with disabilities. During her student teachingyear, 44% of students scored proficient or advanced in state standardized science assessment.In contrast to Cheryl, Nancy’s journey through the program began with an initial struggle to makeconnections between the theories of social justice emphasized in the residency program and her everydayclassroom teaching. Through specific experiences in the program, she developed the sense that social justiceeducators enact rigorous science teaching. Nancy began with an admission that it was not clear to her howtheories of social justice and everyday teaching merged together.I think I have an easier time understanding how I can implement social justice in individualconversations with my students rather than how I can implement it into science content…I’mstill trying to comprehend the different places to include social justice, [but] have not reacheda synthesis stage (i.e., teaching NGSS with a social justice framework) (end of summerreflection).This reflection was written after the summer social foundations course, which emphasizes critical theories andpedagogies that center social justice teaching around the assets and community cultural wealth (see Yosso,2005) that students bring to the classroom. Nancy’s admission that she struggled to see how she could enactICLS 2018 Proceedings717© ISLSsocial justice in building relationships was a reasonable response to the emphasis in the course around getting toknow students. During her fall reflection, she described getting to know students in this way.It was surprising for me to realize how much I think about my students outside of school. Ialready care about them so much and watching them give up or go through strugglesgenuinely hurts me as well…teaching for social justice is a long process and is never fullfinished. Now I don’t see social justice teaching as a fixed goal…but rather a process ofteaching that I must constantly engage with and use. I also want to learn more about thecommunity, and be more of a learner from my students in that sense (end of fall quarterreflection).Nancy began co-teaching with her guiding teacher during the fall quarter and realized the challenge of enactingtheories of social justice in the classroom. Her resolution seemed to be to continue to listen to students andunderstand how to best support them despite their own frustrations and struggles.In the winter quarter, the methods course incorporated two instructional rounds where teachers videorecord their teaching and engage in peer feedback. The promoting content discourse dimension from theteaching and learning framework is emphasized in the methods course and instructional rounds during thewinter quarter. During this quarter, it seemed that Nancy was beginning to develop a sense of how to reconcileher early struggles of separating social justice and teaching science.Whereas I first saw a silent classroom with all eyes on the teacher as the epitome of excellentteaching, my views have since dramatically changed. I now see discussions between teachersand students, and amongst students engaged in content discussions, as the epitome of excellentteaching…I have also seen how important family and community is to my students, and it hashelped me to see the necessity of involving my students’ families and community into myteaching practice. For example, a field trip to the Los Angeles River where students collecteddata on species and water samples was very exciting for my students, as many of them livenearby the LA River, but understandably have never really explored it from a “scientific lens”(philosophy of teaching paper, winter quarter)By learning about the importance of content discourse in student learning, Nancy found a way to enact thetheories of social justice that she struggled with during summer and fall. Nancy seemed to be making theconnection, emphasized in the program, that excellent science teaching is an imperative part of being a socialjustice educator. Also, Nancy started on her community inquiry project during the winter quarter, whichhighlighted ways that she could further connect social justice theories to her own classroom teaching (e.g.,studying the LA River). In her community inquiry project reflection in the spring, she expanded on the idea ofhow to use local scientific phenomena in her science teaching and how that served as an act of social justice.I feel that the community is vibrant, with lots of rich celebration of Latin American culture.The [project] has taught me to view the community with an asset-based mentality as opposedto a deficit mentality. As a science teacher, I would like to explore the ways in which mystudents might tap into community resources to “do science”. This could range from studyingand documenting urban wildlife and green spaces, to examining the prevalence of certaindiseases and the availability/accessibility of health care. In this way, I hope to develop a moreculturally relevant and culturally responsive curriculum for my students (community inquiryproject reflection, spring quarter).Nancy, like Cheryl, learned to name the theories and pedagogies of social justice she was trying to enact.Nancy’s understanding of social justice seemed to be getting clearer as she was able to identify some concreteand actionable ideas to use in her teaching. Nancy reiterated her growing appreciation of the community andhow she could leverage this in her teaching as well as the importance of content discourse as the epitome ofgood science teaching.I now see…students engaged in content discussions, as the epitome of excellent teaching…Iwant students to recognize that when they work together, they will be amazed at how muchthey can think of and solve without me as a teacher being the ultimate dispenser ofknowledge…it takes effective collaboration and building off of one another’s ideas to leadICLS 2018 Proceedings718© ISLSthem to those great solutions. I rarely experienced the benefits of effective collaborationthroughout most of my time as a student, but I became fascinated with the importance ofcollaboration when learning about sociocultural learning theory…students must be givenopportunities to share their ideas and thoughts constructively with one another in order todevelop solutions to the issues that matter to them (Master’s inquiry project, fall quarter, year2).The residency program gave Nancy, like Cheryl, the opportunity to struggle through and make sense of how toenact theories of social justice into her classroom teaching. Initially this was a struggle for Nancy, whoadmittedly did not see how these theories unfold in the classroom aside from individual interactions withstudents. Over time and through experiences in the residency program, she developed a sense of how rigorousscience teaching that promoted content discourse and collaboration was itself an essential part of being a socialjustice educator and concrete way to enact social justice theories in her everyday teaching.Conclusions and implicationsOur study sought to examine how novice science teachers develop into social-justice oriented teachers and howthe opportunities within an urban teacher residency program supported their development. Although Cheryl andNancy brought different life experiences to the program and gave their own versions of social justice education,the key insights from their journeys were that socially just science education required rigorous and equitableteaching on the one hand and caring relationships with students on the other. We found that these ideas weredeveloped through 1) deep engagement in content (e.g., coursework reading, discussions, written reflections), 2)engagement with tools and resources (e.g., quarterly debriefing with faculty advisors), and 3) enactment andrevision of one’s own understanding through interactions with students (e.g., lesson planning and teaching instudent teaching placements). Cheryl and Nancy came to the residency program with similar experiencesworking with children in their undergraduate studies and similar initial ideas about social justice. Yet, theirexperiences in the residency program depicts the situated sensemaking that occurs in these programs as teacherswrestle with complex ideas, such as race and poverty, and attempt to enact theories and pedagogies aimed atdisrupting systemic oppression and inequity. We argue that there is value in the different understandings,enactments, and journeys that teachers take as they are built from their own experiences, histories, and interestsand in response to the urban contexts in which they teach.The IMPACT urban teacher residency program is a teacher education program established to providelow-income urban schools districts with high quality, highly prepared, and committed teachers. The secondaryteachers who enroll in this residency program know a lot about their placement classrooms in advance: they willfocus on STEM in classrooms populated by minority and low-income students, many of whom are also EnglishLanguage Learners and come from immigrant communities. The incoming pre-service teachers, who themselvescome from various racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic backgrounds, chose this program with this foreknowledgein concert with a commitment to social justice education, even though the definitions of what counts as socialjustice might vary widely between applicants. As these two case studies reveal, the applicants came to theirresidency program to become teachers to “make a difference,” be role models to students, empower theirstudents to learn, teach STEM, and increase minority participation in STEM fields. In ways both general andspecific, at the outset of their teacher preparation program, they saw themselves already connected to theirfuture students and saw their mission as teachers to engage their students within a larger community of practice,a community of practitioners working together in a project towards social justice. All participants saw socialjustice education as a life-long process and results from this study suggest that the journey can take unexpectedand divergent pathways as teachers learn and enact these theories and pedagogies of social justice relative totheir own experiences, histories, and interests and the students in their classrooms. These findings shed lightonto the multiple meanings of “social justice” in education and can help inform future research about howprograms can effectively prepare and support the diverse needs of aspiring social justice educators.Current science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) policy in the United States callsfor teachers to ensure equitable access to rigorous STEM instruction for historically underserved communities(Next Generation Science Standards, NGSS Lead States, 2014; Common Core State Standards for Math,CCSSO, 2010; National Education Technology Plan, Office of Educational Technology, 2017). These recentSTEM policy reforms seem to have sparked an increased interest among learning scientists to study andunderstand teacher learning from the perspective of learning science theoretical and methodologicalframeworks. With equity as a central idea within each of these policy reforms, it is imperative that weunderstand how teachers learn to become a social justice oriented STEM teachers in order to shape professionallearning for pre-service and in-service teachers around the intersections of content, theory, and practice.ICLS 2018 Proceedings719© ISLSReferencesBartolome, L. (1994). Beyond the methods fetish: Toward a humanizing pedagogy. Harvard EducationalReview, 64(2), 173-195.CCSSO. (2010). Common core state standards for English language arts & literacy in history/social studies,science, and technical subjects. Washington, DC: Council of Chief State School Officers.Cochran-Smith, M., Villegas, A. M., Abrams, L., Chavez-Moreno, L., Mills, T., & Stern, R. (2015). Critiquingteacher preparation research: An overview of the field, Part II. Journal of Teacher Education, 66(2),109-121.Fisher, D., & Frey, N. (2013). Better learning through structured teaching: A framework for the gradual releaseof responsibility. ASCD.Goldhaber, D., Lavery, L., & Theobald, R. (2015). Uneven playing field? Assessing the teacher quality gapbetween advantaged and disadvantaged students. Educational Researcher, 44(5), 293-307.Jurow, A. S., Tracy, R., Hotchkiss, J. S., & Kirshner, B. (2012). Designing for the future: How the LearningSciences can inform the trajectories of preservice teachers. Journal of Teacher Education, 63(2), 147160.Kawasaki, J., Nava, I., & Francois, A. (2017, April). Supporting pre-service teachers develop asset-based ideasof social justice science teaching. Paper presented at the American Educational Research AssociationAnnual Conference, San Antonio, TX.Lee, Y. A. (2011). What does teaching for social justice mean to teacher candidates? The Professional Educator,35(2), 1-20.Liou, D. D., Marsh, T. E., & Antrop-González, R. (2017). Urban sanctuary schools for diverse populations:Examining curricular expectations and school effectiveness for student learning. Equity & Excellencein Education, 50(1), 68-83.Mills, C., & Ballantyne, J. (2016). Social justice and teacher education: A systematic review of empirical workin the field. Journal of Teacher Education 67(4), 263-276.Nava, I., Park, J., Dockterman, D., Kawasaki, J., Schweig, J., Quartz, K. H., & Martinez, J. F. (2018).Measuring Teaching Quality of Secondary Mathematics and Science Residents: A ClassroomObservation Framework. Journal of Teacher Education, 0022487118755699.Nava, I., Park, J., & Kawasaki, J. (2015, April). Developing professional learning communities around equityfocused practice-based teaching. Paper presented at the American Educational Research AssociationConference, April 2015, Chicago Il.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next generation science standards: For states, by states (Vol. 1: The standards).Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Philip, T. M. (2013). Articulating the purpose of a social foundations of education course through instructorself-interviews. Studying Teacher Education, 9(3), 203-218.Rosebery, A. S., & Puttick, G. M. (1998). Teacher professional development as situated sense‐making: A casestudy in science education. Science Education, 82(6), 649-677.Takacs, D., (2003) How does your positionality bias your epistemology? Thought & Action Journal 19(1), 2738.Ullucci, K., & Howard, T. (2015). Pathologizing the poor: Implications for preparing teachers to work in highpoverty schools. Urban Education, 50(2), 170-193.U.S. Department of Education. (2017). The national technology education plan. e-Learning: Reimagining therole of technology in education. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. Retrieved fromhttps://tech.ed.gov/netp/Yosso, T. J. (2005). Whose culture has capital? A critical race theory discussion of community cultural wealth.Race ethnicity and education, 8(1), 69-91.AcknowledgmentsThe work reported here was supported by a U.S. Department of Education Teacher Quality Partnership Grant(No. 1503511. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do notnecessarily reflect the views of the U.S. Department of Education. We are deeply grateful for the openness andhard work of the pre-service science teachers in the IMPACT urban teacher residency program. Additionally,we are grateful to Imelda Nava, Jaime Vela, Hui Xie and the IMPACT research team for their support andcontribution to this work.ICLS 2018 Proceedings720© ISLS