Bridging Multiple Ecologies to Support and Research Learning inContested SpacesJoanna Weidler-Lewis, The Pennsylvania State University, jrw96@psu.eduCynthia Graville, St. Louis University, cynthia.graville@slu.eduMary Gould, St. Louis University, mary.gould@slu.eduAbstract: This poster presents a theoretical and methodological framework for studyingcomplex phenomenon and organizing for learning in contested spaces. A contested spacechallenges assumptions about power, privilege, and possibility. Our early-stage work isdesigning a family maker space in a minimum-security prison to support STEM pathways forincarcerated women and their children. In order to design for - and research learning - from anequity perspective, multiple “ecologies” are drawn from that we argue are applicable to othercontested spaces, further supporting learning for vulnerable and marginalized populations.Introduction and backgroundOur early-stage research project, STEM Ecologies of Learning for Families (SELF), foregrounds the expertiseof currently incarcerated women as both makers and mothers as we develop a family maker space in prison. Awomen’s prison is a highly-contested space challenging the scope of STEM-for-all initiatives; it challenges bothour notions of who “deserves” education and whose voices are privileged in designing learning opportunities.For Learning Scientists who want to move forward with “equity-oriented” making practice and expand the workbeing done (e.g., Vossoughi, Escudé, Kong, & Hooper, 2013; Schwartz & Gutiérrez, 2015) to other contestedspaces and for vulnerable populations, our theoretical framing and methodological approach to learning researchand design must reflect the complexity, power, and possibility inherent in these spaces. This poster presents ourframework for undertaking such an endeavor.Ecologies of STEM, cognition, and researchSELF has three key ecological frameworks that reflexively support each other: ecologies of STEM, cognition,and research. We use the term “ecology” to represent how all learning processes are interrelated and dependenton the people, tools, and disciplinary practices under investigation.First, this project is focused on creating a STEM ecology that recognizes both horizontal and verticalmovement within STEM activity. Horizontal movement refers to the ways in which everyday practices can beleveraged toward more expansive forms of learning (Engeström, 1987; Gutiérrez & Vossoughi, 2014). Weexamine how incarcerated women can connect their and their children’s everyday practices to STEM practices,widening the possibilities for what can be seen as STEM. At the same time, opening the possibility for a rangeof STEM practices, also allows women and their children to take interest in particular STEM activities andsupport their movement into more focused and deeper learning in particular practices, or the vertical dimensionof learning (Engeström, 2003).Second, SELF is grounded in sociocultural theories of learning in that we view learning as sociallyorganized, dialogic, and relying on cultural tools. While the role of individual cognition has been deemphasizedin social practices theories of learning, we argue that cognition plays an important role in the mutualconstruction of persons and practices (Packer, 2010). Tools, including making activities, are cognitive artifactsthat carry and elaborate information for us (Norman, 1991), they are also reflections of our thinking. Neither thetool, nor our thinking can be separated from the cognitive ecology under study (Hutchins, 2010). It is importantto recognize how people shape and are shaped by their technology use (Bowker, et.al, 1997; Hollan, Hutchins,& Kirsh, 2000). Tools not only afford participation, they can potentially limit the identities available in apractice.Lastly, our project represents an ecology of research. As researchers, we are aware that dominant formsof research often reproduce power-laden relationships between the researcher and “the researched” that need tobe interrogated for whom – and with what consequences – the knowledge gained from research is generated(Gutiérrez & Penuel, 2014; Esmonde & Booker, 2016). We draw on principles from participatory designresearch (Bang & Vossoughi, 2016) to acknowledge the expertise of our participants including incarceratedwomen, STEM professionals, and the researchers. Our ecology of research is a partnership with all involved to“extend the notion of the so-called ‘expert’ to encompass a wider range of stakeholders” (Dimitriadis, 2008).For this reason, not only are our research questions jointly negotiated with our participants, our participants areco-designing family maker activities, as well as constructing and analyzing research data.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1501© ISLSDiscussion and significanceEnlisting incarcerated women as co-researchers is not new (e.g. Fine et al., 2003); however, leveraging theexpertise of incarcerated women as makers and mothers is. This project has implications for research involvingmaking and the underrepresentation of women and vulnerable populations in STEM disciplines, as well as theways to support STEM identity development. However, we argue that our theoretical and methodologicalframing extends to all spaces where dominant ideas regarding disciplinary learning, cognitive agency, and theresearcher as epistemic expert are present. Furthermore, if we interested and committed to designing forlearning in a truly equitable manner, as many of the STEM-for-all initiatives claim, then our theories andmethods must encompass this as a possibility. In our work, we are attempting to create an equitable design oflearning locally for incarcerated women and their children that will extend to other communities more broadly(Gutiérrez & Penuel, 2014). Understanding the foundations for how this is accomplished supports other equitythrough learning endeavors.ReferencesBang, M., & Vossoughi, S. (2016). Participatory design research and educational justice: Studying learning andrelations within social change making.Bowker, G., Star, S.L., Turner, W., & Gasser, L. (Eds.) (1997). Social science, technical systems andcooperative work: Beyond the great divide. Hillsdale, NJ: ErlbaumDimitriadis, G. (2008) Series Editor Introduction. In Cammarota, J., & Fine, M. (Eds.). Revolutionizingeducation: Youth participatory action research in motion. Routledge.Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity-theoretic approach to developmental research.Helsinki, Finland: Orienta-Konsultit.Engeström, Y. (2003). The horizontal dimension of Expansive Learning: Weaving a Texture of Cognitive Trailsin the Terrain of Health Care in Helsinki. In F. Achtenhagen & E. G. John (Eds.), Milestones ofVocational and Occupational Education and Training, Volume 1: The Teaching-Learning Perspective.Bielefeld: Bettlesmann.Esmonde, I., & Booker, A. N. (Eds.). (2016). Power and privilege in the learning sciences: Critical andsociocultural theories of learning. Taylor & Francis.Fine, M., Torre, M. E., Boudin, K., Bowen, I., Clark, J., Hylton, D., & Upegui, D. (2004). Participatory actionresearch: From within and beyond prison bars. Working method: Research and social justice, 95119.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Penuel, W. R. (2014). Relevance to practice as a criterion for rigor. Educational Researcher,43(1), 19-23.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Vossoughi, S. (2010). Lifting off the ground to return anew: Mediated praxis,transformative learning, and social design experiments. Journal of Teacher Education, 61(1-2), 100117.Hollan, J. D., Hutchins, E. L., & Kirsh, D. (2000). Distributed cognition: A new theoretical foundation forhuman-computer interaction research. ACM Transactions on computer-human interaction, 174-196.Hutchins, E. (2010). Cognitive ecology. Topics in cognitive science, 2(4), 705-715.Norman, D. A. (1991). Cognitive artifacts. In J. M. Carroll (Ed.), Designing interaction: psychology at thehuman-computer interface (pp. 17-38). New York: Cambridge University Press.Packer, M. J. (2010). Educational research as a reflexive science of constitution. Learning Research as a HumanScience, 109.Schwartz, L., & Gutierrez, K. (2015). Literacy studies and situated methods: Exploring the social organizationof household activity and family media use. In J. Rowsell & K. Pahl (Eds.). The Routledge Handbookof Literacy Studies. New York: Routledge.Vossoughi, S., Escudé, M., Kong, F., & Hooper, P. (2013, October). Tinkering, learning & equity in the afterschool setting. In annual FabLearn conference. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1502© ISLS