The Interactional Work of Configuring a Mathematical Object in aTechnology-Enabled Embodied Learning EnvironmentVirginia J. Flood, University of California, Berkeley, flood@berkeley.eduBenedikt W. Harrer, San José State University, benedikt.harrer@sjsu.eduDor Abrahamson, University of California, Berkeley, dor@berkeley.eduAbstract: We present a detailed account of interactional mechanisms that support participationin STEM disciplinary practices as an adult and a child explore a technology-enabled embodiedlearning environment for mathematics. Drawing on ethnomethodological studies of technologyrich workplaces, we trace the process of transforming a vague reference into a mutuallyavailable mathematical object: a covariant variable. Our analysis reveals that this mathematicalobject is an interactional achievement, configured via a reciprocal process of instructing oneanother’s attention. In particular, we demonstrate how participants’ explicit responsiveness toindexical and multimodal resources achieves this object.Keywords: objectification, collaborative imagining, ethnomethodology–conversation analysis,multimodality, technology-enabled embodied learning environmentsIntroductionDiscovery-based learning environment designs are increasingly enlisting new user interface technologies (e.g.,Microsoft Kinect) to incorporate the body into computer-mediated, collaborative explorations of STEMphenomena. Technology-enabled embodied learning environments (TEELEs) engage groups of learners in a widerange of topics, from models of meteor orbit trajectories (Lindgren & Moshell, 2011) and atomic interactions(Enyedy et al., 2012) to polar bear energy expenditure (Lyons et al., 2012), and even mathematical objects(Nemirovsky et al., 2012). As these technology-rich environments for inquiry gain popularity in classrooms andinformal learning centers, there is a growing need to investigate how social interactions in TEELEs can supportor constrain children’s opportunities for participation in STEM disciplinary practices.In this paper, we contribute a close examination of a productive sequence of interaction between a childand an adult tutor as they use a TEELE called the Mathematical Imagery Trainer for Proportions (MIT-P). Inspiredby ethnomethodological workplace studies of technology-rich environments (e.g., Goodwin, 1996; Hindmarsh &Heath, 2000), we uncover participants’ methods for transforming an initially vague reference into a ratified,mutually established mathematical object. Our fine-grained analysis allows us to reconstruct the interactionalwork that leads to the joint accomplishment of the covariant variable distance. We find two key interactionalmechanisms involved in this process: (1) responsiveness to indexicality leading to increased specificity; and (2)responsiveness to multimodality in order to demonstrate mutual understandings.Figure 1. When the Mathematical Imagery Trainer for Proportion (MIT-P) is set to a 1:2 ratio, the screen isgreen only when the right hand remote is twice as high as the left hand remote; otherwise it is red.The work of negotiating objects in complex perceptual fields“The unity of a geometrical configuration or a melody is a general problem of organization.”(Gurwitsch, 1964, p. 55)The MIT-P provides an interactive context for users to explore ideas about proportionality through sensorimotoractivity. Children operate two independent, hand-held remotes to manipulate the heights of two correspondingcursors on a computer screen (see Figure 1). The system generates green feedback only when the cursor heightscorrespond to a particular pre-set, concealed ratio (e.g., 1:2 in Figure 1). Whenever the cursor heights do not fulfillthe secret ratio, the screen is red. Children engage in guided exploration as they develop and articulate strategiesICLS 2016 Proceedings122© ISLSfor turning the computer screen green. Adult tutors guide children’s discoveries and facilitate shifts in theirstrategies for generating green feedback by introducing a series of canonical mathematical artifacts—first aCartesian grid, then numerals to label that grid. Children enlist these artifacts to generate more robust descriptionsof strategy, identify patterns, and develop sophisticated quantitative models that account for the behavior of thedevice (Abrahamson et al., 2012).The MIT-P constitutes a complex, dynamic perceptual field of potentially relevant phenomena. Learnersdiscover many perceptual patterns (e.g., haptic, visual) in this phenomenal field of potential relevancies, but a keychallenge is getting others—either peers or adult tutors—to perceive these collections of features as significantpatterns, as well. In the rich multisensory, multimedia landscapes of TEELEs, this does not merely entail directingone another’s attention to visually-present physical features (e.g., in the case of the MIT-P, the cursors on thecomputer screen). Perceived patterns consist of visually available features in the environment, but they may alsoincorporate imaginary realms of possibilities that move beyond the immediate spatio-temporal circumstances(Nemirovsky et al., 2012).To illustrate this, consider, for example, the famous Rubin Vase (see Figure 2).Perceiving the objects face or vase is not merely determined by the invariant, physical sensedata (e.g., the colors, or the boundary between the colors). The same physical features supportboth imaginary perceptual possibilities. In order to perceive one possibility over the other, thesame data has to be organized into different configurations (Gurwitsch, 1964). Organizingparticular features into certain relationships with one another gives an assemblage of detailscoherence as an object (Garfinkel, 2008), whether it is real or imaginary.Figure 2. RubinConfiguring objects for one another by instructing each other’s attention is aVase.ubiquitous practice in technology-rich technical and scientific workplace settings (Garfinkel etal., 1981; Goodwin, 1996; Hindmarsh & Heath, 2000; Stevens & Hall, 1998). Identifying patterns in vast amountsof information and interpreting their significance is a daily endeavor at these sites. Personnel work together tomonitor multiple, heterogeneous streams of information within complex multimedia environments. They mustactively negotiate, constitute, and render particular physical and imaginary features of the scene relevant to theprojects at hand in order to orient each other to potentially significant patterns (Garfinkel et al., 1981; Hindmarsh& Heath, 2000). Professionals use a variety of situated, embodied strategies as part of this collaborative imagining(Murphy, 2009)—including purposefully vague references (Garfinkel et al., 1981; Goodwin, 1996) and gesturalmimicry (Becvar et al., 2005)—to configure and mutually establish objects. Finding creative ways to highlightand render phenomena of interest publicly inspectable from an abundance of data is an important STEMdisciplinary practice, essential to building scientific and mathematical knowledge together (Latour, 1999).In the guided-discovery learning that is characteristic to TEELEs like the MIT-P, participants must workto coach each other in how to attend to the rich haptic and visual phenomena they deem relevant and important ina particular moment. Following the lead of Stevens and Hall (1998) and Koschmann and Zemel (2009), we believethat much can be learned about processes of discovery and objectification in pedagogical environments by lookingfor parallels in the interactional methods employed by professional scientists and technical workers. Inspired bystudies of technical workplaces, we attempt to understand the complexity of the interactional work that goes intoconfiguring mutually available objects in the complex field of potential relevance in discovery learning with theMIT-P. We approach learning as a process of producing intersubjectively-achieved ratified understandings(Koschmann & Zemel, 2009; Schegloff, 1991; Stevens & Hall, 1998). Our goal is to reveal the specificinteractional methods employed by a learner and an adult tutor to accomplish a ratified understanding of amathematical object.A methodology for tracing intersubjectivity as an interactional achievementA powerful architecture for intersubjectivity is built into the sequential nature of interaction: Each conversationalturn consists of an updated display of the speaker’s current understanding of the project underway, which isdesigned in response to an antecedent display of understanding by the prior speakers (Schegloff, 1991). To tracehow an initially vague, proposed perceptual pattern was transformed into a clearly defined intersubjectivelyachieved mathematical object, we engage in a fine-grained analysis of the participants’ embodied interactionalpractices. Our praxeologically-based study of interaction is informed by ethnomethodology, an analyticalapproach that focuses on the in situ methods that people use to coordinate mutually intelligible courses of actiontogether (Garfinkel & Sacks, 1970).Following ethnomethodology, we adopt the view that the meaningfulness of the situations in whichparticipants find themselves is not given a priori and need not be accounted for by partially overlapping ormatching psychological states (Schegloff, 1991). Instead, what enables participants to coordinate a given courseof action (e.g., having an argument, making a discovery) in any actual situation is a sense of mutual intelligibilityICLS 2016 Proceedings123© ISLSthat must be built sequentially, moment-by-moment, with the local resources at hand (e.g., turns at talk, bodies,spatial arrangements, tools) through a relentless process of incremental, public displays of revisions andratifications of meaning (Garfinkel & Sacks, 1970; Goodwin, 1996; Sacks, 1992; Schegloff, 1991). Our analysisseeks to identify the particulars of the interactional resources that participants mobilize to create these scenicdisplays of the sense they are making of a situation (Garfinkel and Sacks, 1970).From evidently-vague reference to reified mathematical objectOur episode is drawn from a corpus of task-based interviews with 4th, 5th,and 6th-grade children using the MIT-P. It occurs about 40 minutes into aninterview, in which Boaz, a 5th-grader, has been working with two adulttutors, Dean and Devon. The MIT-P is currently set to the secret ratio of1:2. In the prior 40 minutes, Boaz has offered several accounts of how tomake the screen green (e.g., the right-hand cursor always has to be higherthan the left-hand cursor). With the newly introduced Cartesian grid, Boazproposes he could use “the squares” to see how much higher the rightcursor is compared to the left cursor.Devon suggests that he and Boaz try this out. Devon moves theleft cursor up one grid box at a time, and Boaz adjusts the vertical positionof the right cursor to make the screen green (see Figure 3). They advancethe cursors up the screen in this fashion, until suddenly Boaz gasps“OHHhhhhh!,” marking what comes next in Excerpt 1 as newly revealedinformation: a proposed discovery (Koschmann & Zemel, 2009).Figure 3. Devon (adult tutor) andBoaz (child) each operate a remoteto control a cursor on the MIT-Pscreen, while Dean (a secondadult tutor) looks on.Excerpt 1112Boaz:Each time it’s (.) increasing the square (1.0)so that one was one then we got to two (.)Boaz moves cursors to…3…then he moves to…4and I'm thinking °sortof like°o::ne7…then moves them to…and then this one’stwo…and finally…56then like here thisone is (.) THREEand then this one is(3.5) it goes uptaFOURSO:o it increases the number of squares each time.In Excerpt 1, line 1 (1.1), after both Boaz and Devon have lowered the remotes, Boaz offers this candidateproposal of a discovery: “Each time it’s increasing the square.” With this vague reference, the sense of thisdiscovery is not yet publicly available to Devon and Dean. The statement functions as a prospective indexical(Goodwin, 1996) that projects reference into the future toward a forthcoming resolution: its sense will need to befurther specified and elaborated as the sequence unfolds. A word, phrase, or expression is indexical if itsintelligibility is only recoverable by considering the context in which it is embedded (Garfinkel & Sacks, 1970).Boaz’s turn in 1.1 initiates Devon and Dean into attending to and examining subsequent turns in thesequence for the sense of his vague reference. The prospective indexical sets up an initial framework forinterpretation: It renders what follows (in 1.2 and 1.4–1.6) as instructions for perceiving the specific phenomenalfeatures that make up the sense of “it’s increasing the square.” By pointing forward toward something whosedetails are not yet specified or ratified by participants, prospective indexicals give objects-in-progress a quasipresence in the interaction, allowing for their ongoing negotiation (Goodwin, 1996). Garfinkel et al. (1981) firstrevealed the function of such evidently-vague reference in the context of professional scientific work, tracing itsICLS 2016 Proceedings124© ISLSkey role in the embodied, social negotiation of a certifiable scientific object of knowledge (the astronomicaldiscovery of a pulsar). Koschmann and Zemel (2009) showed how, in a similar fashion, prospective indexicalsallow students to negotiate and establish ratified kinematics discoveries while exploring a pedagogically-designedphysics microworld.In 1.2, Boaz offers a first, verbal elaboration. Then, he picks up both remotes and in 1.3 through 1.6, henarrates a sequence of activity with the MIT-P. He pauses rhythmically after positioning both cursors and matcheseach position to a verbalized numerical value. Starting at 1.4, he also verbally demarcates each configuration with“this one.” Through this multimodal performance, Boaz offers an ordered series of parallel cases of it’s increasingthe square for inspection. Boaz has narrowed the complex perceptual field of the MIT-P and configured anephemeral, animated realm of possibilities for Devon and Dean to search and examine for potentials of theproposed discovery. In 1.7, Boaz uses a similar statement to 1.1 to now retrospectively index his just-priorperformance (he creates a retrospective indexical).Despite his embodied demonstration, Boaz’s instructions for how to appreciate his proposal are notunequivocal for his audience. The numbers Boaz calls out are consistent with at least two possibilities during eachevent: (1) the positions of the left cursor in each case; and (2) the total number of squares between the verticalpositions of the left and the right cursors. There are also several “increases” one might perceive and attend to: (1)the height of the left cursor; (2) the height of the right cursor; (3) the heights of both cursors; and (4) the distancebetween the cursors. Notably, all these potential patterns contain imaginary features: The properties height anddistance have no material instantiation (as opposed to, for example, the cursors or the lines of the Cartesian gridon the screen) in the phenomenal field. A sufficient amount of interpretive work is still necessary to negotiatewhat features constitute the pattern Boaz is proposing. In Devon’s adjacent, subsequent turn, he showsresponsiveness to the ambiguity of Boaz’s explanation (Excerpt 2).Excerpt 21 Devon: And (1.2) so when you say it increases what- if you were speaking234to someone on the phone and they can't- they can't see what'sgoing on here (.) and they say it inc- WAIT WOAH woah woah, whatare you- what are you talking about, what is increasing?In Excerpt 2, Devon laminates the immediate spatio-temporal present with a hypothetical situation byvoicing an imaginary interlocutor who would have limited perceptual access to the current scene (no visual orhaptic access) at the other end of a telephone line. We can appreciate the function of this turn as a “repair initiator”(Schegloff, 1991). It marks a source of trouble in understanding Boaz’s just-prior formulation. Participants ininteractions have a variety of coordinated repair practices at their disposal to mark and resolve troubles inspeaking, hearing, and understanding. These practices provide mechanisms for incrementally establishingintersubjectivity turn-by-turn (Schegloff, 1991).In this case, the use of “what” has multiple functions. (1) It pinpoints the exact location of the trouble:Devon has swapped Boaz’s “it” with “what” to build the hearably parallel construction, “what is increasing” (2.4),which targets the it as what needs repair. (2) The use of “what” also displays a claim of understanding: It operatesas a candidate understanding—an ontological interpretation of what Boaz originally meant. The understandingDevon displays here is that Boaz’s it is some kind of thing (as opposed to a person—who; a time—when; or aplace—where). Finally, (3) Devon’s “what” projects a format for how Boaz should re-design his initial description(how he should do the third-turn repair): He should further specify the nature of this thing.Devon’s turn explicitly attends to the prospective indexical nature of Boaz’s prior turns and renewsBoaz’s antecedent coda (from 1.7) as prospectively indexical: The lamination with the hypothetical telephonesituation positions 1.7 as continuing to be prospectively indexical. It renders Boaz’s explanation as stillunresolved, unfinished, and in need of elaboration. Devon’s turn encourages Boaz to elaborate the instructions forperceiving the phenomenon in a way that would be sensible for someone not immediately part of the current scene(the person at the other end of the phone line; 2.2). A hallmark of the work of scientists involves the design ofrepresentations to capture and archive features of phenomena, and to make them available in places and timesbeyond the immediate material circumstances in which they were first discovered (Latour, 1999). Thus, this turncreates an opportunity for Boaz to participate in the disciplinary practice of generating a context-independentrepresentation of a phenomenon. In what follows, Boaz does re-design his description, but this does notimmediately result in consensus about the object-in-progress.In Excerpt 3.1, Devon displays his orientation to Boaz’s initial description of the pattern (“by one”) as apotential object (“that thing”). He makes a strong claim that his understanding is the same as Boaz’s and that allthat remains for them to figure out is what to call it (3.2). At first, Boaz does not contest Devon’s development ofICLS 2016 Proceedings125© ISLShis idea. He suggests naming it “plus” and goes on to fit “plus” into Devon’s construction from 3.1: “plus isincreasing” (3.3). Devon’s repetition in 3.4 is another third-turn repair initiator, now locating trouble in “the plus”and providing an opportunity for Boaz to rephrase or elaborate what the plus is in the subsequent third turn.However, Boaz does not elaborate in 3.5 and instead simply says “yeah.” In 3.6, Devon reveals his understandingthat “plus” refers to only one cursor at a time. Boaz responds that “both” should be called plus (3.7). Again, thereare multiple possible interpretations of Boaz’s assertion: It could refer to the pair of the left and right cursors, orsomething else entirely, such as the increasing space the cursors bound when they are moved together in theconfigurations from Boaz’s demonstration (cf. Excerpt 1).Overall, in turns 3.6–3.9, Boaz and Devon display significant difficulties in understanding each other.Unable to project the end of each other’s turns, both Boaz (3.7) and Devon (3.8) interrupt each other mid-sentence.This trouble projecting the boundaries of turns signals a failure to appreciate their ideational content.Excerpt 31 Devon: How should we call that thing that is increasing by one?2345678I can see it also but I'm not sure what to call it.Boaz: Hmmmm call it plus, plus is increasing=Devon: =The plus?=Boaz: =°Yeah°=Devon: =Wa-wh- ss the one on the right? Or theBoaz: -All right, both of them should be called plus cause that'sDevon: -Yeah, yeah, we call these things crosshairs, (°but whatever°), but9oka::y so they’re increasing by one10 Boaz: °Right°. NO not they increase- the first one increases by one and it1112gets higher and then it goes two, three, four, five, si- it goesum um odd even odd even each timeThe breakdown in Excerpt 3 powerfully demonstrates that mutual understandings are incrementallyrenewed and re-achieved on a turn-by-turn basis and can be quite suddenly lost. Participants ongoingly generateresources for their partner(s) to determine whether they are still oriented to the same phenomenon in the sameway and their interlocutor(s) must continually monitor these resources for evidence of misalignments. Eachsubsequent response contains further evidence for the original speaker that their instructed perceiver is or is notorienting appropriately to the features, displaying successful or unsuccessful apprehension of the intendedphenomenon (Hindmarsh & Heath, 2000). In our case, Boaz is instructing Devon’s perception. He must carefullyattend to Devon’s responses for evidence that Devon is apprehending the same phenomenon, and move to remedydetected displays of misunderstandings.In Excerpt 2, Devon had both claimed and demonstrated an understanding of Boaz’s initial proposal(Excerpt 1) that Boaz could monitor (Sacks, 1992; p. 252). Boaz had not challenged this demonstration andseemed to treat it as evidence that Devon had attended to the same features Boaz was instructing him to perceive.Now, in 3.8–3.9, Devon’s turn provides another key demonstration of his understanding for Boaz to assess. Devondemonstrates that he is orienting to Boaz’s “plus” (from 3.7) as a reference to each individual cursor by proposingthe alternate, pluralized label, “crosshairs” (3.8). Then, he carries the plural into the indexical description “they’reincreasing” (3.9). With this turn, Devon creates a public display of what features he is attending to: the two cursors.However, now, Boaz’s challenge (3.10–3.12) suggests that he treats Devon’s latest display as evidence that Devonhas not appropriately oriented to what Boaz wishes to highlight for him.The trouble in Excerpt 3 leads to productive work for the negotiation of the object-in-progress. Devon’sdisplay in 3.8–3.9 creates a new priority for Boaz to re-design his approach. In 3.10–3.12, Boaz repairs hisdescription by elaborating it significantly in response to Devon’s displayed misapprehension. In Excerpt 4, Boazfurther instructs Devon (and Dean who has remained silent but still participates as an on-looking audience) in howto see the phenomenon: He uses a new approach for assembling its features, re-designing his description througha rich performance of gestures and speech to orient his audience.Boaz starts with his right hand (palm-down) above his left hand (palm-up) in 4.1. Then, he moves bothhands farther apart as he lifts both of them higher in the air (4.2). In 4.3, he leans forward to point at the screen.However, unable to reach, he moves back into his seat and creates a space between his hands, sighting through itat the monitor (4.4). In 4.5, with this bounded space assembled, he turns his body toward Devon. He instructsDevon how to see each of his hands: The right hand stands in as the right cursor (4.6) and the left hand stands inICLS 2016 Proceedings126© ISLSas the second, left cursor (4.7). Boaz then increases the spacing between his hands and moves them both upward(4.8). Then he raises both hands even further up and makes the space between each hand even larger (4.9). Eachtime he lifts his hands and increases the spacing between them, Boaz calls out increasing numbers. He concludeswith the retrospective indexical, “it keeps increasing,” pointing back at his performance.Excerpt 421So it goesone43so this is- YEAH so sort ofhuhkay °let me see what I'mtrying to do°two, so wait-56OKAY so this isone square7this one's theright98and this one’sthe secondand it's fourand then it keepson increasingso that wouldbe two rightThrough this multimodal performance, the material nothingness surrounding Boaz’s two hands istransformed into something significant: Boaz generates a perceptually available empty, vertical space(Nemirovsky et al., 2012) for Devon and Dean to attend to. To create this empty space from nothingness, Boazconfigures the outline of the space with his hands, lifting it as a figure from the ground, much like bounding thecontour of the vase in Figure 2 lifts it out of a formless background. The empty space is given quasi-presencethrough bodily activity; it is an imaginary feature that Boaz must instruct Devon and Dean to experience as partof the unfolding object. This now quasi-present imaginary feature allows Boaz to juxtapose several cases of theincreasing, covariant quantity: The empty space is getting bigger as it moves upward.Excerpt 51 Devon: Should we come up with some kind of word=32456this=for7thing that isgro::::wing?How should we call it?In Excerpt 5, Devon displays his understanding by recreating Boaz’s gestures. He elaborates the originalgestures by explicitly tracing the space between his two hands (5.2–5.3). As he says “thing” (5.4) he collapses andre-opens his hands to emphasize his attention to the space between his own hands. Co-timed with the word“growing,” Devon increases the space between his hands as he moves them upward (5.5–5.6). This multimodalrevoicing of Boaz’s idea, with its explicit effort to highlight the empty space, publicly demonstrates that Devonhas organized the same features in the same way as Boaz.ICLS 2016 Proceedings127© ISLSBoaz does not challenge any part of Devon’s interpretation, suggesting that he now finds Devon’sorientation appropriate: Devon’s multimodally displayed understanding of the indicated empty space as a thingthat grows as it is elevated is visibly in alignment with Boaz’s displayed understanding. Boaz demonstrates hissatisfaction with the currently intersubjectively-achieved configuration of real and imaginary features—i.e., thepresently accomplished organization and mutual availability of a perceptual pattern—by now going along withthe proposed project of naming it. He asks if Devon has any suggestions: “Do you have a name for it?” Devonoffers the label “distance” that Boaz promptly affiliates with: “Oh, ye:::ah, the distance.” When Devon furtherelaborates, “the distance between the hands” while repeating his gestures from 5.2–5.4, Boaz smiles, laughs, andaccepts the name: “yeah.” Devon finally proposes a candidate consensus conclusion, “so the distance is growing?”and Boaz confirms it: “The distance is growing.”This name—“distance”—now comes to stand in for a reified assemblage of an ordered collection of realand imaginary features. With this, a mathematical object has been jointly established: It is a covariant variablethat increases while the hands—and therefore the cursors on the screen—move upward. This mathematical object,now called distance, itself is an imaginary object that has no material presence. Rather, it is a property of theconfiguration of the cursors that was made perceivable through Boaz’s and Devon’s figuring of the heightdependent empty space between their hands.Conclusions and implicationsIn this article, we demonstrated how a young learner and an adult tutor working with a technology-enabledembodied learning device for mathematics jointly establish a mathematical object—a covariant variable. Bothactive participants engage in nuanced forms of multimodal interactional work to achieve the mutual availabilityof the object as a coherent assembly of physical and imaginary features. The process of reifying this mathematicalobject is distributed temporally across the interaction, across embodied activity (gestures), across material artifacts(the MIT-P), and notably, across individuals. In this case, the objectification that occurred is irreducible to anyindividual mind. In particular, we identified two key interactional mechanisms occurring between adult andlearner as vital to the intersubjective achievement of the ratified object: (1) Participants’ attention and propagationof prospective indexicals to occasion their elaboration; and (2) participants’ attention to and mimicking of gestures(multimodal revoicing) to demonstrate mutual understanding. Our findings elaborate current frameworks thattrace objectification as a form of ontogenesis (Radford, 2003).While specificity and preciseness are considered hallmarks of sophisticated scientific and mathematicalpractice, our findings suggest that indexicality and vagueness play a beneficial role in configuring and establishingmutually available mathematical objects. In our case, Boaz’s initially vague, prospective indexical descriptionprovides the key resources for interpreting his subsequent performance as the proposal of a significant pattern tobe attended to. Devon’s responsiveness to this prospective indexical generates an environment that allows for thecontinuing negotiation and specification of the object-in-progress. It also affords an opportunity to engage in theSTEM disciplinary practice of developing context-independent representations of phenomena. We therefore addthe use of prospective indexicals as a productive form of “systematic vagueness” that enables discourse andnegotiations between teachers and learners about disciplinary content (Newman et al., 1989; p. 62). An implicationof this study is that explicit responsiveness to indexicality and multimodality in learners’ explanations can fosterproductive engagement in STEM disciplinary practices within TEELEs.Our episode also challenges interpretations of zones of proximal development where learning is seen asthe result of agentive adults or experts structuring a situation for a child or novice, and regulating theirparticipation. What unfolds in our episode is not a simple case of an adult knowing the cultural future and bringingit to bear on a child’s proposed interpretation of events (cf. prolepsis, Stone, 1993). Conceptualizations ofscaffolding as an adult-initiated, asymmetrical process cannot capture the reciprocal instruction necessary forjointly establishing the covariant variable in our episode. Boaz must instruct his adult tutors in how to experiencewhat he is experiencing in order to make the subsequent negotiation of meaning possible. He must also carefullymonitor his tutor’s response for evidence as to whether they have attended to and interpreted what he hashighlighted, and he must be responsive to their interpretations. Our case supports recent efforts to re-capture andhighlight the symmetry of participation in interactional zones of proximal development by analyzing instructionas a bi-directional process between experts and newcomers (Roth & Thom, 2009).With respect to this year’s conference theme, we suggest that empowering learners involves appreciatingtheir symmetrical role in the negotiations of meaning in pedagogical situations. We emphasize the importance offinding ways to support learners’ use of indexicality and multimodality. As demonstrated in our episode, both areproductive strategies for building mutual understandings, and they should be considered valuable and relevantways of practicing and knowing in scientific and technical disciplines.ICLS 2016 Proceedings128© ISLSEndnotes(1) Jeffersonian Transcript Conventions (Jefferson, 2004): (.) for a micro-pause <1 sec; (2.5) for timed pause in seconds;CAPITALS for loud speech; = for latching; :: colons for elongated speech; underline for emphasis; ° for quiet speech.ReferencesAbrahamson, D., Gutiérrez, J., Charoenying, T., Negrete, A., & Bumbacher, E. (2012). Fostering hooks and shifts:Tutorial tactics for guided mathematical discovery. Tech, Knowledge and Learning, 17(1-2), 61–86.Becvar, L. A., Hollan, J., & Hutchins, E. (2005). Hands as molecules: Representational gestures used fordeveloping theory in a scientific laboratory. Semiotica, 4(156), 89–112.Enyedy, N., Danish, J., Delacruz, G., & Kumar, M. (2012). Learning physics through play in an augmented realityenvironment. Intl Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 7(3), 347–378.Garfinkel, H. (2008). Toward a sociological theory of information. (A. Rawls, Ed.). Boulder: Paradigm.Garfinkel, H., Lynch, M., & Livingston, E. (1981). The work of a discovering science construed with materialsfrom the optically discovered pulsar. Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 11, 131–158.Garfinkel, H., & Sacks, H. (1970). On formal structures of practical actions. In J. C. McKinney & E. Tiryakian(Eds.), Theoretical sociology: Perspectives and developments (pp. 337-366). NY: A-P-C.Goodwin, C. (1996). Transparent vision. In E. Ochs, E. A. Schegloff, & S. A. Thompson (Eds.), Interaction andgrammar (pp. 370–404). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Gurwitsch, A. (1964). The field of consciousness. In R. M. Zaner & L. Embree, (Eds.), New York: Springer.Hindmarsh, J., & Heath, C. (2000). Sharing the tools of the trade: The interactional constitution of workplaceobjects. Journal of Contemporary Ethnography, 29(5), 523–562.Jefferson, G. Glossary of transcript symbols with an introduction. In G.H. Lerner, (Ed.) Conversation analysis:Studies from the first generation. John Benjamins, Amserdam, 2004, 13–31.Koschmann, T., & Zemel, A. (2009). Optical pulsars and black arrows: Discoveries as occasioned productions.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(2), 200–246.Latour, B. (1999). Pandora’s hope: Essays on the reality of science studies. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.Lindgren, R., & Moshell, J. M. (2011). Supporting children’s learning with body-based metaphors in a mixedreality environment. In Proc. of the IDC Conf. (pp. 177–180). NYC: ACM.Lyons, L., Slattery, B., Jimenez, P., Lopez, B., & Moher, T. (2012). Don’t forget about the sweat: Effortfulembodied interaction in support of learning. In Proc. of TEI Conf. (pp. 77–84). New York: ACM.Murphy, K. M. (2009). Imagination as joint activity: The case of architectural interaction. MCA, 11(4), 37–41.Nemirovsky, R., Kelton, M. L., & Rhodehamel, B. (2012). Gesture and imagination: On the constitution and usesof phantasms. Gesture, 12(2), 130–165.Newman, D., Griffin, P., & Cole, M. (1989). The construction zone: Working for cognitive change in school NY:Cambridge University Press.Radford, L. (2003). Gestures, speech, and the sprouting of signs: A semiotic-cultural approach to students’ typesof generalization. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 5(1), 37–70.Roth, W.-M., & Thom, J. S. (2009). The emergence of 3D geometry from children’s (teacher-guided)classification tasks. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(1), 37–41.Sacks, H. (1992). Lectures on conversation: Volume II. (G. Jefferson, Ed.). Cambridge: Blackwell Publishing.Schegloff, E. (1991). Conversation analysis and socially shared cognition. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine, & S.D. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 150–170). D.C.: APA.Stevens, R., & Hall, R. (1998). Disciplined perception: Learning to see in technoscience. In Talking mathematicsin school: Studies of teaching and learning (pp. 107–149). NY: Cambridge University Press.Stone, C. A. (1993). What is missing in the metaphor of scaffolding? In E. A. Forman, N. Minnick, & C. A. Stone(Eds.), Contexts for learning: Sociocultural dynamics in children’s learning. NY: Oxford University Press.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based on work supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Award No. 1321042and in part by the Institute of Education Sciences under Award No. R305B090026.ICLS 2016 Proceedings129© ISLS