Idea Identification and Analysis (I2A): A Search for SustainablePromising Ideas Within Knowledge-Building DiscourseVwen Yen Alwyn Lee, Nanyang Technological University, alwynlee@ntu.edu.sgSeng Chee Tan, Nanyang Technological University, sengchee.tan@ntu.edu.sgJoon Kit Kelvin Chee, Ministry of Education, chee_joon_kit_kelvin@moe.edu.sgAbstract: This is a study on the identification and analysis of promising ideas, which examinesthe knowledge building discourse of 20 students within Knowledge Forum, through the I2Asystem in a mixed method approach. It is a challenge in providing support to maintain efforts inidentifying and improving ideas, which this study addresses through visualization and step-wiseanalysis of discourse network measures that are calculated using the Knowledge BuildingDiscourse Explorer. By using Social Network Analysis with chosen keywords and analyzingquality of notes, we are able to identify and trace the evolvement of ideas that become promisingtalking points within the discourse space. Findings show that ideas can be classified and furtheranalyzed to have an impact on subsequent discourse. Teachers can focus their resources onpromising ideas that help the community maintain engagement in creative work to improveideas, so as to learn more effectively and attain knowledge creation goals.IntroductionIn educational institutions, learning approaches have long been operating within the acquisition and participationmetaphors (Sfard, 1998), but there is also a new approach which is seen as an integration of both metaphors oflearning (Paavola, Lipponen & Hakkarainen, 2004). Sfard (1998) examined the acquisition and participatorymetaphors of learning and suggested that both cognitive and situative perspectives are required. Paavola et al.(2004) further suggested that the combination of both metaphors could be problematic, but an integration of bothwould require a third approach: the knowledge-creation metaphor of learning. Scardamalia and Bereiter’s modelof knowledge creation, termed Knowledge Building (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2003), is one of the three influentialmodels reviewed by Paavola et al. (2004), besides transformation of activity system (Engeström, 1999) andcreation of new products at organizational level (Nonaka & Takeuchi, 1995). Knowledge building focuses on K12 learning environment that leverages learner’s natural idea generation capability to work on continualimprovement of their ideas, and for teachers to maintain student engagement in idea improvement. Scardamaliaand Bereiter (2003) distinguished between two modes of learning: namely, the belief mode and the design mode.The belief mode engages learners with what they or others believe or ought to believe, whereas the design modeengages learners with the usefulness, adequacy, improvability and developmental potential of ideas. Knowledgebuilding as a social process makes use of both learning modes, where learners engage in collaborative inquiry toenable creation, contribution and advancement of community knowledge. The concept of idea improvement(Scardamalia, 2002) is crucial as students are required to have motivation in their search for solutions to handlesignificant challenges, be aware of emergent themes of inquiry from multiple sources of inputs, acknowledgeknowledge gaps, and participate in collaborative idea improvement (Zhang, Scardamalia, Reeve & Messina, 2009).In order to encourage and promote continuous efforts in idea improvement, we need a process of sharingand improvement of ideas within the community, and also to identify potential relevant ideas that show relativesignificance and promise to the community, such that these promising ideas could be brought forward and becontinuously improved upon. Isolated suggestions and ideas from individuals are often unable to frame theproblem accurately and cannot provide a complete picture of the ideal solution in most problems. However,students might not have the capability to continuously maintain engagement in the process of idea improvementover long periods of time. In such situations, teachers need to provide relevant support and scaffolds, but readingand monitoring student discourse can be challenging, especially when students’ posts cumulate and becomeincreasingly unmanageable over time. With appropriate tools and technology, such processes can be facilitatedfor greater efficiency and effectiveness. For example, technology and tools can be used for visualization andanalysis, to automate the process of identifying promising ideas to allow efficient learning of content, and to alsoprovide the ability to track the impact after the introduction of promising ideas into the discourse community. Ifthis can be achieved, students would be able to develop ideas to attain knowledge creation goals within theclassroom, and they would not be engaged in other peripheral and less important ideas, which could sideline andaffect their immersion in progressive problem solving (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1993). Identifying promisingideas within a discourse is a reasonable and natural approach towards efficient learning, as discourse often playsa creative role in encouraging improvements on ideas (Lakatos, 1970). Platforms such as Knowledge ForumICLS 2016 Proceedings90© ISLS(Scardamalia, 2004) and software tools like Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer (KBDeX) (Oshima, Oshima,& Matsuzawa, 2012) are used for supporting knowledge building pedagogies, practices and research. Theseplatforms and tools help to characterize constructive interaction between students, not limited to just socialinteractions but also allowing discourse to play a part in determining the nature of ideas that surfaced duringdiscourse. By doing step-wise analysis of idea occurrences and improvements brought about by different discourseunits, the flow and content of ideas can be predicted to improve over the discourse, which can be used as feedbackto inform future classes and for contributing back to the community.In this paper, we seek to identify relevant and promising ideas which may not be immediately apparentto teachers and students, and propose an automated method of tagging promising ideas, which was previouslydone through manual consensus by students (Chen, Chuy, Resendes, & Scardamalia, 2010). The proposed methodof tagging promising ideas and analysis of subsequent discourse would help in deciding whether an idea hassurfaced within the discourse, and if it has sufficient promise and potential to warrant timely interventions so asto sustain creative work in improving emergent promising ideas that eventually lead to community “rise-above”and more effective learning. Rise-above refers to the integration of ideas or elevation of explanation at a highertheoretical or principle level. The method is conducted in the following phases: (a) identification of non-obviousideas among the large number of threads and chatter within online discourse, which might be missed by teachersor students; (b) determination of promising ideas that can sustain engagement of students and contribute to thecommunity discourse; (c) evaluation of the impact and contribution of promising ideas to the community suchthat timely interventions could provide sustained students’ engagement in creative work to improve ideas.The focus on learning process, discourse units and epistemic wordsIn the world of knowledge acquisition, designers construct methods to allow learners to attain pre-determinedlearning goals; whereas in the world of learning, designers focus on methods that support learning processes,rather than the acquisition of knowledge and pre-defined learning goals (Strijbos, Martens & Jochems, 2004). Itis crucial to focus on the learning process in which students seem to benefit from, even though pre-plannedoutcomes might deviate. The learning process within online discourse is relevant to the concept of continuouslyimproving and sharing of students’ ideas for the community to rise above, and this process is not just limited tothe social interaction of students, but also applicable to the usage of discourse units (known as notes withinKnowledge Forum) and words within the learning environment. The ability to identify promising ideas, ideas thatbecome consequential when worked on, is essential for creative work with ideas at all levels (Chen, Scardamalia,& Resendes, 2013). This leads to the need to analyze text within online discourse, which are representations ofopinions and views of students in the digital format, comparable to speech and presentations within traditionalclassroom discourse in the physical and audible form. There are various forms of discourse analysis, includingautomated content analysis that uses Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning techniques (Sun, Zhang,Jin, & Lyu, 2014) to focus on the appealing properties of unsupervised learning in topical models. The objectiveof probabilistic topic models is to automatically discover topics within a corpus and topic assignments ofdocuments based on frequency of unique words. As compared to common choices of topic models such as latentsemantic indexing (LSI) (Hofmann, 2001) and latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Blei, 2012), this research focuseson unique words similar to Sun et al. (2014). In addition, we explore deeper than the concept of topics and themesby identifying the specific ideas that the writer is trying to portray through the linkage and usage of words atdifferent temporal positions within the discourse.Further, the analysis of discourse units and words reflect individuals’ contributions to communityknowledge, which cannot be analyzed through pre- and post-tests (Oshima et al., 2012), while the knowledgelevels that are attained by students are commonly investigated through activity coding such as the coding schemeconducted by van Aalst (2009) on secondary students’ written discourse. Apart from the common practice of usingSocial network Analysis (SNA) in analyzing social patterns of learners, this study focuses on emergentdevelopment patterns of ideas. By using SNA based on words that learners use in their discourse, ideas can beidentified and the level of community knowledge obtained by learners could be represented in a novel way toreflect promising potential of emergent ideas at a point in time within the discourse. SNA could be used as a newrepresentation of community knowledge building by learners (Oshima et al., 2012), which researchers can use tofurther investigate different models associated with the knowledge building community. KBDeX as a softwaretool was utilized in this research as a graphical visualization for identified ideas, and through our analysis, wasused to support interpretations of promising ideas within a community discourse.MethodsThe proposed I2A system in this paper utilized knowledge building platform Knowledge Forum (Scardamalia &Bereiter, 2006) for conducting online discourse. KBDeX (Oshima et al., 2012) was used for analyzing knowledgeICLS 2016 Proceedings91© ISLSbuilding discourse using social network measures, so as to identify ideas with their degree of promisingness whichhave a subsequent impact on community discourse. The discovery of promising ideas and their effects throughsocial network analysis were subsequently qualitatively validated by analyzing the quality of notes.Discourse platform and contextUsing the Knowledge Forum as a collaborative knowledge building environment, this research analyzes the onlinediscourse of 20 eighth-graders who were being taught the topic of “Human Transport System” over a period oftwo weeks. We worked closely with a middle school science teacher, who was able to plan and execute theknowledge building lesson for the students in a computer-aided environment. The teacher involved within thestudy also had prior knowledge building training and was able to facilitate the knowledge building lessonseffectively, having previously used physical “idea cards” to trigger interactions and present authentic problems.Students had experience using Knowledge Forum and were keen to continue using it, as they found that the socialinteractions could help advance community knowledge. Each student was provided with a booklet on a fictionalcharacter “Uncle Yong”, who has an impending heart attack. This problem was authentic to some students as theirfamily members had previously encountered such an issue, thus the problem acted as a trigger aimed at elicitingstudents’ ideas about heart problems. A motivated student (Student S2) posed four thought-invoking questionsthat were closely related to issues that his peers would comprehend. These questions were: What heart problemis he facing? How can he improve on his diet and his lifestyle to get healthier? How will the operation be done?What will be the consequences if he continues to eat unhealthily? Responses were posted as notes withinKnowledge Forum on the “Human Transport System” view, which served as a workspace for all written noteswithin the two weeks learning session. The questions encouraged discussions and debates among students, withthe usage of scaffolds such as “I need to understand” when posting notes of query, “My Theory” and “NewInformation” for statements of information that they have garnered online.Archiving ideas and offline discussions into online notes on Knowledge Forum allow teachers andresearchers to retrieve, assess and analyze the discourse and idea generation process. The discourse consist of 101notes shared by 20 students, where all students contributed at least one note of significant content. Some studentswere very active within Knowledge Forum, constantly replying to other peers’ contributions and were responsiblefor the majority of build-on and rise-above notes. The text within each note in Knowledge Forum were importedinto KBDeX for visualization and analysis, and the majority of these notes were individual expressions of one ormore ideas, apart from the rise-above notes which were co-authored by multiple students and representedcollective ideas. Every note that represented expression of ideas and used within KBDeX, would be termed as a“discourse unit”, or DU for short, represented visually as nodes in a network. Examples of such discourse unitscontaining their respective authors and text are shown in Figure 1.Figure 1. Excerpts of discourse units (DUs) posted by students 9 and 10.Knowledge building discourse explorer (KBDeX) and BC trendsKBDeX was developed as a cohesive and easy-to-use platform that affords visualization of student interactionnetworks, discourse units network and words network (Oshima et al., 2012). Social Network Analysis was usedto generate visualization of students’ contributions within the discourse and to transform the data into a graphicalrepresentation, where measurement indicators such as “density” and “centrality” are used to determine the levelof interaction between students (Wortham, 1999). The commonly used SNA has been found to be insufficient inexamining community knowledge advancement through students’ collaboration and interaction network (Oshima& Oshima. 2007). Interactions between words that learners use in their discourse are important but often neglected,as these words tend to reflect the learners’ knowledge and ideas during discourse of a topic. During our analysisusing SNA, we used a conventional network measure, betweenness centrality (BC) coefficient, to indicateimportant connections between words within discourse units. KBDeX graphically displays BC values that allowsus to identify and differentiate promising ideas. Our interpretation of the BC coefficient can be viewed as ideas’degree of importance to multiple stakeholders within the discourse at different junctures of the discourse. Whenviewed over the entire discourse, the BC coefficients form a BC trend line (Figure 2), which suggests the ideaswithin a DU contain a certain degree of promise towards discourse, and has varying levels of significance andimpact on the community discourse after the DU was introduced into the discourse space.ICLS 2016 Proceedings92© ISLSFigure 2. Example of a betweenness centrality (BC) trend line over the entire discourse.Idea representation through keywordsIdeas are represented mainly through notes on Knowledge Forum, as students seek to query, inform or explaintheir ideas with their choice of known words. Keywords that are important for learning subject matter, managinglearning, and gaining deeper understanding are known as epistemic words. We decided to focus on using objectsand nouns to represent tangible items which students could relate easily to, given that the topic on human transportsystem was pegged at an introductory level. The process of choosing keywords was manually conducted by twoexperts, who were engaged to determine the list of keywords that reflect the level of knowledge, and arerepresentative of key ideas regarding the topic of human transport system. The final list of keywords wereidentified with an inter-rater agreement of 82.4%, with differences between the experts resolved after furtherdiscussions. The final list of keywords contain 18 unique keywords with their respective 13 plural formsconstituting a total of 31 keywords. The keywords are as follows: red blood cells(s), white blood cell(s), platelet(s),oxygen, carbon dioxide, heart(s), lung(s), blood, blood vessel(s), artery/arteries, vein(s), capillary/capillaries,heart attack(s), heart disease(s), clot(s), antibody/antibodies, oxygenated, deoxygenated.Identifying relevant ideas using I2AFigure 3. Example of BC trends for relevant and irrelevant idea.The process of identifying ideas is dependent on the relevancy of contents within the discourse unit. The contentof notes in Knowledge Forum form the basis of ideas within the discourse, and the usage of BC trends as ameasurement index allows us to compare the relevancy of a discourse unit against other parts of the discourse.High betweenness centrality of a certain discourse unit at a certain juncture of discourse suggests that the selecteddiscourse unit works as a key mediator that links other parts of the discourse through itself, and the idea contributedby the participant might represent an emergent idea that is worth exploring. When there are high values of BCwith abnormal behavior within the BC plot, it suggests that a relevant idea could be present and is central at theparticular point of the discourse, which learners should pay attention to. On the other hand, discourse units thatpossess smaller or insignificant values of BC could also represent the existence of less significant ideas that mightnot be relevant, since there is a lower extent or lack of community talk and discussion regarding the idea and thecontents, hence indicating the presence of irrelevant ideas. However, if an idea has promising potential but doesnot possess sufficient relevancy to the community at the point in discourse, validation through qualitative analysiswould then be required to prove and validate the idea’s promisingness.Detecting sustainability of interest in ideas using I2AAs ideas surface and are identified during discourse, it is likely one of two different scenarios could occur to it. Ifthe idea comes across as a major eureka moment of novelty that makes sense and is also interesting to thecommunity, continued discussion among students would most likely occur, with frequent queries and interests tokeep the discussion alive with new perspectives, so as to continuously improve the idea and enhance communityknowledge. As a result, after the initial spike in BC values, the continuous discovery of new ideas relevant to theoriginal idea will cause the BC trend to decrease gradually with subsequent large BC fluctuations and incrementsacross the remaining parts of the discourse as shown in Figure 4a. The other scenario depicts ideas that fall by theICLS 2016 Proceedings93© ISLSwayside due to a lack of discussion and community disinterest. These ideas could either be deemed as commontopics that were already thoroughly discussed, with convergence of opinions and consensus reached within thecommunity; or it could also mean that potential promising ideas gained less traction than expected within thecommunity. This can be similarly further verified using qualitative analysis. This situation where there is little tono community interest in continuing discussion of the idea at a specific discourse juncture, can be reflected in theBC plot (Figure 4b) with decreasing BC trend that tapers off or reduces to insignificant values.Fig 4bFig 4aFigures 4a and 4b. Examples of BC trends for promising interesting idea (left) and uninteresting idea (right).Classification of ideas using I2AUsing the above idea attributes and combining the idea types mentioned in Figures 3, 4a and 4b, our observationsin our analysis allow us to classify the pool of ideas within the discourse into four different classes, based on theirrelevancy and importance to discourse, sustainability of community interest, and impact to the communitydiscourse (Figure 5). Different classes of ideas can surface within a discourse which affects the quality of talk andtypes of discussion. A relevant idea of sustainable community interest is classified as a promising idea, whereasif the idea has non-sustainable community interest, it is still a potential idea which the teacher can act upon, byengaging students and reviving interest in the topic. However, irrelevant ideas that retain continuous communityinterests often digress and affect the community’s direction in advancing knowledge, therefore requiring teachersto further examine affecting notes and their contents in detail, which can reveal possible distracting elementswithin the notes. A similarly irrelevant idea with minimal discussions and non-sustainable community interestswould otherwise be considered a trivial idea. By classifying these ideas, the summation of the counts of differentidea classes within the discourse could also provide a quantitative feel of the discourse’s quality.SustainablePromising IdeasDigressing IdeasNonsustainableInterest to CommunityRelevancy to the Experts/TeachersRelevantIrrelevantPotential IdeasTrivial IdeasFigure 5. The four quadrants of idea classificationFindings and discussionsWe ran the discourse through I2A using KBDeX for visualization, and were able to classify discourse units (DUs)and the respective contents into different idea types. This was done by using I2A to firstly identify ideas, followedby determination of relevant promising ideas, and lastly conducting an analysis of discourse belonging to differentidea types for validation purposes. By tagging and classifying different ideas, teachers and students are able tolearn more effectively and efficiently, by choosing to either prioritize improvement of relevant ideas to increasedepth in knowledge, or to channel resources into broad based learning of all ideas.Figure 6 displays three different examples of ideas that were identified throughout the discourse usingI2A, along with our qualitative interpretations of how the idea was represented within the discourse unit. Theseideas originated from notes extracted from the Knowledge Forum discourse and are an indication of different ideaclasses and types which can arise from a knowledge building discourse. The DUs were listed in chronologicalorder and need not necessarily be in a conversation with the preceding or subsequent DU, since paralleldiscussions took place simultaneously across the community, with students responding to different threads overtwo weeks. The x-axis lists all the DUs within the discourse and are considered as turns in KBDeX, so that step-ICLS 2016 Proceedings94© ISLSwise analysis could be done to track the BC values for each DU, and later used for determining the impact of acertain DU or keyword on the community’s discourse. The y-axis indicates the normalized BC value throughoutthe whole discourse, which reflects the importance of the DU as a key mediator among other DUs, and is alsorepresentative of the DU’s centeredness within the network. The normalized BC values range from 0 to 1, with ahigher score indicating higher centeredness of the DU and its greater role within the discourse. Based on theexemplified DUs and their respective classifications, such a semblance in other discourse can be similarlyclassified using I2A for most idea types, and allows the process to be reasonably scalable in longitudinal studies.Figure 6. BC graph plot of DU18 (Promising Idea), DU32 (Trivial Idea), DU37 (Potential Idea).DU32 - Largely irrelevant note with little sustained community interest – Trivial IdeasS16: my theory - if the flow of oxygen-rich blood to your heart muscle is reduced or blocked,angina (an-ji-nuh or an-juh-nuh) or a heart attack can occur. angina is chest pain or discomfort.it may feel like pressure or squeezing in your chest. the pain also can occur in your shoulders,arms, neck, jaw, or back. angina pain may even feel like indigestion.Explanation: The idea of DU32 was about physical effects due to blocked passages to the heart, which results ina heart attack. A new term “angina” was introduced, but was never picked up by other students for the remainderof the discourse. Even idea improvements by other students resulted in only a slight increase of BC, but the trendeventually subsided when no other references were made over the rest of the discourse. It was deduced thatstudents reading the contents of DU32 were not spurred to further explore the term “angina” and the underlyingreasons for the resulting physical body’s reactions. There was little to no interest regarding this idea as DU32 feltmore like an informational statement rather than a trigger that stimulates motivation to improve on the idea ofangina and its physical effects. Nonetheless, DU32 presented an idea that was slightly interesting to a small portionof the community who have no desire to improve it, and it was verified to be a trivial idea by the teacher.DU37 - Relevant note with limited interests to community – Potential IdeasS15: my theory - the components of blood include red blood cells, white blood cells, platelets,and plasma. some blood cells carry oxygen (necessary for metabolic reactions), some bloodcells fight off invading substances that could destroy your cells, and other blood cells help toform clots, which keep your body from losing too much blood. the fluid portion of the bloodcarries nutrients needed to fuel each cell in the body. it also shuttles wastes that need to betransported to the excretory system to be passed out of the body and carbon dioxide that needsto be transported to the lungs to be exhaled. http://www.dummies.com/how-to/content/whatare-the-components-of-human-blood.html ~S15 & S12 –Explanation: The notes leading up to DU37 provided the community with sufficient materials to craft a generalidea (roles of blood components in the human transport system). The idea was improved with extra informationabout waste movements in DU37 itself and was further substantiated with a web link for verification andexploratory work. Curious students investigated the web link to gather more knowledge about the idea, evidencedby DU51’s addition of “blood cell ratios” as new information, and DU54’s web link with detailed explanationson “chances of infection”. The idea was continuously improved throughout the discourse before a final consensuswas reached by the community in the form of a rise above note. The difference between this potential idea andother ideas was the additional work that students put into collating and interpreting of information from previousnotes to form connections between keywords. Readers were able to easily link knowledge acquired from otherDUs within the current context, and be motivated to continue seeking answers to queries that they generate fromreading other students’ work. The web link’s presence served as an added incentive to search for more evidenceICLS 2016 Proceedings95© ISLSto verify theory proposed by other students. DU37 was considered a culmination of work from rise-above betweentwo students that can provide a more relevant and idea-centric discussion as part of potentially promising ideas.DU18 – Relevant promising note with high community interest – Promising IdeasS11: clogged arteries can lead to multiple medical conditions. 1. coronary artery disease. whenplaque accumulates in the arteries carrying blood to the heart, it results in coronary arterydisease, which could lead to heart attacks. 2. carotid artery disease. the carotid arteries run upeither side of your neck and supply oxygen to your brain. when arterial plaque accumulates incarotid arteries, it can lead to stroke.Explanation: DU18 played an important role in the early part of the discourse as it was the key mediator in linkingup two different groups of students that were having separate discussions, but talking about similar ideas such asthe definition of arteries and atherosclerosis, but there was a missing aspect of the human transport system thatwas not discussed, i.e., the blood as a medium that transports resources to other parts of the body and theconsequences due to deprivation of such resources. DU18 acted as a trigger that invoked student interests andallowed convergence of ideas into a single note, where students can pool their resources into improving thepromising idea. Other than containing part of the idea regarding the circulatory transport system, the causes andeffects were also linked together within the same note to prove a causal relationship that made sense to thestudents. As a result, subsequent discussions were used to describe and explain observations from a differentviewpoint, where students were able to start looking at the big picture and strived to improve on the relevant ideainstead of focusing on insignificant details. The subsequent contributions were mostly motivated inputs fromstudents that started thinking deeply about the roles of blood constituents and how it affects the human body. Thepreviously mentioned relevant idea in DU37 was directly influenced and traced back to DU18, where the idea hadsince improved and evolved to become the main idea in DU37.This study of applying analytics showcases the ability to identify promising ideas currently present withinthe discourse and early identification of ideas which could evolve into promising ideas in later stages of thediscourse. It provides an explanation of an idea’s impact on subsequent discourse, since an earlier detectedpromising idea could have potential influence and ramifications on other ideas later in the discourse. A commonobservation of the discourse analysis shows that most of the BC values eventually taper off to lower BC values atthe end of the discourse, as more notes were introduced into the discourse, and students within the communitygradually reached a consensus on key ideas of the topic, resulting in lesser debates or conflicting perspectivesregarding ideas, especially in situations where proposed ideas are substantiated with authoritarian sources such asteachers or verified with multiple web resources. To measure the accuracy of automatic tagging of promisingideas, the identified ideas using I2A were compared against the teacher’s list of ideas and keywords that shouldbe acquired by students after the two week learning session. Most identified relevant ideas (88.2%), whetherpromising or not, were in concordance with the teacher’s intention and pre-lesson learning objectives.Conclusions and future directionsThis current study introduces an initial effort in identifying and analyzing promising ideas within the knowledgebuilding environment. By using SNA and measurement indicators such as betweenness centrality, we show thatshifting analysis away from the student social interaction network to the idea network of discourse units allowsus to identify and assess ideas along with their degree of promise. This work demonstrates the potential forautomated tagging of promising ideas and the measurement of subsequent discourse impact on the community,which could significantly affect the community’s rise-above. We believe that this research allows students andteachers to focus more on improving identified promising ideas beyond the current status quo, and also providescommunities with the chance to advance knowledge by learning more efficiently, rather than spending time tryingto identify possible relevant and promising ideas from a large pool of community ideas.We acknowledge that there would be challenging work in the future, as we seek to expand our studies tostudents of different levels of expertise such as tertiary level students. We could track the level of understandingand types of ideas within students so as to address the evolvement of ideas and learning processes from the learningjourney of a novice into an expert, together with the exploration of possible uncovered idea types. The process ofchoosing keywords can be enhanced in subsequent studies by including verbs to the list of nouns, as verbs couldrepresent actions and processes that link nouns together, similar to how mind maps function. Another potentialdirection of research is to further analyze the temporal dimension of the discourse data known as turns in KBDeX,which was briefly mentioned in the paper, so we can understand how SNA measures can affect the discourse withtimely interventions. Having analyzed a knowledge building class in practice, future studies can also be conductednot limited to knowledge building communities, but also on other online discourse platforms.ICLS 2016 Proceedings96© ISLSReferencesBereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1993). Surpassing ourselves: an inquiry into the nature and implications ofexpertise. Chicago: Open Court.Blei, D. M. (2012). Probabilistic topic models. Communications of the ACM, 55(4), 77-84.Chen, B., Chuy, M., Resendes, M., & Scardamalia, M. (2010). “Big Ideas Tool” as a new feature of knowledgeforum. In 2010 Knowledge Building Summer Institute (KBSI). Toronto, Ontario, Canada.Chen, B., Scardamalia, M. & Resendes, M. (2013). Dynamics of Promisingness Judgments in Knowledge BuildingWork of 8-to 10-Years-Olds. Poster presented at the 2013 AERA Annual Meeting, San Francisco, CA.Engeström, Y. (1999). Activity theory and individual and social transformation. In Y. Engeström, R. Miettinen &R.-L. Punamäki (Eds.). Perspectives on activity theory (pp. 19-38). Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress.Hofmann, T. (2001). Unsupervised learning by probabilistic latent semantic analysis. Machine learning, 42(1-2),177-196Lakatos, I. (1970).The methodology of scientific research programmes. In I. Lakatos and A. Musgrave (Eds.),Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge (pp. 91-195). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.Nonaka, I., & Takeuchi, H. (1995). The knowledge-creating company: How Japanese companies create thedynamics of innovation. Oxford University Press.Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Knowledge Forum Japan Research Group. (2007). Complex network theory approachto the assessment on collective knowledge advancement through scientific discourse in CSCL. In C.Chinn, G. Erkens, & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), Proceedings of CSCL 2007 (pp. 563-565). Mahwah, NJ:Lawrence Erlbaum.Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Matsuzawa, Y. (2012). Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer: a social networkanalysis application for knowledge building discourse. Educational technology research anddevelopment, 60(5), 903-921.Paavola, S., Lipponen, L., & Hakkarainen, K. (2004). Models of innovative knowledge communities and threemetaphors of learning. Review of educational research, 74(4), 557-576.Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective Cognitive Responsibility for the Advancement of Knowledge. In B. Smith(Eds.), Liberal Education in a Knowledge Society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge building. Encyclopedia of Education. New York: Macmillan,1370-1373.Scardamalia, M (2004). CSILE/Knowledge Forum. In Education and technology: An encyclopedia (pp. 183-192).Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In K. Sawyer(Eds.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 97-118). New York, NY: CambridgeUniversity Press.Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one. Educational Researcher,27(2), 4-13.Strijbos, J. W., Martens, R. L., & Jochems, W. M. (2004). Designing for interaction: Six steps to designingcomputer-supported group-based learning. Computers & Education, 42(4), 403-424.Sun, W., Zhang, J., Jin, H., Lyu, S. (2014). Analyzing Online Knowledge-Building Discourse Using ProbabilisticTopic Models. International Conference of Learning Sciences, 2, 823-830.van Aalst, J. (2009). Distinguishing knowledge-sharing, knowledge-construction, and knowledge-creationdiscourses. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(3), 259-287.Wortham, D.W. (1999). Nodal and Matrix Analyses of Communication Patterns in Small Groups. In C. M.Hoadley, & J. Roschelle (Eds.), Proceedings of the Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL)1999 Conference (pp.681-686). Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University.Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., & Messina, R. (2009). Designs for collective cognitive responsibility inknowledge building communities. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(1), 7–44.AcknowledgmentsThe research reported here was supported by the Centre for Research and Development in Learning, NanyangTechnological University, and we want to also thank Dr Teo Chew Lee and her team for the research funded byMOE Academies Fund NRF2012-EDU001-EL008, together with participating teachers and students in this study.ICLS 2016 Proceedings97© ISLS