Using Web 2.0 Technologies to Facilitate Scaffolding of StudentLed, Collaborative Learning Outside of the ClassroomStephen M. Rutherford, Amber M. Moorcroft, and Sheila L. Amici-DarganRutherfordS@cardiff.ac.uk, MoorcroftAM@cardiff.ac.uk, Amici-DarganSL@cardiff.ac.ukSchool of Biosciences, Cardiff University, UK.Abstract: Collaborative Learning (CL) is a well-established pedagogy for formal learning inthe classroom, but there is little research into CL in non-formal learning environments.‘Scaffolding’ required to structure CL activities, is often absent in non-formal CL. ‘ShadowModules’, student-led, student-focused CL groups which parallel the taught module/course,provide this scaffolding. Shadow Modules correlate with positive grade outcomes andresources produced by CL activity are shared using Web 2.0 technologies, and utilized widely.Shadow Modules provide a sustainable format for CL outside of the formal classroom.Keywords: Collaborative Learning, Scaffolding, Web 2.0, non-formal learning, social mediaIntroductionCollaborative learning (CL) is a powerful pedagogy (Dillenbourg, 1999), but it requires ‘scaffolding’ (activitiesor tasks defined by the teacher or facilitator, to structure the collaborative interactions; Wood, Bruner, & Ross,1976) to be effective. CL also has potential to support CL in non-formal learning (self-directed learning,reinforcing information, revision, or assignments). However, non-formal CL often lacks scaffolding, resulting inloss of direction and focus (Scott, Moxham, & Rutherford, 2014). A framework for scaffolding for non-formalCL activities is needed, therefore. We have developed and approach, ‘Shadow Modules’- voluntary student-led,student-focused CL communities, which run alongside a formal taught module/course, reinforcing the content,but are not part of the formal taught curriculum (Scott et al.,2014). The Shadow Module (Figure 1) is run by a ‘ShadowModule Leader (SML) who organizes and leads CLsessions. The SML liaises with the teacher(s) for guidance,but other than this, the Shadow Module has no formal linkwith the formal taught course. Shadow Modules are eitherface-to-face CL groups, online collaborative social mediacommunities, or a fusion of both. Resources created inShadow Module activities are shared with all students viaWeb 2.0 collaborative technologies. Feedback from theSML to academic staff can have positive impact on theongoing development of the taught module itself. This studyevaluates the impact of Shadow Modules on studentFigure 1. The Shadow Module format,outcomes and investigates potential factors influencingshowing interactions between stakeholders.students’ engagement with the Shadow Module CL activities.MethodologyShadow Modules were associated with Year 1, 2 and 3 undergraduate Bioscience modules/courses. Accessionsof student-generated Shadow Module resources were counted, to reveal student engagement patterns. Therelationship between Shadow Module engagement and module grades was also investigated. Open-questionquestionnaires, and semi-structured interviews with participants were analyzed using Grounded Theory.ResultsShadow module resources are used actively by studentsFigure 2 shows number of accessions of resources, in the time period prior to, and after, the end of moduleexam. Usage levels suggest both participant and non-participant students were utilizing shadow moduleresources. The most effective Web 2.0 medium for authoring resources was the shared document in GoogleDrive. Social media was the most common platform for sharing resources and outputs (Facebook or Learnium).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1733© ISLSShadow Modules correlate withimproved student outcomesHigh levels of engagement in the ShadowModule correlated with a significantly greatermodule grade than students who did not engagein any shadow module activity (Figure 3;unpaired t-test, P = 0.05).Complex factors influence studentengagement with Shadow ModulesFigure 4 summarizes the codes from theinterview analyses. The codes show that studentsfaced a range of influencing factors, with positiveand negative interactions affecting theirengagement with Shadow Module activities.Figure 3. Module grade versusengagement with CL activities.Module grade normalized againstoverall degree average. Highengagers, n = 17; non-engagers, n= 278. Error bars = SEM. Unpairedt-test shows significance, P = 0.05Figure 2. Number of accessions of online resources/day.Date of module examination is indicated by an arrow.Figure 4. Associations made between themes identified in codesdeveloped from interviews. Arrows represent positive (green arrow), ornegative (red arrow) effects on one another.DiscussionWeb 2.0 collaborative technologies appear to facilitate a positive impact of the shadow modules to broaden thescope of non-formal CL activities. Either by developing mutually-supportive online communities, or sharing theoutputs of face-to-face CL activities with the wider cohort. Shadow Modules conform to frameworks forscaffolding (Applebee, 1986). By encouraging students to work in partnership – both with each other and withacademic staff – they become active agents in co-constructing their own learning and that of their peers.ReferencesApplebee, A. N. (1986). Problems in process approaches: Towards a reconceptualization of process instruction.In A. R. Petrosky & D. Bartholomae (Eds.), The Teaching of Writing. 85th Yearbook of the NationalSociety for the Study of Education. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Dillenbourg, P. (1999). What do you mean by ‘collaborative learning’? In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.), Collaborativelearning: Cognitive and computational approaches (pp. 1 -19). Oxford: Elsevier.Scott, J. L., Moxham, B. J., & Rutherford, S. M. (2014). Building an open academic environment - a newapproach to empowering students in their learning of anatomy through 'Shadow Modules'. J Anat,224(3), 286-295. doi:10.1111/joa.12112Wood, D., Bruner, J., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem-solving. Journal of Child Psychologyand Child Psychiatry, 17, 89-100.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1734© ISLS