Sequencing Support for Sense Making and Perceptual Fluency withVisual Representations: Is There a Learning Progression?Martina A. Rau, University of Wisconsin – Madison, marau@wisc.eduMiranda Zahn, University of Wisconsin – Madison, mrzahn@wisc.eduAbstract: We tend to assume that visuals help students learn. But visuals can impede learningif students lack representational competencies that enable them to understand what the visualsshow. We consider two instructional activities that target two qualitatively different representational competencies: explicit sense-making competencies and implicit perceptual fluency.Prior cross-sectional studies showed that students’ prior knowledge determines in which sequence they should receive sense-activities and perceptual-activities. This raises the question:is there a learning progression for sense-making competencies and perceptual fluency? In thispaper, we address this question with a longitudinal experiment in which 71 students workedwith sense-activities and perceptual-activities integrated in six instructional units of a chemistry undergraduate course. For each unit, students either received sense-activities or perceptualactivities first. We assessed learning gains of chemistry knowledge after each unit. Resultssuggest a learning progression that aligns with results of prior cross-sectional studies.Keywords: Multiple visual representations, representational competencies, explicit and implicit learning processes, sense making, perceptual fluencyIntroductionInstructors often use multiple visual representations to make content knowledge accessible to students (NRC,2006). For example, chemistry instruction typically includes the visuals in Figure 1, which emphasize complementary concepts that students need to integrate when learning about atomic structure. Indeed, there is abundantevidence that, compared to learning with a single visual, multiple visuals can help students learn contentknowledge because they allow students to form more accurate mental models (Ainsworth, 2006).Figure 1. Visuals of atoms: (a) Lewis structure, (b) shell model, (c) energy diagram, (d) orbital diagram.Yet, visuals can impede learning if students lack representational competencies: knowledge about howvisuals show information relevant to scientific and professional practices (NRC, 2006). Students need two typesof representational competencies (Rau, 2017a). Sense-making competencies allow students to explain how visuals show concepts. For example, chemistry students need to explain how the valence electrons shown in Lewisstructures (Figure 1a) and inner-shell electrons (Figure 1b) have different energy levels (Figure 1c) because theyreside in orbitals (Figure 1d). Students acquire these competencies via explicit processes involved in verbal explanation. Perceptual fluency allows students to quickly and effortlessly infer more than is shown in a visual.For example, chemistry students need to “mentally see” inner-shell electrons, energy levels, and orbitals basedon Lewis structures. Students acquire perceptual fluency via implicit processes that are inductive and nonverbal.Analogous to Kahneman’s (2003) research on decision making, sense-making competencies correspond to deliberate System 2 thinking, whereas perceptual fluency is similar to intuitive System 1 thinking ( Rau, 2017a).Prior research showed that providing students with activities that support sense-making competenciesand activities that support perceptual fluency enhances their learning of content knowledge (e.g., Rau & Wu,2015). Further, prior cross-sectional studies showed that students’ prior content knowledge level determineswhich sequence of sense-making and perceptual-activities they most benefit from (Rau, 2017b). Students whohad low or high prior knowledge benefited most from receiving perceptual-activities first. Students with intermediate prior knowledge benefited most from receiving sense-activities first. These findings evoke a learningprogression of sense-making competencies and perceptual fluency for students at various stages of learning.ICLS 2018 Proceedings264© ISLSHowever, one cannot infer longitudinal effects from cross-sectional studies. Thus, we currently do not knowhow students’ benefit from sense-activities and perceptual-activities changes over the course of longer learninginterventions that typically occur in courses in which instruction on a sequence of topics spans multiple weeks.To address this question, we present a longitudinal experiment that compared sequences of senseactivities and perceptual-activities over the course of a multi-week learning intervention. We chose chemistry asa domain for this research because chemistry instruction heavily relies on multiple visuals, which poses an obstacle to students who fail to acquire key representational competencies (NRC, 2006). At a theoretical level, thisexperiment provides new insights into how representational competencies develop along with student’s learningof content knowledge. At a practical level, the experiment provides recommendations on how to sequence instructional activities that help students learn new content knowledge with visual representations.Prior researchResearch suggests that students need two different types of representational competencies to learn with visualrepresentations. These competencies are acquired via qualitatively different types of learning processes. Hence,they are most effectively supported by different types of instructional activities. While we focus on cognitivelearning theories, the following review illustrates the relevance of this research to sociocultural theories.Instructional activities that support sense making with visual representationsIn order to use visuals to learn new content knowledge, students need sense-making competencies: the ability tounderstand how different visuals show complementary information about a concept (Ainsworth, 2006; Rau,2017a). For example, when making sense of the visuals in Figure 1, students have to explain that the Lewisstructure shows valence electrons (black dots in Figure 1a), which correspond to the four electrons on the outershell (green dots in Figure 1b), which have higher energy levels than the inner-shell electrons (green arrows inFigure 1c), and which reside in electron clouds that are larger than those of the inner-shell electrons (greenshapes in Figure 1d). By making sense of such connections, students learn about domain-relevant concepts. Indeed, sense making is a key part of discipline discourse in STEM (Wertsch & Kazak, 2011). For example,chemists use visuals to discuss concepts and to solve problems (Kozma, Chin, Russell, & Marx, 2000).Students acquire sense-making competencies by verbally explaining principles by which the visualsdepict relevant information (Koedinger, Corbett, & Perfetti, 2012; Rau, 2017a). This process involves mappingvisual features (e.g., dots) to abstract concepts (e.g., electron distributions) (Gentner & Markman, 1997). Thisallows students to distinguish relevant and irrelevant visual features and to determine which information is (or isnot) shown in different visuals (Ainsworth, 2006). These sense-making processes are characterized by explicitexplanations that students have to willfully engage in (Chi, Feltovitch, & Glaser, 1981; diSessa & Sherin, 2000).Prior research yields a number of design principles for activities that enhance sense-making competencies. Such sense-activities ask students to verbally explain which visual features of different representationsshow corresponding or complementary information about concepts (Seufert, 2003). Further, sense-activities aremost effective if they ask students to actively construct mappings (Bodemer & Faust, 2006). Finally, theyshould help students attend to relevant visual features (Bodemer & Faust, 2006; Stern, Aprea, & Ebner, 2003).Instructional activities that support perceptual fluency with visual representationsResearch on expertise suggests that students need a second type of representational competency: perceptual fluency, which allows them to quickly and effortlessly translate across representations (Gibson, 2000). Experts“see at a glance” what a given visual shows without any perceived mental effort (Chi et al., 1981; NRC, 2006).For example, chemists quickly see that the Lewis structure in Figure 1a shows the same atom as the shell modelin Figure 1b. Experts are so efficient at extracting information from visuals that it seems intuitive. This enablesthem to effortlessly combine information from multiple visuals (Kellman & Massey, 2013). Cognitive psychology research attributes this high level of efficiency to perceptual chunking: visual features serve to retrieve acorresponding schema that describes related concepts (Richman, Gobet, Staszewski, & Simon, 1996). The sociocultural literature describes perceptual fluency as an important aspect of disciplinary discourse (Wertsch &Kazak, 2011). Perceptual fluency plays an important role in social interactions that involve translating amongvisuals. For example, Kozma and colleagues (2000) describe how experts’ fluency with visuals enables them tocommunicate efficiently while collaborating on complex problems. Thus, perceptual fluency allows students toinfer community-specific ways of thinking beyond what visuals explicitly show (Airey & Linder, 2009).Students learn perceptual fluency via perceptual-induction processes: they induce connections amongvisuals without explicit instruction but through experience with many examples (Gibson, 2000; Goldstone,Schyns, & Medin, 1997). Cognitive theories describe perceptual-induction processes as nonverbal and implicitbecause verbal reasoning is not necessary (Koedinger et al., 2012; Richman et al., 1996) but can interfere withICLS 2018 Proceedings265© ISLSlearning (Schooler, Fiore, & Brandimonte, 1997). According to sociocultural theories, community practices allows students to induce a “visual language”: students can become fluent with visuals by imitating how expertsuse them, without explicitly knowing what they show (Airey & Linder, 2009; Wertsch & Kazak, 2011).Prior research yields several design principles for activities that enhance perceptual fluency. Such perceptual-activities provide many simple tasks that ask students to quickly judge what a visual shows (Kellman &Massey, 2013). Effective perceptual-activities draw attention to relevant visual features by varying irrelevantfeatures and contrasting them to relevant features. They should encourage students to rely on perceptual intuitions about what they see rather than explaining what they see. Students should get immediate feedback only onthe accuracy of their response without conceptual explanations, to engage implicit rather than explicit processes.Combining sense-making and perceptual-induction activitiesPrior experiments (e.g., Rau, 2017b) tested effects of sense-activities and perceptual-activities on learning ofcontent knowledge. The experiments compared (1) a condition in which students received only sense-activities,(2) only perceptual-activities, or (3) both sense-activities and perceptual-activities to (4) a control condition thatreceived multiple visuals but no sense-activities or perceptual-activities. Only the condition that combinedsense-activities and perceptual-activities had significantly higher learning gains than the control condition.This finding bears a theoretical question about how sense making and perceptual induction interacts instudents’ learning of content knowledge. This question has practical implications for how sense-activities andperceptual-activities should be sequenced. On the one hand, explicit sense-making competencies involveknowledge about which visual features show conceptually relevant information. This may help students inducemeaning from visuals when they work on perceptual-activities. Therefore, doing sense-activities first may helpstudents learn from perceptual-activities (sense-enhancement hypothesis). On the other hand, perceptual fluencyinvolves intuitive knowledge about how to see meaning in visuals. This may reduce cognitive load when students engage in conceptually demanding sense-activities. Therefore, doing perceptual-activities first may helpstudents learn from sense-activities (perceptual-enhancement hypothesis).Our prior research tested these hypotheses by comparing sequences of sense-activities and perceptualactivities. Results showed that effects depend on prior knowledge and spatial skills (Rau & Wu, 2015). Studentswith low prior knowledge benefitted most from receiving perceptual-activities before sense-activities. This effect reversed for students with intermediate prior knowledge, who benefitted most from a sense-perceptual sequence—especially if they had low spatial skills. The effect flipped again for students with high priorknowledge, who benefitted most from a perceptual-sense sequence.These findings invoke a learning progression. It is possible that early in the learning process, the perceptual-sense sequence is most effective because a preliminary level of perceptual fluency helps students makesense of visuals by freeing cognitive capacity for effortful explanations. Later, the sense-perceptual sequencemay be most effective because it allows students to focus on understanding how visuals show, which they canthen refine in subsequent perceptual-activities that help them see this meaning automatically. Later yet, the perceptual-sense sequence may be most effective because high levels of perceptual fluency may allow students toput their implicit knowledge of visuals at the service of explicitly making sense of how visuals show concepts.A critical limitation of our prior research is that it has not tested a learning progression. The prior studies were cross-sectional and involved relatively short interventions. That is, prior knowledge was assessed witha pretest and considered to be static for the short duration of the experiment. Hence, they did not consider howstudents’ knowledge level develops over the course of a longer intervention. We address this limitation with amulti-week experiment in which the same students worked through a cohesive curriculum with multiple units.Research questionsWe investigate which sequence of sense-activities and perceptual-activities most enhances students’ learning ofchemistry knowledge (research question 1). In light of prior findings, we explore if the effect of sequence interacts with students’ prior chemistry knowledge and their spatial skills (research question 2). Further, we investigate how the effect of the sequence changes over the course of the intervention (research question 3). Extrapolating from prior cross-sectional studies, we hypothesize that for early units in the learning intervention, studentsshow higher learning gains if they receive perceptual-activities before sense-activities. For units in the middle ofthe learning intervention, we hypothesize they show higher gains if they receive sense-activities first. For unitsat the end of the intervention, we hypothesize they show higher gains if they receive perceptual-activities first.MethodTo address these questions, we conducted an experiment as part of an undergraduate chemistry course.ICLS 2018 Proceedings266© ISLSParticipantsSeventy-one undergraduate students were in the course. They were assigned to sense-activities and perceptualactivities as part of weekly homework assignments. They received course credit for completing the assignments.The instructor selected the sequence of activities to align with her course schedule.Instructional activitiesSense-activities and perceptual-activities were implemented in an educational technology for undergraduatechemistry: Chem Tutor (Rau & Wu, 2015). Students were assigned to work on six units that covered differentchemistry topics related to electron configurations and atomic structure using the visual representations in Figure 1. As all units relate to periodic table trends, the units are modular in these sense that they could be sequenced in various ways that align with different instructors’ course plans. For each unit, students first receivedtwo activities that introduced them to how the visuals show key concepts. Next, students received senseactivities and perceptual-activities, sequenced according to their experimental condition.Sense-ActivitiesFigure 2. Example sense-activity. Students are given an orbital diagram and construct a shell model of the sameatom. Then they receive fill-in-the-blank prompts to make sense of how the two visuals show atoms.Figure 2 shows an example sense-activity. These activities engage students in verbally mediated explanationbased processes while they work on problem-solving activities that are common in chemistry instruction. Tothis end, students receive prompts to self-explain differences and correspondences among visuals. They respondto the prompts using menu-based selection. The content of the prompts was generated based on learner-centeredstudies with novice students and expert chemists. The selection choices were drawn from student-generated explanations. Further, the prompts focus on those concepts and visual features that expert chemists frequently usewhen using visuals to make sense of atomic structure. Further, Chem Tutor provides error-specific feedbackmessages and hints on demand that provide conceptual explanations.Perceptual-ActivitiesFigure 3 shows an example perceptual-activity. The goal of these activities is to engage students in inductiveprocesses. To this end, students are given one visual and have to select one of four other visuals that shows thesame atom. They are prompted to solve this task quickly and intuitively, without overthinking their choices andwithout being afraid of making mistakes. Students receive many of these one-step problems in a row. The answer choices are designed to direct students’ attention to relevant visual features by contrasting relevant visualfeatures. The contrasting cases were selected based on learner-centered studies that investigated which visualfeatures expert chemists pay attention to but novice chemistry students tend to confuse. If students select thewrong visual, Chem Tutor tells them they made an error and asks them to try again. This is in line with perceptual learning research that recommends providing correctness feedback only so as to encourage implicit ratherthan explicit processes (Kellman & Massey, 2013).ICLS 2018 Proceedings267© ISLSFigure 3. Example perceptual-activity that provides contrasting cases of relevant visual features. Students areprompted to solve them quickly and intuitively. They receive only correctness feedback on their selections.Experimental designStudents were randomly assigned to one of two experimental conditions for the entire duration of the experiment. The sense-perceptual condition received sense-activities before perceptual-activities for each of the sixunits. The perceptual-sense condition received perceptual-activities before sense-activities. For each unit, allstudents first received two regular activities that introduced how the visuals depict the chemistry concepts covered in that unit. Then, for each unit and in the sequence corresponding to their condition, they received foursense-activities and 36 perceptual-activities. We chose the number of activities based on pilot tests of how manyactivities yield significant gains on tests of sense-making competencies and perceptual fluency, respectively.MeasuresWe assessed students’ spatial skills with the Vandenberg & Kuse mental rotations test, which is commonly usedin research on spatial skills and chemistry learning (e.g., Stieff, 2013). Further, we assessed students’ knowledgeof the chemistry concepts covered in Chem Tutor with pretests and posttests for each unit, developed and evaluated with chemistry experts. Two equivalent test versions were used for the pretests and posttests. For each unitthe sequence in which students received the test versions was counterbalanced across pretest and posttest.ProcedureStudents were assigned to work on the Chem Tutor units as a homework assignment for their chemistry course.Students had to complete the six assignments in order to align with the course schedule. The assignments werespread across three consecutive weeks, with two units per week. Students accessed the units online. As with anyhomework assignment, students could take breaks as needed. For each unit, students first received a pretest,then worked on the activities as per their experimental condition, and then completed the posttest for the unit.ResultsStudents were excluded from the analysis if they failed to complete the assignment by the deadline imposed bytheir course instructor. Of the 71 students, 62 completed units 1 and 2; 69 completed unit 3; 68 completed 4; and63 completed units 5 and 6. For the following analyses, we consider p.η2 as a measure of effect size, p.η2 ≥ .01being a small effect, p.η2 ≥ .06 a medium effect, and p.η2 ≥ .14 a large effect.Effects of sequence on learning gainsTo test effects of sequence on learning gains (research question 1), we used ANCOVAs with students’ posttestscores for the given unit as dependent measure, sequence as independent factor, and pretest scores for the givenunit as covariate. To test whether sequence interacts with prior knowledge (research question 2), we added interaction terms for pretest and spatial skills with sequence to the ANCOVA model. In the following, we reportresults from the model with the interaction effects that were significant. For significant interactions, we exam-ICLS 2018 Proceedings268© ISLSined the direction of effects with effect slices that compute the effect of sequence for students with low, intermediate, and high prior knowledge, using the 33rd and 66th percentiles as cutoffs. Table 1 shows results by unit.For unit 1, we found no effect of sequence on posttest scores, F(1, 60) = 2.51, p = .12, and no interaction between sequence and pretest or spatial skills (Fs < 1). For unit 2, we found no effect of sequence on posttest scores (F < 1) and no interaction between sequence and pretest (F < 1). There was a significant interactionof sequence with spatial skills, F(1, 57) = 5.41, p = .01, p.η2 = .16. However, effect slices showed no significanteffects for students with low, intermediate, or high prior knowledge (ps > .17).For unit 3, we found a significant effect of sequence on posttest scores, F(1, 66) = 6.33, p = .01, p.η2 =.08, such that students in the perceptual-sense condition had higher learning gains than students in the senseperceptual condition. There was no interaction between sequence with pretest or spatial skills (Fs < 1).For unit 4, we found a significant effect of sequence, F(1, 63) = 4.15, p = .05, p.η2 = .06, such that students in the sense-perceptual condition had higher learning gains than students in the perceptual-sense condition. There was no interaction between sequence and pretest (F < 1). However, there was a marginal interactionbetween sequence and spatial skills, F(1, 63) = 2.89, p = .09, p.η2 = .04. Effect slices showed that the advantageof the sense-perceptual condition was more pronounced for students with low spatial skills (p = .06) than forstudents with intermediate (p = .48) or high spatial skills (p = .92).For unit 5, we found a marginal effect of sequence, F(1, 57) = 4.15, p = .09, p.η2 = .05, such that students in the sense-perceptual condition had higher learning gains than students in the perceptual-sense condition. There were no interaction between sequence and pretest (F < 1) or spatial skills, F(1, 57) = 2.36, p = .13.For unit 6, we found a significant effect of sequence on posttest scores, F(1, 59) = 5.80, p = .02, p.η2 =.09, such that students in the perceptual-sense condition had higher learning gains than students in the senseperceptual condition. There was a significant interaction with pretest, F(1, 59) = 4.20, p = .05, p.η2 = .07. Effectslices showed that the advantage of the perceptual-sense sequence was more pronounced for students with low(p = .01) and intermediate prior knowledge (p = .06) than for students with high prior knowledge (p = .76).There was no interaction of sequence with spatial skills (F < 1).Examining Table 1 allows us to answer how the effect of the sequence changed throughout the intervention (research question 3). Counter to our hypotheses, we did not see differences between conditions in earlyunits. However, the results for units 3-6 match our hypotheses in the sense that students show a benefit for theperceptual-sense sequence in units 3 and 6 (i.e., in the first half of the intervention and at the end of the intervention) and a benefit for the sense-perceptual sequence in units 4 and 5 (i.e., in the middle of the intervention).Table 1: Overview of sequence effects by unit. (*) indicates effects with p < .10; * p < .05; ** p < .01Unit 1Unit 2Unit 3Unit 4Unit 5Unit 6Effect on posttestPerceptual-sense > Sense-perceptual **Sense-perceptual > Perceptual-sense *Sense-perceptual > Perceptual-sense (*)Perceptual-sense > Sense-perceptual *Direction of interaction effectsEspecially for low spatial skillsEspecially for low and intermediate pretestDiscussionPrior research showed that students most benefit from interventions that combine activities designed to supportfor sense-making competencies and perceptual fluency. Further, prior cross-sectional studies showed that students’ prior knowledge seems to determine in which sequence sense-activities and perceptual-activities shouldbe combined. These findings invoked a learning progression that had not been tested. Our findings from thislongitudinal study match previous findings from cross-sectional studies. Based on our results, we tentatively putforward the following progression with, roughly, four phases. In the first phase (units 1-2), we found no difference between sequences. It is possible that at this early stage, students familiarize themselves with how the visuals show concepts, which is considered to be an important learning process that occurs before students learn tomake connections among different visuals (Ainsworth, 2006; Rau, 2017a).In a second phase (unit 3), students benefited from receiving perceptual-activities before senseactivities. This finding is consistent with the theory that perceptual fluency frees cognitive capacity that studentscan invest in effortful explanation-based processes while working on sense-activities. It is possible that thismechanism is important at this earlier stage because the cognitive load of explanation-based sense-activitiesICLS 2018 Proceedings269© ISLSwould be too high and could impede students’ learning if they lack a preliminary level of perceptual “intuitions”about what the visuals show and inhibits their ability to participate in disciplinary discourse with these visuals.In a third phase (units 4-5), students benefited from receiving sense-activities before perceptualactivities. This finding is consistent with the theory that sense-activities help students attend to relevant visualfeatures while they work on perceptual-activities. It is possible that this mechanism is important in this middlestage because students have sufficient knowledge so that sense-activities are not so cognitively demanding thatit would impede learning. Further, first focusing on how visuals show particular concepts allows students torefine their understanding of domain-relevant concepts. Subsequent perceptual-activities can then serve to refinethese connections between visuals and concepts, allowing students to automatically “see” concepts in visuals.In a fourth phase (unit 6), students again benefited from receiving perceptual-activities before senseactivities. This finding again aligns with the theory that perceptual fluency frees cognitive capacity that studentscan invest in effortful explanation-based processes. It is possible that this mechanism becomes important againat this late stage because now the main benefit of perceptual fluency is to put intuitive knowledge about visualsat the service of explaining how visuals show concepts—which is afforded by the perceptual-sense sequenceOur experiment makes important novel contributions to the literature on representational competencies.We expand theory by providing new evidence that there is a learning progression of representational competencies. Specifically, our focus was on learning of content knowledge. We found that students’ acquisition of content knowledge is best supported if they receive activities that focus on implicit, then explicit, and then implicitknowledge about visuals. Our findings also have practical implications for the sequence of these instructionalactivities that support representational competencies in chemistry. Our findings show that if sense-activities andperceptual-activities are sequenced in a way that matches the hypothesized learning progression, they achievehigher learning gains of content knowledge.Limitations and future directionsFuture research should address a number of limitations of our study. First, our study provided chemistry contentin particular sequence, which matched the schedule of the course in which we situated our experiment. Therefore, future research should test whether the findings of a learning progression remain when sense-activities andperceptual-activities are added to a different sequence of content-focused instruction. Second, while we considerthe fact that our experiment was embedded in a real chemistry course a strength by enhancing its external validity, this choice could reduce the internal validity of our experiment. Students received instruction on the chemistry content outside our intervention—even though this instruction was the same for all students, it is possiblethat it interacted with our intervention in an unknown way. Therefore, future research should investigate theeffects of sequencing sense-activities and perceptual-activities in more controlled contexts. Third, while we hadsufficient statistical power to detect small effect sizes of main effects, our sample may have been too small todetect small interaction effects between sequence and prior knowledge. Therefore, future research should use alarger sample to investigate potentially undetected effects. Fourth, our study did not include control conditionsthat received only sense-activities, only perceptual-activities, or only regular activities without support for representational competencies. While our prior studies showed that students benefit from the combination of senseactivities and perceptual-activities, those prior studies included short interventions and did not consider progressions across longer learning interventions. Therefore, future studies should test whether the combination ofsense-activities and perceptual-activities is indeed most effective throughout the learning progression. In particular, it would be interesting whether in the first stage of our tentative learning progression where we did not finda difference between conditions, students might benefit from regular activities alone, so that they can familiarizethemselves with one visual at a time. Finally, future work should investigate how to translate our findings intosequences of sense-activities and perceptual-activities. Specifically, we need to know when a student hasreached a level of proficiency that requires a switch in the sequence of these activities. We plan to address thisquestion in our own work by examining how real-time data on students’ problem-solving performance can beused to predict which particular sequence an individual student would most benefit from.ConclusionTo conclude, our research is, to the best of our knowledge, the first to demonstrate that there may indeed be alearning progression of explicit and implicit representational competencies. Our findings demonstrate thatproviding activities that support these competencies in a sequence that matches this learning progression has asignificant impact on students’ learning of content knowledge. This finding is striking because all students received the same instruction; only the sequence differed. Even when embedded in an existing chemistry coursethat provided instruction beyond our intervention, the sequence of sense-activities and perceptual-activities affected students’ learning of content knowledge with medium to large effect sizes.ICLS 2018 Proceedings270© ISLSReferencesAinsworth, S. (2006). Deft: A conceptual framework for considering learning with multiple representations.Learning and Instruction, 16(3), 183-198. doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2006.03.001Airey, J., & Linder, C. (2009). A disciplinary discourse perspective on university science learning: Achievingfluency in a critical constellation of modes. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(1), 27-49.doi:10.1002/tea.20265Bodemer, D., & Faust, U. (2006). External and mental referencing of multiple representations. Computers inHuman Behavior, 22(1), 27-42. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2005.01.005Chi, M. T. H., Feltovitch, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics problems byexperts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152. doi:10.1207/s15516709cog0502_2diSessa, A. A., & Sherin, B. L. (2000). Meta-representation: An introduction. The Journal of MathematicalBehavior, 19(4), 385-398. doi:10.1016/S0732-3123(01)00051-7Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist,52(1), 45-56. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.52.1.45Gibson, E. J. (2000). Perceptual learning in development: Some basic concepts. Ecological Psychology, 12(4),295-302. doi:10.1207/S15326969ECO1204_04Goldstone, R. L., Schyns, P. G., & Medin, D. L. (1997). Learning to bridge between perception and cognition.Psychology of learning and motivation, 36, 1-14. doi:10.1016/S0079-7421(08)60279-0Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and choice - mapping bounded rationality. AmericanPsychologist, 9, 697–720. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.58.9.697Kellman, P. J., & Massey, C. M. (2013). Perceptual learning, cognition, and expertise. In B. H. Ross (Ed.), Thepsychology of learning and motivation (Vol. 558, pp. 117-165). New York, NY: Elsevier AcademicPress.Koedinger, K. R., Corbett, A. T., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The knowledge-learning-instruction framework:Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36(5), 757–798. doi:10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.xKozma, R., Chin, E., Russell, J., & Marx, N. (2000). The roles of representations and tools in the chemistrylaboratory and their implications for chemistry learning. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(2),105-143. doi:10.1207/s15327809jls0902_1NRC. (2006). Learning to think spatially. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.Rau, M. A., & Wu, S. P. W. (2015). ITS support for conceptual and perceptual processes in learning withmultiple graphical representations. In C. Conati, N. Heffernan, A. Mitrovic, & M. F. Verdejo (Eds.),Artificial Intelligence in Education (pp. 398–407). Cham, Switzerland: Springer.Rau, M. A. (2017a). Conditions for the effectiveness of multiple visual representations in enhancing STEMlearning. Educational Psychology Review, 29(4), 717–761.Rau, M. A. (2017b). Sequencing support for sense making and perceptual induction of connections amongmultiple visual representations. Journal of Educational Psychology.Richman, H. B., Gobet, F., Staszewski, J. J., & Simon, H. A. (1996). Perceptual and memory processes in theacquisition of expert performance: The epam model. In K. A. Ericsson (Ed.), The road to excellence?The acqquisition of expert performance in the arts and sciences, sports and games (pp. 167-187).Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum Associates.Schooler, J. W., Fiore, S., & Brandimonte, M. A. (1997). At a loss from words: Verbal overshadowing ofperceptual memories. Psychology of Learning and Motivation: Advances in Research and Theory, 37,291–340. doi:10.1016/S0079-7421(08)60505-8Seufert, T. (2003). Supporting coherence formation in learning from multiple representations. Learning andInstruction, 13(2), 227-237. doi:10.1016/S0959-4752(02)00022-1Stern, E., Aprea, C., & Ebner, H. G. (2003). Improving cross-content transfer in text processing by means ofactive graphical representation. Learning and Instruction, 13(2), 191-203. doi:10.1016/S09594752(02)00020-8Stieff, M. (2013). Sex differences in the mental rotation of chemistry representations. Journal of ChemicalEducation, 90(2), 165-170. doi:10.1021/ed300499tWertsch, J. V., & Kazak, S. (2011). Saying more than you know in instructional settings. In T. Koschmann(Ed.), Theories of learning and studies of instructional practice (pp. 153-166). New York: Springer.AcknowledgmentsWe thank Judith Burstyn, John Moore, Rachel Bain, and Amelia Berendt for their help with this study. Thiswork was supported by NSF IUSE #1611782.ICLS 2018 Proceedings271© ISLS