Navigating Connected Inquiry Learning with ScienceKitDaniel Pauw, University of Maryland, College Park, dpauw@umd.eduTamara Clegg, University of Maryland, College Park, tclegg@umd.eduJune Ahn, University of Maryland, College Park, juneahn@umd.eduElizabeth Bonsignore, University of Maryland, College Park, ebonsign@umd.eduJason Yip, University of Washington, jcyip@uw.eduJudith Uchidiuno, University of Maryland, Baltimore County, jodili1@umbc.eduAbstract: New pervasive, social, and mobile technologies hold great potential for supportingyoung people’s connections between interests, peer culture, and academic pursuits. Suchconnected learning experiences are critical for deep and engaged learning. However, efforts toidentify and sustain ways to connect these experiences for learners remain elusive. In thisstudy, we shed light on how we can initiate the process of connected learning throughtechnology-realized and facilitator-based scaffolding of learners’ interests, social interactions,and scientific inquiry pursuits. Specifically, we documented three cases of learners in anafterschool program called Kitchen Chemistry and their use of a social media app calledScienceKit. Analysis of ScienceKit data with facilitator interactions reveals a typology oflearner paths across connected learning experiences. Furthermore, understanding typologiesthat best match each learner appears to be critical for helping learners to make connectionsacross interest-driven and peer-supported scientific inquiry.Keywords: connected learning, educational technology, social media, science inquiryIntroductionPervasive, social, and mobile technologies hold great potential to help young people connect their interests, peerculture, and academic pursuits (Ito et al., 2013). Such connected learning experiences are critical as research hasshown that when learners deeply identify with a discipline, they engage more often (Ito et al., 2013), developdispositions in those disciplines (Clegg & Kolodner, 2014), and begin to see themselves as empoweredcontributors to that discipline (Nasir, 2002). To date, immersive and social technologies (e.g., gaming systems,social media sites) that have fueled connected learning have mostly supported powerful learning outside ofschool and traditional academic disciplines (e.g., Squire, Ben DeVane, & Durga, 2009). Often, efforts toidentify and sustain ways to connect these experiences to more formal academic endeavors remain an elusiveenterprise (Ito et al., 2013). One key factor in helping forge links between learners’ interests and theiracademics, has been finding ways to balance between offering them flexibility to explore their personal interestsin socially relevant ways, while providing more structured scaffolding needed to support their procedural andconceptual understanding within a discipline (Clegg et al., 2012; Ito et al., 2013). Our research engages with thepersistent question of how to design for such balance: What technology-based and facilitator-supportedinteractions promote and strengthen the connections that learners make across spheres of connected learningexperiences; specifically their procedural and conceptual understandings of a discipline, personal interests, andpeer interactions?The study reported here is part of our larger design-based research initiative to promote connectedlearning experiences that we call life-relevant science learning, to help learners identify and explore thepotential roles they can play in science and to help them find personally meaningful connections to science(Clegg & Kolodner, 2014). Specifically, we shed light on how we can initiate the process of connected learningthrough technology-realized and facilitator-based scaffolding of learners’ interests, social interactions, andscientific inquiry pursuits. We examined learners’ entries in a social media app called ScienceKit that wedesigned to promote life-relevant science inquiry and facilitate responsive, real-time inquiry scaffolding (Ahn etal., 2014). ScienceKit was specifically designed to help amplify learner dispositions. In previous studies, wefound that ScienceKit enabled facilitators to notice learners’ interactions and experiences that are often difficultto discern in the physical environment (Ahn et al., 2014). Through analysis of these entries, we sought tounderstand the role of ScienceKit and adult facilitation in influencing how learners navigated different spheresof connected learning. Our findings begin to articulate the types of scaffolding that are needed – which cancome from different sources such as technology, peers, and educators – that promote connected learningexperiences, particularly for learners from traditional school environments in which interests and peer cultureare often de-emphasized or discouraged (Songer, 2006).CSCL 2015 Proceedings300© ISLSBackground: Connected learning frameworkIto et al.’s (2013) connected learning framework guides our approach to scaffolding learners’ experiences inlife-relevant science learning environments. Connected learning describes a learning process that is driven bypersonal interests, encouraged with peer support, and helps learners connect their personal pursuits to formalacademic and career possibilities (Ito et al., 2013). Interest-driven activities often lead to personal enjoyment,curiosity about unexpected gaps in knowledge, concern regarding a subject matter, and choices to pursueactivities that help an individual solidify their identity, life goals, or self-improvement over a longer-term(Edelson & Joseph, 2004). Life-relevant learning seeks to connect academic pursuits, peer-support and personalinterest through mindful guidance and scaffolding to maintain a learner’s focus.Peer-support provides a means for connecting learners’ interests to scientific inquiry. With networkedand mobile technologies, peer-support has expanded from face-to-face interactions among similar-aged learnersto also include learners over vast distances and asynchronous communication (Clegg et al., 2013; Ellison,Steinfield, & Lampe, 2007; Kreijns, Kirschner, & Jochems, 2003). These networks differ from prior peersupports by offering persistent records, searchability, replicability, and an increased reach for communication(boyd, 2009). Such features are valuable tools that afford learners with opportunities to engage in authentic,collaborative inquiry that mirrors scientific practice (Ketelhut, Nelson, Clarke, & Dede, 2010). Social mediatools offer personally relevant modes of communication, allowing learners a way to express themselves througha variety of means via new media (e.g., music, photos) (Greenhow & Robelia, 2009).The academic sphere of learning consists of more traditional disciplinary learning venues such asacademic studies, civic engagement, and career opportunities (Ito et al., 2013). We situate scientific inquiry asan academic sphere of learning as inquiry is shaped by standards-based frameworks such as the Next GenerationScience Standards (NGSS) (NRC, 2012; NSTA, 2012). Scientific inquiry involves asking questions about theworld, searching to understand what is known, recognizing the gaps in one’s understanding, and investigating toanswer remaining questions (e.g., Clegg & Kolodner, 2014). We can readily design and observe rote steps toscientific inquiry in which a learner follows a predictable series of steps, such as question and answer prompts(which we refer to as algorithmic inquiry). However, science learning environments that focus solely on rotepractices can create situations in which learners can become detached or unmotivated to learn the more complexforms of inquiry (Chinn & Malhotra, 2002).The connected learning framework aspires to weave together these three spheres of learning. However,our understanding remains limited regarding the ways in which we can initiate and strengthen learners’ abilitiesto connect their experiences across these spheres. For example, helping a learner move from a personal interestto a deeper disciplinary practice is a complex process. The converse situation is also difficult in manyestablished academic contexts, where learners may not perceive science as interesting or personally relevant(Chinn & Malhotra, 2002). The result is a rift between academic, interest-driven, and peer supportedexperiences, which could then pose challenges for researchers and practitioners who help learners engage inconnected learning experiences. While Ito et al. (2013) focus on systemic challenges to promoting connectedlearning (e.g., socio-economic inequalities), we investigate the practical applications of connected learning toidentify challenges that arise on a day-to-day basis and ways to address them. We seek to discover ways inwhich software-realized and facilitator-based scaffolding can help learners navigate effectively across theirpersonal interests, peer interactions, and academically oriented scientific inquiry. Therefore, our study aims touncover how the artifacts learners captured (e.g., images, video, drawings) through the use of a social media tool(ScienceKit) can inform our understanding of how they connect their personal interests and academicallyoriented spheres of learning, and shed light on the barriers they may face in this process. When helping learnersengage in life-relevant science learning, we must take any rifts across these spheres into account and helplearners forge new connections to mitigate them.MethodsDesign approachWe enact Ito et al.’s (2013) connected learning framework by linking children’s interests in cooking and eatingto scientific inquiry in a social context with peers and adults who share their interests. Learners in our studyparticipated in the Kitchen Chemistry (KC) life-relevant science learning program, an after-school or summercamp program where children learn science and scientific inquiry skills through making and perfecting dishes(Clegg et al., 2012). In KC, learners use the ScienceKit social media iOS™ app that enables learners to capturemoments of interest in their daily lives (e.g., cooking) with multi-media (e.g., photos, drawings, videos, andtext) and connect them to science inquiry by making claims, posing questions, and designing experiments (Ahnet al., 2014). These learner-created entries are then shared amongst all learners to support social interaction. ForCSCL 2015 Proceedings301© ISLSthis study, we analyzed learner generated data gathered in the ScienceKit iPad™ app (Figure 1).We collected ScienceKit data over three consecutive days (~ 4.5 hours each day) in a weeklongimplementation of the KC program that was run in a summer camp serving a lower socioeconomic status (SES)public elementary school. Seven learners (9-11 years old) participated in the camp. Seven researchers and onescience teacher served as facilitators in the environment. Including our entire research team as facilitators in theenvironment ensured full participation of researchers in our design-based research process (Barab & Squire,2004) and approximated our inclusive, future vision of integrating community volunteers in such programs. Wegathered the ScienceKit entry data primarily from learner-created entries, though for some entries facilitatorssupported data input (e.g., if the learner’s hands were full due to cooking activities).Figure 1. A) ScienceKit allows for posting photos, videos, drawings, and associated text. B) Learners andfacilitators can then see everyone’s posts on a global timeline. C) Learners used ScienceKit it a variety ofsituations (e.g., drawing together, recording events from afar).Context and data collectionOn the first day of KC, we explained to learners that they would ultimately conduct their own investigations aschefs, investigators and scientists to perfect a dish of their choosing. We shared our collective goal to connecttheir personal cooking interests to science learning. Each day we encouraged them to ask and explore questionsin which they were personally interested. We also focused on helping learners use ScienceKit to express theirinterests and explore their inquiry questions. The first two days of the program were semi-structured days inwhich facilitators provided inquiry questions and helped learners to carry out cooking investigations. On thefirst day, learners made observations of four batches of brownies and hypothesized about the ingredient orprocedure that was changed among the variations. After a discussion of how the number of eggs was varied ineach batch of brownies, learners carried out an experiment investigating oil and water miscibility using eggs asan emulsifying agent. The second day’s investigations focused on baking cookies with different leaveningagents to understand how leavening agents react and the role their reactions play in making cookies. This dayconcluded with the learners developing their own interest-driven inquiry plan to be conducted on the third andfourth days. Throughout the program, learners used ScienceKit to document their experiences, ask newquestions, collect data, and make claims. Learners also used ScienceKit to capture playful, fun, or socialmoments in the program. For this study, we did not evaluate ScienceKit data on the fourth day as much sincethe final day was focused more on presentations of their findings to parents and the local school community.We used methods consistent with a comparative case study (Merriam 1998) on this singleimplementation of KC. We compared three cases of learners (Juan, Larielle and Aziza, Noah) to examine howconnected learning took place in KC through the use of ScienceKit. We collected data from various sources(multiple video perspectives of the learning activities and context, researcher field notes, learner reflections andinterviews). For this study, our focus was on analysis of learners’ ScienceKit entries. We unpacked theinteraction moments that learners captured in ScienceKit themselves to illuminate our understanding of how thechildren made connections across the spheres of peer-oriented, interest-driven, and academically orientedlearning experiences. As such, we analyzed learners’ ScienceKit entries using qualitative coding methods(Strauss & Corbin, 2007). We coded each learners’ entries for interest, peer-culture, and inquiry attributes.Interest-driven contributions refer to entries that related to or described learners’ hobbies, curiosities, orexcitement (Edelson & Joseph, 2004). Similarly, peer-culture entries are posts that displayed learners peerinteractions (e.g., selfies with one another, interviewing peers) or that reflected common peer practices (e.g.,when learners appeared to be imitating pop culture references, language, or inside jokes they had observed oftheir peers’ previous entries in ScienceKit). Finally, we used Chinn & Malhotra’s (2002) framework forscientific inquiry to identify scientific practices learners exhibited in their ScienceKit entries. Interest, peerCSCL 2015 Proceedings302© ISLSculture, and inquiry codes were not mutually exclusive. Drawing on Ito’s (2013) vision of connected learning, itwas our hope that learners’ entries would reflect overlaps in these codes. Coding for each entry also accountedfor relevant meta-data (e.g., time the entry was posted, who made the entry, what media if any did the entryuse). Next, we conducted an axial coding pass where we identified high-level themes of the ways that learners’interests, peer interactions, and inquiry came together (or remained disparate) in their use of ScienceKit overtime. We also examined how these connections or disconnections were influenced by the ScienceKit app andadult facilitation.ResultsWe detail several vignettes of learners’ experiences that reflect three distinct paths across interest-powered,academically oriented, and peer-supported connected learning spheres. Our discussion then highlights ouranalysis of the ways in which facilitator-based and software-realized scaffolding influenced connected learningexperiences.Inquiry to interest and peer supportOur first vignette highlights a learner who made diverse attempts to engage in inquiry and peer interactions, butdid not make many connections between these spheres of connected learning. On the first day of KC, Juan, arising 4th grader in KC, was very energetic during his group’s investigation of ways to mix oil and water usingeggs as an emulsifier. His attempts to find a correct “answer” for how the ingredients interacted were illustratedin his ScienceKit video entries, which detailed his thought processes, hypotheses, and observations. Forinstance, Juan stated, “My hypothesis was sort of right, but I think you have to shake [the oil and water to getthem to mix].” When a facilitator asked Juan to observe the bottles again to allow the oil and water to sit for awhile to see if they were indeed mixed, Juan stated in a ScienceKit video that “You’re starting to see the yellowcome back. Oh come on, I was wrong!” While looking over the investigation procedures, Juan noticed that wewere going to add an egg to the oil and water mixture, and wondered aloud, “If an egg would float on [the oiland water]”. Juan then quickly changed his question to ask whether a baby elephant would float on the oil andwater. When facilitators tried to connect to his interest in baby elephants to a movie or television show withbaby elephants, Juan ended the conversation and his ScienceKit entry stating “Ah, yeah, that's all I got for now.”Juan did show some interest and connection to peer groups, but did not fully engage these interests andpeer groups in his KC inquiry experiences with ScienceKit. For instance, he attempted to connect with fellowlearner Allen by referring to an earlier comment Allen made in ScienceKit about a “cookie monster” as thelearners were baking cookies to explore various leavening agents. Juan related to Allen’s post by making hisown post about a “cookie master.” However, Juan’s outreach to his peers did not result in an exchange betweenlearners in ScienceKit. While Juan continued to use ScienceKit on the second day to create inquiry-relatedposts, his posts did not reflect algorithmic inquiry as they had on the first day of KC. Instead, Juan continued tomake posts connected to what he found interesting at the moment, such as stating his drawing of a cookie was a“cool cookie”. However, he did not connect to interests he may have had external to KC. By the third day, Juandrastically reduced his use of ScienceKit, resulting in only 5 posts compared to the first day’s 27 posts.Analysis of JuanJuan’s use of ScienceKit suggests that it was difficult for him to connect an academic focus to his pre-existinginterests or peer-groups. Initially, Juan was actively engaged in the scientific inquiry process, as seen when hestated factual observations and engaged in algorithmic scientific inquiry during the pre-planned investigations.He also playfully expressed himself during inquiry projects and when using ScienceKit in general. However, itwas difficult for facilitators to uncover what Juan’s personal interests were, and how they might be connected toinquiry. Without apparent connections between his academic pursuits, interests, or peer interactions, facilitators’scaffolding within ScienceKit largely focused on Juan’s inquiry practice as it was an area that he seemed to bemore willing to share with facilitators. Effectively, Juan’s ScienceKit use focused mostly on engaging in preplanned scientific inquiry. We suspect this may be because Juan missed the introduction to interest-driveninquiry on the first day. Missing this key discussion, coupled with the more rote academic practices and culturethat he was familiar with in a more traditional classroom, may have impacted Juan’s willingness to share hisinterests and connect his peer interactions to inquiry. Our analysis of Juan's case suggests that learners’interests may not initially be apparent, thus making it difficult for facilitators to connect their interests toinquiry and peer-oriented experiences.Peer-culture to interestOur next vignette describes two learners, Larielle and Aziza, friends who initially used ScienceKit to navigateCSCL 2015 Proceedings303© ISLSfrom peer-interactions to interest-driven inquiry before facing challenges with their peer-oriented inquiry. Onthe first day of KC, a fellow learner, Demarco, started taking photos of other learners during a whole groupdiscussion. Larielle and Aziza quickly imitated Demarco’s posts during the meeting, taking photos offacilitators and peers. Such peer-oriented posts were common from Larielle and Aziza throughout KC, whetherit was during social time or formal inquiry activities. The girls also often shared ScienceKit on one iPad™ forinquiry tasks. As a result, their inquiry tasks were increasingly distributed on Larielle’s ScienceKit account.During inquiry-based tasks, Larielle and Aziza often created videos in ScienceKit by interviewing oneanother about what they were doing in KC. For instance, one interview occurred over the course of twoScienceKit videos for a total length of 20 minutes. Aziza recorded the inquiry and interviews throughout theentries. Both learners were focused on strengthening their group identity while using ScienceKit. For instance,they started the video by stating, “Welcome to table #4, people. Here is [Larielle] and here is our friend here”when introducing Larielle and the facilitator at the table. Aziza then reviewed the four different brownies theywere investigating, asking her partner questions such as, “So [Larielle], […] how is brownie #1 looking?” Bothgirls crafted their video as an interactive, interview-like dialogue on the brownies and measurement tools.Midway through the video, the facilitator helped scaffold the inquiry by prompting them with questions such asasking them to compare two brownie variations. Eventually, Larielle and Aziza even started making predictionsabout how the brownies were made both with help from the facilitator and independently.On the second day, Larielle and Aziza worked with their science teacher from the previous year, Ms.Smith. One of the facilitators directed the interview and ScienceKit in each of their interview-style videos onthis day. Thus Aziza, who had been operating ScienceKit for the group on the first day, was not able to directthe camera on her specific interests. The content of the interview also changed when the facilitator conductedthe interview. The group used ScienceKit as they made observations of three variations of cookies made withdifferent leaveners. When asked whether they thought all groups were measuring the size of the cookie doughonce it had been placed on the baking sheet, Aziza stated “kinda”. However, when the facilitator prompted herfor clarification, she revised her answer to “well, I think they are doing the same.” Aziza then shifted to askingthe facilitators questions such as “are we going to bake these?” and “how you think the cookies going to turnout?” The facilitators answered these questions, which redirected the focus of the inquiry back to the facilitatorrather than Larielle and Aziza. This exchange reflected a marked reduction in the amount of peer-interactionthat was visible in the girls’ ScienceKit interactions during the second day of inquiry sessions Their subsequententries also became more passive as Larielle and Aziza often propped the iPad™ on a bookshelf withScienceKit recording “hands-free” video of their interactions rather than using it for peer interviews.Analysis of Larielle and AzizaOur analysis of this vignette suggests that social learning technologies can have a positive impact on learners’ability to connect with their peer-groups while engaging in scientific inquiry. With Larielle and Aziza, thepractice of interviewing connected their peer-group to interest-driven inquiry. When the facilitator prompted thechild interviewer with questions, s/he was able to help the learners use ScienceKit to reflect on the inquiry-basedaspects of their experiment. However, once the facilitator more actively assumed the interviewer role toencourage specific lines of inquiry, Larielle and Aziza began to use ScienceKit more passively. Larielle andAziza seemed to lose interest in the immediate inquiry when they were no longer conducting interviews as apeer-group. This change in usage seems to suggest that facilitator-provided scaffolding could unintentionallysteer learners away from peer-supported inquiry and decrease engagement with the learning technology. Wesuspect that working with their teacher may have also impacted the power dynamics of Larielle and Aziza’sgroup compared to the first day, reinforcing an emphasis on academically oriented inquiry. Moreover, as thelearners became less actively engaged with the inquiry process, they also seemed to become less engaged withScienceKit. We hypothesize that ScienceKit was no longer part of Larielle and Aziza’s peer-group, resulting inLarielle and Aziza recording less of their interests while using ScienceKit as a peer-group.Interest to inquiryA third path we observed involved facilitators who focused on navigating learners toward the academic spherewhile scaffolding interest-driven inquiry. During the first day of the program, learners were frequently promptedto draw upon personal curiosity to ask new inquiry questions during planned inquiry activities as well as duringdowntime. One such example of spontaneous, interest-driven inquiry occurred during breakfast on the first day.As learners were acclimating to ScienceKit, they carried their iPads™ to the breakfast table. One learner, Noah,snapped a photo of strawberries on the table and made the ScienceKit entry, “Some [strawberries] probably gotmore care than others. Some are bigger than others.” In a later post, Noah posed a question about whether milkhad sugar as an ingredient, using a photo of a milk-carton with attached meta-text. Noah then began to exploreCSCL 2015 Proceedings304© ISLSthe questions he posted by reviewing the ingredients lists (or “nutrition”) on the wrappers of his breakfast foods(e.g., milk, cereal). As other learners began to see Noah’s posts in ScienceKit, they began to post their ownsimilar questions.Noah’s other entries on the first day of KC also reflected a focus on interest-driven inquiry (rather thanpeer support). He would often go into great detail when exploring the semi-structured inquiry projects, such aswhen he commented “How much they each rose [brownie #4] 1 inch, [brownie #2] 1 inch, [brownie #1] 1 inch,[brownie #3] half inch” or when he stated “Maybe [the brownie variation labeled] B3 needed to be in the ovenlong enough to rise higher. B3 is shorter than the rest.” While Noah did not document his peer-oriented inquiriesas much as others, he did post many factual observations and shared important algorithmic inquiry.On the second day of KC facilitators encouraged learners to capture as much of their cookingexperiments as possible using ScienceKit. Likewise, we observed that Noah’s ScienceKit posts increased.However, his posts on Day 2 consisted mostly of photos or videos of what they were doing in the program (e.g.,mixing ingredients) as opposed to inquiry-based reasoning about the experiences he was capturing (e.g., makingclaims, asking questions). While Noah still created posts that displayed his inquiry-based reasoning practices,the amount of such posts were relatively the same as in the previous day (4 posts showing algorithmic inquirycompared to 5). Additionally, Noah’s Day 2 posts consistently lacked visible peer-interactions or connectionswith others in the group. When Noah was given the opportunity and support by facilitators to create his owninquiry, he did derive his inquiry question from personal interest. Noah’s own investigation involved exploringvariations of his mom’s meatloaf recipe so that he could later share his results with her. Noah continued tocarefully document his inquiry-based process the next day (e.g., with posts describing the consistency of thevarious meatloaf recipes prior to cooking).Analysis of NoahThroughout the KC program, Noah consistently demonstrated his ability to engage in interest-driven inquiry,from the questions during breakfast on the first day to engaging in a more complex inquiry when conducting hismeatloaf investigation. However, Noah did not connect his inquiry to peer-groups in KC. Scaffolding on Day 2may have influenced Noah’s use of ScienceKit to focus more on the academic sphere instead of finding ways toencourage a connection to peer-groups that happened serendipitously during breakfast on the first day, when heseeded questions to his fellow learners. Facilitators also noted that Noah was a more introverted learner, whichmay have affected the number of peer-oriented ScienceKit posts that he made. Based on the ways in whichNoah’s questions propagated to his peers early on in the KC program, it may have been helpful to acknowledgeNoah’s ability to create new interest-driven inquiry topics and encourage him to engage more with peer-groups(e.g., helping fellow learners to create more complex inquiry) to further his connected learning experiences.Note that the context of KC activities may have influenced the type of ScienceKit entries that Noahmade. During Day 1, instead of cooking, learners made observations and claims about pre-baked brownievariations. During Day 2, learners were actively engaged in experiment processes (e.g., measuring and mixingingredients), with less time to make observations and claims about their results. On Day 3, learners engaged intheir own interest-driven inquiries. Day 3’s data for Noah reflects the strongest connection betweenacademically oriented and interest-powered spheres, as he was deeply invested in a cooking investigation torecreate and improve upon his mother’s meatloaf recipe. Using Noah’s strong interest and ability to createinquiries from those interests came close to complex scientific inquiry, but lacked peer-support. His casesuggests that connecting less socially prone learners to others may be challenging, but simply exposing theirinquiry practices to others may facilitate social exchanges.DiscussionOur analysis of a practical application of Ito et al.’s (2013) connected learning framework underscores theimportance of being attuned to the interactions and influences that learners, facilitators, and technological toolsexert within in a connected learning context. While social learning technologies can help minimize disconnectsbetween interest-driven and peer-supported spheres for learners, the gaps between these spheres and learners’academic pursuits, remain non-trivial to traverse. A key take-away from this analysis is that ScienceKit affordedus a rich data channel to help identify, follow, and strengthen learners’ connections across academicallyoriented, interest-driven, and peer-supported spheres of influence. The findings from our study underscore theways in which social media-based tools and associated learner data illuminate our understanding of the pathsthat learners can follow across academically oriented, peer supported, and interest-powered contexts.Importantly, these data also shed light on potential barriers and missed opportunities that researchers andpractitioners can use to initiate and strengthen connections across the interrelated, but often disconnected,spheres. For example, our analysis of Noah revealed that he had a fairly high degree of personal interest inCSCL 2015 Proceedings305© ISLSinquiry (e.g., unprompted observations about strawberries, ingredients in milk, designing new variations on hismother’s meatloaf recipe). Facilitator efforts to reinforce his knowledge of academically oriented scientificprocedures (measuring, mixing, comparing) seemed to be beneficial. However, facilitators could have takenadvantage of the data in Noah’s ScienceKit stream to quickly connect the academically oriented, process-basedartifacts he created on Day 2 to his personal interests (seen on Day 1). Furthermore, facilitators could havedevised opportunities for Noah to showcase his personally relevant meatloaf investigation with peers, therebystrengthening the peer-supported sphere of his connected learning network.Figure 2. This figure depicts situative learner practice based on Ito et al.’s connected learning framework,(2013) and potential difficulties encountered by different learners. Though similar in shape, it is not intended tobe two dimensional or representative of a Venn diagram. A) Juan’s interests and peer-support were difficult toconnect to his focus on academic activities. B) Larielle and Aziza’s path moved from peer support to interestsbut transition to formal academic inquiry were challenging. C) Scaffolding helped Noah to create interest driveninquiry but did not help him connect to peer-support groups with his inquiries.Another key take-away is that the ScienceKit data, coupled with analysis of facilitator-learnerinteractions, revealed the beginnings of a typology of learner paths across connected learning experiencesspecific to Kitchen Chemistry. Our analysis has revealed a variety of possible paths that learners may take asthey develop more comprehensively connected learning experiences (Figure 2). It appears that not only canthere be a rift between the academic sphere and the interest and peer-support spheres as previously described,but there might also be a similar gap separating peer-support for learners such as Noah (Figure 2C).Understanding what typology best matches each learner could be critical for helping learners engage in using anew learning technology for interest-driven and peer-supported scientific inquiry, specifically in connectedlearning contexts such as Kitchen Chemistry. Researchers could use such a typology to evaluate the efforts oflearners to effectively engage in connected learning. The typology might also inform new designs for connectedlearning experiences themselves. Both of these findings contribute to our understanding of individual learnerpaths within connected learning experiences, and suggest design implications for strengthening the ways inwhich learners traverse across the spheres of connected learning.Overall, our analysis points to the potential of more complex social tools and focused reflection ofeducators to ascertain learners’ natural orientations within academic, peer-oriented, and interest-driven spheresand to make decisions about how to direct them toward more connected learning. For example, during the Day 1activity, the scientific inquiry practices that we foregrounded were making observations and proposing claimsabout experiment results. Facilitators asked the learners to examine four batches of brownies and to try todetermine what ingredient might have been varied to cause any differences in physical characteristics, such astexture, taste, density, color. The learners were explicitly asked to engage in academically oriented inquiry.During the next 2 days, KC activities required more active engagement by learners in the actual cookingprocess. Learners captured these activities both because they wanted to and because they were encouraged to doso. We believe it is difficult to tease apart whether facilitators directed learners or whether learners wanted tocapture everything. With reflective practice (Schön, 1983) facilitators and technology designers should alsoreflect on the logical intent and purpose of actions. Facilitators may have needed more time and better tools (inScienceKit) to review and reflect on the media captured during these activities to connect procedural practices toinquiry-based practices. Future work can focus on developing social inquiry technologies to make such learnerinterest and peer-interactions in the current science camp setting as well as community contexts easier forfacilitators to recognize in real-time. Additionally, research into social inquiry technologies should support moreadaptable scaffolding to help learners navigate connected learning paths, thus empowering learners to connect toCSCL 2015 Proceedings306© ISLStheir interests and peer-groups.ReferencesAhn, J., Clegg, T., Yip, J., Bonsignore, E., Pauw, D., Gubbels, M., et al. (2014). Seeing the unseen learner:designing and using social media to recognize children's science dispositions in action. Learning,Media and Technology, 1–31. doi:10.1080/17439884.2014.964254Barab, S. & Squire, K. (2004). Design-Based Research: Putting a Stake in the Ground. The Journal of theLearning Sciences, 13(1), 1-14.boyd, d. (2009). Why Youth (Heart) Social Network Sites: The Role of Networked Publics in Teenage SocialLife.Chinn, C. A., & Malhotra, B. A. (2002). Epistemologically authentic inquiry in schools: A theoreticalframework for evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86(2), 175–218.Clegg, T. L., Bonsignore, E., Yip, J. C., Gelderblom, H., Kuhn, A., Valenstein, T., et al. (2012). Technology forpromoting scientific practice and personal meaning in life-relevant learning (pp. 152–161). Presented atthe Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children, ACM.Clegg, T. L., Yip, J. C., Ahn, J., Bonsignore, E., Gubbels, M., Lewittes, B., & Rhodes, E. (2013). When face-toface fails: Opportunities for social media to foster collaborative learning (pp. 1–8). Presented at theTenth International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning.Clegg, T., & Kolodner, J. (2014). Scientizing and Cooking: Helping Middle‐School Learners Develop ScientificDispositions. Science Education, 98(1), 36–63.Edelson, D. C., & Joseph, D. M. (2004). The interest-driven learning design framework: motivating learningthrough usefulness. Presented at the ICLS '04: Proceedings of the 6th international conference onLearning sciences, International Society of the Learning Sciences.Ellison, N. B., Steinfield, C., & Lampe, C. (2007). The Benefits of Facebook “Friends:” Social Capital andCollege Students’ Use of Online Social Network Sites. Journal of Computer-MediatedCommunication, 12(4), 1143–1168. doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00367.xGreenhow, C., & Robelia, B. (2009). Old Communication, New Literacies: Social Network Sites as SocialLearning Resources. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 14(4), 1130–1161.Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., et al. (2013). Connected learning: anagenda for research and design.Ketelhut, D. J., Nelson, B. C., Clarke, J., & Dede, C. (2010). A multi-user virtual environment for building andassessing higher order inquiry skills in science. British Journal of Educational Technology, 41(1), 56–68.Kreijns, K., Kirschner, P. A., & Jochems, W. (2003). Identifying the pitfalls for social interaction in computersupported collaborative learning environments: a review of the research. Computers in HumanBehavior, 19(3), 335–353.Merriam, S. B. (2008). Qualitative Research: A Guide to Design and Implementation. San Francisco: JosseyBass Publishers.Nasir, N. S. (2002). Identity, Goals, and Learning: Mathematics in Cultural Practice. Mathematical Thinkingand Learning, 4(2-3), 213–247.National Research Council, Education, B. O. S., Education, D. O. B. A. S. S. A., & Standards, C. O. C. F. F. T.N. K.-1. S. E. (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education:. National Academies Press.National Science Teachers Association. (2012). Next generation science standards. Retrieved on.Quintana, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R. G., et al. (2004). A scaffolding designframework for software to support science inquiry. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 337–386.Schön, D. A. (1983). The Reflective Practitioner. Basic Books.Songer, N. B. (2006). BioKIDS: An animated conversation on the development of curricular activity structuresfor inquiry science.Squire, K. D., Ben DeVane, & Durga, S. (2009). Designing Centers of Expertise for Academic LearningThrough Video Games. Dx.Doi.org.Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. (2007). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developinggrounded theory, 3rd ed. SAGE Publications.CSCL 2015 Proceedings307© ISLS