Mentors in the Making: A Case Study of Heterogeneity in MeaningMaking at a Public Library MakerspaceTesha Sengupta-Irving, Lauren Vogelstein, Corey Brady, and Emily Phillips-Gallowaytesha.sengupta-irving@vanderbilt.edu, lauren.e.vogelstein@vanderbilt.edu, corey.brady@vander bilt.edu,emily.phillips.galloway@vanderbilt.eduVanderbilt UniversityThe rise of public makerspaces in the US is seen as a way to democratize access to STEM fields, but manyquestions remain about how the maker movement can reach a diversity of youth in sustained ways. Adultmentors are a potential pivot: the expansiveness or narrowness of their conceptions of making and makers mayshape the democratizing potential of makerspaces. This poster studies adult mentors at an award-winning publiclibrary makerspace working with racially and socioeconomically diverse teens. It asks How do these mentorsconceptualize their practice and the relationship between mentors, making, and (teen) makers? Our findingscontribute to broader efforts to establish makerspaces at public institutions that truly democratize access topowerful ideas and practices.Data were generated over three months in 2017, in a study including participant observations, semistructured interviews with mentors and makerspace leadership, and interviews with focal students. Here wefocus on mentor interviews, exploring how they, as institutional agents and artists with expertise in varyingdomains (e.g., textile crafts, robotics, music production), conceptualize the relationship between mentors,makers, and making. We use Chevallard’s (1985) didactical model to frame accounts of their conceptions (seeFig 1a). This model was originally proposed to analyze general elements of a mathematics learning environment- namely, teacher, student, and knowledge taught (Ben-Peretz, Moon & Brown, 2004); for our study thistranslates as a system with vertices for mentor, maker, and making, respectively. Chevallard’s model isdeceptively simple because the surrounding context, though not explicitly depicted, is as important as theelements themselves. That is, Chevallard argued that institutional and societal contexts matter significantly forhow relationships between teacher, student, and content unfold, although scholars adopting the framework oftenneglect its dynamic aspects (see Schoenfeld, 2012). A sociocultural perspective on the didactical systemhighlights how mentors’ conceptions are shaped by personal histories and by social, historical, and politicalcontexts of schooling, the library, and the broader maker movement.Figure 1a. The didactic triangle (Chevallard, 1985), left; and Figure 1b. our analytic refiguring, rightFindingsAs Figure 1b suggests, we found that mentors engaged thoughtfully about how heterogeneity was built intothe design and enactment of the makerspace in ways that indicated achievements along the mentor andmaking vertices. For our interviewees, the “mentor” vertex should be imagined as “exploded” to reflect thearray of expertise that various mentors embodied. The makerspace’s targeted hiring of artists strengthened itsgoal of heterogeneity in making while also allowing teens to experience the space as having a purpose apartfrom career readiness or technical training. Mentors represented an expansive definition of making, one thatcounters a dominant narrative in the US Maker Movement in which accomplished making practices often mapto technology-centered entrepreneurship. In particular, the deliberate inclusion of spoken word and music artistsindicates the makerspace’s vital connections to a city actively reviving Black heritage music in the South.Images of making embodied in the mentors’ expertise were also decoupled from the pursuit of economic returnin the lives of minoritized teens. The “making” vertex of the didactic system should also be “exploded” into anarray of vertices, reflecting the plurality of ways that “making” was defined in this setting - 3D printing,3Doodlers, virtual reality play, music production, textile art and animation, to name a few. This plurality(greater than “making as robotics” but less than “making as all cultural practice”), resonated with the diversityof material resources in the setting and of expertise among the mentors. Teen makers could regularly chooseamong a range of activities on entering the space.In counterpoint with these successes, at the “maker” vertex, many mentors expressed uncertainty orconflict. Some mentors seemed unsure about the importance of drawing new makers into the space. Relatedly,ICLS 2018 Proceedings1693© ISLSmentors’ perspectives differed on whether making was a priori a necessary good for all teens. These challengesboth point to questions about the nature and flexibility of relationships with teen makers that mentors sought topromote. While mentors generally understood their work intrinsically to involve building relationships withteens, they described this in two ways. Some described maker-mentor relationships as grounded in sharedhistories and experiences, or social affinity (e.g., racial or linguistic similarities), mentioning the need for teensto see themselves physically represented among the mentors. Such affinity-based perspectives implicitlyrecognize the expansiveness of making as a cultural form for all racial, economic, and social communities. Andwhile this runs productively counter to the Maker Movement as a cloistered space of straight, white, uppermiddle-class masculinity (see, e.g., Beuchley, 2013; Dawkins, 2011; Vossoughi, Hooper, & Escudé, 2016), ourdata suggest caution in relying on representational approaches to enact structural change: to refigure making inlight of such broad participation means also creating the conditions for mentoring as an anti-bias practice. Asecond way mentors spoke of building mentor-maker relationships was through making. In the terms of thedidactic model, rather than follow a direct connection of maker to mentor, this approach had mentors meetingmakers at the making vertex, when shared social histories or affinities were elusive. However, a challengenaturally emerged here in conceptualizing teens who are not yet connecting with a making practice. Nonparticipation in the space or activities often led mentors to hypothesize about kinds of teens, in ways thatrevealed challenges they faced to bridge social distance. The need to support mentors in an ongoing project ofdeveloping and sustaining a sociopolitically and ideologically informed reflective practice (Philip, Gupta, Elby& Turpen, 2017; Zeichner & Liston, 2013) thus emerged as integral to the makerspace’s larger efforts atbroadening and sustaining participation in making among a diversity of makers.ConclusionThe U.S. has seen a rapid rise in making and digital fabrication in education. The diffuse nature of where, howand when making occurs suggests limitless possibilities for it as a form of social creativity and innovation, andfor who might identify as a maker. However, equitably institutionalizing such human activity is a nontrivialchallenge (Halverson & Sheridan, 2014), and makers would benefit from the body of research on how topromote ambitious and equity-oriented practices. This includes continuing to expand epistemic heterogeneity inmaking, by promoting mentors who embody (professionally and personally) the expansiveness of making as acultural form. Further still, supporting and organizing mentors’ learning in relation to the sociopolitical contextof their work (past and present) as a reflective practice (cf., Zeichner & Liston, 2013) may empower them toidentify deficit ideologies of race, poverty or gender, which we know infiltrate science and engineering learningcontexts (e.g., Philip, Gupta, Elby & Turpen, 2017), from subverting the otherwise democratizing power of thework they do. This emerging field of action, we argue, offers a consequential foothold for the learning sciencesto “count” and to contribute to ways of rethinking learning in the digital age.ReferencesBuechley, L. (2013, October). Closing address. FabLearn Conference, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA.Retrieved from http://edstream.stanford.edu/Video/Play/883b61dd951d4d3f90abeec65eead2911dBen-Peretz, M., Brown, S., & Moon, B. (Eds.). (2004). Routledge international companion to education.Routledge.Chevallard, Y. (1985). La transposition didactique—Du savoir savant au savoir enseigné. Grenoble: La PenséeSauvage.Dawkins, N. (2011). Do-it-yourself: The precarious work and postfeminist politics of handmaking (in) Detroit.Utopian Studies, 22(2), 261-284.Halverson, E. R., & Sheridan, K. (2014). The maker movement in education. Harvard Educational Review,84(4), 495-504.Philip, T. M., Gupta, A., Elby, A., & Turpen, C. (2017). Why Ideology Matters for Learning: A Case ofIdeological Convergence in an Engineering Ethics Classroom Discussion on Drone Warfare. Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 1-41..Schoenfeld, A. H. (2012). Problematizing the didactic triangle. ZDM, 44(5), 587-599.Vossoughi, S., Hooper, P. K., & Escudé, M. (2016). Making through the lens of culture and power: Towardtransformative visions for educational equity. Harvard Educational Review, 86(2), 206-232,307-309.Zeichner, K. M., & Liston, D. P. (2013). Reflective teaching: An introduction. Routledge.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported in part by an internal grant from Peabody College at Vanderbilt University.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1694© ISLS