Room for Everyone? Identification Processes in CraftingKatherine Chapman, Melissa Gresalfi, Amanda Bellk.chapman@vanderbilt.edu, melissa.gresalfi@vanderbilt.edu, amanda.m.bell@vanderbilt.eduVanderbilt UniversityAbstract: Studies attempting to address the relative absence of women and girls from theSTEM pipeline often focus on deficits in the girls themselves, or—slightly less often—on theshortcomings of culture and context. This early-stage interview study starts instead from apositive space of persistence in the mathematical practices of textile crafting and examines thelocal negotiation of identification processes as compared with those in K-12 math classes.IntroductionDespite significant gains in K-12 achievement, females1 in the United States continue to be underrepresented incareers related to science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) (State of Girls and Women inSTEM, 2016). While some studies that address this observation focus on individual traits such as “grit” or“persistence”, other scholars seek to understand how women are systematically excluded from STEM-relatedspaces (e.g. institutions of higher education, tech companies). Such analyses have shown that gendered socialprocesses contribute to women routinely being told, often tacitly, that they do not belong in these spaces (Seronet al., 2016). These analyses shift the onus for change from individual women to institutions, but they stilldocument failure, starting culturally valued spaces and showing how they exclude the participation of women.In response to these deficit analyses, we offer the counter example of textile craft. Even in the modernday such communities tend to be dominated by—though not exclusively available to—women; furthermoretextile crafting practices themselves have been shown to involve mathematics (e.g. Hebb, 2003). These speacestherefore provide a context that potentially shares some similarities with STEM-related careers (i.e. doing math)while presumably avoiding the gendered practices that systematically exclude women.Furthermore, analyses of these broader gendered social processes often rely on assumptions of culturaluniformity. This assumption is rejected by poststructuralist and intersectional perspectives, which emphasize anindividual’s position in multiple social streams. Thus, in an attempt to account for the heterogeneity of women’sexperiences, we start from an interactionist perspective and examine the process of identification more closely.Specifically, we take a view of identification as an interactional achievement (Cobb, Gresalfi, & Hodge, 2009),looking at how personal identities—the extent to which a person identifies, complies, or resists—develop inrelation to prevailing normative identities in a given social context (Cobb, Gresalfi, & Hodge, 2011). Finally,though the theorized site of underrepresentation is in STEM careers, the process of identification with adiscipline begins much earlier; thus, we contrast stories of crafting with stories of K-12 experiences.The current study looks at the experiences of six women as reported in hour-long interviews.Beginning with the identification framework mentioned above, we explore the opportunities to participate inschool mathematics and in craft that are described by our participants, and the extent to which individuals cometo identify with, comply with, or reject such forms of participation.MethodsThe six interviews included in this analysis were identified as potentially representing a range of identificationwith mathematics (three answered “yes” to the question “Did you enjoy math in school?” and three answered“no”) and are confined to knitting and crochet—two crafts that had overlapping practices. Semi-structuredinterviews were conducted by one of the first two authors over the phone, audio recorded, and later transcribedby a third party. Transcripts were reviewed by all three authors in four distinct phases of inductive coding.Table 1: Case ComparisonsParticipant LucindaMath norms logical, patterndriven, sense of asingle rightanswerICLS 2018 ProceedingsOlympiaconcept-driven,sense ofmathematics as aconstellation ofconnected topicsCaroline2sensemaking,particularly toovercomedyscalculia1701MicaMarloas a student—solitary, blackrote, repetitive; as and white,a teacher—confusing,problem-solving, anxietymultipleprovokingpathwaysPaulaspeed, naturalability, no clearpath© ISLSIdentification full identification full identification rejected someambivalentaspects butidentifies withthe disciplineCraftingseeing things fall process-focus;balance;goal-oriented;normscrafter as finalinto place;skilled iteration; flexibility;putting in theflexibilityfuzziness; fluidity authority;expertise takestime; usingjudgmenttimefull rejectionrejected math,though identifiedwith math-insciencemany ways toprocess-oriented;engage; fluidlots of resources;movementexpertise showsbetween practices in productDiscussionAcross all six interviews, we find remarkable within-person consistency across the contexts of mathematics andcrafting. It is not the case, for example, that each woman was performing in one way in math class and in acompletely different way in her crafting community. Rather, in each case, the personal preferences that thewomen described as the basis for their identification, compliance, or rejection of the normative identity wasconsistent, whether for math or for craft. Participants brought something they felt personally committed to—beit a focus on process, a love of logic, or a deep need for deliberate sense-making—and that was measuredagainst the local normative identity. As regards school mathematics, in two of the cases women rejected thelocal normative identity of mathematics, resulting in disidentification with mathematics as a discipline. In threecases, individuals identified with the practices of the class. In a final case, one woman was able to carve out herown space in which to identify with mathematics, despite embodying certain conflicts with the local normativeidentity. As regards crafting, by contrast, all participants were able to carve out their own spaces, without in anyway making a less clear commitment to being a certain-kind-of-crafter. Rather, in this space, multiple identitieswere recognized and valued, and many women even moved fluidly between those practices, while stillmaintaining a commitment to a dominant preference. Thus we find, in crafting there is remarkable consistencyacross the normative identities available precisely because those identities are themselves heterogeneous,allowing for the legitimate participation of many different kinds of crafters.Limitations and next stepsWe acknowledge that this is a preliminary sketch. In particular, future work will compare these findings to thelarger corpus. Most importantly, however, the specific contribution of gender—to say nothing of race or otheridentities—is itself undertheorized in this preliminary analysis, largely due to constraints of the data. We seethis commitment to outline these higher-level norms as honoring the post-structuralist call to pay attention towithin-group differences as a way of resisting dominant narratives of sex-based traits. Still, more work isneeded to investigate and document how these identification processes intersect with the social construction ofgender and other identities, both within and across these different settings.Endnotes(1) We follow Leyva (2017) in using the terms ‘females’ and ‘males’ to denote sex or sex categories, and ‘women’ or ‘girls’and ‘men’ or ‘boys’ when denoting gender categories. Whilex we aim analytically to focus on notions of gender as adiscursive social production, where statistics are based on sex-categorization we acknowledge such through diction.(2) All names save this one are pseudonyms.ReferencesCobb, P., Gresalfi, M., & Hodge, L. L. (2009). An interpretive scheme for analyzing the identities that studentsdevelop in mathematics classrooms. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 40-68.Gresalfi, M. S., & Cobb, P. (2011). Negotiating identities for mathematics teaching in the context ofprofessional development. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 42(3), 270-304.Hebb, K. (2003). The Mathematics of Quilting: A Quilter's Tacit Knowledge of Symmetry, Tiling and GroupTheory. In Meeting Alhambra, ISAMA-BRIDGES Conference Proceedings (pp. 511-520). Universityof Granada.Leyva, L. A. (2017). Unpacking the male superiority myth and masculinization of mathematics at theintersections: A review of research on gender in mathematics education. Journal for Research inMathematics Education, 48(4), 397-433.Seron, C., Silbey, S. S., Cech, E., & Rubineau, B. (2016). Persistence Is Cultural: Professional Socialization andthe Reproduction of Sex Segregation. Work and Occupations, 43(2), 178-214.State of Girls and Women in STEM. (2016). Retrieved April 24, 2017, from https://ngcproject.org/statistics.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1702© ISLS