Negotiating Academic Communities: Narratives of Life-longLearnersSally Fincher, University of Kent at Canterbury, UK, s.a.fincher@kent.ac.ukSebastian Dziallas, University of Kent at Canterbury, UK, sd485@kent.ac.ukOfra Brandes, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel, ofra.brandes@mail.huji.ac.ilYifat Ben-David Kolikant, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel, yifat.kolikant@mail.huji.ac.ilR. Benjamin Shapiro (discussant), University of Colorado, Boulder, USA, ben+web@getdown.orgAbstract: We bring together three case studies in computer science and engineering which werelaunched for the same purpose: to understand what participants – students, high-school teachers,and university teachers – considered themselves to be significant in their pursuit of professionalgrowth and what empowered and disempowered them. All three studies use narrative methods,although in different ways. The studies share two findings: (a) participants were engaged inprocesses of becoming or being life-long learners, and (b) the importance of community in theirnarratives.Keywords: computer science, narrative methods, community, life-long learningIntroductionComputer Science (CS) and engineering face challenges due to rapid technological changes. Teachers need notonly to keep up with these changes but must also be able to teach the changing material. Students have to developthe ability and propensity to constantly learn, adopt and adapt changes. In this symposium we bring together threecase studies in computer science and engineering which were undertaken for the same purpose: to understandwhat participants – students, high-school teachers, and university teachers – considered to be significant in theirpursuit of professional growth and what empowered and disempowered them.All three studies used narrative methods. Specifically, in the first study, Dziallas interviewed AmericanCS and engineering students in a learner-centered engineering program about their learning processes over thecourse of their life. In the second study, Fincher followed CS higher education faculty from various countries fora year, asking them to fill out a diary one day every month, capturing details of their daily work. In the third study,Ben-David Kolikant and Brandes asked CS teachers who participated in leading teachers courses to write theirprofessional biographies. These methods differ. Fincher’s diaries are written in present tense and tell the story ofsingle days, reflecting what participants saw as being important at that time, while both Dziallas and Ben-DavidKolikant and Brandes used retrospective biographical approaches, albeit differently.Nevertheless, the findings of these studies are similar in two major aspects. First, participants wereengaged in processes of becoming or being life-long learners. In all studies the desire to excel for self-realizationwas a prominent drive. Students and teachers alike developed their own rule systems and paved their own ways.In both Fincher’s and Ben-David Kolikant’s work, university and high-school teachers respectively reporteddealing with time management and logistics, yet spending valuable time planning new projects, finding newlearning opportunities – and moreover, they expressed positive emotions towards these challenges. In Dziallas’study the students had to adjust to an environment specifically designed to develop these lifelong learning skills.Second, the importance of community permeates these narratives, albeit with a different expression ineach. In Dziallas' study, students develop lifelong learning skills at a college where they live on-campus for allfour years of their undergraduate education in an immersive community. Ben-David Kolikant and Brandes foundthat participants in the leading teacher program valued the sense of community the program gave, to be with“peculiar creatures” like themselves. And in Fincher’s diary study, participants negotiated relationships withinlocal and disciplinary communities.This symposium, hence, sheds light on the processes of becoming and being life-long learners, and thedifficulties they entail. It raises questions regarding the role of one’s actual and designated identity in (life-long)learning. (Sfard and Prusak, 2005) In Dziallas’ study, students’ designated identities, the wish to become part ofa community, brought about substantial learning. However, in the other two studies concerning professionals’learning, it was their actual identity, that of life-long learners, which brought about learning. The communitysurrounding them was not a designated one, it was an actual one. Indeed, the professionals experienced theircommunity as an essential resource to sustain life-long learning; in all case studies, it is the community which isthe basis of participants' sense of empowerment. This symposium also highlights the benefits of narrativeapproaches, their diversity and richness in exploring professional development and growth.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1055© ISLSStudents’ positioning in life stories of learning experiencesSebastian DziallasIntroduction and contextThe goal of this study was to explore how classroom and campus community influence student learning; howstudents position themselves in them; and how they make sense of their own experiences over time.Phil Hammack argues that we construct narratives to make sense of our experiences by integrating storiesof culture with our daily experiences. These stories of culture are scripts available to members of a particulargroup (such as students at a specific institution) – they are master narratives (Hammack, 2008). Students positionthemselves against these scripts. Of course, they are specific to institution and context – they can’t simply betransferred. But the stories and positions we identified may provide opportunities for other institutions to drawupon as they look for ways to help their students develop lifelong learning skills.In this work, then, we draw on interviews from a preliminary study with a dozen students at Olin College.Olin College is a small undergraduate institution in the United States that was founded in response to multiplecalls for change in engineering education (National Academy of Engineering, 2005). The overall learningenvironment at the college was designed to be deliberately disruptive: all of the 350 students live on campus forthe duration of their degree program and the curriculum is largely project-based with much of students’ workgrounded in real world and interdisciplinary contexts. In a paper describing the initial curriculum at the college,the faculty called for it to “motivate students and help them to cultivate a lifelong love of learning.” (Somervilleet al., 2005) In a previous effort, we explored the role of the curriculum in shaping students’ learning experiences(Dziallas & Fincher, 2014). Now, we are interested in how the campus community and students’ view ofthemselves in it shape their development as lifelong learners.MethodologyThe concept of positioning theory is about “how people use words (and discourse of all types) to locate themselvesand others.” (Moghaddam & Harré, 2010) Yamakawa, Forman, and Ansell use positioning theory to explore howstudents and teacher position themselves in the context of a third grade mathematics classroom. They considerindividual speech events – for example students discussing the solution to an assignment with the teacher – inclassroom discourse. They then describe implications of this positioning on students’ identity construction. Thisdiscourse-centric perspective leads them to adopt a social stance on identity, which, they argue, is “temporary,changeable, and unstable in nature.” (Yamakawa, Forman, & Ansell, 2009)We employ a similar approach in this work, but rely on individual life story interviews which were drawnfrom a protocol originally developed by Dan McAdams (McAdams, 1997) to focus on students’ learningexperiences. As part of this approach, we adopt a perspective of unity and coherence in the self, as it is commonin life story approaches, allowing us to trace students’ wider learning trajectories and to hear echoes of pastexperiences. Life story approaches are grounded in a tripartite model of personality consisting of dispositionaltraits, personal concerns, and narrative identity. In this model, narrative identity consists of the life story that we,as adults, “[continue] to author and revise over time to make sense, for [ourselves] and others, of [our] own lifein time.” (McAdams, 1995) It is an internalized and continually evolving story of who we are.FindingsCommunity and confidenceOne of the themes we originally identified in the interviews was an academic dislocation upon entering college“that reinforces fundamentally different values of what it means to be an engineer” from students’ previous,largely grade-driven, experience in high school (Dziallas & Fincher, 2014).First semester was getting used to Olin and is interesting, because it is the culture shock. Youare surrounded by the same 300 people, and all these people are doing amazing projects, andyou just feel like, especially freshman year, you feel like you aren’t good enough. [Natalie Lee]Here, Natalie (we use pseudonyms throughout) is positioning herself in relation to others in thecommunity as somebody who, having just arrived on campus, isn’t initially “good enough” despite her previousacademic achievements and acceptance at Olin with its competitive admission process. In fact, this sense appearsto be directly connected to her perception of others within the community. However, through opportunitiesafforded to her in both the local campus and wider academic community, her confidence grew.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1056© ISLSI was [a teaching assistant for] a class and people actually wanted my help, and I was actuallyuseful. I felt like I could actually share my information. Olin gave me this new sense ofconfidence that I didn’t really ever have before. [Natalie Lee]This newfound “sense of confidence” permeated our conversations with students. For many of them, itallowed them to reposition themselves in the community. This transformation in students’ perspectives ofthemselves and their learning appears to be driven by a change in what it means to study engineering in this newcontext: in terms of what kind of knowledge “counts” as engineering knowledge (Stevens, O’Connor, Garrison,Jocuns, & Amos, 2008), but also in terms of what kind of learning is supported and valued by the community atthe institution. For Natalie, this shift manifested itself in her growing more confident in listening to her internalvoice and taking a course she was passionate about.I was planning on taking some sort of bio engineering class … and then I realised that there isthis other class I wanted to take at the same time. I made the decision to drop the bio classes andtake “Teaching and Learning” instead. Which was actually a really hard decision to make, ...but I did it anyway. It was the best decision I have made so far. [Natalie Lee]Faculty supportAnother theme we identified involves the community encouraging discussions of classroom experiences. Forexample, Samuel positions himself here as somebody willing to engage with and improve his education. And tohis surprise, he discovers that others have positioned themselves similarly in this new community.So, first off, the ability to look at [a course] and say, “Here’s some concrete things that I don’tlike about this experience” was amazing. The second was being around people, students in thiscase, who were similarly engaged in this class and in their education. That I could talk withthem about what they didn’t like and come to a level of understanding where we could startthinking of possible solutions was further incredible. [Samuel Cline]This kind of engagement extends to faculty members as well.And lastly, that I was at a place where we could talk to a professor for multiple hours on aweekend – one of the busier professors – for multiple hours on a weekend... [Samuel Cline]Another student was even more explicit about the close faculty-student relationship she found at Olin.… there was a shift from looking at professors as guiding figures, to looking at professors ascolleagues. People who want to know about me, as much as I want to know about them. Theywant to know about what I know, as well as I know want to know what they know. [SusanaClinton]This shift affected her own approach to learning.I decided that it was more important to develop good relationships with the faculty, than tonecessarily understand everything that they’re saying in class. So while I do still attempt tounderstand, it's not super important that I understand as much as I understand how to learn howto understand. [Susana Clinton]Susana positions herself as seeking “good relationships” with professors at Olin. However, in the contextof the Olin community, this desire is not driven by a focus on extrinsic metrics, such as grades. She is insteadlooking to “learn how to understand” for herself. Indeed, in a shift from the previous model, her conception oflearning appears to be linked to interactions with people in the community around her, rather than test scores.DiscussionIf learning is conceptualized as participation, then what is learned are the norms and practicesof a community (Sfard, 1998). In schools, students and teachers participate in collective workto construct, maintain, or alter the cultural and historical practices of their classroomcommunity. (Yamakawa et al., 2009)ICLS 2016 Proceedings1057© ISLSThis perspective emphasizes the importance of community for learning. We have characterized students’conceptions of a learning environment that was specifically designed to foster lifelong learning and discoveredthat these conceptions include the campus community. Students repositioned themselves within this communityover time which was an important aspect of becoming life-long learners. We saw commonalities of developingconfidence and intrinsic motivation in their stories (similar to, for example, the concept of self-authorship). Asstudents enter this new part of their learning journey, they describe a process of becoming empowered, feelingmore confident, and adopting positions more equal to faculty. Indeed, changing educational practices in theclassroom to foster lifelong learning skills alone may not be sufficient. The positions faculty and students adoptwith regard to each other appear to be a central part in the development of students’ conception of their learning.We contend that the community at Olin encourages this kind of behavior and that its structure influences thepossible positions its members adopt – to study, to engineering, and to lifelong learning.Non-storied narrative: Community in academic diariesSally FincherMost academics experience, if not inhabit, two communities. One is the local community of their Universitycontext, the other is as cosmopolitan researchers, reaching out to a community of collaborators and peers in otherinstitutions. This is a well-observed phenomenon, first framed by Robert Merton who distinguished two roleorientations and introduced the terms “local” and “cosmopolitan” in this way:The localite largely confines his interests to this community. He is preoccupied with localproblems, to the virtual exclusion of the national and international scene. He is strictly speaking,parochial.” whilst the cosmopolitan has some interest in the local community “he is also orientedsignificantly to the world outside and regards himself as an integral part of that world. (Merton,1957, p. 447)Merton’s student, Alvin Gouldner, took this distinction into a study of 125 faculty members from a midrange US university he calls “co-op college” (Gouldner, 1957, 1958). In this explicitly educational context, hedefined his two latent organisational types like this:Cosmopolitans: those low on loyalty to the employing organization, high on commitment tospecialized role skills, and likely to use an outer reference group orientation.Locals: those high on loyalty to the employing organization, low on commitment to specialisedrole skills, and likely to use an inner reference group orientation. (Gouldner, 1957, p. 290)Gouldner defines these as “latent” rather than “manifest” types because people with ostensibly identicalroles (“associate professor” or “senior lecturer”) may, in fact, have different orientations. Nevertheless, it is clearthat researchers are more likely to have a cosmopolitan orientation: they have an external community from wherethey draw validation and specialised disciplinary skills. Teachers, on the other hand, are more likely to have anorientation to local context and constraints, and draw validation from the institutional community. In education,these distinctions have been widely drawn on to characterise academics’ activity (Baker & Zey-Ferrell, 1984),and to explore the implications for the amount and balance of academic work, including issues of status and reward(Grimes and Berger, 1970) (Tuma and Grimes, 1981). However, in this work, rather than applying these categoriesas theoretical distinctions, we were more interested to examine how these communities were formed andexperienced. In this, we looked to the minutiae of academic life, as recorded in academic diaries.The corpusThe Share Project (SP) ran from 2008-2012 and aimed to gain insight into how educators share teaching practice;how they represent it; and how, when and with what evidence they change their practice(http://www.sharingpractice.ac.uk). The project comprised several inter-related investigations and used narrativeboth as a medium with regard to representing practice and as a methodology in research studies. In investigatingteachers’ practice, SP undertook four distinctly separate narrative enquiries (Fincher, 2012). One of these,modelled on Mass Observation (MO & Harrisson, 1943) asked academics to keep a diary on the 15th of everymonth between September 2010 and August 2011.In using a diary elicitation, we were anxious to find out what was significant in academics' lives - notwhat someone else thought should be significant. The solicitation was explicit: “We want you to tell us what youreally do. We're interested in detail and nuance, in the gaps between what is supposed to happen and what doeshappen, between staff and student, between institution and individual.”ICLS 2016 Proceedings1058© ISLSThe texture of academic lives is distinctively different depending on their disciplinary orientation. Forsimple example, Humanities scholars tend to work alone, or in very small teams, with modest grant income;Science academics tend to work in labs, often in substantial research groups, on substantially funded projects.This paper eliminates the variance of discipline by reporting a study of computer science academics that draws ona subset of 82 diarists from 389: this selected corpus comprises 575 entries.MethodThe day-survey diaries have an overwhelming emphasis on the quotidian, the ordinary, the matter-of-fact. Thiscollection allows us an ant’s-eye view of academic life, from the small, daily interactions that the diarists report,either as commonplace, or as unusual. Rather than seek “themes” we coded for concrete action and activities andsystematically extracted details in several groups:1. Interactions and activities: in this category we noted personal interactions that might indicateinvolvement in personal and professional networks. We noted conversations with Heads of School, ITdepartments, professional colleagues, etc. We also included interactions in regard to professionalactivities more broadly meetings with research students, attending conferences, work on grant proposals,etc. These latter items helped form a more complete snapshot of the kinds of things a diarist is doing.Description of meetings over food (lunch, coffee etc.) were separately noted.2. Representations of practice and artefacts of practice. This category included references to lecture slidesor assessment activities, as well as implicit use of representations (e.g. at meetings discussing curricularrevisions).3. Change Examples. We extracted all examples of change in teaching practice in two groups. One groupcontained description of changes in practice and preparation habits, the other was composed of referencesto student-driven change, where the diarist adjusted their delivery or materials in response to studentfeedback or observation.Academic communityIn the diaries most often (although not universally) both of Gouldner’s community constructions were evident,and often illuminated when they come into conflict. One way in which conflict occurs is when boundaries arebreached, and we saw several variations of this (Cohen, 1985). Sometimes the boundaries are internal, whereinstitutional priorities conflict with departmental work:Looking back, I don't think I did a single stitch of actual computer science work or even thoughtabout the process of actually teaching computer science. All of today was strategizing aboutoutreach or administration of programs. [264, June]More commonly, however, the diarists identify the conflict of local and cosmopolitan community interms of finding time and space to do justice to the work of both:Snuck a few minutes to read reviews of our CHI submission. It's a new community for us and Ifound the reviews really informative … It's nice to think about research, even if only for a fewminutes in the day. [47, Nov]Managed to get some of the research work completed. It is a struggle to balance the goodteaching with good research [73, Nov]Having spent the last two days reviewing student project reports, it was good to be able to getback to revising a research paper this morning. I have now sent off the revision to my co-authorin Canada. [75, Sep]As well as these expected constructions, in narrowing our focus to a single discipline we were struck bythe quality of activities and interactions that related specifically to these academics’ disciplinary orientation, assomething separate from their engagement with institutional and research communities. The field and subjectmatter of computing is driven by fast-moving technological advances, and is in constant flux. Student expectationis conditioned by current devices, and there is no sense in which the same lectures can be delivered year-on-year,as in subjects with less volatile material. Most often this was mentioned regard to the currency (and credibility)of teaching material. Sometimes references are immediate and personal, a matter of knowledge and challenge:ICLS 2016 Proceedings1059© ISLSBeej changed all of his examples to take advantage of IPv6 networking routines … My examples(and notes) will need to be almost completely rewritten because the technology changed. [50,Sep]I teach computer science. Today will be spent trying to learn a programming language that Imay be called on to teach in the future. Won't spend a lot of time on it, but I should get started.A few months ago, I started wondering just how many programming languages I have used, orat least studied in my 40 years in the field. It was 14. After 14 languages, number 15 won't behard, I think. [45, Aug]Also took a look at some material on ASP.NET MVC as I'm due to teach this to postgrads soonand I'd better know something about it by then!” [38, Oct]Sometimes the reference is more general, linked to departmental concerns and local community:We discuss plans for the revised Masters' program. It seems our programs need constant revisionto keep up with industry expectations." [60, Nov]We characterised this consistent external reference as a “third community”. Diarists assumed on-goingengagement with current technology as part of their pedagogic responsibility to their local community, not onlyin its impacts on their personal practice, but also in regard to students’ development.I had a chat with people in my department who were playing with the latest iPad technologyand discussing how they were incorporating it into their multimedia lectures. [28, Jan]I really like to use practical tools in my courses. I think it's important for computingprofessionals to develop skills in finding their way through new technology. The challenge isthat requires a significant time investment in not just learning the tools, but also updatingassignments, lab description, and installation instructions. [116, Oct]ImplicationsDiaries (and quotations from diaries) are, by their nature, unremarkable. But they are also revealing in their recordof the routine; these narrative fragments expose the everyday dance that academics tread, reconciling the demandsof different communities, and different community pressures, that inform their professional lives. The “thirdcommunity” that the computer science diaries expose suggests a different sort of academic engagement, one thatsits between Merton and Gouldner’s local and cosmopolitan constructs. It is distinctive because “membership” ofthe third community crosses boundaries, requiring that materials and methods from an external reference groupare not simply used to validate external standing (as is the case with cosmopolitan research) but must be importedand instantiated to maintain standing in the internal, local, community (in teaching). The daily-constructed storiesof actual identity (Sfard and Prusak, 2005) recorded in the diaries might indicate that professional academicidentity in computer science is supported by a powerful, engagement with life-long learning.AcknowledgementsWith thanks to Brad Richards who did the initial coding.The need of community of equals at times of changes: The narratives of IsraeliCS leading teachersYifat Ben-David Kolikant and Ofra BrandesSupporting and nurturing life-long learning skills and disposition among teachers is an important and challengingtask in this era. Teachers need these skills to rapidly adjust to frequent and substantial changes in curricula andpolicy (Gilbert, 2006). Many models of teacher growth assume that the content knowledge is stable (e.g., Berliner,2001) and put the emphasis on what Shulman termed as pedagogical content knowledge (Shulman, 1986; 1987).CS education is characterized by extreme instability of the curricula and teaching methods (Roberts, 2004) and assuch it can serve as, metaphorically, a mirror into the future school reality of rapid changes.Here we report on a study conducted in Israel at a time of a dramatic change. CS has been an electivecourse in Israeli high schools for many years. In 2008 the Israeli high-school CS curricula moved from proceduralprogramming to object-oriented programming (OOP). CS teachers had to teach a paradigm they did not learn inthe university and did not use for their own programming projects. Teaching materials (textbooks, teacher guides,ICLS 2016 Proceedings1060© ISLSlaboratory sessions, and so forth) were developed by groups (of teachers and researchers) appointed by theministry of education. Yet, the dissemination both of the new content knowledge and of the “best” ways to teachit were, and still are, a challenging task.The concept of “CS leading teachers” course was developed to address this challenge. The courses areannual and involve a small group of teachers with good teaching reputations. The underlying assumption is thatthese teachers can serve as agents of change in their field. The courses have been run by Machshava, the IsraeliCS national teacher center. Each year is devoted to a certain topic and contains a component of participants’ workfor the wider community of CS teachers, for example, the preparation of laboratory assignments and exercises.Specifically, in 2008, when the Israeli high-school CS curricula moved from procedural programming to OOP,these teachers were taught OOP in the course. In parallel, they taught it in their classroom for the first time. Theywere also asked to conduct workshops on OOP for fellow teachers. The course supported these activities byproviding time and a framework for discussing how to teach the new content in their own practice and to fellowteachers.The study reported here is a part of a bigger project launched in order to understand the professionalgrowth of these teachers. As part of this, we solicited the professional narratives of these teachers as well as theirprofessional self-perceptions (Van Driel et al, 2001). To this end, we asked 12 teachers who participated in thesecourses to write their “professional biographies”. Participants included all the teachers who participated in 2008and who conducted a workshop for fellow teachers. All participants also participated in the course at least threemore times, in subsequent years. The instructions were to write 2-3 pages with the guidelines: “don’t provide uswith a list of formal training opportunities; we are interested in a description of important junctions, significantdecisions and deeds as well as your self-perceptions as a teacher."It seems that these teachers are life-long learners. Specifically, several characteristics emerged in theteachers’ description of their professional path. All the participants defined themselves as pioneers, or, using thewords of one of them as “jumping into deep, cold water”. Not only were they accustomed to the rapid changes,they were also looking forward to new programs and projects, being eager to challenge themselves. Seven teachers(58%) described their professional growth using the words “in parallel” or “at the same time”, emphasizing thatthey were never content with “just teaching”, but rather were always engaged in additional, self-motivatedprofessional activities, such as studying in the universities, taking (or giving) professional development courses,initiating a new track in school, working in programming in the industry, and developing teaching materials andbooks. The majority (75%) mentioned that requirement to teach a new paradigm meant that their contentknowledge (let alone pedagogical content knowledge) was often far from perfect, however they embraced thefragility: “never mind. If I made a mistake, I’ll fix it in the next lesson”. The main difficulty they experiencedwas loneliness, having to cope with innovations by themselves. Some participants mentioned creativity as animportant feature, having to develop materials for themselves.Two thirds of the participants mentioned the course as a significant step in their professional growth, allof them justified it with the opportunity to form a community, a tighter collaborative relationship with peers withthe similar propensity of embracing change and challenge. These relationships were valuable in the contexts ofteaching new programs, they helped them to better cope with their fragile (pedagogical) content knowledge,consulting and exchanging ideas, tips, and materials.Five participants (42%) mentioned that the course enabled them to extend their professional actionsbeyond the walls of their classrooms, especially to help peers, directly or indirectly (e.g., by producing teachingmaterials), and make an impact on the CSE community by serving on committees and attending conferences. Mostof the teachers valued the course because of the community it had helped them to form and not, for example,because of the exposure to new content and the encounter with University academics. This result suggests thatalthough these expert teachers were far from being novices, and certainly were capable of learning by themselves,they valued the community, which in turn suggests that what life-long learners in this domain need is a continuousopportunity to have a community of equals, where they can elaborate difficulties emerging from their fragilecontent knowledge as well as share and exchange pedagogical ideas.The fact that only 42% of the teachers mentioned the course as preparing them to be agents of change inthe bigger community of computer science teachers aligns with a previous study on an earlier course of CS leadingteachers, that of 2004, in which participants’ initial self-perception was that of knowledge consumers, interestedmerely in their own teaching, rather than that of contributors to the greater community (Ben-David Kolikant andPollack, 2004). We believe that a focus on become change agents can and should be nurtured throughout thecourse. For example, the design of the course by Ben-David Kolikant and Pollack (2004) supported such a change.More work is needed in order to pursue ways to recruit these teachers' enthusiasm towards challenge and changefor the benefits of the wider community of CS teachers.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1061© ISLSReferencesBaker, P. J., & Zey-Ferrell, M. (1984). Local and Cosmopolitan Orientations of Faculty: Implications forTeaching. Teaching Sociology, 12(1), 82-106.Ben-David Kolikant, Y. & Pollack, S. (2004). Community-oriented pedagogy for in-service CS teacher training.ACM SIGCSE Bulletin, 36(3), 191-195.Berliner, D. C. (2001). Learning about and learning from expert teachers. International journal of educationalresearch, 35(5), 463-482.Cohen, Anthony P. (1985) The Symbolic Construction of Community. London: RoutledgeDziallas, S., & Fincher, S. (2014). Learning to learn: The co-evolution of an institution and its students. In 2014IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE) (pp. 1–7).Fincher, S (2012) Using Narrative Methodology: University of Kent PressGilbert, Jane. 2005. Catching the knowledge wave? The knowledge society and the future of education.Wellington, New Zealand: NZCER.Gouldner, A. W. (1957). Cosmopolitans and Locals: Toward an Analysis of Latent Social Roles - I. AdministrativeScience Quarterly, 2(3), 281-306.Gouldner, A. W. (1958). Cosmopolitans and Locals: Toward an Analysis of Latent Social Roles - II.Administrative Science Quarterly, 2(4), 444-480.Grimes, A. J., & Berger, P. K. (1970). Cosmopolitan-Local: Evaluation of the Construct. Administrative ScienceQuarterly, 15, 407-416.Hammack, P. L. (2008). Narrative and the Cultural Psychology of Identity. Personality and Social PsychologyReview, 12(3), 222–247.Mass-Observation, & Harrisson, T. H. (1943). The Pub and the People. A worktown study. London: VictorGollancz.McAdams, D. P. (1995). What Do We Know When We Know a Person? Journal of Personality, 63(3), 365–396.McAdams, D. P. (1997). The stories we live by: personal myths and the making of the self. New York: GuilfordPress.Merton, R. K. (1957). Social theory and social structure (revised and enlarged edition. ed.): Free Press of Glencoe.Moghaddam, F. M., & Harré, R. (2010). Words of conflict, words of war: how the language we use in politicalprocesses sparks fighting. Praeger.National Academy of Engineering. (2005). Educating the Engineer of 2020: Adapting Engineering Education tothe New Century. National Academies Press.Plummer, K. (2001). Documents of Life 2: An Invitation to a Critical Humanism (2nd ed.). London: SagePublicationsRoberts, E. (2004, March). The dream of a common language: The search for simplicity and stability in computerscience education. In ACM SIGCSE Bulletin (Vol. 36, No. 1, pp. 115-119). ACM.Sfard, A. (1998). On Two Metaphors for Learning and the Dangers of Choosing Just One. EducationalResearcher, 27(2), 4–13.Sfard, A., & Prusak, A. (2005). Telling Identities: In Search of an Analytic Tool for Investigating Learning as aCulturally Shaped Activity. Educational Researcher, 34(4), 14–22.Shulman, L. S. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational researcher, 4-14.Shulman, L. (1987). Knowledge and teaching: Foundations of the new reform. Harvard educational review, 57(1),1-23.Somerville, M., Anderson, D., Berbeco, H., Bourne, J. R., Crisman, J., Dabby, D., … Zastavker, Y. (2005). TheOlin curriculum: thinking toward the future. IEEE Transactions on Education, 48(1), 198–205.Stevens, R., O’Connor, K., Garrison, L., Jocuns, A., & Amos, D. M. (2008). Becoming an Engineer: Toward aThree Dimensional View of Engineering Learning. Journal of Engineering Education, 97(3), 355–368.Tenenberg, J., & Fincher, S. (2007, March). Opening the door of the computer science classroom: the disciplinarycommons. In ACM SIGCSE Bulletin (Vol. 39, No. 1, pp. 514-518). ACM.Tuma, N. B., & Grimes, A. J. (1981). A Comparison of Models for Role Orientations of Professionals in aResearch-Oriented University. Administrative Science Quarterly, 26(2), 187-206.van Driel, J. H., Beijaard, D., & Verloop, N. (2001). Professional development and reform in science education:The role of teachers’ practical knowledge. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(2), 137–158.Yamakawa, Y., Forman, E., & Ansell, E. (2009). Role of positioning: The role of positioning in constructing anidentity in a third grade mathematics classroom. In K. Kumpulainen, C. E. Hmelo-Silver, & M. César(Eds.), Investigating Classroom Interaction: Methodologies in Action (pp. 179–201). Sense Publishers.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1062© ISLS