Epistemic Agency as a Members’ ExperienceDanielle Keifert, University of California Los Angeles, keifert@ucla.eduChristina Krist, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, ckrist@illinois.eduDéana Scipio, University of California Davis, aeolani@gmail.comAnna Philips, Tufts University, Anna.Phillips@tufts.eduAbstract: We present a conceptualization of epistemic agency that centers attention onparticipants’ experience as a central identifying criterion, including the powered nature ofinquiry. This allows us to examine how and by whom the inquiry is defined, navigated, andreified. We draw upon the existing conceptualization of inquiry as a members’ phenomenon toattend to how key epistemic moments—beginnings and endings—allow us to recognizelearners’ competence in defining and shaping knowledge products. We take this as anopportunity to sensitize ourselves to issues of power and equity in STEM learning spaces. Weargue that viewing epistemic agency as a members’ experience sensitizes researchers andeducators to collaboratively decide with learners (rather than for learners) what counts asmaking progress and identifying paths within and through STEM learning environments.IntroductionOne of the key challenges of the “practice turn” in US science education (Ford & Forman, 2006) is supportinglearners’ participation in science and engineering practices, particularly with respect to knowledge building.Informed by research on learning environments that turn over varying degrees of knowledge-buildingresponsibility to students (e.g., Calabrese Barton & Tan, 2010; Engle & Conant, 2002; Scardamalia, 2002), mostscholars agree that epistemic agency is a key goal underlying these reforms (Berland et al., 2016; Duschl, 2008;Stroupe, 2014; Windschitl, Thompson, & Braaten, 2008). Existing characterizations of learners participating withepistemic agency often position learners to negotiate paths forward within ongoing inquiry by engaging with thesubstance of ideas (e.g., arguing that a model of air should include empty space between particles) or navigatinginvestigations once begun (e.g., deciding what roles each group member will take on to conduct an experiment).In contrast, we wish to examine how learners negotiate the context of the inquiry itself: how students and youthnegotiate satisfying beginnings and endings to inquiry (e.g., orienting to a new shared puzzle as worthy ofinvestigating, coming to consensus that as explanation is satisfactory). Here we draw on Schegloff’s (1992)context—an understanding of participants’ activity that participants’ themselves show to be relevant duringinteraction—in this case how participants show they are orienting to their activity as a moment of inquiry. Wealso examine negotiations with series of moments in inquiry pathways. We argue that attending to negotiationsacross moments and pathways sensitizes us to issues of power and equity as we wrestle with how to productivelysupport students’ agentive participation in science knowledge building.In this paper, we present a conceptualization of epistemic agency that centers our attention on theexperiences of participants as a central identifying criterion. This allows us to examine how and by whom themoments of inquiry are defined, navigated, and reified. We begin by drawing upon a framing of inquiry as amembers’ phenomenon (Keifert, 2015; Keifert & Stevens, accepted) as a lens for exploring critical moments ininquiry: interactional beginnings and endings. We use this lens to examine two examples of students beginningand ending inquiry on their own terms (over and against their teachers’ plans). We build a conceptualization ofepistemic agency a members’ experience (EAME). This conceptualization prepares us to recognize participants’competence and create space for transformative outcomes. We intend this conceptualization to be drawn upon asa lens not only at the scale of particular interactions (as members’ phenomenon is bound), but also at broaderscales of activity across learning experiences. As a result, we see the value of EAME in presenting a view oflearning where learners’ experience is the center of educators’ and researchers’ attention for deciding what countsas meaningful participation in scientific work. This re-positions all learners, but particularly those historicallydisempowered in STEM spaces, to use science as a tool for their own learning and purposes.An interactional definition of inquiry as a guiding lens for epistemic agencyWe begin by briefly presenting inquiry as a members’ phenomenon—IMP (Keifert, 2015, Keifert & Stevens,accepted). IMP helps identify where “productive scientific work” might be happening by recognizing howparticipants orient to their activity as inquiry. Specifically, we examine beginnings and endings as key momentsin any interaction (Jordan & Henderson, 1995). These moments illustrate how participants jointly negotiate whatit is that is worth working on together, rather than looking for interactions that fit an a priori description of doingscience or inquiry, such as characterizations of argumentation or experimentation. Importantly, this lens is notICLS 2018 Proceedings192© ISLSmeant to replace such characterizations or to negate the importance of accountability to the discipline forsomething to “count” as doing science. Instead, this lens is meant to highlight what may be otherwise overlookeddimensions of the data: it focuses our attention on what participants do that signals productive work to them. Wedraw upon IMP in the analysis of two moments of inquiry (in a middle school classroom and undergraduatephysics course) to examine how students’ experiences with shaping inquiry in beginnings and endings tell usabout what counts as meaningful, agentive scientific work to them. This analysis in turn helps us to developepistemic agency as a members’ experience, a conceptualization we find fruitful at multiple scales.Inquiry as a Members’ Phenomenon (IMP)To identify participants’ perspectives about what counts as productive work to them (Sacks, 1967/1992; Stevens,2010), we draw on a definition of inquiry developed through interactional and ethnographic analyses of videodata of everyday interaction (McDermott, Gospodinoff, & Aron, 1978; Jordan & Henderson, 1995). Theseanalyses characterized patterns of beginnings and endings of joint exploration, as well as the ways that childrenmade progress during inquiry as they drew upon a variety of sensemaking resources. Figure 1 represents thesepatterns as a prism. The definition of inquiry synthesized from these patterns emphasizes (1) how participantscome to begin inquiry as they orient to a shared puzzle, (2) the sensemaking they engage in to make progress ininquiry, and (3) how they end that inquiry as they orient to ending in a manner satisfactory to them.The PrismPatterns in the DataDefinition of Inquiry as a Members’ PhenomenonFigure 1. The prism of Inquiry as a Members’ Phenomenon (Keifert & Stevens, accepted).An IMP illustration: Caroline, Momma, and the FogWe present a brief example drawn from this data corpus to illustrate how IMP shows up in interaction and guidesour attention to what participants consider to be important and productive work. This example comes from videoof Caroline (5y 11m) and Momma at breakfast. Caroline worked to initiate a joint exploration around the fog shenoticed outside. Caroline turned her head to the front of the house, then called “Hey Momma” and pointed towardsthe front of the house, wiggling her hand and adding “Outda window?” in a concerned tone. She then asked, “Whyis it so smoky?” After she saw Momma looking out a different window, she repeated this pattern. Caroline’s‘winding up activity’ (Jordan & Henderson, 1995) carefully coordinated Momma’s attention through talk, gaze,and gesture before she uttered her first question. The range of material and interactional resources she drew uponto coordinate this activity provide indicators that exploring this shared puzzle was important for Caroline.Ending their joint interaction around the “smoky” also required coordination of material and interactionalresources. After walking out the front door to examine the fog more closely, Momma returned and explained toCaroline, “I think it’s just fog...like clouds that are way down low...just blowing by.” Momma oriented to this asa satisfactory explanation for her by turning away to talk to Caroline’s sister. However, after Momma turnedaway, Caroline asked, “But, has it done that before?” pressing for further explanation. In response, Mommareoriented to their exploration. She explained that while it “doesn’t happen very often here,” “it’s nothing to worryabout…[it] happens to be what the weather is today...kinda of low level- low layer of fog”. In response, Carolineturned her attention elsewhere, indicating her satisfaction. In this episode, Caroline and Momma jointly achieveda satisfactory ending only when both oriented to Momma’s explanations as satisfactory. Similar to ‘winding up’efforts, these ‘winding down’ efforts indicated what kind of explanation was satisfactory for Caroline.This moment illustrates what we mean by jointly negotiated; it highlights Caroline’s work to achieveshared attention with Momma, their shared exploration of the fog, and efforts to achieve a satisfactory resolution.It also highlights that even very young children like Caroline, age five, take such puzzles seriously as worthy ofexploration. This focus on the relevant puzzles and satisfying explanations aligns with recent work emphasizingaffect as inherent to inquiry (Jaber & Hammer, 2016; Manz 2015) and work that recognizes children’s diversesense-making resources (e.g., Nasir, Rosebery, Warren, & Lee, 2006). As an endogenous representation ofICLS 2018 Proceedings193© ISLSinquiry, IMP focuses on learners’ experience, supporting researchers and designers to explore inquiry pathwayswith learners in ways that allow joint determination of what counts as important and productive scientific work.Looking for epistemic agency in interactional beginnings and endsUsing IMP to identify moments of productive scientific work helps us decide where to look for the epistemicagency that matters in terms of shaping participants’ experiences of making decisions about beginning and endingknowledge-building interactions. After identifying these interactional beginnings and endings, we then sought tocharacterize how epistemic agency shows up in those interactions. Rather than viewing epistemic agency as a traitor characteristic of an individual, we draw on Damşa and colleagues (2010) interactional conceptualization ofepistemic agency as shared, emergent through “collaborative activities aimed at the creation of shared knowledgeobjects” (p. 146). In addition, we use Gresalfi et al.’s (2009) operationalization of “agency” as actions (or refrainsfrom acting) that impact the joint activity of a group. When we add “epistemic,” we focus in on actions (orrefrains from action) related to knowing and knowledge-building. For example, the choice of using a black penover a blue pen may be an exercise of agency, but typically not one of epistemic agency. However, if that choiceis accompanied by a conversation about how water molecules and air molecules are two different things andshould be represented differently, then that choice becomes an exercise of epistemic agency.We are also explicitly interested in young peoples’ epistemic agency—that is, in understanding how it isthat students and youth act in ways that substantially impact collaborative knowledge-building activity in science.This activity often occurs in settings where students are the “novices” and adults are considered the “experts”: K12 schooling, university classrooms, or programs for youth involvement in professional science labs. Structurallyspeaking, the bulk of the substantive epistemic decision-making is the responsibility of these expert adults.Therefore, any actions on the part of students and youth that have an impact on their shared knowledge buildingare the result of a re-negotiation of epistemic responsibility and of power. We examine such instances next.Epistemic agency in inquiry: Images of some ideal casesWe present two examples illustrating young people’s experiences in substantially negotiating the beginnings andendings of inquiry: their epistemic agency. Examples come from studies conducted in a variety of settings (K-12,university science classrooms) with diverse participants (middle school-young adults). Each vignette represents asubstantial re-negotiation of epistemic responsibility and power in ways that allowed learners to be the primarydecision-makers at critical points of their inquiry. We use them as vision-casting illustrations: they are not meantto be representative, but instead were intentionally selected to provide concrete cases that expand our notions ofwhat it means to fully embrace reform-based goals of engaging students meaningfully in science practices.Beginning by identifying and articulating problemsWe begin by exploring students orienting to a shared puzzle at the beginnings of inquiry and at pivot points towardnew lines of investigation. Determining what is cause for inquiry is a significant epistemic accomplishment. Thisexample comes from a study which identified exemplar moments of students’ seeking coherent, causalexplanations of the natural world and to identify themes and patterns across these cases (see Watkins, Hammer,Jaber, Radoff and Phillips, in press; Phillips, Watkins and Hammer (2017). In all cases, students did work toidentify, articulate, convince others of inconsistencies or gaps in their understanding, which we refer to asproblems or puzzles. In most cases, this process was a primary dynamic, sustained for several minutes andinvolving multiple participants. In this way, we see this work of orienting towards a shared puzzle as importantto the students’ experiences of engaging in inquiry. These shared puzzles become student-created knowledgeobjects. In no case was this an explicit goal of the instructors; rather the importance of problems as knowledgeobjects emerged spontaneously within classrooms that fostered epistemic agency.To illustrate this point, we present part of an episode from a discussion section within a college physicscourse. During the previous day’s lecture, students discussed a homework question: Does an escalator do more,less, or the same work on you if you walk up or stand still as you go between floors? Most students answered thatthe escalator does more work. After some discussion about each option, the instructor had given students theanswer—the escalator does less work on you when you walk—and moved on. In a recitation section the next day,the TA noticed that students were still discussing the question. She abandoned her previous plans and askedstudents instead to share their thinking about the question. A student, Pat, struggled to articulate her confusion.Pat:I was saying if we're- Well, if you're walking up the escalator, doesn't the escalatordo-well we already know it does less work on you but, like, if for that time, you'restill moving up, you're moving up at a constant rate so it's not changing the amountof- wait, ok let me try to articulate this.ICLS 2018 Proceedings194© ISLSTA:Pat:TA:Pat:TA:Pat:Ok. (6.0 second pause)Well, when you're walking- no, the escalator isn't doing more work on you whileyou're walking up for the same argument that we said in class where it was like, yourfeet is always on the ground, so the same amount of weight is always on the ground,so therefore the escalator is always exerting the same amount of force on you. But ifyou're jumping for example, then that means that the amount of force the escalatoron you- is doing on you, changes (inflected up).So, if you're jumping, or I would argue, even walking…No, if you're jumping on the same step, and you're moving up an escalator, forexample,Oh, if you're jumping on the same step.(Overlapping) [Same step]. So, in that case, wouldn't the escalator be doing moreforce on you, compared to if you're standing still?(A) Pat pauses for six sections(B) Pat gestures as she says “jumping on the same step”Figure 2. Pat explains (left, front) works to articulate her question.Within a brief back and forth with the TA, Pat clarified that her question was about what happens if you jump upand down on the same step as you move up the escalator (Figure 2). Other students then took up this question,driving a new round of discussion around the concepts of force and work. There was still something botheringstudents, including Pat, about the original homework question. There was still a problem, even though they knewthe correct answer to the original question. Pat’s achievement in this moment was not constructing an answer orexplanation; it was constructing a new question to address her confusion about the earlier question and answer.We see students’ epistemic agency, not only in the sense that they had control over the topic they pursued,but also in the sense that they had the authority to decide whether or not there was a puzzle. In this episode, wesee Pat’s contribution sparking renewed engagement around the ideas of work and force. In other cases, we seestudents’ work to articulate their confusion and construct problems sparking new lines of inquiry and sustainingstudents’ engagement (Phillips, et al 2017; Watkins, et al, in press). We see a complementary response of theeducator, allowing Pat and the students the time and power to determine for themselves (at the cost of her lessonplan) a problem worth pursuing. By attending to this beginning, we see how students shifted what counted as openfor inquiry, thereby determining for themselves (and with the support of their instructor) a context for inquiry.Ending inquiries by listening, empathizing, and changing one’s mindWe now explore how shared epistemic agency shapes ending inquiry. This example comes from a study thatobserved middle school science classrooms to examine students’ participation in science practices developed overthree years (Krist, 2016). We present a moment when middle school students oriented to a satisfactory ending toexploration, by their own terms; their experience was one in which they had the power to decide their inquiry wasdone, and they took on the responsibility to get everyone (including the teacher) on the same page about it.During the last few days of an earth sciences unit exploring plate tectonics, Mr. M’s 8th grade class wastrying to figure out what kind of plate interactions were forming the Andes Mountains in South America. Theyinitially claimed that they were caused by oceanic- continental subduction, when an oceanic plate moves towardsand underneath a continental plate, but they noticed two key details that made them question this claim: the trench(a key feature indicative of subduction) was slightly west of the South American coastline; and the SouthAmerican plate itself was much bigger than South America, meaning it was covered about equally with ocean andcontinent. These observations led to a several-minutes-long discussion about how they would define whether theSouth American plate was oceanic or continental.Before they had reached a decision, Logan asked why it even mattered that they decide which kind ofplate it was anyway, eventually proposing that all plates are an alloy-like mixture of basalt and granite:Logan: Why can’t it just mix together? Like, to make bronze we, we’ve got to mix copper andtin together. Nah, I’m ser–this is on point? [...] No, look, to make something else,ICLS 2018 Proceedings195© ISLSyou’ve got to mix two things together. You get that, right? So why can’t the plates justlike, mix together and then they make like a super-plate?This idea was highly contentious, and became more heated as Logan drew out his idea on the board and labeledone melting plate as “oceanic” and one melting plate as “continental” (Figure 2). Several members of the classinsisted that his labels were a problem, but Logan argued it did not matter what the labels were. There was a lotof cross-talk in response, with several students voicing their opinion that his idea could not work. In the midst ofthis milieu, Amy, who had been quiet, clarified why Logan’s model did not work:Amy:I think what I’m trying to say is that like, it wouldn’t make sense because isn’t theoceanic plate like, less dense? I mean-Logan: No. The oceanic’s more dense.Multiple speakers: [Unintelligible] why is that? [Several voices] Why is that one there?Mr. M: Okay, then – I want, I want just Amy and Logan, no one else, for the next minute.[Several voices; Amy says something inaudible to Logan]Logan: I get it [erases board](A) Logan’s model of mixed plate materials.(B) Logan after erasing his model and explainingwhat he “got” about plate density.Figure 3. Images representing students’ discussion.As Logan erased the board, Mr. M exclaimed, “I don’t get it, what’s this—Wait, ah—ha?!?” He jumpedforward from where he had been in the back of the room, sat at a table in the second row, and raised his hand.Logan gestured for him to speak, and Mr. M said, “I don’t get what you just got. Can you say it slowly?” Loganexplained that the differences in density in the plates meant that the continental plate could not go under theoceanic plate. Mr. M responded, “Okay, I missed that. So something was mislabeled or something?” While Mr.M struggled to understand why Logan had thrown out his entire model, Courtney summarized for Mr. M that inlight of Amy’s idea, only one type of plate could go under the other; so then if the Andes were formed bysubduction, the South American plate would have to be continental.This “ending” of the inquiry was catalyzed by Amy’s simple, and mostly inaudible, comment about platedensity. She made this comment after listening to Logan’s idea and others’ critiques of it and pinpointing a pieceof information that he was missing that convinced him to change his mind. While Mr. M saw this “resolution” asa decision about the labels on Logan’s model, which perhaps they could continue tweaking, Logan and Courtneysaw it as an ending of an exploration around Logan’s idea. This case highlights how students pushed back uponthe power structures of schooling in that they move the teacher to their satisfaction despite his expectations/plans.It is important to note, however, that the work they are doing is different than conceptualizations of students’resistance in the classroom, or intentional non-participation, often in opposition to a teacher’s wishes (e.g., Hand2010). In this case, the teacher and students were on the same “team,” so to speak; through their negotiation, hewas eventually brought on board with their experience of a satisfactory ending.Epistemic agency as a members’ experienceThese two examples illustrate epistemic agency as a member’s experience (EAME). Our brief analysis illustratesthe interactional accomplishments involved in orienting to beginnings and endings to inquiry and in substantiallyshaping the nature of those beginnings and endings. This prepares us to recognize the importance of empoweringlearners to make critical epistemic decisions in key moments such the negotiation of beginnings and endings toinquiry that fundamentally influence subsequent inquiry pathways. In this way, EAME also helps us attend toissues of power and potential transformation across the process of inquiry. We now draw upon EAME to explorelearners’ transformation of inquiry paths across the scale weeks engagement in an informal learning environment.ICLS 2018 Proceedings196© ISLSUsing Epistemic Agency as a Members’ Experience as a lens to understandyouths’ transformation of inquiry pathsDrawing upon epistemic agency as a members’ experience (EAME), we attend now to the impact of histories ofpower and exclusion in STEM spaces by considering how membership interacts with epistemic agency.Specifically, we draw upon EAME to sensitize us to the contexts learners create (and re-create) for inquiry whenthey are positioned as epistemic agents throughout the process of inquiring. Considering how people canparticipate with epistemic agency raises questions not just about the nature of participation but also the goals.For the purposes of this paper let us consider the concept of making progress through the prism of IMPin Figure 1 (above) by leveraging data at a different scale. Making progress through the prism can be thought ofas either potentially benign participation trajectories, or as a set of powered interactions (Esmonde & Booker,2017). In this case we explore two types of trajectories for youth participating with epistemic agency: a) inclusiveand b) transformative (Scipio, in preparation). Inclusive epistemic agency refers to the ways in which youth wereable to feel like knowledge creators within existing STEM participation frames (Stroupe, 2014). Transformativeepistemic agency refers to the ways in which youth are able to transform science learning spaces to more closelyresemble their own ways of knowing and sharing expertise across the longer pathways they navigate throughlearning experiences. We present here a brief characterization based on extensive ethnographic analysis (Scipio,2015) to illustrate inclusive and transformative epistemic agency.Inclusive epistemic agency is built upon work that draws links between everyday science and canonicalscience practices (Bricker & Bell, 2014; Toomey Zimmerman & Bell, 2014) making it clear that youth canparticipate in disciplinary ways. While this work repositions youth as knowledge holders and developing experts,these descriptions may also sensitize us to evaluate youth participants’ competence only in relationship todisciplinary practices. Using examples from youth participating in a chemical oceanography out-of-school time(OST) broadening participation program (Scipio, 2015), we can see how powered relationships to disciplinaryexpectations can shape youth participation trajectories. The OST program was a collaboration between two youthserving environmental education programs, a chemical oceanography laboratory, and a learning sciences researchlaboratory. Youth in the program learned about fish feminization in the local body of water and designed theirown research project to leverage the chemical oceanography laboratory’s resources to answer their own questionsabout water quality. The youth in Scipio’s study participated in the full practices of the collaborating laboratory.They learned how to “make progress” in ways that mapped onto canonical expectations—they collaborativelydesigned and conducted a research study, they made a poster, and they presented their work at an internationalconference. As such, their epistemic agency and pathways through the prism were directly related to canonicaldefinitions of STEM participation (similar to the hypothetical students in the classroom in the introduction).This leads us to ask questions about EAME informed by Megan Bang and Shirin Vossoughi’s questions(2016) about designs in the learning sciences. In particular, can students have experiences in which their decisionmaking involves “productively disrupting historically powered relations as part of working towards equity andforms of just democracies” (p. 173)? Aiming for such versions of epistemic agency is particularly important foryouth from nondominant groups who frequently experience school science spaces as places where settledexpectations of normative behaviors and epistemologies are in conflict with their lived experiences and interests(Bang, Warren, Rosebery & Medin, 2012) and also has the potential to disrupt powered relationships inclassrooms (Warren & Rosebery, 2011). While inclusive epistemic agency plays an important role in learning, itdoes not present a way of thinking about youth participating with epistemic agency that allows youth as themembers to define the context of inquiry or re-define forms of science participation. Truly redefining epistemicagency as a members’ experience calls for an exploration of the ways that youth participants’ agency transformsSTEM spaces (Calabrese Barton, 2001; Calabrese Barton & Tan, 2010). Calabrese Barton (2001) explored thiswithin the context of urban schools where young women redefined what “making progress” in STEM learningspaces could look like. In the OST program, redefining participation led the youth and scientists to collaborativelycreate new sampling, analysis, and data processing protocols in response to questions posed by youth participantsand to transform communication. For example, the team co-created a new sampling kit using glass bottles becausethe youth wanted to be able to test for chemicals in plastics and the old sampling bottles would have contaminatedthe water. Youth and scientists collaboratively created a new inquiry pathway—they asked a new questionrequiring the development of new procedures and materials. The lab then adopted these procedures as part of theirstandard practice. Thus, youth transformed the practices of this lab as they became members of it. Drawing uponEAME aligned with a critical historical perspective sensitizes us to transformative outcomes.Discussion and implicationsWe have presented a conceptualization of epistemic agency that centers our attention on the experiences ofparticipants, especially the powered nature of interactions in which participants (learners and educators) negotiateICLS 2018 Proceedings197© ISLSthe contexts of inquiry. We introduced the frame of inquiry as a members’ phenomenon to draw our attention tothe ways in participants jointly negotiate the context of inquiry. We demonstrated how drawing on IMP orientsour attention to the beginnings and endings of inquiry as key moments of negotiation where we can see learners’experiences of epistemic agency. We saw students’ competence in articulating their confusion and decidingwhether there was a problem to be investigated. We also saw students’ competence in orienting both themselves,and then their teacher, to a satisfactory ending of inquiry by their own terms. We then drew upon thatrepresentation of epistemic agency as a members’ experience at a different analytic scale and in conjunction witha critical historical perspective to orient us not only to learners’ competence in negotiating beginnings and endings,but to position youth to transform ongoing disciplinary practices of STEM laboratories to include new practicesthat reflect new contexts of inquiry negotiated based on their own interests and concerns.What does this mean for us as researchers and as educators? First, assuming that learners are capable ofexerting epistemic agency is an important first step, and working to create pathways in which they experience thatownership and power is a critical design goal. Many of the existing examples in the literature are cases in whichstudents’ epistemic agency was emergent through a confluence of design factors (e.g., Engle & Conant, 2002);cases of environments explicitly designed to support students’ epistemic agency are rare (see Calabrese Barton &Tan, 2010, Bang et al., 2017 as examples of spaces intentionally designed to support students’ epistemic agency).In part this is because the goals of having learners participate in science practices in ways that position them toengage deeply with the substance of ideas and to take ownership in navigating the investigations that work tobuild them (Reiser, Novak, & McGill, 2017) are incredibly difficult to realize fully in classrooms. We are drawingupon carefully selected moments to push forward our conceptualizations of epistemic agency, and to remind usthat “agency” is not only about providing choice, but that it requires careful decision-making about the nature ofthose choices. It requires thinking first about how participants would experience the constraints and affordancesof those choices, and how that experience might shape future possibilities for decision-making and interaction.We also see how when learners are positioned as competent, we should expect to be unsettled. Attendingto issues of power and equity in learning requires that learners be positioned as epistemic agents with the powerto transform the context of inquiry, both in regards to the practices and paths. This requires active work on thepart of facilitators to support students’ transformative work. It also requires support for educators to learn tonavigate with students rather than for students. The examples presented here illustrate how teachers and facilitatorshad to “let go” of their plans and follow learners. In terms of teacher learning and PD, we need new heuristics andcriteria that teachers/facilitators can learn to leverage in supporting students, both as competent epistemic agents,and as transformative epistemic agents who disrupt existing powered relations.ReferencesBang, M., Brown, B., Barton, A. C., Rosebery, A., & Warren, B. (2017). Toward more equitable learning inscience. In C. Schwarz, C. Passmore, & B. J Reiser (Eds)., Helping Students Make Sense of the WorldUsing Next Generation Science and Engineering Practices. NSTA Press.Bang, M., & Vossoughi, S. (2016). Participatory Design Research and Educational Justice: Studying Learningand Relations Within Social Change Making. Cognition and Instruction, 34(3), 173–193.Bang, M., Warren, B., Rosebery, A. S., & Medin, D. (2012). Desettling Expectations in Science Education.Human Development, 55, 302–318. Berland, L. K., Schwarz, C. V., Krist, C., Kenyon, L., Lo, A. S., &Reiser, B. J. (2016). Epistemologies in practice: Making scientific practices meaningful for students.Journal of Research in Science Teaching.Bricker, L. a., & Bell, P. (2014). “What comes to mind when you think of science? The perfumery!”: Documentingscience-related cultural learning pathways across contexts and timescales. Journal of Research in ScienceTeaching, 51(3), 260–285.Calabrese Barton, A. C. (2001). Science education in urban settings: Seeking new ways of praxis through criticalethnography. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(8), 899–917.Calabrese Barton, A., & Tan, E. (2010). We be burnin'! Agency, identity, and science learning. The Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 19(2), 187-229.Damşa, C. I., Kirschner, P. A., Andriessen, J. E., Erkens, G., & Sins, P. H. (2010). Shared epistemic agency: Anempirical study of an emergent construct. the journal of the learning sciences, 19(2), 143-186.Duschl, R. (2008). Science education in three-part harmony: Balancing conceptual, epistemic, and social learninggoals.Review of research in education, 32(1), 268-291.Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition andInstruction, 20(4), 399-483.Ford, M. J., & Forman, E. A. (2006). Chapter 1: Redefining disciplinary learning in classroom contexts. ReviewICLS 2018 Proceedings198© ISLSof research in education, 30(1), 1-32.Gresalfi, M., Martin, T., Hand, V., & Greeno, J. (2009). Constructing competence: An analysis of studentparticipation in the activity systems of mathematics classrooms. Educational studies in mathematics,70(1), 49-70.Hand, V. M. (2010). The co-construction of opposition in a low-track mathematics classroom. AmericanEducational Research Journal, 47(1), 97-132.Esmonde, I., & Booker, A. N. (2017). Power and privilege in the learning sciences : Critical and socioculturaltheories of learning. New York: Routledge.Jaber, L. Z., & Hammer, D. (2016). Learning to feel like a scientist. Science Education, 100(2), 189-220.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction Analysis: Foundations and Practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39–103.Keifert, D. (2015). Young Children Participating in Inquiry: Moments of Joint Inquiry and Questioning Practicesat Home and in School (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from Proquest. (3724286)Keifert, D. & Stevens, R. (accepted). Competent inquirers making sense of things together: Young children’sinquiry as a members’ phenomenon. Journal of the Learning Sciences.Krist, C. (2016). Meaningful engagement in scientific practices: How classroom communities develop authenticepistemologies for science (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest. (1826020461).Manz, E. (2015). Resistance and the development of scientific practice: Designing the mangle into scienceinstruction. Cognition and Instruction, 33(2), 89-124.McDermott, R. P., Gospodinoff, K., & Aron, J. (1978). Criteria for an ethnographically adequate description ofconcerted activities and their contexts. Semiotica, 24(3-4), 245-276.Nasir, N., Rosebery, A., Warren, B., & Lee, C. (2006). Learning as cultural process: Achieving equity throughdiversity. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences. New York:Cambridge University Press.Phillips, A. M., Watkins, J., & Hammer, D. (2017). Problematizing as a scientific endeavor. Physical ReviewPhysics Education Research, 13(2), 020107.Reiser, B. J., Novak, M., & McGill, T. A. W. (2017). Coherence from the students’ perspective: Why the visionof the Framework for K-12 Science requires more than simply “combining” three dimensions of sciencelearning. Paper prepared for the Board on Science Education Workshop, 6/27/2017.Sacks, H. (1967/1992). Omnirelevant devices; settinged activities; “indicator terms” (February 16, 1967). In G.Jefferson (Ed.), Lectures on conversation: Volumes I and II (pp. 515–522). Oxford, England: Blackwell.Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. Liberal educationin a knowledge society, 97, 67-98.Scipio, D. A. (2015). Developing mentors: Adult participation, practices, and learning in an out-of-school timeSTEM program. Retrieved from ProQuest. (1722533538).Scipio, D. A. (in preparation). Broadening participation through inclusive and transformative epistemic agencywithin a chemical oceanography out-of-school time program.Stevens, R. (2010). Learning as a Members' Phenomenon: Toward an Ethnographically Adequate Science ofLearning. Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education, 109(1), 82-97.Stroupe, D. (2014). Practice Communities: How Teachers and Students Negotiate Epistemic Agency and LearnScience-As-Practice. Science Education, 98(3), 487–516.Toomey Zimmerman, H., & Bell, P. (2014). Where Young People See Science: Everyday activities connected toscience. International Journal of Science Education, Part B, 4(1), 25–53.Warren, B., & Rosebery, A. S. (2011). Navigating Interculturality: African American Male Students and theScience Classroom. Journal of African American Males in Education, 2(1), 98–115.Watkins, J. E, Hammer, D, Jaber, L., Radoff, J. & Phillips, A. M. (in press) Positioning as not-understanding:The value of showing uncertainty for engaging in science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching.Windschitl, M., Thompson, J., & Braaten, M. (2008). Beyond the scientific method: Model‐based inquiry as anew paradigm of preference for school science investigations. Science Education, 92(5), 941-967.AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank Brian Reiser for his feedback on earlier discussions of this work. The projects describedin this paper were funded by a National Science Foundation grant to the LIFE Center (#SMA-0835854) and tothe University of Washington (#9014483), an Institute of Education Sciences grant to Northwestern (US DOE#R205B080027), a National Science Foundation grant to Northwestern University (#1020316), a Gordon andBetty Moore Foundation grant to Tufts University (GBMF3475), the NAEd/Spencer Dissertation FellowshipProgram, the John F. Burlingame Graduate Fellowship in Physics, and the TERC Postdoctoral Fellowship.ICLS 2018 Proceedings199© ISLS