Design Math: Middle-School Youth Making Math by Building YurtsKylie Peppler and Mishael Sedaskpeppler@iu.edu, rmsedas@iu.eduIndiana UniversityTarrence Banks, John Searcy, and Scott Wallacebankst54@theprojectschool.org, jsearcy@theprojectschool.org, swallace@theprojectschool.orgThe Project SchoolAbstract: While Project-Based Learning (PBL) has been shown to be an effective approach tolearning, teaching math through PBL has long been challenging for practitioners. To explorenew ways to engage youth and complement math learning in the classroom, researchers andmiddle school teachers collaborated to implement a year-long PBL course, “Design Math.” Thiscourse supported math learning through design and textile-based crafting projects by leveragingembodiment and tangible manipulatives. Students built life-size and scale-model yurts (i.e.,tents) while adhering to a set of design constraints. Preliminary findings suggest that projectbased approaches in math learning have the potential to promote and sustain studentengagement, broaden participation in mathematical thinking, and afford deeper conceptualunderstanding of the mathematical concepts of measurement and geometry.Keywords: Project-based math learning, geometry, middle-school math, ConstructionismIntroductionIn 2016, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics projected that the strongest job growth in the next decade will be inthe areas of “operations research analysts, statisticians, actuaries, and other mathematics-oriented jobs,” whichare projected to grow by 28% (compared with just 12.5% for computer and information technology) (DeSilver,2016). Giving the growing employment trends for math-oriented jobs, it is startling to see that only 33% of eighthgrade students are at or above their math proficient level (U.S. Department of Education, 2015). That is, whilemath is increasingly important for job-seekers in the United States, those who are educated in the U.S. are lessqualified to fill these positions. But more than exclusively making a “market economy” argument of supply versusdemand, the poor math performance trend of these students is an indicator of insufficient preparation in priorgrades and for future academic years, especially if they will be pursuing STEM careers.For more than two decades, Project-Based Learning (PBL; Blumenfeld et al., 1991; Krajcik & Shin,2014) has been an effective pedagogical approach to developing problem solving skills, deeper conceptualunderstanding, and increasing engagement. However, studies of project-based math initiatives are outnumberedby studies of project-based learning in science and social studies (Condliffe et al., 2017). In order to contribute tothe understanding of the effectiveness of project-based learning for math content and practices, we partnered witha public charter school. This unique setting has integrated PBL across its entire educational ecosystem (i.e.,teachers, students, curriculum, culture) for over eight years, but not as consistently every year for mathematics.To address this need, we developed a Research-Practice Partnership with teachers and administrators for grades7-8 for the co-creation and implementation of a new PBL math curriculum, Design Math (DM).DM is a set of collaborative PBL activities for the learning of middle-school geometry through designing,modeling, and sewing in two projects: a scale model and a full-size fabric yurt (i.e., tent). DM is designed toaddress a number of Indiana State’s middle-school geometry math standards, including (1) 2D-3D nets, (2)protractor use, (3) area and volume calculation, (4) angle types (e.g., acute, obtuse), (5) congruence, and (6)transformations. In our research, we sought to discover whether students in grades 7-8 demonstrate mathematicalproficiency as defined by the National Research Council (NRC) through their involvement in DM, as well as touncover the extent to which this project-based math learning initiative affords conceptual understanding ofgeometry and measurement, increases and sustain student engagement, and promotes problem solving skills.BackgroundSince the 1990s, major reforms in mathematics education have resulted in periodic Math Standards (e.g., NationalCouncil of Teachers of Mathematics, 2000) which guide all state educational systems with one commonunderstanding of mathematical proficiency. The National Research Council (2002, 2005) defined mathematicalICLS 2018 Proceedings1165© ISLSproficiency as five interdependent strands: conceptual understanding, procedural fluency (computing),strategic competence (applying), adaptive reasoning, and productive disposition (engaging).When math is believed to be just rules and procedures, one is putting a lot of emphasis on the computingstrand that produces a weak level of math proficiency. But if pedagogical approaches include all strands, then theywill produce strong sense making necessary for successful problem solving (NRC, 2005). Research shows thatPBL usually involves real-world contexts, supporting and promoting deeper understanding, and sustainedengagement (Epstein et al., 2010). PBL is also collaborative and cognitively engaging, with multiple sources ofsupport as students apply their knowledge and understanding of concepts (Blumenfeld et al., 1991). Thus, webelieve that PBL aligns with the goals of mathematical proficiency.However, project-based math can be challenging. Working outside of “traditional” textbooks andcurriculum can be seen as risky for teachers given the high-stakes nature of math performance in today’s publicschool context. Thus, teachers are rightly concerned about students performing adequately on both state anddistrict standardized tests (Huberman et al., 2014). Other challenges are that PBL takes more time to prepare andimplement than more traditional approaches; it needs careful preparation to provide scaffolds and to be able toimplement during limited class periods. PBL activities also introduce classroom management skills different fromthose of the traditional classroom, such as providing constant feedback, giving more time for reflection, andfacilitating small-group collaboration, among others (Darling-Hammond et al, 2008).Though PBL has not traditionally focused on including the creation of tangible manipulatives in theprojects, the production of personally meaningful artifacts (i.e., “objects-to-think-with”) can support the learningof underlying concepts that are inherent in the materials used during construction (Papert, 1980). According toconstructionist theory, learning happens best when learners build knowledge structures in context throughdesigning publicly shareable artifacts and also ongoing reflection (Papert & Harel, 1991). We take this as thetheoretical basis for the hands-on, tangible design of DM.MethodsDesign Math took place in a public not-for-profit charter school with about 270 students; about 36% were eligiblefor free or reduced lunch. DM took place 1-2 times per week in one-hour sessions for one school year. Theparticipants were 72 students (25 girls and 47 boys), mostly from grades 7 and 8, and a few math-advancedstudents from grades 5 and 6. The three teachers in this classroom were the primary drivers of the curriculumdevelopment, receiving occasional suggestions from researchers.Though we administered a variety of assessments throughout the year, including a final survey to learnabout student perceptions of the benefits of DM and final semi-structured interviews with focal students, in thisshort paper we focus on the video recordings of the construction of the life-size yurt. In the first half of the schoolyear, the project was to create a full-size yurt large enough to fit eight students and be able to withstand outdoorconditions of a cold fall night (see Figure 1). They were provided with a prompt (i.e., build a 5-side yurt usingwood, canvas, and other provided materials and tools) and worked in groups to accomplish the goal.Figure 1. “Yurt Day” at the farm. Middle school students building their yurts from their blueprints.After two 1-hour planning sessions in the classroom, the class took a one-night camping trip to a farm where thelife-size yurts were put to the test in a real-world context. The time to complete their project was unconstrained,except they had to have a final structure to spend the night in. We video recorded the building process of threegroups, for eight hours each. In the second half of the school year for the second project, students were instructedto build a scaled-down model of a yurt of their choice with a short concept statement, scaled floor plan,orthographic drawings (top, front, back, and sides), 3D perspective images, and optional, scaled furniture.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1166© ISLSFindingsThe data we present here (see Table 1) comes from Sam (8th grade), Rob (6th), Todd (8th), Peter (7th), and Gabe(7th). This piece comes from a video recorded, semi-structured interview inside the yurt they built during theexperience on the farm. This group talked about their understanding of specific geometric concepts when one ofthe authors asked them to imagine they were substitute math instructors of 6th grade students. Then he asked:“Do you think this [DM] project would teach them [6th graders] geometry? Yes or no? And how would it teachthem better?… Is it helpful? Not helpful?”Table 1: Excerpt of one interview transcription with one of the focal groups during the trip to the farmSam:Interviewer:I think it will definitely help them with geometry. Because, like, for each side we had tomeasure like the angles and get the right shapes and why not...like figuring out likebuilding architecture...Yeah I think ‘cause the main thing I learned was the surface area. I’ve never heard thatlike umWhere’s the surface area here (pointing inside the yurt)?Peter:Outside. Everywhere.Todd:Anywhere. Anywhere there’s stuff.Rob:What was it? (looking at Todd as if expecting an answer). It was like 140 square feet.Gabe:It was 110 square feet. Well, it was supposed to be (boys chuckle).Todd:Peter:We got it pretty exact…So I think this is really a hands-on thing and I used to think that's a better than there'slike a paper (clapping hands as if holding a paper to show the flat surface of it) that says"what's um the surface area?" It's shaped like it's better to like, you, to look at it fromdifferent perspectives. And um if it's a challenge you'll think about it more and I thinkthat it would just kind of burn it into your brain like...I'll remember this.Gabe:Um, yeah I also think this is like a really good thing, 'cause a lot of stuff I kind ofalready knew already...there's no reason for me to know it... it was just kind of another...thing of math that, I ...learned from my teacher that I would never use but...you have touse stuff like...finding how to make a pentagon, like finding the angles, measuring allthe stuff, like finding the hypotenuses, Pythagorean Theorem, all that stuff, we reallyhave to actually use it, 'cause we have to sleep in these. Like we have to build this andthen if we, like if we hadn't finished it we would still have to sleep here. So it reallygives us like good incentive and, like, like, real world, I don't know, connections, to likeall that math that you learn in school that you don't think you need.Todd:I have to, like, add on to that, like I don't think I, I personally, I don't think I learned anew, entirely new like, a concept, but putting them into real life, other than, um, justknowing them it is an entirely different level of learning math.Rob:This exchange demonstrates examples of understanding, applying, reasoning, and engaging (i.e., mathproficiency). Rob expresses understanding when he says, “the main thing I learned was the surface area.” Peteralludes to easier future recall due to deeper understanding when he says, “I think that [the challenge] it wouldjust kind of burn it into your brain like...I'll remember this.” Gabe demonstrates application of the math when hesays, “you have to use stuff like...finding how to make a pentagon, like finding the angles...” Peter showsreasoning when he says “it's better to...look at it [hands-on project] from different perspectives.” Gabe also showsan example of application and engagement when he says, “[the project] really gives us like good incentive and,like, like, real world, I don't know, connections, to like all that math that you learn in school that you don't thinkyou need.”Discussion and implicationsThis short interview extract provides evidence of math proficiency we are uncovering through the analysis of ourdata corpus. DM, as a project-based math learning initiative afforded conceptual understanding of geometry,increased and sustained student engagement, and promoted problem solving skills. Anecdotal data from parentsand graduation speeches from 8th grade students also shared how the “yurt project” (DM) was a favorite project.Standardized tests may need to be adapted to place greater emphasis on other forms of math proficiencybeyond conceptual understanding and procedural fluency (computing) (NRC, 2005; Darling-Hammond, et al.,2008). For instance, math education researchers Boaler and Staples (2008) found that “unfamiliar terms andICLS 2018 Proceedings1167© ISLSculturally biased contexts” of a state standardized test may have contributed to its “inability...to capture themathematical understanding” of their research participants involved in a project-based math curriculum (625).When in fact, their participants successfully demonstrated mathematical understanding in different assessmentsadministered by the researchers. If more schools continue to adopt PBL in math classrooms, high-stake Stateassessments may need to be optimized to adequately measure mathematical proficiency for all five interdependentstrands (i.e., understanding, computing, applying, reasoning, and engaging).In an upcoming paper, we expect to share our findings that could contribute to design principles of thesetypes of PBL math initiatives for math proficiency, particularly with the infusion of hands-on projects involvingtextile-based materials to help students create their personal manipulatives (“objects-to-think-with”). We wouldalso pinpoint design and implementation challenges of DM to identify areas of research to spread the benefits ofPBL for math to help students be prepared in an increasingly technical and math-based world.ReferencesBlumenfeld, P. C., Soloway, E., Marx, R. W., Krajcik, J. S., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar, A. (1991). Motivatingproject-based learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning. Educational psychologist, 26(3-4),369-398.Boaler, J., & Staples, M. (2008). Creating mathematical futures through an equitable teaching approach: The caseof Railside School. Teachers College Record, 110(3), 608-645.Condliffe, B., Quint, J., Visher, M. G., Bangser, M. R., Drohojowska, S., Saco, L., & Nelson, E. (2017). ProjectBased Learning A Literature Review. MDRC.Darling-Hammond, L., Barron, B., Pearson, D., Schoenfeld, A.H., Stage, E.K., Zimmerman, T.D.,Cervetti, G. N.,Tilson, J. L. (2008). Powerful Learning: What We Know About Teaching for Understanding. JosseyBass.DeSilver, D. (2016) Jobs requiring preparation, social skills or both expected to grow most. Pew Research Center,October 13, 2016Epstein, Y. M., Goldin, G. A., Schorr, R. Y., Capraro, R., Capraro, M. M., & Warner, L. B. (2010). Measuringengagement structures in middle-grades urban mathematics classrooms. AERA, Denver, CO.Huberman, M., Bitter, C., Anthony, J., and O’Day, J. (2014). The shape of deeper learning: Strategies, structures,and cultures in deeper learning network high schools. Washington, DC: American Institutes for Research.Krajcik, J. S., & Shin, N. (2014). Project-Based Learning. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook ofthe Learning Sciences (pp. 275-297): Cambridge University Press.National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000). Principles and Standards for School Mathematics. Reston,VA: Author.National Research Council (2002). Helping Children Learn Mathematics. Washington, DC: The NationalAcademies Press.National Research Council (2005). How students learn: Mathematics in the classroom: Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books.Papert, S., & Harel, I. (1991). Situating constructionism. Constructionism, 36(2), 1-11.U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, National Assessment of EducationalProgress(NAEP).(2015).MathematicsAssessments.Retrievedfromhttps://www.nationsreportcard.gov/reading_math_2015/#mathematics/acl?grade=8AcknowledgementsThis project was possible by the support of the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Re-CraftingMathematics Education: Designing Tangible Manipulatives Rooted in Traditional Female Crafts (grant 1420303)awarded to Dr. Kylie Peppler. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not of the NSF. We thankour students and their parents, Ms. Cathy, Ms. Sandy, Ms. Karla, Ms. Sara, Sophia, Naomi, Anna, Kate, Tony,Ed, Lori, and Janis.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1168© ISLS