Taking on the Challenges of Learning in the Digital Age:Grade 5 Students’ Mindsets and Strategiesin Knowledge Building CommunitiesYotam Hod, University of Haifa, yotamhod24@gmail.comGuangji Yuan University at Albany, SUNY, gyuan@albany.eduHe Zhou, University at Albany, SUNY, hzhou@albany.eduJianwei Zhang, University at Albany, SUNY, jzhang@albany.eduAbstract: The goal of this study is to advance the understanding on the mindsets andstrategies that students employ as they deal with the challenges, obstacles, and setbacksinherent in knowledge building communities. In the first iteration of a three-year designbased research study, students in four grade 5 classroom knowledge buildingcommunities studied human body systems. We collected data on 93 students from peerinterviews dealing with the challenges and approaches that they employed during theirinquiry process. Using an inductive approach that examined students’ reactions, weidentified 247 relevant utterances which we organized and coded. Our first key findingindicates the inter-relation between students’ attitudes, beliefs, understandings, andfeelings related to their mindsets. Our second key finding shows that students rely ondifferent strategies of an inquiry cycle when they face challenges and setbacks. Theseresults set the stage for further inquiry and design modifications.Reorganizing education in the digital ageEducation in the digital age needs to be reorganized to enculturate creative knowledge practices, which are thenew norm in most social sectors (Adams Becker, Freeman, Giesinger, Cummins, & Yuhnke, 2016). As a keychallenge, the new model of education needs to provide a way into the knowledge-creating culture for everychild, not only the highly engaged learners. Collaborative, inquiry-based programs have been developed to bringauthentic knowledge-generating processes and practices, like questioning, into the classroom (Hod & Sagy,2017). Research has identified productive patterns of inquiry and discourse, with a strong correlation showingthat the more students engage in such processes, the deeper understanding they achieve (Zhang, Hong,Scardamalia, Teo, & Morley, 2011). However, the learning sciences still faces a serious gap of knowledge abouthow to support students who are not actively engaged in such processes. Addressing this challenge requires usto understand the whole child in inquiry-based learning. In addition to investigating the sociocognitive processesof idea development, we need to understand students’ socioemotional experiences that may support or hindertheir productive engagement. This research attempts to expand the idea-centered foci of knowledge building byexamining the different mindsets and strategies that students take when they participate in knowledge buildingpractices. The goal is to understand students’ approaches as they face the challenges, obstacles, and setbacksinherent in the knowledge building process and test designs to better motivate and engage all learners.Challenges and approaches of knowledge building in the digital ageA set of core principles has been identified to characterize the complex dynamic practices that students inKnowledge Building Communities (KBCs) must develop to be productive (Zhang et al., 2011). Students need totake high levels of epistemic agency to choose what they want to learn, at what time, and with whom they wantto engage in a sustained learning trajectory (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014). They must actively improve ideas,treating ideas as objects of never-ending refinement in their quality and coherence. Likewise, students mustcontribute to a culture where collective responsibility is a norm, requiring them to stay aware of thecontributions of others and contribute in ways that complement those contributions even though they may beworking on different inquiry questions (Zhang, Scardamalia, Reeve, & Messina, 2009). Enculturating thesetypes of practices can be a challenging undertaking for any learner.A great deal of research on KBCs has aimed to elucidate and foster these types of practices among theKBC participants. For example, in their study investigating the epistemic agency of students in four KBCs,Cacciamani (2010) reported on the strategic actions that students took when they engaged in self-organizedlearning. As part of their examination of the way students continually improved their ideas, van Aalst and Chan(2007) found that portfolios as part of the knowledge building process was effective in fostering inquiry anddeeper levels of domain understanding. To foster collective cognitive responsibility, Zhang et al. (2009)ICLS 2018 Proceedings1033© ISLSprogressively adapted the social structures from fixed, to interacting, to opportunistic groups. While a significantbody of knowledge has developed about how to develop the complex practices students need to foster theirparticipation in knowledge building cultures, research has emphasized sociocognitive dimensions of learning.Investigations of learning in KBCs that also take into consideration the motivational and socioemotional aspectsof the way students deal with the challenges of knowledge building are needed (Miyake & Kirschner, 2014).New approaches to fostering students’ growthIn recent years, new research directions have emerged which are relevant to the challenge of promotingknowledge building in the digital age, but which have not yet been applied to this line of research. In particular,the notion of fixed and growth mindsets has gained widespread popularity across a number of areas, includingorganizational psychology, athletics, parenting, and interpersonal relationships (Dweck, 2006). People’s viewsof intelligence as being fixed or incremental and their ability to persist in the face of obstacles and challengesare associated with different learning engagements. People with fixed mindsets are likely to shy away fromthese challenges, as they threaten to disconfirm their positive views of their own intelligences and/orcapabilities. Whereas, those with growth mindsets see challenges as opportunities to learn and grow andtherefore are more likely to embrace challenges and persist despite setbacks. This line of research on mindsets isconsistent with several other contemporary concepts, such as productive failure (Kapur, 2008), desirabledifficulties (Schmidt & Bjork, 1992), impasse-driven learning (Van Lehn, Siler, Murray, Yamauchi, & Baggett,2003) and research on grit (Duckworth, Peterson, Matthews, & Kelly, 2007), which suggest that persisting in theface of challenges and obstacles is a disposition of highly successful and creative people.As a pedagogy well-suited for contemporary times that entails having students confront the complexchallenges of learning and knowledge creation in the digital age, we contend that KBCs may favor students withgrowth mindsets, but those with fixed mindsets may face a more significant challenge, particularly incomparison with traditional modes of instruction. To begin our exploration of this contention, and with the aimof better understanding how students deal with the challenges, obstacles, and setbacks inherent in the knowledgebuilding process, this study examines students’ mindset-related experiences in four Grade 5 knoweldge buildingcommunities. Our research questions include: (a) What types of core attitudes, beliefs, understandings, andfeelings do 5th grade knowledge builders demonstrate in line with a growth mindset? And (b) what are thedifferent strategies that 5th grade knowledge builders take to deal with the challenges of knowledge building?MethodologyThe study was conducted in the midst of an ongoing design-based research (DBR) study with the dual aim ofadvancing theories of learning while contributing to practice-based principles (Anderson & Shattuck, 2012). Thegeneral structure of our research program is to implement three progressively refined iterations of a KBC in thecontext of 5th grade science classes taking place in one elementary school in upstate New York. We arecurrently analyzing data from four classrooms after the first iteration of the study and here report on our findingsthus far. Based on the findings related to our research questions, we will be implementing a refined iteration infour classes during the 2017-2018 academic year, followed by a third iteration in 2018-2019.We audio recorded, transcribed, and analyzed data from 53 student pair-interviews who signed consentforms for interview analysis (for a total of 93 students), where they were asked to reflect upon their knowledgebuilding processes throughout the year and discuss their answers with each other. During these interviews,students interviewed each other about their ‘journey of thinking,’ where they faced challenges and obstacles andhow they dealt with them, and what advice they would give future students engaged in knowledge building.Based on students’ responses to these interview questions, we were interested in examining how the studentsdescribed the way they dealt with the challenges of knowledge building.Our data corpus included 247 utterances—defined as meaningful units information about an idea—thatrelated to their experiences and mindsets as knowledge builders. We used an inductive data analysis approach(Hatch, 2002; Strauss & Corbin, 1998), which involved reviewing the data repeatedly in stages of progressiverefinement, until their meanings became clear to us and we could organize these utterances into categories.Three researchers coded the data, with an acceptable inter-rater reliability (Cohen’s kappa = .87).Preliminary findingsOur preliminary findings capture a set of core attitudes, beliefs, and feelings assocaite with students’ knoweldgebuilding experiences as well as the range of strategic responses that the students took to deal with the variouschallengse and barriers of knowledge building (see Table 1).Table 1. Students’ reported core and secondary mindsets when faced with the challenges of knowledge buildingICLS 2018 Proceedings1034© ISLSGrowth Mindsets CategoriesExamples of Sub CategoriesCore growth mindset (attitude, belief, understanding, feeling)Have a positive outlook and beWork hardserious about the learningTry your bestStudent Utterances“Try your hardest, and if it getshard…”Understand their will be setbacks inthe processDon’t give up“Never stop working hard”Trust or believe that your persistencewill pay offBelieve that you will find the answer“But you just got to keep going andeventually you'll find it”Enjoy the process despite setbacksFollow what interests you“I find it is interesting to me. Dosomething that you are into.”Work it outFind it interestingStrategies to deal with challengesCome up with good questionsPick generative research topics“Pick an umbrella question - thatmain question and branch off of that”Check what authoritative sourceshave to sayAsk an expert“I asked the person studying the sametopic as me and they gave me theanswer for it”Gather relevant informationBuild up informationCheck resourcesMake connections“Start out with stuff that youunderstand and then excel from thatpoint”Examine or analyze the knowledgethat you findDo experiments“Bring in experiments”Collaborate with othersShare with othersMake a model“We all worked together to solve it”Work togetherWe refer to the growth-oriented attitudes, beliefs, understandings, and feelings that the students had inregards to the challenges of knowledge building as ‘core’ growth mindset issues. Each one of these four mindsetissues were further broken down in sub-categories (n= 17), which were further sub-divided into a number ofrelated utterances (n= 96). The actions that students described or suggested to others as part of their mindsetstrategies were indicative, but secondary expressions of students’ mindsets. Like with the core mindset, eachstrategy was broken down in sub-categories (n=24), further sub-divided into related utterances (n=152).DiscussionOur goal in this ongoing research is to understand students’ approaches as they face the challenges, obstacles,and setbacks inherent in knowledge building communities and test designs to better motivate and engage alllearners. Our preliminary results are promising. Overall, we have identified four categories of core knowledgebuilding mindsets and five related strategies after a careful examination of 93 5th grade students.The core knowledge building mindsets span the attitudes, beliefs, understandings, and feelings that wediscovered using an inductive approach to analyze the data. At this point, we cannot correlate students’performance as knowledge builders with the type of mindsets that we have found. However, the existing dataindicate that students’ reactions to the challenges and obstacles must be examined through a holistic perspectiveto get a full account of their experience. Students expressed feelings together with their attitudes,understandings, and beliefs, suggesting that these are interrelated. Such findings that are indicative of holisticperspectives are consistent with a wide range of contemporary sociocultural research (e.g., Heyd-Metzuyanim &Sfard, 2012; Herrenkohl & Mertl, 2010).The strategies, unlike the prior category, appeared to indicate different aspects of research that thestudents were collectively engaged in. Specifically, their responses corresponded to a model of inquiry along thelines of (1) question; (2) check authoritative sources; (3) gather information; (4) analyze; and (5) collaborate.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1035© ISLSNext steps and conclusionThis first stage of research will be followed up with additional analysis steps that will build on our knowledgeabout the relation between mindsets and KBCs. Specifically, we plan to: (1) Conduct a content analysis toexamine the quality of students’ knowledge building and how this relates to their core beliefs and strategies thatwe found during the peer interviews; (2) Take a careful look at students’ experiences together with their withfixed or growth mindsets to better understand their knowledge building practices at a fine level of detail; and (3)Repeat this study in iteration two and three, each time with refinements. In iteration two, during metacognitivemeetings the teachers will facilitate student-led discussions about the different beliefs and strategies related tofacing obstacles that the students employed, as we have discovered thus far at this stage of the research.To sum, KBCs have reconceptualized classroom practice for over two decades, yet further research isneeded to better understand how to continue to support students in the complex transition to participate inknowledge building cultures. Developing growth mindsets and strategies with regards to the challenges,obstacles, and setbacks entailed in authentic knowledge building are one of the most important goals ofeducation in the digital age, particularly as they address the whole student. This study contributes to theendeavor to advance this vital area of research and practice on learning in the digital age.ReferencesAdams Becker, S., Freeman, A., Giesinger, C., Cummins, M., and Yuhnke, B. (2016). NMC/CoSN HorizonReport: K-12 Ed. Austin, TX: New Media Consortium.Anderson, T., & Shattuck, J. (2012). Design-based research: A decade of progress in education research?Educational Researcher. Retrieved from http://edr.sagepub.com/content/41/1/16.shortCacciamani, S. (2010). Towards a knowledge building community: from guided to self-organized inquiry.Canadian Journal of Learning and Technology/La revue canadienne de l’apprentissage et de latechnologie, 36(1).Duckworth, A. L., Peterson, C., Matthews, M. D., & Kelly, D. R. (2007). Grit: perseverance and passion forlong-term goals. Journal of personality and social psychology, 92(6), 1087.Dweck, C. S. (2006). Mindset: The new psychology of success. Random House Incorporated.Hatch, J.A. (2002). Doing qualitative research in education settings. Albany, NY: State University of NewYork Press.Herrenkohl, L. R., & Mertl, V. (2010). How students come to be, know, and do: A case for a broad view oflearning. Cambridge University Press.Heyd-Metzuyanim, E., & Sfard, A. (2012). Identity struggles in the mathematics classroom: On learningmathematics as an interplay of mathematizing and identifying. International Journal of EducationalResearch, 51-52, 128-145.Hod, Y., & Sagy, O. (2017). Whose culture is it? Modeling the design of authentic learning environments andthe cultures they mediate. In Smith, B. K., Borge, M., Mercier, E., and Lim, K. Y. (Eds.), Making aDifference: Prioritizing Equity and Access in CSCL, 12th International Conference on CSCL, Volume1 (pp. 87-94). Philadelphia, PA: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Kapur, M. (2008). Productive failure. Cognition and Instruction, 26(3), 379-424.Miyaki, N., Kirschner, P. A. (2014). The social and interactive dimensions of collaborative learning. In R. K.Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences, Second Edition (pp. 418-438). NewYork, NY: Cambridge University Press.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, andtechnology. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences, Second Edition(pp. 397-417). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Schmidt, R. A., & Bjork, R. A. (1992). New conceptualizations of practice: Common principles in threeparadigms suggest new concepts for training. Psychological Science, 3, 207–217.Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developinggrounded theory (2nd edition). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.van Aalst, J., & Chan, C. K. (2007). Student-directed assessment of knowledge building using electronicportfolios. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(2), 175-220.VanLehn, K., Siler, S., Murray, C., Yamauchi, T., & Baggett, W. B. (2003). Why do only some events causelearning during human tutoring? Cognition and Instruction, 3(21), 209-249.Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R. & Messina, R. (2009). Designs for collective cognitive responsibility inknowledge-building communities, Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(1), 7-44.Zhang, J., Hong, H. Y., Scardamalia, M., Teo, C. L., & Morley, E. A. (2011). Sustaining knowledge building asa principle-based innovation at an elementary school. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20, 262-307.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1036© ISLS