The Obj–Subj Dialectic and the Co-Construction of HierarchicalPositional Identities During a Collaborative Generalization TaskJosé Francisco Gutiérrez, University of Wisconsin at Madison, jgutierrez7@wisc.eduAbstract: This paper presents a theoretical model of mathematics teaching and learning thatcaptures the reflexive relationship between processes of objectification and subjectificationinherent in classroom discourse. I call this model the “obj–subj dialectic,” and ultimately I positthat students’ respective semiotic means of objectification also function, simultaneously, assemiotic means of subjectification. I use this model to analyze and describe the individualstudent learning of three high school students engaged in a generalization task and the emergentsocial power dynamics. Findings show that whereas students made statements that positionedthemselves as having the correct answer (i.e., as mathematical authorities), some studentsresorted to a broader arsenal of semiotic resources to make their point, which resulted indifferentiated status positions. Thus some students gained “mathematical ascendency” overothers, which refers to the co-construction of hierarchical positional identities emerging fromthe obj–subj dialectic during multimodal interactions.Keywords: discourse, objectification, mathematical cognition, instruction, power dynamicIntroduction: The story of Thalia, Ailani, Xeni, and Mr. LamThree high school students, Thalia, Ailani, and Xeni, have been working together on a pattern-finding problem,when their classroom teacher, Mr. Lam, approaches their table and asks questions related to their work. Theproblem presents a sequence of four geometric figures, and there is a numerical pattern that enables students tomake predictions about figures further along the sequence, such as Fig. 10. Taking lead of the group, Thalia hasmade a prediction about Fig. 10, using an arithmetic strategy that effectively determines figures in the sequence.However, her strategy achieves this goal using a recursive technique, that is, by iteratively progressing from eachfigure to the next, whereas optimally a strategy would determine figures by algebraic function, without recourseto known items along the sequence. Mr. Lam prompts the group to consider much larger numbers, such as Fig.100, asking, “So we have to know the one before it [Fig. 100]? Is there a way that we don’t have to know the onebefore it?”Mr. Lam may not be aware of it, but a conflict is about to erupt. Implicit in his question is the assumptionthat the group’s strategy is inefficient. After a 2-sec pause, Thalia stomps her feet and exclaims to Mr. Lam, “Bruh,why you asking all these questions?” Ailani stirs the conflict, interjecting loudly, “YES!” Mr. Lam, keeping hisusual calm and professional demeanor, responds to Thalia: “My name is not ‘Bruh.’ My name is Mr. Lam, andI’m challenging you. That’s why I’m asking you these questions, because I want you to get smarter.” Thalia buriesher face behind her hands and starts laughing sheepishly; her face still hidden behind her hands, she continues:“OK, Mr. Lam, why you asking (all these questions).”Background and objectivesThere is more to learning mathematics in a classroom than learning content. I recorded the above vignettewhile observing Mr. Lam’s classroom as part of my research on the challenges and opportunities for improvingmathematics education for students from historically marginalized public school populations. Thalia’s statementof “Why you asking all these questions?” reflects a complex sentiment. She may perceive that she and her peersare being questioned unnecessarily, even interrogated about their participation in the task. Ailani agrees withThalia’s sentiment and, together, their behaviors indicate their sense of Mr. Lam’s instruction as coercive at worst,or troublesome at best.This vignette sparked a variety of questions for me. What does it mean for mathematics students toexperience classroom discourse in this way? What aspects of classroom interaction give rise to this type of socialmathematical antagonism? What is the pedagogical utility of framing mathematics learning as adversarial or aschanging intellectual capacity?Thalia and Ailani’s apparent discontent with their mathematics teacher and Mr. Lam’s particular viewson mathematics pedagogy could be isolated phenomena limited to the envelope of this particular classroomcommunity; it is conceivable that this interaction between three high school students, a teacher, and mathematicscontent is not representative of broader trends. However, by reflecting critically on the results of previous studiesthat I conducted in similar classroom settings (e.g., Gutiérrez, 2010, 2013), I argue that these participants’ICLS 2016 Proceedings687© ISLSexperiences are related to broader issues endemic to not only mathematics classrooms serving historicallymarginalized students, but to all classrooms. The study presented in this paper is part of a larger project that aimsto show that mathematical learning is not power neutral, but rather individual learning and power relations aremutually constituted through discourse.The broader research project investigates how relations of power, which are inherent to all educationalsettings, impact students’ quality of engagement and therefore learning. Whereas I focus my research effortsspecifically on students from historically marginalized public school populations, such as African American,Latino/a, and economically disadvantaged students, I theorize that all students’ participation, dispositions towardclassroom practice, and mathematical knowledge are mediated by relations of power that shape local instructionalcontexts and the social interactions therein. To illuminate these issues, I bring to bear complementary learningsciences and sociopolitical perspectives to expose hidden structures, mechanisms, and processes of power thateither enable or hinder classroom mathematics learning.The objectives of this paper are (1) to provide a sketch of the theoretical stance underlying the largerproject, and (2) to present an emerging approach that stems from this theoretical orientation. At the center of thisapproach is the notion of an objectification–subjectification dialectic, which I define, apply, and elaborate in thesections below. Specifically, I analyze Thalia, Ailani, and Xeni’s multimodal interactions during a group task,through the lens of the obj–subj dialectic.Theoretical perspectives and relevant literatureThe larger research project assumes the following theoretical stance: individual learning and social power relationsbecome imbricated through discourse so as to mutually constitute and express each other. I view discourse notmerely as an analytic lens for observing the learning–power imbrication, but also as the medium through whichmathematical knowledge and power relations simultaneously become objectified, stabilized, and reproduced. Inparticular, I conceptualize the learning–power imbrication as the reciprocal discursive process whereby (1)students appropriate cultural artifacts (e.g., algebraic symbols and forms) as semiotic means of objectifyingpersonal pre-symbolic, proto-mathematical knowledge (Abrahamson, 2009; Radford, 2003); yet so doing, (2)students not only adopt a new perspective on the world but they also become cognitively “beholden” and subjectto particular discursive practices that temporally and ontologically precede them (cf. “ontological imperialism,”Bamberger & diSessa, 2003) and are inherently hierarchical. Thus, acts of (1) objectification (that forge individuallearning) are at the same time acts of (2) subjectification (that reify relations of power). See Figure 1, below.The obj–subj dialectic in mathematical discourse is not a novel perspective per se and similar ones arefound in the literature (e.g., Heyd-Mezuyanim & Sfard, 2012; see below). However, returning to the underlyingtheoretical stance of this line of work, I have found the construct of a learning–power imbrication especiallyuseful, because K-12 mathematics education occurs within a broader nexus of asymmetric power relations thathave not been adequately accounted for in the literature. The goal of this paper is to explore how the analyticconstruct of the obj–subj dialectic can shed light on hidden discursive mechanisms that give rise to the learning–power imbrication in mathematics education.In the model, the “obj” side of the dialectic is based on Luis Radford’s theory of knowledgeobjectification (2003), and in particular his semiotic–cultural taxonomy of students’ types of generalizations—factual, contextual, and symbolic generalizations (“F-C-S”). The F-C-S framework distinguishes among threegeneralization types in accordance with their level of generality (see Radford, 2003, for more detail). I haveadapted the framework and applied it in a diversity of educational settings. I aruge that F-C-S represents threemodes of action (Gutiérrez, 2010) that students appropriate as means of dealing with pattern-generalizationproblems. In other words, the F-C-S framework describes both the final products of students’ algebraic reasoning,as well as the processes that would result in those products. Thus the F-C-S framework enables analysis of thesemiotic spaces that students and teachers must navigate. Furthermore, I argue that these semiotic spaces bothreflect and influence students’ mean-making while at the same time, these semiotic spaces are differentiallyimbued with status and authority. That is, as students and teachers navigate or traverse different levels of generalityinherent in mathematical discourse, they simultaneously navigate/traverse relations of power (subjectification),which I explain next.Turning to the “-subj” side, I combine several perspectives from various bodies of literature. Mostrelevant to this paper however, is the work of Anna Sfard. Sfard and colleagues (2012) open up new analyticavenues dealing with direct subjectification—when certain verbal utterances directly indicate a human actor.Building on yet extending this approach, I show in my data analysis instances where the referents of verbalutterances do not directly involve human actors but nevertheless involve indirect subjectification. Someutterances/actions mark subjectification through tacit positioning (Harré, 2008).ICLS 2016 Proceedings688© ISLSFurthermore, as students make mathematical assertions during collaborative problem solving, I argue,their discursive action creates hierarchical positional identities that must then, in turn, either be taken up, accepted,contested, negotiated, or rejected. The construct of “positional identity” is based on the work of Marcy Wood(2013) on “micro-identity” that describes “identities enacted in a moment in time” (p. 778). However, I emphasizethe “positional” aspect to describe an emerging power dynamic, and the term already points to the mechanism bywhich hierarchizing occurs—positioning (Harré, 2008). That is, I conceptualize positional identities ashierarchical, because co-constructed subject positions are differentially imbued with social status and authority.Furthermore, these hierarchical positional identities are associated with students’ “locations” along the F-C-Strajectory.Figure 1. (a) The obj–subj dialectic: a synthesized analytic construct for observing how students appropriatecultural artifacts (e.g., algebraic symbols and forms) as semiotic means of objectifying pre-symbolic knowledge,in relation to subjectification acts that shape their positional identity. (b) As students enter each of the “F-C-S”discourse stratums and shift across them, they simultaneously create positional identities that are differentiallyimbued with status and authority. Thus, mathematics learning and ways of knowing become imbricated withemergent relations of power.Methodological approachBelow I analyze two transcription segments from a much longer vignette of video data. Specifically, I explore thetension between “obj,” the semiotic resources (e.g., gesture and language, as well as conventional tools such astables and graphs; Radford, 2003) to which students have recourse to make mathematical assertions, and“subj,” the hierarchical positional identities that participants co-construct through these multimodal interactions(cf. Harré, 2008; Sfard & Prusak, 2005).Data, participants, and taskThe data are from a year-long participant ethnography where I immersed myself within a single mathematics classat César Chávez School for Restorative Justice (all names are pseudonyms), a small public high school located ina large, diverse urban district in northern California. At the time of the data collection (2013-2014) over 90% ofthe student body was Latino/a, African American, or recent immigrant students—all from the working-class andlow-income neighborhoods surrounding the school.This data collection project combined classroom observation with principles from design-based research.The focal data was collected in the Fall semester during a phase in the project where I worked closely with theteacher, Mr. Lam, to co-design and implement an experimental instructional unit. I focus my analysis on a 35-minspan of video involving a group of three female students, Thalia (Grade 9), Ailani (Grade 9), and Xeni (Grade10). The group assignment is a pattern task that combined geometric objects called “Spiralaterals” with algebraicreasoning. A Spiralateral is drawn on graph paper and is derived from a set of rules, see Figure 2. Frank Odds(1973) describes how to construct a {1, 2, 3} Spiralateral:First draw a segment of unit length to coincide with the edge of a graph square. Turn rightthrough 90° and draw a segment two units long. Again turn right through 90° and draw asegment three units long. A basic pattern of 1-2-3 has now been established. Repeat the samesteps again, continuing from the outer end of the three-unit segment. After [three] repetitions ofthe basic pattern, the segment will join the point at which the diagram started (p. 121).ICLS 2016 Proceedings689© ISLSThe specific task involved a poster that presents the first four figures (i.e., “Fig. 1,” “Fig. 2,” “Fig. 3,”and “Fig. 4”) of a Spiralateral sequence, and the task objective was to express a “Code” as a set of algebraicformulas in the form of {f1(n), f2(n), f3(n)} and whose inputs are the figures’ ordinal positions (Figure 3). A keydesign feature for implementing the Spiralateral sequences was to substitute larger numbers (e.g., Fig. 10, Fig.100), as a way for students to realize that an arithmetic-recursive strategy may be inefficient, thus motivating theneed for more powerful tools and strategies such as algebraic generalizing and the use of direct formulas.Figure 2. Steps in the construction of a “3-legged”Spiralateral (image from Odds, 1973).Figure 3. Poster presenting a 3-legged Spiralateralsequence, modeled as {2, 3, n+5}.Sample data analysis: The obj–subj dialectic as an analytic frameHere I present two transcription episodes followed by a line-by-line qualitative microgenetic (Schoenfeld et al.,1991) analysis of the semiotic resources in the students’ obj–subj processes. In this first episode Ailani adamantlyclaims that the solution to Fig. 10 is nineteen, whereas Thalia argues that it is fifteen; Xeni is reading her bookand does not contribute mathematically in this particular transcript segment. (Note on transcript conventions:double slashes “//” mark beginning and end of overlapping utterances; two dots “..” at end of text is very slightpause, less than a second; repeated letters, e.g., “generaliiize,” mark lengthened syllable, each repeated letterequals one “beat”; and “(??)” and “(this)” are unclear/inaudible reading or a tentative reading.)Episode 4 (of 13) – Timestamp [08:13–09:34] – Thalia, Ailani, and Xeni work on team task122 Ailani:[holds poster in front of her face with both hands, counts aloud; as shecounts, her right hand comes free and she begins counting with her fingers]“Eleven twelve.. thirteen.. fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen,nineteen.” [reaches back and taps Mr. Lam on the shoulder] “Fig. 10 will be(1-sec pause) nineteen.” (10-sec pause) [to no one in particular, sheannounces] “(Fig. 10 will be).. nineteen.”123 Thalia:[gazes down; indicates table of values] “Fig. 10 will be fifteen.”124 Ailani:[responds to Thalia] “Nineteen.”125 Thalia:[gazes down; shakes head no] “Fig. 10 will be fifteen.”126 Xeni:[leans her head on her hand; unclear where her gaze is].127 Ailani:[loudly, almost shouting] “Fig. 10 will be nineteen!”128 Thalia:[still without lifting her gaze, indicates entries with her finger as she talks ina rhythmic cadence] “It goes two-three-six, then it goes two-three-seven,then it goes two-three-eight, then it goes two-three-nine, then it goes twothree-ten, then it goes two-three-eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen.”[keeps gaze down, continues working]129 Xeni:[adjusts in her seat; it is possible that she responds to something Thalia orAilani said, but one cannot tell from the footage]130 Ailani:[briefly gazes in Xeni’s direction, but it is unclear if she actually addressesXeni; likely addressing no one in particular] “I say nineteen. (4-sec pause)I’m not even sure I counted that right, but who cares?”Analysis of Lines 122–130 reveals two important components. First, this excerpt reflects Thalia’s andAilani’s first mathematical objectifications—both of which were articulated in the Factual mode. Ailani’s semioticmeans of objectification consisted of a counting strategy and verbal speech (with a certain illocutionary force) toassertively express a partial solution, in the form of f3(10) = 19. Ailani counted on from a known quantity (f3(4) =6) but she had not yet indicated that she was attempting to generalize a numerical pattern. Thalia too resorted toICLS 2016 Proceedings690© ISLSverbal speech, yet she also used rhythm, gesture, and repetition, and a mathematical table as semiotic resources.Entering a rhythmic cadence (Line 128) enabled Thalia to objectify an arithmetic-recursive generalization, in theform of {2, 3, f3(n−1)+1} which, in this context, is more informative than Ailani’s solution.The second component this transcription reflects is a dynamic process of subjectification. To examinethe dynamics of subjectification, I focus on whether/how Thalia and Ailani refer to themselves and each other.Thalia did not refer to herself or Ailani directly. Looking at Thalia’s pronominal usage, what we see is that thereferents of her speech did not directly involve human actors. And yet, Thalia made statements that implied shehas the correct answer and Ailani does not. Ailani, too, made statements that tacitly positioned herself as havingthe correct answer. Thalia, however, resorted to a broader arsenal of semiotic resources to make her point.Additionally, Thalia did not make eye contact with Ailani, instead keeping her gaze on her work. This socialmathematical power encounter resulted in differentiated status positions. Ailani’s effort to appropriatemathematical authority was challenged, and an opportunity was missed to engage in dialog and collaborate on theshared goal, to determine Fig. 10.In sum, both Thalia and Ailani attempted to gain mathematical ascendency over the other, which is aconstruct I claim that describes the hierarchical status positions that were being co-constructed in the moment.Mathematical ascendency is based on the semiotic resources marshaled by and pitted against individualinterlocutors. Thus, Thalia’s and Ailani’s respective semiotic means of objectification simultaneously functionedas semiotic means of subjectification.Importantly, if we had been looking at subjectifying utterances only as defined by Sfard and colleagues,we would highlight only one single incident, when Ailani admits her counting strategy’s inaccuracy (Line 130).But analysis of this single turn of talk, although a crucial one, does not capture the dynamics of implicit positioningin Lines 122–129. As the three students continue to make mathematical assertions throughout the remainder ofthe episode, they co-construct positional identities that must then, in turn, either be taken up, negotiated, orrejected.Episode 5 (of 13) – Timestamp [09:34–10:56] – Mr. Lam’s first visit with Thalia, Ailani, and XeniThis episode begins as Mr. Lam returns to Team 1 in response to Ailani’s tap on his shoulder. Ailani and Thaliaonce again assert their solutions regarding Fig. 10 and attempt to establish their mathematical ascendency. As theyargue, Mr. Lam turns to Xeni and asks her questions that would steer her toward acting in relation to the assignedtask. What I aim to show in the detailed analysis, below, is that although Ailani and Thalia argue their respectivesolutions and appear to be reaching an impasse, their individual learning trajectories nevertheless show movementfrom the Factual to the Contextual modes of reasoning and, moreover, that these advancements were forged inand through the social mathematical power dynamic.131 Mr. Lam:132 Ailani:133 Mr. Lam:134 Thalia:135 Mr. Lam:136 Thalia:137 Xeni:138 Mr. Lam:139 Xeni:140 Mr. Lam141 Thalia:142 Ailani:ICLS 2016 Proceedings[to Ailani] “Alright what’s the question? What was the question? You cameup with how many—the code?”“Nineteen.”“Nineteen?”[loudly] “No! No. [softly, counts to herself; keeps her gaze down] Twelve..fourteen.. [to Mr. Lam] It’ll be fifteen.”[walks around to Xeni’s side of the table; slides poster closer to her]“Fifteen? //Xeni, what do you think?”//“It’ll be fifteen.// I think I did this right but I might be wrong.”“(??)”“Hmm.”[turns her gaze away from Mr. Lam, down to her desk] “I don’t know.”[to Xeni] “OK, what might help? You think maybe writing in the codemight help? [slides poster closer to her and indicates the “{?, ?, ?}” alongthe bottom of each figure] If you write in the code and look for a pattern?”“It’ll be fifteen. [waves a sheet of paper in front of Mr. Lam but he ignores itand keeps his gaze on Xeni; Thalia gazes up at Mr. Lam for the first time,hands a sheet to Mr. Lam] I already wrote all the codes.”[gaze down at her desk; she is drawing]691© ISLS143 Mr. Lam:144 Ailani:145 Thalia:146 Mr. Lam:147 Thalia:148 Mr. Lam:149 Thalia:150 Mr. Lam:151 Thalia:152 Ailani:153 Xeni:154 Thalia:155 Ailani:156 Mr. Lam:157 Thalia:158 Mr. Lam:159 Thalia:160 Mr. Lam:161 Thalia:162 A. & X.:[grabs sheet from Thalia and places it in front of Xeni on her desk] “Ohgood she’s got the codes. So maybe you can find a pattern based off of hercodes. [talks in a singsong voice as he points with his fingers to values inThalia’s table] Two three six, two three seven—”[interjects loudly; to Mr. Lam] “It just added a number!”[interjects loudly as well; to Mr. Lam] “It just goes six seven eight nine teneleven twelve thirteen fourteen fifteen.”[nods head, either agreeing or counting along or both] “Two three eight, twothree nine, two three ten..”[with a tone suggesting that the pattern should be obvious to Mr. Lam]“Eleven twelve thirteen fourteen fifteen.”“So what do you notice about the first two [referring to the first two entriesof the code]?”“What do you mean?”“What do you ah—”[makes repeating arching gesture across the figures in the poster] “It goessix seven eight nine ten eleven twelve thirteen fourteen fifteen.”[adjusts in her seat; without lifting her gaze, loudly] “No, it don’t!”[no indication she is contributing to the converstaion; yet she could beobserving/listening]“It does. It always adds//”//[to Thalia] “Bruh, it’s like ten [lifts gaze from herdesk to Mr. Lam] but you added one or two.”[to Thalia, indicating entries in her table of values] “Two three—no but—nobut look, it says two then three then //six.”//“Six.”“Then this one says two then three then seven. // Two three eight.//[with a tone suggesting thatthe pattern should be obvious to Mr. Lam; talks fast, indicating entries in thetable with her finger] “It goes two three and then eight, and then it goes twothree and then nine, and then it’s going to be two three and then ten, andthen eleven twelve thirteen fourteen fifteen.”[to Thalia] “OK so two three fifteen, you’re saying?” [to Ailani; makesrepeated arching gesture with his right hand, marking each “entry” of thecode with each motion] “OK that’s what she meant when she said fifteen.So that code, it’s staying two [gestures up-down], three [gestures up-down],and then something [gestures up-arching over to the right-down, palm up;starts to walk away]. [to the group] OK so how would you find for any—forany number?”[throws hands in the air; posture and facial expression suggest frustration; toXeni] “You just keep adding the number, duhhh!” [looks to Ailani, thenlooks to Xeni][no response]Earlier in Episode 4, we observed that Thalia’s and Ailani’s semiotic means of objectification also servedas semiotic means of subjectification, and as such these semiotic resources formed the basis of a socialmathematical hierarchy. Here in Episode 5 the power dynamic continues and the students marshaled their semioticresources to resolve an overt mathematical conflict, but we also observe that the teacher marshaled his semioticresources, as well, to orient Xeni toward acting in ways that are relevant to the problem-solving domain. WhenMr. Lam walked away from Ailani and Thalia’s side of the table to Xeni’s side and asked her, “What do youthink?” he positioned Xeni as the center of attention and her (non)participation as the critical aspect of thesituation, even as Ailani was vying for his attention regarding Fig. 10.ICLS 2016 Proceedings692© ISLSThalia too fought for Mr. Lam’s attention, for him to recognize that she had done all the work, when shestated “I already wrote all the codes” as she waved the sheet of paper in Mr. Lam’s view. Her tone of voicesuggested that he need not bother Xeni with that task because it was “already” completed. Mr. Lam maintainedhis usual warm, professional demeanor at this moment as well, and finally accepted Thalia’s gesture to look at hercodes. In that moment, Ailani interjected with, “It just added a number!” (Line 144), which is an utterance iteratedin the Contextual mode as it referred to a general procedure and was not tied to concrete elements in the problemspace. What is most interesting to note at this point, is that this is the first student utterance coded in the Contextualmode, whereas all previous utterances were articulated at the Factual level of generality. Thalia, too, interjectedat the exact moment that Ailani articulated her Contextual statement (Line 145), with a re-articulation of herFactual recursive generalization: “It just goes six seven eight nine ten eleven twelve thirteen fourteen fifteen.” Mr.Lam responded to Thalia’s and not Ailani’s contribution, asking a question about the pattern that Thalia wasverbalizing. Ailani’s contribution went unacknowledged and, as a consequence, Ailani went unrecognized ashaving achieved a greater level of generality than all the other student participants.We see here that Ailani’s semiotic means of objectification have increased in generality, suggestingincrease in her mathematical sophistication and understanding. However, when we look closely at Ailani’s remarkto Thalia, “Bruh, it’s like ten but you added one or two” (Line 155), we see that the mathematical basis of herassertion is uncertain. Ailani is not sure if one needs to add 1 or add 2 from the last known quantity (Fig. 4), soshe adjusted the repeated summand to account for the difference between Thalia’s answer of “fifteen” and her“nineteen.” Despite the uncertainty Ailani is indicating here in Episode 5, and despite Ailani having admitted thepossibility of a faulty counting strategy at the end of Episode 4, she nevertheless continued to hold on to thissolution. She is personally invested in the task and will carry this solution through to the end. (The analysis ofEpisodes 8 & 11 show that her statement of “added one or two” comes back into play.)Thalia responded to Ailani’s assertions with a statement that reflects her first teeter into the Contextualmode of reasoning, at Line 154: “It does. It always adds—” but it was cut off by Ailani.Both Ailani and Thalia made statements that express a mathematical procedure, but the illocutionaryforce of their utterances also positioned them as capable of asserting knowledge and thus established them asauthority figures in the discussion. I claim that through these complex interactions, the threshold to operate in theContextual mode was lowered because their status and identity were at stake. That is, the inherent power struggleof the conversation spurred them on to position themselves as authority figures within that dynamic, and whatresulted were Ailani and Thalia’s first Contextual statements.With regard to Mr. Lam’s role in the evolving dynamic. At Line 143, there was a notable shift in Mr.Lam’s discourse from general discusive tactics (to encourage Xeni to participate) to operating in the Factual mode,when he highlighted certain aspects of the problem situation, marking them as imporant with his tone and cadence.Mr. Lam revoiced Thalia’s recursive generalization (Line 159), but he shifted the semiotic space fromthe Factual to the Contextual level of generality. So doing, Mr. Lam did not reiterate the additive/recursivecomponent of Thalia’s code, only that the first two entries remained constant while the variable was the third entry(Line 160: “It’s staying two, three, and then something”). As Episode 5 came to an end, Mr. Lam walked awayand tossed a final question to the team, asking them to consider cases beyond just the first ten figures (Line 160:“for any number?”). Thalia scoffs at Mr. Lam’s final question, with one final statement in the Contextual modethat, for her, captures the complete solution (Line 161: You just keep adding the number—duhhh!”). Thalia mayhave interpreted the subtext of Mr. Lam’s question as evaluating her solution as insufficient, and she disagreedwith his assessment. Mr. Lam’s question is a common tactic used in these kinds of instructional contexts involvingfigural patterns, intended for students to realize that recursive strategies are limited when dealing with cases muchfurther down the line. Thalia’s comments point to a mismatch between her perception of the requirements of thetask and Mr. Lam’s expectations.Thalia’s frustration ensues, all the way until Episode 11, where an overt conflict erupts between her, Mr.Lam, and Ailani. This conflict momentarily leaves the discursive frame of “mathematical practice” to a broaderideological frame. Below, I present a synopsis of Episode 11, so as to briefly highlight other aspects of the socialmathematical power dynamic. Specifically, the teacher makes two noteworthy moves in Episode 11 that haveimplications for the teaching and learning of mathematics more broadly. First, Mr. Lam challenges the group togeneralize their Code to a normative algebraic one that can predict much larger numbers along the sequence.Second, Mr. Lam encourages Xeni to participate in the activity, to include her in the discourse. Yet so doing,whereas Mr. Lam’s moves were pedagogically effective, they reifyied mathematical hierarchies that prioritizecertain forms of argumentation over others (e.g., formal symbolism over explanations involving gesture and othercommunicative measures) and thus positioned Xeni with higher status.ICLS 2016 Proceedings693© ISLSEpisode 11 (of 13) – Timestamp [25:18–29:54] – “My name is not ‘Bruh’.”Mr. Lam returns to Team 1 and is met by Thalia with a question: “Are we done?” Mr. Lam confirms they arenearly done. Mr. Lam turns to Xeni and kneels down next to her to talk. He reminds both Ailani and Xeni that thetask at hand involves working on the assigned pattern task, not drawing pictures. Thalia defends her team,exclaiming, “We just did it, look it! We just did that.” Mr. Lam does not respond to Thalia and instead asks Xeniwhat she noticed about the Spiralateral pattern. Working together, Mr. Lam, Thalia, and Xeni co-construct a Codefor the pattern. Xeni articulates her version of the final proposed solution using formal symbolism, stating that thelast part of the Code is “n plus one.” While Mr. Lam tries to unpack what Xeni means by “n,” Thalia interjectsand gives indication that she is growing frustrated with the conversation and is focused on task completion…whichbrings us to the opening scenario at the very top of this paper.The solution that Team 1 has articulated, for items beyond Fig. 4, achieves the goal using a recursivetechnique that relies on known items along the sequence. Mr. Lam prompts the group to consider much largernumbers, such as Fig. 100, asking, “So we have to know the one before it [Fig. 100]? Is there a way that we don’thave to know the one before it?” After a 2-second pause, Thalia stomps her feet and exclaims to Mr. Lam, “Bruh,why you asking all these questions?” Ailani stirs the conflict, interjecting loudly, “YES!” Mr. Lam calmlyresponds to Thalia: “My name is not ‘Bruh.’ My name is Mr. Lam, and I’m challenging you. That’s why I’masking you these questions, because I want you to get smarter.” Thalia buries her face behind her hands and startslaughing sheepishly; her face still hidden behind her hands, she continues: “OK, Mr. Lam, why you asking (allthese questions).”Mr. Lam continues the mathematical conversation and challenges the group with “So could you evenfigure out Fig. 100 right now?” adding the parameter of “I don’t tell you what Fig. 99 looks like, can you tell meFig. 100?” Thalia explains her method for Fig.’s 1–10, but Mr. Lam insists that her method is insufficient foritems much further along the sequence. Ailani leans back in her chair, throws her arms behind her, looks to Mr.Lam and leans forward as she exclaims: “Well maybe—OK so (like) two three and you don’t have to know all ofthem, you know the first—you can know the original one and then (add on)! And then figure out Fig. 99.” As shespeaks, Ailani pounds the table with the marker in her hand and uses a tone of voice suggesting to Mr. Lam thatshe aims to “settle the score” once and for all in this confrontation. Thalia interrupts Ailani, softly clapping herhands together as she speaks, accentuating each word as she talks: “Why you talking so ratchet?” Mr. Lam weighsin with: “Don’t get hyped up against me.” As Mr. Lam is speaking, Thalia points to him and says: “Ratchet. Sayit, don’t get ratchet.” Mr. Lam does not respond to Thalia’s comment and instead steers the conversation back tothe mathematics at hand, asking about Fig. n. The conversation continues for a few more minutes, until finallyXeni arrives at a closed solution of “n plus five.” (See Gutiérrez, 2016, for richer description and deeper analysisof Episode 11, in which I explore a possible mechanism that links cognition to social structures and vice-versa inthis episode.)ConclusionsAn analysis of mathematical ascendency, through the lens of the obj–subj dialectic, suggests that power dynamicsand new mathematical understandings are co-constitutive through public discourse. The results of the studypresented here, combined with findings from the larger project, show that the co-construction of power relationsand the co-construction of knowledge are not necessarily distinct processes. Surely each of these processes canbe independently instantiated in practice, but I maintain that they also become co-constitutive at certain points inthe discourse, thus the learning–power imbrication emerges.ReferencesGutiérrez, J.F. (2010). Distinguishing between the process and the product of student algebraic reasoning. In K.Gomez, L. Lyons, & J. Radinsky (Eds.), Learning in the Disciplines (ICLS2010). Univ of Ill., Chicago.Gutiérrez, J. F. (2013). Agency as inference. REDIMAT, 2(1), 45-76.Gutiérrez, J. F. (2016, July). Exploring tensions in the obj–subj dialectic (In N. Presmeg & L. Radford [CoChairs], Topic Study Group 54: Semiotics in mathematics education). 13th International Congress onMathematical Education (ICME). Hamburg: University of Hamburg.Abrahamson, D. (2009). Orchestrating semiotic leaps. C&I, 27, 175–224.Bamberger, J., & diSessa, A. (2003). Music as embodied mathematics. IJCML, 8, 123–160.Harré, R. (2008). Positioning theory. Self-Care, Dependent-Care, and Nursing, 16(1), 28–32.Heyd-Metzuyanim, E., & Sfard, A. (2012). Identity struggles in the math classroom. IJER, 51-52, 128–145.Odds, F. C. (1973). Spirolaterals. Mathematics Teacher, 66(2), 121–124.Radford, L. (2003). Gestures, speech, and the sprouting of signs. MT&L, 5, 37–70.Sfard, A., & Prusak, A. (2005). Telling identities. Educational Researcher, 34(4), 14–22.ICLS 2016 Proceedings694© ISLS