Conjecture Mapping the Library: Iterative Refinements TowardSupporting Maker Learning Activities in Small Community SpacesVictor R. Lee, Mimi Recker, and Abigail L. Phillipsvictor.lee@usu.edu, mimi.recker@usu.edu, abigail.phillips@usu.eduInstructional Technology and Learning Sciences, Utah State UniversityAbstract: A recent and important innovation in design-based research (DBR) is the use ofconjecture maps, where researchers explicitly articulate the conjectured mediational relationsbetween their designed goals and the learning designs and contexts. In this paper, we present adesign case as an iterative sequence of evolving conjecture maps. As each conjecture map wastested, we revised it to highlight and refine our articulation of the tools and processes thatembodied our design approach. Our design case involves small-town and rural communityand school libraries in the United States as partners and DBR sites, with the goal of supportinglibrarians as they learn to develop and enact new STEM-oriented maker programs for youth.We show how conjecture mapping informed and supported our DBR work and how it helpedpush for specificity in hypothesized relations between the design, the learning setting, theoutcomes, while also forcing a reflection on design constraints.IntroductionA hallmark of the Learning Sciences in the decades since its inception is design-based research (DBR) (DBRC,2003). While the digital age portends the increased availability of new technologies to support learning, wecontend that design-based research, with its focus on understanding and refining practical and theoreticalknowledge about how change is effected in real world use contexts, remains both important and necessary to theLearning Sciences scholarly community. To that assertion, however, we note that efforts to critically reflectupon and modify the work and practices of DBR have been fairly limited. Relatively recently, there have beennew proposals for modifying the stances and routines of DBR, such as social design experiments – where equityand issues of justice are top-level foci (Gutiérrez & Jurow, 2016), design-based implementation research –where large educational systems are enlisted as sites and partners for designs addressing problems of practice(Penuel et al., 2011), and conjecture mapping – where design researchers explicitly specify the conjecturedmediational relations between their goals and the learning environment (Sandoval, 2014). The latter is the focusof this paper. In following with a more recent turn in DBR research toward presenting design cases and howthey adapt over time (Svihla & Reeve, 2016), we present our design case for inspection.Our design case involves small town and rural public and school libraries in the United States aspartners and DBR sites. Recently, libraries have been generating interest in Learning Sciences as designedlearning spaces (Lee et al., 2016; Subramanian et al., 2012). Successful implementation of new learningenvironments and programs within libraries have typically involved large libraries in urban communities, withthe YOUMedia program in Chicago (Austin et al., 2011) and the Bubbler in Madison (Halverson et al., 2017) asnoted examples in the United States. Less well represented in the Learning Sciences literature are libraries thatserve small towns and rural communities. Libraries serving these communities offer unique challenges: theirstaffing levels tend to be lower, staff are less likely to hold appropriate library certification or degree, andresources are typically insufficient (Barron, 1995).In this paper, we begin by describing the settings for our work, and our goal of supporting librarians asthey learn to develop and enact new STEM-oriented maker programs for youth. We present this work as anevolving sequence of conjecture maps that articulate theoretically important features of our design and how theywere expected to produce intended outcomes. As each conjecture map was tested, we revised it to highlight andrefine our articulation of the sociotechnical tools and processes that embodied our design approach. In this way,we show how conjecture mapping reflected, informed, and supported our DBR work. In following with otherpublished models in the Learning Sciences (e.g., Edelson, Gordin, & Pea, 1999), we identify how ourunderstanding of a complex learning setting and leverage points developed over time. We also articulate whatconjecture mapping offer to learning scientists over an extended period of design research.Literature reviewThe origin of design-based research is often traced to the early 1990s and the writings of Ann Brown (1992) andAllan Collins (1992). While the terminology originally differed in those early works (i.e., design experimentsand design science, respectively), the fundamental orientation remained the same: researchers aimed to establishICLS 2018 Proceedings320© ISLSpractical theory from creating, testing, and refining educational resources and learning designs in real worldsettings. The educational theory to be developed, termed by some as “humble theory” (Cobb et al., 2003), wouldknowingly differ from the kinds of grand theories associated with laboratory science which often attempted touncover fundamental and unifying principles and laws that transcended contexts and setting. For education,which involved inherently complex relations and practices, an alternative research approach was needed thatcould support the discovery and realization of educational goals. As an example, design-based research couldestablish new kinds of scientific practices that could be realized in a K-12 classroom (e.g., argumentation) andarticulate the means and tools necessary to get there.Conjecture mapping (Sandoval, 2014) has been introduced as a means for such articulation. It arosefrom the observation that while there appeared to be uptake in the use of DBR (Anderson & Shattuck, 2012) andin its sanctioning within official publications (e.g., Sandoval & Bell, 2004), processes for doing DBR were illspecified. At its core, conjecture mapping involves the following elements: 1) a high level conjecture about howto support learning, 2) the embodiment of that conjecture in a specific design, 3) mediating processes producedby the embodiment to yield 4) desired outcomes. The relationship between the embodiment of the design andthe mediating processes are the design conjectures. The relationship between the mediating processes and theoutcomes are the theoretical conjectures. Through conjecture mapping, the simultaneous work of developing adesign to support learning and developing theory can both be brought to the fore. Sandoval (2014) representsthese relations in a manner comparable to Figure 1.Figure 1. The grammar of conjecture mapping.Informally, this grammar for describing design-based research has been enthusiastically received bythe Learning Sciences community, but instances of it have rarely appeared in the literature (W. Sandoval,personal communication, May 12, 2017). Throughout this paper, we use the grammar and vocabulary ofconjecture mapping to present the iterative (and still evolving) conjectures we have been developing to supportthe following initial high-level conjecture: given appropriate supports, libraries is small and rural communitiescan provide a range of Maker and STEM-oriented educational programs for youth patrons that enableproduction of functional and digitally enhanced artifacts. Similar to how others have used high levelconjectures, ours includes a vision of learning and learning environments and how particular forms of it can andshould take place in library settings. As will be seen below, this high level conjecture, the embodiment of designdecisions, mediating processes, and outcomes have changed over time to help us better understand the domainand the supports necessary to engineer our intended learning activities.Data sourcesPartners for this design work include four middle school libraries from a single, rural-serving school district inthe United States and two public libraries in small towns within the same school district boundary. Data havebeen collected at virtually all of the libraries and with all librarians at these sites, with three school libraries andone public library providing the bulk of our data (an intentional move as part of the larger multi-year researchand design project). Data included 160 hours of observation documented with 183 pages of field notes and 191photographs, six recorded interviews, two focus groups, notes from our design sessions, and other artifacts (e.g.librarian produced marketing, school district meeting minutes), collected over approximately 18 months.By design, we emphasized an observational stance during the first phase of the project (roughly sixmonths). That is, we limited any intentional introduction of new tools or resources and primarily conductedweekly observations and interviews with librarians and at our partner libraries to understand existing practice.This was in line with adoption of contextual inquiry (Beyer & Holtzblatt, 1998) as an overarching designICLS 2018 Proceedings321© ISLSapproach, where the central and primary commitment is understanding what individuals are doing within theirexisting spaces. In the second phase, we began to take our initial observations to develop prototype activitiesand resources that we then tested with librarians and youth patrons in focus groups and workshops, with theexpectation that these would need substantial and continual revision. That phase has taken roughly a year ofcontinuous work and just concluded prior to authoring this paper. A third phase is currently underway.Data analysisAs a design-oriented paper, our goal is not to provide an extensive accounting of our analysis of all collecteddata. More traditional empirical studies are forthcoming. We do note, however, that our analysis activities haveinvolved systematic coding of field notes and interviews using accepted methods associated with qualitativeresearch (Saldaña, 2015) to inform our assertions. Given our goal of applying conjecture mapping anddemonstrating how conjecture mapping can articulate changes in knowledge gained from design research, wepresent descriptive excerpts for illustration and justification rather than counted codes. Due to space limitationsinherent in conference papers, we will only be reporting on some of our realizations and conjecture mapping.Evolution of conjecture mapsThe initial conjecture mapAt the start of our design-based research project, we had a rudimentary mapping of how our design work wouldlead to a set of desired outcomes (see Figure 2). Namely, we collaborated with partnering library directors andschool librarians who had expressed interest in having their libraries participate in the “Maker movement” thathas been increasingly appearing in their professional literature (e.g., newsletters and journals) andcommunicated to them from various stakeholders or affiliates (e.g., district office coordinators for schoollibraries). The outcomes we hoped to realize were instantiations of high quality youth Maker programs createdby our partner librarians and an increase in the amount of Maker programming. We knew that libraries,including those with whom we had partnered, already hosted youth programs and activities – whether it wasgaming groups or afterschool homework clubs. This existing youth program development expertise was a keymediating process and a resource to enable the creation of Maker programs. As this was a new endeavor, weexpected that our research team would have more direct involvement when we transitioned from observationalto interventional work, with our university-based team members taking on more active development andfacilitation roles for some Maker programs and helping to conceptualize program opportunities given our ownextensive prior engagements with the larger Maker education research community.Figure 2. Initial conjecture map.Our expectation was that after some initial time investment in working with and observing the librariesand their personnel, we would be able to create a set of demonstration materials that embodied realisticenactments of Maker programs in small libraries. We also had the expectation that there were a number ofexisting digital informational and communications resources through which libraries learned about possibleprogram ideas, such as social media and email lists within the local professional community that would enableknowledge sharing of different kinds of library-based programs. We hoped to discover and enact means forbuilding upon those connective media. For instance, we assumed that social media use kept libraries abreast ofwhat other libraries in the region were doing and could be reinforced to promote, model, and share ideas forMaker programs.Given our expectation of existing use of informational and communications media, particularly withinsocial media among librarians, and an ease with youth program development, our data collection approach wasto initially observe existing library program development practice without any researcher intervention. That is,ICLS 2018 Proceedings322© ISLSwe shadowed librarians at work, interviewed and observed them as they came up with youth programs, andattended and observed those youth programs and other routine activities at our partner libraries.Initial discoveriesFrom our early observations and interviews, we were quickly humbled as project partners. The number ofresponsibilities and expectations placed on library professionals, whether they worked in a school or publicsetting, were well beyond what we had anticipated. In hindsight, this was naiveté on our parts by not havingpreviously researched how librarians work and learn. For example, within the school library setting, there wereconstant demands on librarian time, with librarians taking on instructional planning, student advising, classsupervision, assessment, financial management, school technology support, and fundraising above and beyondcollections development and management. Observational interviews with school librarians often took placewhile things were momentarily quiet and the librarian was answering our questions while simultaneouslyshelving, assisting students, or preparing the library for a class of students arriving during the next period.In the public library setting, there were demands on staffing, grant writing, customer service, report preparation,and community relations. In addition to these activities, this meant that youth programs were considered infleeting moments when they were not already obligated to another service. Very limited staffing meant thatthere was one full-time employee in the school libraries and usually just one at the public libraries, given theirsmall size. In public libraries, when there was the luxury of more than one full-time staff member, the individualwho coordinated and facilitated youth programming had several other responsibilities beyond that. This is incontrast to larger libraries that have a dedicated youth services librarian.The need for “at-a-glance” program planning materialsWhen we observed and inquired about youth program planning, we saw that the librarians who were mostdirectly involved would conduct quick online searches for program examples, with social curating sites such asPinterest mentioned regularly. Often stated as driving program constraints were what librarians had heard aboutor knew youth would be interested in doing and what would be relatively quick to prepare and familiar enoughthat they could execute the program given limited preparation time and budgetary resources. As we probed whatled librarians to proceed with program design in this way, we found that it was largely driven by a desire to findnew ideas quickly, to “see things in pictures,” and to adapt without extensive preparation on their part. Forinstance, one librarian relied on Pinterest for images of Harry Potter craft activities that could be adapted as ayouth library program.As we began some very early user tests of prototype demonstration materials with librarians in theform of print materials, images received the bulk of attention, large sections of text were ignored, and thelibrarians made active requests for more pictures of completed examples and how they worked. That led us tofocus on highly pictorial materials and to explore strategies to represent completed examples and models inmore immediate ways than what existing Maker education resources typically do. In this way, we discoveredthat the quick glance a librarian might take would reveal to them what could be possible and attainable.Variable images for desirable librarianship practiceWe also learned from our observational work that different librarians had very different images for whatconstituted a successful youth program. On the more conservative side, as conveyed by one of our partneringschool librarians, an image of a program would involve youth quietly working on a creative activity that posedno disruptions to others who were visiting the library seeking a quiet reading or study space. Toward the otherextreme, a public and a school librarian stated that libraries should be lively, noisy spaces during adolescentyouth programs. We observed, and have noted elsewhere (Lee, Lewis, Searle, et al., 2017), that a librarian’ssense of librarianship practice – including what youth behaviors should be like, what purposes youth programsserved, and what should be expected during a youth program – strongly influenced how different forms of youthprogram were designed and enacted by different librarians. Those who saw their work as maintaining andreproducing services in a self-contained way tended to have rigid programs that were not well attended byyouth. Those who saw their work as reinventing the library and connecting to whatever resources were availablein their immediate community had highly attended programs and were described very positively by vocalpatrons and community members.Treatment of physical and occupied space in the libraryFinally, we observed that at programs with high levels of youth participation, the youth acted in ways thatsuggested a very different relationship with the library space and place than would be seen in a more typicalICLS 2018 Proceedings323© ISLSclassroom. Libraries that hosted highly attended youth programs had youth who spoke out without raising theirhands, would take off their shoes and walk barefoot in the library aisles, would sit with their feet on tables or siton tables themselves, and play loud music and dance. One public library hosted teen programs after regularlibrary operating hours. Adult patrons were not allowed, furniture was freely rearranged, and teens ran, laid onthe ground, texted friends or played board and phone games, or found private nooks to sit and congregate withfriends. This suggested to us that how the library space was understood – in terms of who should have accessand what behavioral norms were acceptable – were important for youth to be motivated to actively attend andengage. This was confirmed in interviews with librarians. These observations led to a major revision of ourconjecture map, described in the next section, as we more actively began to develop and enact new programs.The second conjecture mapAs we transitioned to design and implementation of Maker activities and away from strict, non-interventionistobservations, one major change to our conjecture map was a change in its high-level conjecture (see Figure 3).Whereas before our conjecture had been about enabling Maker programs to take place in the library generally,we came to recognize that our partner librarians felt limited in their prior knowledge related to Maker programsand limited in their time to learn what they believed was necessary to support Making. This tied into a perceivedidea of who gets to be a Maker and what activities constitute Making. In light of that, we internally andexternally adjusted our expectations that the Maker programs offered in these libraries would appropriately bepresented as low threshold, entry-level activities. We did not expect that the librarians would establish and leadrobotics and coding clubs, and recognized that they often preferred to bring in someone else from theircommunity (e.g., another teacher in the school for a school library or a representative from a communityorganization) for activities that went beyond what they felt they could learn and lead in a short amount ofscattered preparation time. While supporting that, we also wanted to empower the librarians to lead programs.Beyond changes to our high level conjecture, the embodiments of our design activities changeddramatically from what we had originally anticipated. In light of how we observed librarians curating programideas and what kinds of materials they felt comfortable using, we began to develop visual guide programmaterials that were intended to encapsulate information about how a library Maker program could be sequenced,what materials were needed, and some fundamentals necessary for the creation of workable digital artifacts. Forinstance, a simple template for creating a basic paper circuit was necessary to establish some basic rules forconnecting components into a functional circuit. When we tested templates that were available freely online, wediscovered where novice users made errors (such as in tearing copper tape to make corners or creating shortcircuits near batteries) and made our own version of simplified materials that avoided some of these challenges.We then found was that once we created these visual guide program materials, some librarians thoughtthey should also be given to their youth patrons. This meant that some youth received materials explaining howlibrary activities should be sequenced, how to address learning goals, how to communicate with youth patrons.In light of that, we began to deliberately separate materials for the librarian to plan the program, and materialsfor the librarian to copy and share with youth. This combination of librarian materials and patron materials wasintended to provide new images for what could be done within the library, how the space within the librarycould be used, and decentralize expertise so librarians did not feel that they must present themselves as experts.Figure 3. The second conjecture map, with major changes highlighted in gray.During our first enactments of newly developed Maker programs in the libraries, we observedimmediately that youth had variable attendance. When a series of programs was offered over multiple days,some youth would show up for the first time on the third day and others would show up only on the first and lastdays. As such, we observed it would be difficult to design sequences of activities that became more advancedICLS 2018 Proceedings324© ISLSover time because invariably, new youth who had never attended would arrive. We began to explore clearlyidentified ‘Newcomers stations’ so that first time and ‘drop-in’ program attendees could get started on their own.We also noticed that many youths who came complained that they did not know what to Make. After afew different attempts, and in consultation with participating youth, proposing a theme was recognized as animportant program structuring element. For instance, if the theme was “Fun and Games”, attending youthenjoyed displaying how they could creatively embody that theme in their creations and what they could createthat might push the boundaries of “games” (e.g., such as Pokemon Go vs. a board game). Also, we had observedsome libraries had multi-week themes, such as “Marvel” films, that librarians reported resulted in increasedyouth attendance at programs. Building on that seemed to attract youth, according to librarians, and showed therange of ideas youth had for what could be made (e.g., a superhero mask vs. a weapon vs. a film scene).Our intended outcomes from this conjecture map modification and for the subsequent six months ofdesign and implementation work were: to emulate engaged youth participation comparable to what librariansreported as taking place during their most successful youth programs, to ease the librarian into being acomfortable facilitator and helper for students rather than feeling the need to be a content expert, and to use thesuccesses of these experiences to empower librarians to create their own Maker-themed programs. We nextdescribe two observations from enactments of library programs.Need for more initial investment from youthThe new conjectures we established seemed more appropriate and tractable. Evidence for this included ourlibrarians taking on more assistive (rather than leader) roles with youth patrons during program enactments, aswell as strong program attendance. Still, some Maker activities and technologies had a much more enthusiasticreception from youth than others, including ones that the librarians and we had thought would be positivelyreceived. We thus began to see the need to increase youth involvement in initial program conceptualization. Atsome public libraries, teen advisory boards exist to get feedback on program ideas. Their members seem to alsoshow heavy investment in library-based programs and are key figures in publicizing the programs and bringingnew youth to the library. The literature on teen advisory boards is sparse, but working with them directly wasfruitful for our design work and also empowered librarians to feel more confident in their decision making. Wehave since been working with our school librarians to encourage them to establish their own teen advisoryboards, which is not a typical structure in school libraries. In addition, we introduced practices ofintergenerational co-design (Guha et al., 2013) into researcher-librarian-youth program conceptualization.The ‘domino effect’ of participating in Making at the libraryAs noted above, one librarian was more conservative and structured and tried to keep everyone at the same pace.In these instances, youth guide materials were supportive of the librarian’s preferred style of instruction.However, in more unstructured enactments, we saw librarians leave the youth guide materials out near theactivity. Then, when these were used, one youth would figure out what to do, and then others would observewhat that youth was doing and imitate him/her/them, and then occasionally expand on that in ways that wouldthen be imitated by others in its new expanded form. In Maker learning activities, Blikstein (2013) noted a‘keychain’ effect where youth would restrict themselves to making a single example when exposed to a newMaker technology, for example 3-D printing the same object (e.g., a keychain) repeatedly. In Blikstein’s work,the ‘keychain’ effect was viewed critically, rather than as an opportunity for learning. However, in our context,a ‘domino effect’ took place where guide materials we had designed were initially used by one youth, andobservation of what that youth was doing and then personal modification contributed to other youthsubsequently engaging in the Making activity. When new youth joined, they ignored the guide materials andopted to learn by watching. This social process of observation, imitation, and modification as a kind of vicariouslearning was not one we had expected, and is now one we wish to account for in the design of library-basedMaker programs. This process does not eliminate the need for youth guide materials, but has introduceddifferent patterns and evolutions in youth participation.The current conjecture mapWe have begun a third phase of work involving another design iteration with new librarians and new cohorts ofyouth. This has also entailed revisions in our conjecture map and our related design work (see Figure 4). First,the split between program materials and youth guide materials seemed consistent with what librarians wantedand used. However, we observed that for some librarians, the youth guide materials took primacy and theprograms became exercises in students working through those only. We also observed the aforementioned‘domino effect’ where youth guide materials were used once by one or a few youth to get the activity started andthen ignored by others.ICLS 2018 Proceedings325© ISLSAdditionally, drawing from Learning Sciences innovations where science curriculum materials wereenhanced to become educative curriculum materials (Davis & Krajcik, 2005), we began to modify the librarianprogram materials to become educative. We have systematically reviewed recently identified design principlesfor educative curriculum materials (Davis et al., 2017) and identified translations for the library setting. We areadopting those principles for the library context and are examining how well our embodiment of those supportschanges how librarians view, enact, and facilitate educational programs.Figure 4. The current conjecture map with changes from previous iteration highlighted in gray.With respect to outcomes, the ‘domino effect’ described above alters our expectations for librarianfacilitation. In part, we have come to see that a librarian’s sense of librarianship – including their view of howactivities should be enacted in libraries and what role the librarian should play – still influences theirfacilitation. Changing the sense of librarianship is a long term endeavor, comparable to how teachers changetheir teaching practice. Still, we have observed modifications in the librarians, such as expanding the range ofprogram offerings within library spaces and using teen advisory boards to help distribute expertise and supportyouth programs. Informally, we are seeing an increase in new library programs being initiated by our partnerlibrarians using prior programs as inspiration. For example, we are seeing one partner school librarianencouraging the use of cardboard with students to engineer miniature skating parks and launching steampunkfashion making activities without our prompting and another has been making terrariums. As this next iterationof design and enactment of youth Maker programs in libraries unfolds, we will continue to examine if ourconjectures are indeed plausible and attainable through our design work and revise and test more as necessary.ConclusionThe goal of this paper has been to demonstrate and apply conjecture mapping grammar to iterative work withsmall town public and school libraries. We presented three iterations of our conjecture maps developed over 18months of a design research partnership. In doing so, we note several things. First, while conjecture mappingpushes for specificity in hypothesized relations between the design, the learning setting, and the outcomes, theprocess of conjecture mapping also forces reflection on constraints. Many examples in Learning Sciencesresearch that have reflected upon design have been in classroom settings. By moving to the library setting, anew set of constraints associated with the target population and demands on professionals working in this spacehave surfaced. The specific embodiments of design decisions were informed by these constraints, and theprocess of conjecture mapping prompted reflection on them. In conjecture mapping of new domains, we believeit is necessary and productive to identify and articulate constraints. That may not require additional componentsto a conjecture map diagram, but they are important parts of the design process.Second, conjecture maps will undergo change over time, and design cases that make these changes visiblewill be instructive for the community. In our work, we have recognized where we were too general in ourassumptions, such as what supports and exemplars would be adequate for use in library-based learning. Indeed,the need for more necessary supports in the process of iterative design has been documented elsewhere (Edelsonet al., 1999). However, a push for final-form relations can mask the many decisions and influences involved inrealizing an educational design. Like others (Svhila & Reeve, 2016), we believe that surfacing these helps thecommunity appreciate and relate to the complexity of the work of doing design research.Finally, conjecture maps push researchers toward articulating mediators within the system. For us, we havebegun to articulate the kinds of entities and competencies that one ought to consider in our design space, such ashow physical space is arranged or the sense of librarianship maintained by individual librarians. The precisionrequired of conjecture maps encourages these articulations, and thus it seems to be a promising support forontological innovations in design research (diSessa & Cobb, 2004).ICLS 2018 Proceedings326© ISLSReferencesAustin, K., Ehrlich, S. B., Puckett, C., & Singleton, J. (2011). YOUmedia Chicago Reimagining Learning,Literacies, and Libraries: A Snapshot of Year 1. Consortium on Chicago School Research at theUniversity of Chicago Urban Education Institute.Barron, D. D. (1995). Staffing rural public libraries: The need to invest in intellectual capital. Library Trends,44(1), 77–87.Beyer, H., & Holtzblatt, K. (1998). Contextual Design: Defining Customer-Centered Systems, MorganKaufmann. San Francisco.Brown, A. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.Cobb, P., Confrey, J., DiSessa, A., Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educationalresearch. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9-13.Collins, A. (1992). Toward a design science of education. In New directions in educational technology (pp. 1522). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.Davis, E. A., & Krajcik, J. S. (2005). Designing educative curriculum materials to promote teacherlearning. Educational Researcher, 34(3), 3-14.Davis, E. A., Palincsar, A. S., Smith, P. S., Arias, A. M., & Kademian, S. M. (2017). Educative CurriculumMaterials: Uptake, Impact, and Implications for Research and Design. Educational Researcher, 46(6),293-304.diSessa, A. A., & Cobb, P. (2004). Ontological innovation and the role of theory in design experiments. TheJournal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 77-103.Edelson, D. C., Gordin, D. N., & Pea, R. D. (1999). Addressing the challenges of inquiry-based learningthrough technology and curriculum design Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8(3/4), 391-450.Guha, M. L., Druin, A., & Fails, J. A. (2013). Cooperative Inquiry revisited: Reflections of the past andguidelines for the future of intergenerational co-design. International Journal of Child-ComputerInteraction, 1(1), 14-23.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Jurow, A. S. (2016). Social design experiments: Toward equity by design. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 25(4), 565-598.Halverson, E., Lakind, A., & Willett, R. (2017). The Bubbler as Systemwide Makerspace: A Design Case ofHow Making Became a Core Service of the Public Libraries. International Journal of Designs forLearning, 8(1).Lee, V. R., Lewis, W., Searle, K. A., Recker, M., Hansen, J., & Phillips, A. L. (2017). Supporting interactiveyouth maker programs in public and school libraries: Design hypotheses and first implementations. InP. Blikstein & D. Abrahamson (Eds.), Proceedings of IDC 2017 (pp. 310-315). Stanford, CA: ACM.Lee, V. R., Tzou, C., Bang, M., Bell, P., Stromholt, S., Price, N., . . . Barron, B. (2017). Libraries as emergingspaces for computer-supported collaborative learning in schools and communities. In B. K. Smith, M.Borge, K. Y. Lim, & E. Mercier (Eds.), Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning. Philadelphia, PA: ISLS.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Haugan Cheng, B., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development atthe intersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational researcher, 40(7), 331-337.Sandoval, W. (2014). Conjecture mapping: An approach to systematic educational design research. Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 23(1), 18-36.Sandoval, W. A., & Bell, P. (2004). Design-based research methods for studying learning in context:Introduction. Educational Psychologist, 39(4), 199-201.Saldaña, J. (2015). The coding manual for qualitative researchers. Sage.Svihla, V., & Reeve, R. (Eds.). (2016). Design as Scholarship: Case Studies from the Learning Sciences.Routledge.Subramaniam, M. M., Ahn, J., Fleischmann, K. R., & Druin, A. (2012). Reimagining the role of school librariesin STEM education: Creating hybrid spaces for exploration. The Library Quarterly, 82(2), 161-182.The Design-Based Research Collective. (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educationalinquiry. Educational Researcher, 5-8.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by Institute of Museum and Library Services grant number RE-31-16-0013-16.ICLS 2018 Proceedings327© ISLS