A Learning Sciences Perspective on the Development ofTeachers’ Digital IdentityYu-Hui Chang, University of Minnesota – Twin Cities, chan1173@umn.eduAbstract: This case study explored pre-service teachers’ development of digital identity byuncovering their thinking on technology as connected with pedagogy to construct learningactivities. 27 participants’ learning artifacts (e.g. an open-ended questionnaire about digitaltool selections) were collected throughout a 14-week licensure course. Primary findingsshowed that teachers’ perceptions of digital tools shifted from a single-purpose to a versatilepurposed approach, presenting the growth of digital identity with pedagogical changes towardto student-centered design.Keywords: Digital Identity, Teacher Development, Technology IntegrationIntroductionFrom a learning sciences perspective, it is essential to know the trajectories of growth in teachers’ knowledgeand practice (Fishman, Davis, & Chan, 2014). With the growing need for integrating technology into teachingand learning, education in the digital age is being redefined by the ubiquitous of learning with emergingtechnologies. With these new learning opportunities, digital thinking along with digital identity are developedby educators who teach themselves a new technology, redesign pedagogies to amplify the use of technology,and redefine learning environments for students. In other words, our thoughts can be shifted and transformedwith digital tools that foster creative learning, reconstruct learning identities (Loveless & Williamson, 2013) andsituate digital identity (Goode, 2010). While teacher preparation programs are keeping up with the digitalchanges to develop pre-service teachers’ pedagogical mindsets and skills (Ertmer, Ottenbreit-Leftwich, Sadik,Sendurur, & Sendurur, 2012), there is a need to understand how pre-service teachers reconstruct their digitalthinking through their own technology integration practice (Burden, Aubusson, Brindley & Schuck, 2016).Therefore, the purpose of this study is to understand pre-service teachers’ conceptual changes ondigital identity through technology integration. This study intends to provide further insight into how teacherscultivate their own digital thinking in their instruction and curriculum and transform their own pedagogy indigital age. In order to uncover pre-service teachers’ thinking process, the research questions have two facets:(1) how do pre-service teachers perceive the use of technology in teaching and learning? and (2) how do preservice teachers conceptualize their digital thinking?MethodThis study utilized case study methods (Yin, 2014) with an aim to support the development of tech-integrationtheories within teacher preparation programs. Data were collected from a 14-week licensure course abouttechnology integration in teaching and learning at a midwestern university in the U.S. Throughout the 14-weekcourse, 27 participants engaged in course discussion to reflect on general topics of technology in education,including technology integration frameworks, digital citizenship, 21st century learning skills, instructionalmedia, classroom management, alternative assessments, differentiation, and culturally responsive teaching. Inaddition to course discussion, participants had opportunities to share their reflections through different digitaltools and create a digital portfolio by using the features on Google Sites. Data sources were 27 pre-serviceteachers’ learning artifacts, including: (1) open-ended questionnaires, (2) online postings, and (3) selfreflections. A content analysis was performed using both open coding and constant comparative methods(Miles, Huberman, & Saldana, 2013) to investigate the conceptual changes of teachers’ digital thinking.Primary findingsThe frequency and percentage of technology tools used that were pre-service teachers’ self-reported favoritesboth in the first week and the fourteenth week were investigated. During the first week, a majority (65.5%) ofresponses identified a specific device that was useful for a teacher, whereas the rest (34.5%) identified a specificsoftware application that was useful for a teacher or student. However, at the 14th week, teachers expressedtheir thinking differently. The reasons these tools were named as favorites in the majority of responses werecategorized by the researcher as enabling student-centered creation (32%) and enabling teacher assessment(32%). For instance, teachers liked the ability to have learners create digital stories and to evaluate learners’ICLS 2018 Proceedings1731© ISLSperformances instantly. The rest responses were categorized as classroom management (21.4%) and teachingmaterials (14.3%), such as recognizing a platform to manage learning materials for students or using atechnology to create instructional media for students.These results indicate a technological and pedagogical knowledge shift among pre-service teachersduring the course. The researcher took a closer look at their thinking. In the first week, the device and softwareapplication responses represented a perception of the technology tool on an efficient ‘single-purpose level’. Thiscan be seen from a participant’s statement identifying the computer as a favorite tool because it “allows studentsto search and become intrigued. It improved my research skills over the years and I know it can do the same formy students as well” (PT#2). In contrast, in response to the same question at the end of semester, all the digitaltools declared as favorites by participants were categorized as diverse software usages. To be more specific,their responses about these software applications showed that their thinking developed and expanded to connecttechnology with pedagogical knowledge, such as creation or assessment. Participants started to describe afavorite tool with mindful educational purposes by saying that “it is a different way for students to expressthemselves and show what they learned in a way that isn't a written paper” (PT#10). Given the fact thatparticipants considered diverse educational purposes when choosing tools for their instructional design, theresearcher found this perception pattern as the ‘versatile-constructed level’ during their post-training.ConclusionsBased upon this initial study, the researcher found that pre-service teachers’ perceptions of digital tool usage areinterfering with teaching beliefs. As participants gained opportunities to explore their choice of differenttechnology tools throughout the 14-week course, they looked at the tools’ uses from a more constructivistmindset. Thus, at the end of the course, their selection of a favorite tool was no longer based on a specificdevice for efficiency; rather, they considered more which tools best support teaching and learning in practicalways. The researcher argues that the development of digital identity is not only overlapped betweentechnological knowledge (e.g, participants’ self-learning of the applications of a new tool) and pedagogicalknowledge (e.g., participants’ reflection on how to integrate a tool with pedagogical approaches), but alsofostered by community of practice (Wenger, 1998). This implies that with the rapid change in technologyproducts, future teachers are starting to teach themselves to use a new technology tool and develop their digitalidentity through wider participation with an attempt to transform pedagogies for students.In addition, professional development could foster both transformative use and learning by facilitatingteachers rethinking their personal pedagogical mindsets and redefining a tool to meet students’ learning purposewhen integrating technology into classrooms. Furthermore, this study suggests that teachers be mindful of theirdevelopment of digital thinking and identity to transform learning through technology integration. To validateprimary study results and examine the above patterns and assumptions, future research of this study willcontinue exploring and analyzing other participants’ artifacts, including teachers’ digital portfolios and lessonplans to triangulate the initial findings of this study.ReferencesBurden, K., Aubusson, P., Brindley, S & Schuck, S. (2016). Changing knowledge, changing technology:Implications for Teacher Education Futures. Journal of education for Teaching: International researchand pedagogy, 42 (1).Ertmer, P. A., Ottenbreit-Leftwich, A. T., Sadik, O., Sendurur, E., & Sendurur, P. (2012). Teacher beliefs andtechnology integration practices: A critical relationship. Computers & Education, 59(2), 423-435.Fishman, B. J., Davis, E. A., & Chan, C. K. K. (2014). A learning sciences perspective on teacher learningresearch. In Sawyer, R. K. (Ed.). The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences: 2nd Edition.P750-p769. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Goode, J. (2010). The digital identity divide: how technology knowledge impacts college students. New media& society, 12(3), 497-513.Loveless, A., & Williamson, B. (2013). Learning identities in a digital age: Rethinking creativity, educationand technology. New York, NY: Routledge.Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldana, J. (2013). Qualitative data analysis: A methods sourcebook.Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Yin, R. K. (2014). Case study research: Design and methods. Fifth Edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1732© ISLS