Conceptual Fluency: Switching Between Pre- and Post-ThresholdAssumptions of Molecular DynamicsPrajakt Pande, Homi Bhabha Centre for Science Education, TIFR, Mumbai, India, prajaktp@hbcse.tifr.res.inHannah Sevian, University of Massachusetts, Boston, MA, USA, Hannah.Sevian@umb.eduAbstract: We present preliminary analysis of chemistry graduate students' and secondarychemistry teachers' assumptions about mechanisms of chemical phenomena, around a set ofthreshold concepts. Chemistry education literature largely identifies pre-threshold assumptionsas naive/alternative conceptions not particularly useful in understanding chemical phenomena.In the context of molecular dynamics, a threshold is considered to exist between thinkingdeterministically vs. probabilistically. We argue that (a) a deterministic perspective is as usefulas a probabilistic one, (b) even experts implicitly exhibit (do not lose) deterministicassumptions, (c) probabilistic mental models are built on top of deterministic models, usingmultiple instances of the phenomena of interest, and (d) expertise involves willfully switchingbetween pre- and post-threshold assumptions.IntroductionResearch on misconceptions and alternative frameworks has occupied a great deal of effort over the past decades.These endeavors characterize and differentiate between the ways in which students misunderstand the naturalworld and the models that science offers to explain it. At this point, there is no longer any doubt that alternativeconceptions occur. Voluminous evidence supports claims that experts reason differently than novices (e.g. Kozma& Russell, 1997), and that some misconceptions are robust (diSessa, 2006).Posner et al. (1982) introduced the theory of conceptual change to explain how students’ conceptionschange when new ideas and evidence are introduced. According to this theory the changes are analogous to thetwo-phase model of conceptual change in science (Kuhn, 2012; Carey, 1999). Borrowing terminology fromPiaget, they called the first phase ‘assimilation’. This occurs when learners use concepts they already possess torationalize new ideas and evidence. The second phase, called ‘accommodation’, is more radical. It occurs whenexisting concepts are inadequate to rationalize new ideas and evidence, and the learner must replace or reorganizeconceptual understanding. One thread of research proposes a parallel between the historical evolution of conceptsin the discipline of science and the development of concepts in a child's mind (psychological recapitulation or thetheory-theory view (Carey, 1999; Karmiloff-Smith, 1988; Vosniadou et al., 2008). A similar thread suggests thatconceptions (alternative and correct) belonging to ontologically different categories (e.g. direct causal vs.emergent notions notion of a phenomenon, looking at a concept as a 'substance' vs. a more dynamic 'process'notion of the same) are more robust and difficult to remove/rectify, than ontologically similar ones (two different'direct causal' notions of that phenomenon; Chi, 2008).Although such models of conceptual change, and the curricular approaches they inspire, stress aqualitative understanding of scientific concepts and an overall constructivist perspective towards learning, manyof them downplay or undermine the role of prior knowledge. They do so by considering that, as a result of rationalthinking by the learner, correct conceptions will be chosen over (and will replace) misconceptions whenever thelearner encounters conflicting ideas (Smith et al., 1993). This has propagated a problematic model of the mindthat concepts can be replaced like physical objects.The ‘knowledge in pieces’ (diSessa, 1993) perspective on the mechanism of conception and conceptualchange suggests that a person’s knowledge system consists of numerous simple elements of knowledge, calledphenomenological primitives (p-prims). These p-prims are formed as a result of superficial interpretations ofexperiences of physical reality by novices, and are organized gradually into a conceptual network. In novices, thisnetwork is poorly organized, whereas in experts (through conceptual change), these pieces of knowledge aresystematically integrated into larger and more complex systems of knowledge.Alternatively, Mortimer (1995) has illustrated that a learner can hold several alternative concepts in themind, and that context influences, but does not determine, the formation and exhibition of such concepts. At anygiven time, the learner's mind holds a distribution of different related (yet alternative and even contrasting)concepts. The concepts can be characterized, and each learner has a different distribution of these, called aconceptual profile. The conceptual profiles approach mildly denies the very occurrence of conceptual change, andmaintains that alternative concepts can not only co-exist but also are necessary as they are often appliedpragmatically in corresponding contexts.ICLS 2016 Proceedings898© ISLSThere does not seem to exist a consensus among learning scientists (diSessa, 2006) on how conceptualchange occurs, what are the mental mechanisms involved, and how can this process (of conception) be intervenedwith, if at all! A first step in resolving some of this conflict is to establish evidence for whether naïve assumptionsor superficial interpretations are indeed replaced by more sophisticated assumptions or conceptual networks whenconceptual change occurs, or if sophisticated assumptions and conceptual networks exist alongside naïveassumptions and superficial interpretations that continue to be relied upon. Considering that there are differentforms of expertise, specifically expertise as researchers in a discipline and expertise in teaching a discipline, wedesigned a study to examine what assumptions are relied upon by experts who can be expected to have changedconceptions to at least some degree, if conceptual change occurs.We present a preliminary analysis from a think-aloud and eye-tracking experiment showing that expertsexhibit contradictory assumptions about mechanisms of chemical phenomena depending on the nature of theprompt. We then illustrate how a mixed distributed cognition and neural network model of knowledgerepresentation may provide a possible mechanism of conception and conceptual change.The experimentWe selected related pairs of assumptions that have been studied sufficiently and are considered to exist on oppositesides of a threshold concept (Meyer & Land, 2006). Threshold concepts are recently and increasingly robustlycharacterized as conforming to the following main features: 1) they are difficult to grasp, i.e., troublesome, 2)people’s thinking becomes transformed when they cross over a threshold, 3) understanding a threshold conceptgenerates interrelations between concepts previously considered unrelated, 4) the transformation is irreversible,and 5) the concepts serve as boundaries that mark a discipline (Loertscher et al., 2014; Talanquer, 2014).Working within the discipline of chemistry, the threshold concept selected for our exploratory study ischaracterized by a transition that Talanquer describes as “from a centralized causal process to an emergent processschema” (Talanquer, 2014). This threshold concept centers on transformations of matter. Four related pairs ofassumptions appear to straddle the threshold: (a) static vs. dynamic views of molecular behavior, (b) deterministicvs. probabilistic views of chemical phenomena, (c) direct causal vs. emergent views of mechanisms that underlieprocesses, and (d) object vs. interactions views of structure and properties of matter. Preliminary analysis reportedhere concerns (a) & (b) only.Sample and methodologyEight chemistry graduate students (GS2-GS9) from a university and six experienced secondary chemistry teachers(T2-T7) from schools in the Northeastern USA participated in this study. Participants were recruited from thesetwo populations because they have different kinds of expertise (chemistry content expertise, and expertise inteaching chemistry), and the goal of this study was to examine expertise in chemistry considered broadly. Allparticipants were individually presented with the same visuals, prompts and questions on a laptop screen, andwere asked to talk the researcher through her/his entire thinking process. Figure 1 shows the protocol for one ofthe three experiment trials.Figure 1.Experiment trialQuestions 2 and 3 were designed to stimulate reliance upon deterministic assumptions, the snapshots were staticpictures and the question asked about the immediate timeframe (‘what happens next?’). Question 4 was designedto stimulate probabilistic assumptions, as the question requested mechanistic explanation of how molecular-scaledynamics conflate to account for an emergent phenomenon. There were three trials, each involved presentationof four visual stimuli corresponding to a specific chemical phenomenon: a photograph of the macroscopicICLS 2016 Proceedings899© ISLSphenomenon, then three identical copies of snapshots of a molecular dynamics simulation with different questionsasked for each of the identical stimuli. Three phenomena were presented: (a) mixing of methanol and water in theliquid phase, (b) formation of ice crystals from liquid water, and (c) combustion of hydrogen gas. Audio and videorecorders were used to record participants' explicit thought processes for further analysis. Eye-tracking (TobiiTX2-60) was also employed to capture implicit behavior-level correlates of the deterministic-probabilistic thoughtprocesses, as well as differences between those correlates, if any.AnalysisThe think-aloud audios were transcribed. Trains of thought within responses to each question for each participantwere characterized as indicating reliance upon either 'deterministic' assumptions or 'probabilistic' ones, based onindicators summarized in Table 1. Other codes, and eye-tracking results are not reported in this paper.Table 1: Preliminary qualitative coding scheme for think aloud data.Mental model/codeIndicators/MarkersDeterministicLinear explanations of reaction mechanisms (uncertainty of events ignored), explainedmolecular/reaction behavior deemed certainProbabilisticNon-linear explanations of reaction molecular behavior, uncertainty/affecting factorsconsidered, particular behavior of molecules/reactions as a function of probabilityFindingsFor the 'single molecule behavior' questions (Q2 & 3 - Figure 1, total six questions across three trials), eightparticipants provided probabilistic explanations (e.g. Transcript 1). They indicated the 'likelihood' of a molecularevent depending on the properties of the picked molecule and its surrounding, and other possible factors that couldaffect that reaction. Four participants provided deterministic explanations (e.g. Transcript 2). One participant (T4)tended to use probabilistic and deterministic perspectives equally often interchangeably.1. Transcript 1 (GS7): So.. the oxygen molecule near the bottom right, I don't know where it’ll be, but itwon’t be where it is right now. And.. uh.. it may not be an oxygen molecule if it collides.. um.. with ahydrogen atom or molecule.. um.. with enough force to break the bond. That's about it.2. Transcript 2 (T2): Let’s pick another one.. to the right of those methanols, there are three water moleculesin close proximity and the same thing I think would happen. The more negative oxygen side would beattracted to the more positive hydrogen side of the other two water molecules. And therefore they wouldmove close together. That’s it.For the ‘mechanism’ questions (Q4 - Figure 1, total three questions over all trials), all participants (exceptT6) tended to provide ‘likelihood’ explanations. Interestingly, these overall seemingly probabilistic answers‘emerged’ out of different small and isolated instances of deterministic explanations of molecular events. Insummary, most participants relied upon both deterministic and probabilistic explanations while answering the‘single molecule behavior’ as well as ‘mechanism’ questions. Thus, it seemed difficult and inappropriate to call aparticipant either a deterministic or a probabilistic thinker.Discussion and conclusionsIn this study, the ‘single molecule behavior’ questions were intended to cue for pre-threshold (deterministic)assumptions, while ‘mechanism’ questions were intended to cue for post-threshold (probabilistic) assumptions, ifthe participant had developed these assumptions.Preliminary findings indicate that participants employed both pre- and post-threshold assumptions quitepragmatically. Deterministic assumptions were often exhibited among some participants when behavior of a singlemolecule was in focus. Meanwhile, the same participants seemed to employ probabilistic assumptions whenexplaining macro-level manifestations of molecular interactions. Deterministic models of phenomena offerexecutive control over variables by lowering cognitive load, and allowing externalization, (throughrepresentations and actions, Kirsh, 2013). Probabilistic models provide holistic understanding of chemicalphenomena. Below we briefly discuss a possible general mechanism of conception indicating how assumptionslying on both the sides of a threshold can co-exist/exhibit. We present here a theoretical proposal based on recentadvances in cognition. Our preliminary empirical findings described above are used to illustrate the promise ofthe argument.ICLS 2016 Proceedings900© ISLSA neural network model of conceptionNeurons in the brain are connected to each other, forming a web. The networks formed out of these connectionscan exist in multiple activation states. Several neuro-imaging experiments and studies in distributed cognitionshow that specific activation patterns in the brain are coupled with specific elements in the external world (suchas entities, phenomena, and their representations or models). There may not be a direct one-to-one correspondencebetween activation patterns and the external world, but the coupling has biological correlates.We imagine a conceptual network supported by (possibly built upon) this biological neural network.Unlike in a semantic network, experiences of worldly events are coded as activation patterns in this conceptualneural network, so are scientific experiences of worldly events - through either direct exposure to those phenomenaand/or multiple external representations and models of those phenomena (Pande & Chandrasekaran, 2016). In ourview, a collection of related activation patterns is exhibited as assumptions/generalizations built upon relativelyconcrete experiences. Any new experience around corresponding worldly element leads to a reorganization of theexisting network (or activation patterns), thus, changing the assumption. The extent of this change would dependon the (virtual) size of the previous network - richness and diversity of previous experiences. This property of thenetworks makes some assumptions robust, for instance the assumption among children (and even adults) that ‘theearth is flat’ as deemed robust by previous research. We argue that this, and assumptions alike, are not onlyretained in the network but also used implicitly.This neural network model makes possible understanding ‘alternative conceptions’ as naturalconceptions that can have validity under some circumstances, endowing them with utility. Thus, they should notbe viewed as ‘things to be dealt with’. There is no qualitative/mechanism level difference in the formation as wellas nature between alternative and so called ‘correct’ concepts. This view is sympathetic with the p-prims as wellas conceptual profiles approaches. From our perspective, the more diverse one’s experiences around a concept,the richer the network/activation patterns may be. Expertise, therefore, is redefined as the ability to willfully switchbetween multiple assumptions/activation patterns. In other words, the conceptual neural network perspectivepredicts conceptual fluency rather than conceptual change, as a model of learning.ReferencesCarey, S. (1999). Sources of conceptual change. Conceptual development: Piaget’s legacy, 293-326.Chi, M. T. (2008). Three types of conceptual change: Belief revision, mental model transformation, andcategorical shift. International handbook of research on conceptual change, 61-82.diSessa, A. A. (2006). A History of Conceptual Change Research: Threads and Fault Lines. CambridgeUniversity Press.diSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an epistemology of physics. Cognition and instruction, 10(2-3), 105-225.Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1988). The Child is a Theoretician, Not an Inductivist*. Mind & Language, 3(3), 183-196.Kirsh, D. (2013). Embodied cognition and the magical future of interaction design. ACM Transactions onComputer-Human Interaction (TOCHI), 20(1), 3.Kozma, R. B., & Russell, J. (1997). Multimedia and understanding: Expert and novice responses to differentrepresentations of chemical phenomena. Journal of research in science teaching, 34(9), 949-968.Kuhn, T. S. (2012). The structure of scientific revolutions. University of Chicago press.Loertscher, J., Green, D., Lewis, J. E., Lin, S., & Minderhout, V. (2014). Identification of Threshold Concepts forBiochemistry. CBE-Life Sciences Education, 13(3), 516-528.Meyer, J. H., & Land, R. (2006). Threshold concepts and troublesome knowledge. Overcoming barriers to studentunderstanding: Threshold concepts and troublesome knowledge, 3-18.Mortimer, E. F. (1995). Conceptual change or conceptual profile change?.Science & Education, 4(3), 267-285.Pande, P., & Chandrasekharan, S. (submitted). A distributed and embodied cognition account of representationalcompetencePosner, G. J., Strike, K. A., Hewson, P. W., & Gertzog, W. A. (1982). Accommodation of a scientific conception:Toward a theory of conceptual change. Science education, 66(2), 211-227.Smith III, J. P., diSessa, A. A., & Roschelle, J. (1994). Misconceptions reconceived: A constructivist analysis ofknowledge in transition. The journal of the learning sciences, 3(2), 115-163.Vosniadou, S., Vamvakoussi, X., & Skopeliti, I. (2008). The framework theory approach to the problem ofconceptual change. International handbook of research on conceptual change, 3-34.Talanquer, V. (2014). Threshold concepts in chemistry: the critical role of implicit schemas. Journal of ChemicalEducation, 92(1), 3-9.A. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges increating complex interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.ICLS 2016 Proceedings901© ISLS