Projected Worlds:How Informal Digital Learning Organizations ConceptualizeOrganizing Youth FuturesRafi Santo, New York University, Rafi.Santo@nyu.eduJuan Pablo Sarmiento, New York University, Jp651@nyu.eduJune Ahn, New York University, June.Ahn@nyu.eduAbstract: Understanding learning as an inherently value-laden and socio-political process isincreasingly a concern of the Learning Sciences, and this focus forces us to confrontfundamental questions relating to the purposes of learning and the multiplicity of possible andintended futures for learners implied by their learning environments. In this study, we utilizethe framework of ‘learning as the organization of social futures’ – one that simultaneouslyforegrounds values and their expressions within learning activity – to understand orientationsof informal digital learning organizations. The study focuses on three organizations, all part ofa larger research-practice partnership. Utilizing staff interviews and organizationaldocumentation, our findings show that the kinds of social futures valued by informal digitallearning organizations varied in (1) how specified versus open-ended these futures were, (2)their focus on access to existing social futures vs creation of alternative social realities inorder to allow new possible futures, (3) their relative focus on individual versus collectivefutures, with each of these dimensions having implications in terms of ways that pedagogiesare designed within these organizations.As Learning Scientists increasingly aim to conceptualize learning more explicitly through socio-political andhistorical frameworks (McWilliams & Penuel, 2016; PLWC, 2017), we must confront fundamental questionsrelated to the purposes of learning, the underlying values that drive the design of learning environments, and thekinds of futures those environments imply for learners. In doing so, an understanding of learning as “theorganizing of access to valued social futures” (O’Connor & Allen, 2010) helps us to simultaneously foregroundboth the value-based commitments of learning environments - what sorts of worlds they are implying, their telos- and the structural mechanisms and practices they employ to make those worlds possible for learners.The following study uses this framework of organizing social futures to explore another area that hasbeen a historical focus of the Learning Sciences - informal learning with technology, specifically within thecontext of informal out of school organizations (Santo, 2017a; Kafai et al., 2009). In doing so, we attempt tomake more transparent the ways that such learning settings conceptualize their role and how technology plays apart in it. Given the relevance of informal learning environments within larger STEM and digital learningecosystems (Acholonu, Pinkard & Martin, 2015; Ching et al., 2016), it is valuable to consider the roles theymight play in supporting learning pathways across settings. In doing so, the study bridges two current areas ofscholarship: studies exploring the place of ideological commitments and underlying value systems of learningenvironments, and studies that focus on cross-setting learning pathways and ecosystems. Our objective is toshow how designed learning pathways are themselves always imbued with, and should intentionally contendwith, commitments about which social futures are valued.We focus on three informal learning organizations, all part of a larger research-practice partnership cofacilitated by the authors. All are community-based, located across urban centers in the United States and haveself-identified as being engaged with digital learning in the context of their youth programs. All serveminoritized, low income communities and have explicit, though nuanced and distinct, commitments to equity.In order to understand these organizations’ orientations towards valued social futures and the ways thattechnology relates to the organization of access to those futures, the research team engaged in 2 hour interviewswith staff at each of the organizations which were augmented and triangulated with organizationaldocumentation and participant observation.Our findings show that the kinds of social futures valued by informal digital learning organizationsvaried in (1) how specified versus open-ended these futures were, (2) their focus on access to existing socialfutures vs creation of alternative social realities, and (3) relative focus on individual versus collective futures.The first organization, LightLine, represented open-ended futures to be achieved through pedagogiesand technologies associated with creative, collaborative ‘making’. The executive director shared that he wantedto “eliminate all notions of an end point for a kid” and that “we don't believe that a kid's road to success is beingthe thing that is in demand right now. […] We want the kids to have their own opinions about what their road toICLS 2018 Proceedings1673© ISLSsuccess is.” The strategy to not focus on organizing towards any highly specified social future either in terms ofacademic, professional or civic engagement was indexed in the ways that they approached their pedagogy andthe place of technologies within it. Students worked on what could be seen as somewhat idiosyncratic and evenwhimsical ‘maker’ projects, and the usage of technology in their pedagogy was determined largely based on itsutility in supporting more generalist orientations to creativity and collaboration. LightLine’s implied socialfutures were largely (1) open-ended in the sense that they were not linked to highly specified social world ordiscipline, (2) had a relative focus on the social futures of individuals rather than collectives, though it implicitlysaw collaborative activity as a feature of those futures and (3) generally did not address whether valued socialfutures involved participating in existing social structures or creating alternative social realities.A second organization, TinkerSpace, is a community-based technology education organization based inmid-sized Northeastern city describes itself as a “maker space” and “tech center” serving non-dominant youth.Its conceptualization of valued social futures for its youth rests on an idea of “having an economicallysustainable job or career and being a contributor back to your community.” Their focus on technology careerreadiness indexed a somewhat more specified professional future, but it’s broad commitment to “being acontributor” indexed a more open-ended civic future. This more specified professional orientation was reflectedin their approach to which technologies they taught their youth to use, framing these choices as being aboutbalancing “applicability with accessibility”, such as using the free, open source GIMP photo editor as opposedthe more expensive but professional standard of Photoshop. Overall, their talk reflected a commitment tosupporting individuals to access existing social futures currently out of reach.Of the three, the final organization, Thrivewire, a computing education organization rooted in a highpoverty area in a large northeastern city, shared the most highly specified conceptualization of social futures forits students. Their organization fused a strong pre-professional orientation and advanced technical computingskills training for individual non-dominant youth with a socio-political vision of “bootstrapping a technologyecosystem” in their region and of supporting alumni to “create their own economy”, one that was seen as largelyseparate from the broader, white and upper middle class dominated technology sector and that would “beat themto market”. In order to do so, it made choices about teaching with technology that were heavily driven bymarket trends and where it projected greatest areas of labor need would be. Thrivewire’s conceptualization ofsocial futures was highly-specified, and collectively-oriented towards creating an alternative social order.Examining the projected futures that informal digital learning organizations imagine and aim toorganize for their youth allows a deeper understanding of the kinds of underlying values that guide their work,ones that this study shows are far from unidimensional. Similarly, the analysis reveals diversity in the ways thatsuch organizations think about the role of and decisions around technology as it relates to the organization ofthose futures. Within the context of the larger project of building cross-setting learning pathways andecosystems, attending to such differences in orientation can help stakeholders involved in those effortsunderstand both what kind of roles informal digital learning organizations might play, and whether alignment ofvalues among stakeholders exists. The framework may also provide tools for both reflection by educationalorganizations about the kinds of futures they want to support or by researchers interested in analyzing thecommitments of learning environments they study or design.ReferencesAcholonu, U., Pinkard, N., & Martin, C. K. (June, 2015). Locating Opportunity Gaps by Mapping theComputer Science Landscape in Chicago. Presented at Digital Media and Learning Conference, LosAngeles, CA.Bevan, B. (2016). STEM Learning Ecologies: Relevant, Responsive and Connected. Connected ScienceLearning: Linking In-School and Out-of-School STEM Learning. 1(1).Ching, D., Santo, R., Hoadley, C., & Peppler, K. (2016). Not just a blip in someone’s life: integrating brokeringpractices into out-of-school programming as a means of supporting youth futures. On the Horizon,24(3). pp. 296-312.Kafai, Y. B., Peppler, K. A., & Chapman, R. N. (2009). The Computer Clubhouse: Constructionism andCreativity in Youth Communities. Technology, Education--Connections. Teachers College Press. NewYork, NY.McWilliams, J., & Penuel, W. R. (2016). Queer theory in the learning sciences. Power and Privilege in theLearning Sciences: Critical and Sociocultural Theories of Learning, 93.Santo, R. (2017). Working Open in the Hive: How Informal Education Organizations Learn, Collaborate andInnovate in Networks. Doctoral Dissertation. Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.The Politics of Learning Writing Collective (2017). The Learning Sciences in a New Era of US Nationalism.Cognition and Instruction, 35(2), 91-102.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1674© ISLS