The Structures of Embodied Play Activities and TheirImpact on Students’ Exploration of the Particulate Natureof MatterBria Davis, Indiana University, davis217@umail.iu.eduXintian Tu, Indiana University, tuxi@umail.iu.eduJoshua A. Danish, Indiana University, jdanish@indiana.eduNoel Enyedy, University of California Los Angeles, enyedy@gseis.ucla.eduAbstract: This study investigates how activity structures influence how students representtheir understanding of complex science concepts. Twenty-four second grade students werequasi-randomly assigned to either a modeling-play or game-play condition. In both conditions,students took on the role of embodying particles within a mixed-reality simulation to exploreparticulate nature of matter. Results showed that game-play influenced prompts andexplanations to be more activity oriented, while modeling-play led conversations toencompass more conceptual nuances.Introduction and theoretical frameworkThe role of embodiment in cognition, along with the increased availability and uses of motion trackingtechnology, has led to an increase in instructional designs that aim to support learning through embodiment(Lindgren & Johnson-Glenberg, 2013). Game-like technology such as mixed reality (MR) interfaces canleverage embodied play within learning environments in ways that allow students to explore complex conceptsthrough movement and gesture (Danish et. al, 2015). In an effort to document how distinct forms of embodiedactivity play a role in shaping student learning, the present analysis contrasts two forms of play within the sameMR environment to better understand how the structures of play influence student interaction and learning.This study builds upon the prior success of the Science Through Technology Enhanced Play (STEP)project, which is a unique platform that allows students to learn about the particulate nature of matter throughdifferent types of embodied play within a mixed reality learning environment (Danish et. al, 2015). In this study,two forms of play are contrasted: modeling-play and game-play. The modeling-play condition is unstructured indesign to orient students towards producing their own scientific models, spontaneous narratives and negotiablerules. The game-play variation is more structured by focusing on winning as an end goal, having overt rules anda fixed narrative. Our theoretical assumption is that the combination of imaginary situations and rules withinplay helps students build accurate understandings of complex processes that are situated within the learningenvironment (Vygotsky, 1978). Centering our framework on Activity Theory (Engeström, 1999), we focus onhow student learning is mediated by the division of labor, rules, and tools that structure the play activity. Ourassumption is that the different forms of play become visible to the participants through these mediators. Forexample, the modeling-play activity draws upon classroom norms for how to represent concepts, while thegame-play activity draws upon the explicit rules of the game to inform students’ activity. In both conditions, thesame underlying rules drive the MR simulation so that students can explore those rules through their play.As students navigate through the STEP learning activities a particularly important mediator of theiractivity is the teacher. The teachers in this study were aware of the planned play structures, and brought theirunderstanding to how they worked with the students and the software interface. Therefore, our analysis aims tounpack how the teacher and other designed features of the activity worked together to structure the students’ongoing activity, and how these distinct structures supported the students in learning the content. Our goal incontrasting these two conditions is to better understand how different features of play are taken up by studentsand teachers as they engage in learning activities. We aim to answer the following two research questions: 1)How does the structure of the environment appear to influence teacher prompt patterns? and 2) What is theinteraction between the students and the teachers based on those structures?Methods and learning environment designThe participants were 24 second grade (7 to 8 years old) students in an elementary school in a small Midwesterncity. The students were quasi-randomly assigned into four groups, two in the modeling-play condition and twoin the game-play condition. Two partner teachers each worked with two groups of 6 students, one in themodeling-play condition, one in the game-play condition. Students in both conditions participated in the STEPenvironment by embodying the role of either water particles or energy sources and interacting with peers. As thestudents move within an open space, Microsoft Kinect cameras track their motion and feed it into the STEPcomputer simulation; a projected video display then depicts their movements and provides a visual feedbackICLS 2018 Proceedings1763© ISLSstate meter that shows how successfully students are jointly creating certain states of matter. In the modelingplay activity, students are free to create and revise models of the states of matter in whatever manner theycollaboratively choose. In contrast, students in the game-play condition need to represent specific states ofmatter at the right time to help a fictional robot navigate a volcanic island. Although the curricula for eachcondition are parallel, the rules for each activity differ in the amount of flexibility the students have to attempt toshow the states of matter. After each activity, students participated in a debrief discussion to reflect on theconcepts being explored. All activities and debrief discussions were videotaped for later analysis.To better understand how the structure of the activities influenced the teachers as well as the students’sense making processes as they engaged in producing scientific explanations, we conducted a thematic analysis(Braun & Clarke, 2006). We iteratively identified 4 types of prompts that teachers used: 1) asking fordescription, 2) asking for reflection, 3) soliciting information about concepts, and 4) encouraging students tocommunicate with each other. We used the teacher prompts as a way of subdividing the activities, given thatthey frequently framed the students’ engagement with the content. These categories were then the basis forquantitative comparisons across the conditions as we sought to see whether there were different patterns ofinteraction and student explanations between the two conditions.ResultsIn the modeling-play condition students could freely explore the rules of “how to be a particle”, and thusteachers were more likely to prompt students to reflect on and describe their embodied experience as theycommunicated with their peers during the exploration activity. This seemed to allow students to make moresalient connections from the embodied play activity to the concepts about states of matter. In the game-playcondition, the students’ goal was to “win the game”; to win, students needed to collectively create the necessarystates of matter to help the robot survive within the simulation. Because of this, the teachers mainly focused onhelping the students win the game by using more prompts that encouraged students to give guiding directions toone another within the space, rather than prompting students to explicitly converse about their conceptualunderstanding of particle behavior. Overall, the thematic analysis revealed that as students navigated through themodeling-play activities, their verbal and gestural responses were more science-concept oriented, while studentsin the game-play condition directed their responses towards making physical moves to win the game.DiscussionPlay is a common, and powerful way of organizing embodied learning environments. However, play can meanmany different things, including either freedom to pursue student interests, as in our modeling-play condition, oraiming to “win” in a more structured environment as in our game-play condition. Thus, our goal was to betterunderstand how these different features of play support learning activities. Furthermore, teachers are keymediators of how students engage in play activities within the learning environment. In the current study,teachers’ questions provided a space for students to engage with the science content, and the teachers were morelikely to pose these questions in the open-ended modeling activity. Students showed a similar pattern ofengaging more directly with the concepts in the modeling conditions, and instead focusing on winning in thegame condition. Nonetheless, teachers were able to use the debrief discussions in both conditions to explore theconcepts, resulting in similar learning gains across conditions. Moving forward, it will be valuable to continueexploring how different facets of play support student learning both during play, and during post-play debriefs.ReferencesAlibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. J. (2012). Embodiment in mathematics teaching and learning: Evidence fromlearners' and teachers' gestures. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(2), 247-286.Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology,3(2), 77-101. doi:10.1191/1478088706qp063oaDanish, J., Enyedy, N., Saleh, A., Lee, C. (2015). Science through technology enhanced play: Designing tosupport reflection through play and embodiment. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conferenceon Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL 2015) (pp. 332-339).DeLiema, D., Saleh, A., Lee, C., Enyedy, N., Danish, J., Illum, R., & Mahoney, C. (2016). Blending play andinquiry in augmented reality: A comparison of playing a video game to playing within a participatorymodel. Singapore: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Engeström, Y. (1999). Activity theory and individual and social transformation. In Y. Engeström, R. Miettinen,& R. L. Punamäki (Eds.), Perspectives on activity theory. New York: Cambridge University Press.Lindgren, R., & Johnson-Glenberg, M. (2013). Emboldened by embodiment: Six precepts for research onembodied learning and mixed reality. Educational Researcher, 42(8), 445-452.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: the development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1764© ISLS