Learning Engineering Practices Through Drones:Iterative Design of an Informal Learning CurriculumSrinjita Bhaduri, Katie Van Horne, and Tamara Sumnersrinjita.bhaduri@colorado.edu, katie.vanhorne@colorado.edu, sumner@colorado.eduUniversity of Colorado BoulderRandy Russell and John Ristveyrrussell@ucar.edu, jristvey@ucar.eduUniversity Corporation for Atmospheric ResearchAbstract: Informal learning programs provide youth with additional opportunities to engagein STEM. Here, we report on an informal engineering program for low-income youth. Wedescribe how a curriculum was modified to reflect the instructional shifts outlined in theFramework for K-12 Science Education and how these changes enhanced youth interests andengagement in engineering practices.IntroductionAfterschool programs are an important part of the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)ecosystem, providing youth with opportunities to spark or deepen their interests in STEM, engage in science andengineering practices, and understand the value of STEM for society and future employment. In formaleducational settings within the United States, science learning in classrooms is undergoing profound changes,motivated by the Framework for K-12 Science Education (NRC, 2012) and the Next Generation ScienceStandards (NGSS Lead States, 2013). There have been numerous studies examining the implementation of newcurricula designed to support the instructional “shifts” described in these documents in formal educational settings(see, for example, Severance, Penuel, Sumner, & Leary, 2016). However, there have been fewer studies examininghow these shifts influence the design of STEM curricula in informal learning settings. We report on thedevelopment and implementation of an afterschool program designed to engage low income, middle school youthin engineering experiences in atmospheric and related sciences.Theory and prior workSupporting the instructional shifts in the Framework and NGSS are central to our approach. The Frameworkadvocates for using phenomena to drive instruction in science as a means of sustaining student interests andpromoting 3D learning. With this approach, the focus of learning is about figuring out how to explain aphenomenon not learning about a set of topics. Within science, the goal is to build and refine models to explainand predict phenomena, based on evidence (Lehrer & Schauble, 2006). Within engineering, the goal is to engageyouth in designing solutions to problems, using evidence of their design’s efficacy to inform and motivate iterativeimprovements. A core premise of this approach is that through “figuring out” youth will be guided to engage in3D learning, where their knowledge of disciplinary core ideas and cross cutting concepts (such as patterns orcause and effect) is developed through deep engagement with science and engineering practices. Ideally, whenasked what they are doing and why, youth should be able to describe how their learning activities are helpingthem to solve their engineering problem. The ability of youth to understand the purpose behind discrete activitiesis one way of operationalizing student-centered measures of curriculum coherence. Researchers have proposedstorylines as a promising approach for developing coherent curriculum (Shwartz, Weizman, Fortus, Krajcik, &Reiser, 2008). A storyline is a way to represent sequence of lessons where each lesson is driven by youth questionsand each activity helps youth to make progress on explaining an anchoring phenomenon.Context, methodology, and analysisEngineering Experiences is an afterschool engineering curriculum based on Unmanned Aerial Vehicles(UAV/Drones). Participating youth learn how to fly drones and how to use them as platforms for scientificinvestigations. Figure 1 shows the design of iteration three of the curriculum, where we focused on coherencearound a driving question for the semester. This program was studied over the course of three iterations followinga design-based research methodology. The first and second iterations were at a middle school that serves youth ingrades 6 – 8; 40% of the students at this school are Hispanic while 50% are Caucasian. Almost 45% of the studentsqualify for free-and-reduced lunch (FRL). The third iteration took place at a PK-8 School where 84% of thestudents are Hispanic, 12% are Caucasian, and 83% qualify for FRL.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1513© ISLSFigure 1. Curriculum Design around a Driving Question in Iteration Three.In each iteration, we collected data using journal prompts, project artifacts, observations, and interviewswith youth and adult participants. We used “flight logs” as an unobtrusive journaling notebook for gatheringevidence about youths’ interests, engagement, and knowledge. In survey questions and interviews, we asked youthto reflect on their interests, performance expectations, relevance of the program to their lives, and their use ofengineering practices. Our session observation protocol focused on observing the degree to which youth wereengaged in different activities and enacted engineering design practices, as well as how the participating adultssupported the youths’ experiences. Analysis was conducted collaboratively by the research team.Results and discussionOur results suggest that using phenomena and design problems to drive instruction can help sustain studentinterests. In all three iterations, participating youth reported that their main reason for attending was their interestin drones – 57% of youth noted that the drone content was pretty important in iteration three. However, in earlieriterations, this interest did not sustain their participation, with attendance declining through the duration. Initeration three, nearly all youth completed the 14-week program, which was longer in duration and intensity thanthe previous iterations. We observed that youth were deeply engaged in the activities for majority of the sessions.In earlier iterations, youth would disengage from activities and passively observe. Our observations also revealeddifferences in youth engagement with engineering practices. Youth were engaging in more testing of specificdesigns, more iterations of their designs, and ultimately creating more sophisticated designs. In the earlier programiterations, youth were limited in their ability to iterate due to the short durations of each session and interviewswith youth revealed that they were not motivated to iterate as they perceived their designs to be “good enough.”We hypothesize that the curriculum’s new emphasis in version three on engaging in argument fromevidence helped youth to convince themselves that more work was needed to improve their designs. For instance,during interviews, youth often discussed the need to collect data to justify their decisions or processes. One youthstated, “I would use some research data and say if I tested it on my own processor or designer city I made on myown. So, I would show them evidence and anything else that I used to do with the drone” [T1]. Thus, building onthe framework helped us to create an in-depth afterschool program that built on student interest while engagingthem in significant science and engineering practices.ReferencesLehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2006). Cultivating Model-Based Reasoning in Science Education. CambridgeUniversity Press.National Research Council(NRC) (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscuttingconcepts, and core ideas. National Academies Press.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Severance, S., Penuel, W. R., Sumner, T., & Leary, H. (2016). Organizing for teacher agency in curricular codesign. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25(4), 531-564.Shwartz, Y., Weizman, A., Fortus, D., Krajcik, J., & Reiser, B. (2008). The IQWST experience: Using coherenceas a design principle for a middle school science curriculum. The Elementary School Journal, 109(2),199-219.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1514© ISLS