What’s the Difference? A Closer Look at Idea-Centric Analysis ofOnline Discourse in K12 and Higher Education SettingsAlwyn Vwen Yen Lee, Seng Chee Tanalwynlee@ntu.edu.sg, sengchee.tan@ntu.edu.sgNanyang Technological UniversityAbstract: This study investigated the differences between two online discourses in the eighthgrade and post-graduate settings, in an initial effort to understand how students deepen theirunderstanding by improving their ideas through knowledge building discourse. Using an ideacentric approach for discourse analysis, preliminary findings show a diverse and larger numberof ideas in the eighth-grade discourse when compared to a smaller variety but more promisingideas in the post-graduate discourse. The findings provided information about strategies to guideand scaffold students of different levels in their improvement of ideas and understandingthrough knowledge building discourse.Keywords: Discourse analysis, idea analysis, knowledge building, K12, higher educationIntroductionThe approach of framing and co-constructing knowledge through technology (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994;Cohen & Scardamalia, 1998) has been established for some time, with discourse increasingly taking place inonline spaces. Knowledge building (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2003) was developed as a pedagogical approach toleverage learners’ natural capability of idea generation for collaborative improvement of ideas through discourse.For students to achieve a deeper approach to learning (Biggs, 1987) and use the most appropriate cognitiveactivities for handling learning tasks, there is a need for analyzing ideas in the discourse so that users are able torecognize ideas that are potentially interesting to the community and continue improving these ideas to enhancetheir learning and understanding. The productive use of the “improvable ideas” principle (Scardamalia, 2002)through inquiries and productive discourse could encourage students to value every contribution and idea indiscourse as being potentially improvable. K12 students are assumed to be still developing their knowledgebuilding capacity, whereas higher education students are considered to be more mature in such an approach, butis this assumption always valid? The findings in this study could shed some light on this assumption and providevaluable information about strategies to guide and scaffold students at different levels, to improve their ideas andunderstanding through knowledge building discourse.Method and plan of analysisDatasetThe dataset contains a week of discourse data selected from two discourse communities, namely a middle schoolclass in the K12 setting and a graduate course in the higher education setting. There were 20 eighth-graders in themiddle school class discussing the scientific topic of “Human Transport System”, with 101 notes beingcontributed and shared among the community on the Knowledge Forum – a knowledge building environmentbuilt specifically to support collaborative production and refinement of communal knowledge. Similarly, a totalof 13 in-service teacher participants discussed the “basic principles of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning (CSCL)” and contributed 162 notes to the Knowledge Forum.Method and analysisThis study employed the methodology Idea Identification and Analysis (I2A; Lee, Tan, & Chee, 2016) to conductan idea analysis and compare the knowledge building discourses from K12 and higher education settings. Thismethodology was primarily developed and used as a tool to identify ideas promising to the students or the teachers.I2A aided in the analysis of knowledge building discourse using network measures such as betweenness centralityto identify ideas that have a subsequent impact on community discourse. As a result, promising and potentialideas from discourse were classified as part of the process that measured the progress of idea development inknowledge building discourse. Promising ideas are defined to be of great relevance to the community and areable to sustain the community’s interests and therefore, are worth pursuing and likely to affect the communaldiscourse. Potential ideas exhibit lesser communal relevance to some extent and the community’s interest in theseideas are difficult to be triggered or sustained. Therefore, in order for these ideas to have some form of impact orICLS 2018 Proceedings1401© ISLSinfluence on communal discourse, scaffolds and interventions are required to elevate and maintain thecommunity’s interests in the ideas within the discourse. The discovery of promising ideas and their effects throughnetwork analysis were subsequently validated using a qualitative analysis.Preliminary resultsPreliminary results computed from the network analysis in the I2A methodology show that a total of 10 ideas(including both promising and potential ideas) were identified from the eighth-grade discourse, but only one ideawas considered promising; whereas 8 ideas were identified in the post-graduate discourse, of which half wereconsidered promising to the discourse community. The categorization of ideas was qualitatively assessed and88.9% of the identified ideas were recognized to be correctly classified by two raters, consisting of teachers andinstructors participating in the discourses. Together with a visualization of notes that were created on theKnowledge Forum, these results offered a new perspective on the development of ideas in knowledge buildingdiscourse from different settings. The post-graduate students were able to produce an equal split of potential andpromising ideas from their communal discourse, signifying the focus on idea quality and promisingness.Comparatively, the student community from the K12 setting was keen to contribute more ideas, with a majorityof them being potential rather than promising ideas. The students in the eighth grade were generally able tocontribute notes with ideas that were potentially promising and broadly interesting to the discourse community,but these ideas lack a convincing attribute to encourage uptake by other students or impact subsequent discourse.Contrarily, from the post-graduate discourse, the group of promising and potential ideas acted as key mediatorsbetween different groups of students and became triggers that stimulated student interests in relevant andsupplementary content.Conclusion and future workIn conclusion, the differences of knowledge building discourse from a K12 and higher education setting wereinvestigated, in an effort to understand how students in different settings deepen their understanding using ideasin knowledge building discourse. Based on an idea analysis and comparison of two discourses, more ideas weregenerated but were less promising in the eighth-grade discourse, while fewer ideas were generated but were morepromising to the post-graduate community. K12 students had difficulty in harmonizing with the community’sgoals, while students in higher education were able to organize their ideas and thoughts to improve the coherenceof ideas and their level of understanding, with the contrast possibly attributed to the different cognitive ability ofstudents. For future work, this preliminary study presented the possible role of a computational-basedmethodology for idea analysis in discourse. The technological affordance of Knowledge Forum and findings fromthis study were instrumental in aiding the construction of strategies to guide and scaffold students in theirimprovement of ideas and maintaining the support and interest of the community in generating more promisingideas, deeper understanding, and attainment of knowledge creation goals.ReferencesBiggs, J. B. (1987). Student Approaches to Learning and Studying. Research Monograph. Australian Council forEducational Research Ltd., Radford House, Frederick St., Hawthorn 3122, Australia.Cohen, A., & Scardamalia, M. (1998). Discourse about ideas: Monitoring and regulation in face-to-face andcomputer-mediated environments. Interactive Learning Environments, 6(1-2), 93-113.Lee, A. V. Y., Tan, S. C., & Chee, K. J. K. (2016). Idea Identification and Analysis (I2A): A search for sustainablepromising ideas within knowledge-building discourse. In C. K. Looi, J. Polman, U. Cress, & P. Reimann(Eds.), Transforming Learning, Empowering Learners: Proceedings of the 12th InternationalConference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS ’16), 20-24 June 2016, Singapore (Vol. 1, pp. 90-97).International Society of the Learning Sciences.Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.),Liberal Education in a Knowledge Society, 97, 67-98.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge building. Encyclopedia of Education (pp.1370-1373). NewYork: Macmillan Reference.AcknowledgmentsThis work and research were supported by the MOE Academies Fund NRF2012-EDU001-EL008 and the Centrefor Research and Development in Learning, Nanyang Technological University (CRADLE@NTU).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1402© ISLS