Distributions, Trends, and Contradictions: A Case Study inSensemaking With Interactive Data VisualizationsVasiliki Laina, Tufts University, Vasiliki.Laina@tufts.eduMichelle Wilkerson, University of California, Berkeley, mwilkers@berkeley.eduAbstract: Data visualizations are transforming how information is communicated. Educatorsshould understand and support how youth reason about these complex representational artifacts.We analyze an interview in which young learners interpreted an interactive visualization asdescribing both relative distribution and absolute trends, and resolved conflicts related to thisdual interpretation by re-aligning mathematical and personal knowledge. This case reflects aneed for attention to multidimensional data and narrative design in research on data visualizationliteracy.Keywords: data visualization, case study, technology, data analysisIntroduction and backgroundNovel, narratively driven visualizations of data are transforming how knowledge is communicated in popularmedia and many professional disciplines. Such visualizations are designed to foreground certain “stories” throughdata, or to allow viewers to pursue certain lines of inquiry through those data (Segel & Heer, 2010). Sometimesthe intentions or emphases of a given visualization, however, might not connect to learners’ interests or priorknowledge. Understanding and supporting how learners work with such visualizations—how they find, explore,and critically interpret patterns in terms of the systems they describe—is important as educators seek to integratedata visualization into the K-12 curriculum, and to prepare data literate learners.Making sense of data requires learners to construct and coordinate understandings of evident or implicitpatterns in data, and of the situation for which the data were collected. There is evidence that students canproductively engage in this back-and-forth, with varying levels of success. Lehrer and Schauble (2004) showedthat, while making sense of a representation, students leveraged contextual knowledge to explain patterns theynoticed, often supplementing their own observations of the actual phenomenon. Ben-Zvi and Aridor-Berger(2016) described a pair of students gradually developing connections between their understanding of context anddata during a statistics exercise. Schwartz and Martin (2004) argued that when students coordinate between data,representations, and mathematics, they “…go through a process of invention, noticing, and revision that helpsthem develop insight into the relation between representations and the quantities they represent” (p. 138).We posit that narrative visualizations—designed to emphasize certain stories or lines of inquiry throughcomplex, multidimensional datasets—can introduce additional complexities to this coordination process. Here,we present a case study that illustrates this complexity. While working to make sense of a visualization illustratingfuel consumption trends, a pair of middle-grade students developed a double interpretation of the data, onefocusing on distribution (emphasized in the visualization), and one focusing on trends over time (driven by theirknowledge of global energy trends). These two interpretations created logical conflicts that emerged in the girls’interactions with one another and with the visualizations. They overcame these conflicts by re-aligning theirinterpretations of both the data and the situation. Since many visualizations feature both distributions and changeover time, and since we found evidence of such conflations in other interviews, we argue that this paper shedslight on a number of specific themes worthy of further study.MethodsThe DataSketch project studies how middle school youth think and learn about data visualization via interviews,classroom studies, and design activities. Here, we focus on one approximately 45 minute interview with a pair ofgirls, Aphrodite (6th grade) and Stryker (8th grade; participants’ chosen pseudonyms). Both were members of anall-girls after school science club where interviews were conducted, and knew each other prior to the study.During the interview, participants were asked to look at two interactive data visualizations. For thepurposes of this paper, we focus on Aphrodite and Stryker’s work with one visualization, described in detailbelow. The interview was semi-structured, based on an eight-question protocol designed to probe how learnersunderstood and navigated connections between data presented, the intended message of the designers, andlearners’ understandings of the situation represented. Questions included “What is the message you think this istrying to send?”, or “What would you expect this [visualization] to look like in the future?”. We used video andscreen capture to record participants’ interactions with one another, the interviewer, and the visualization.ICLS 2016 Proceedings934© ISLSThe visualizationThe visualization we used concerns the total primary energy consumption of different fuels in the UK each decadefrom 1970 to 2010 (Figure 1; EvoEnergy, 2011). It is an interactive tree with circle “leaves” of different colorsand sizes. To the right of the tree is a legend with fuel types and corresponding colors; to the left, there is a list ofyears. When the user hovers over a fuel type, a corresponding percent value is shown on the tree. When a userhovers over the years, circles on the tree change colors to reflect the relative distribution of fuel types for thatyear. The size of the tree, and position of “leaves”, stay the same. Fuel consumption is always presented as arelative percent of energy consumption; and no information about total consumption is provided.Figure 1. Snapshots of the visualization displaying data for 1970 (left), 1990 (middle) and 2010 (right).We selected this visualization because some features are relatively conventional (area as percentage), while othersare unexpected (apparent meaninglessness of circle size). There are also multiple ways to “follow” data: Usingyears on the left to view distributions over time, or fuels on the right to focus on only one fuel.Case selection and analysisWe selected this case as the focus of this short report for three reasons. First, it serves as a particularlyexplicit example of a phenomenon we have observed in other interviews, whereby learners conflate descriptionsof distributions with descriptions of trends over time. Second, the participants were talkative and comfortableworking with the data, which makes more explicit and available for study the nature of such conflation. Third,novel interactive visualizations of the sort popular in media and science communication often involve data aboutdistributions and trends over time, and as such are likely to trigger similar questions and conflicts. Our analysisidentified themes in learners’ treatment of data, interpretations, and ways of resolving conflict (Aronson, 1995).FindingsWe report two main findings. First, we will show the girls interpreted data in the visualization in two differentways, as describing (i) distribution and (ii) trends over time. This was evidenced in the girls’ references topercentages as describing relative consumption of fuel, or change in percentages over time as describing changein actual consumption of fuel. We call these usages ‘relative measure’ and ‘absolute quantity’, respectively.These two interpretations can be in conflict. Imagine 5 red marbles are added to a collection of 10 redand 10 blue marbles. The percent distribution of this collection would change from 50% red and 50% blue to 60%red and 40% blue. An ‘absolute quantity’ interpretation would emphasize the decrease in percentage of bluemarbles from 50% to 40%, perhaps suggesting there are fewer blue marbles in the collection. A ‘relative measure’interpretation would emphasize that the blue marbles account for a smaller part of the collection.Next, we will argue that the ways in which participants shifted between interpreting the data as relativemeasure or actual consumption, and the ways they addressed conflicts that emerged from these different usages,were driven by their negotiations between contextual and mathematical knowledge.Multiple interpretations of the same dataWhen introduced to the visualization, Aphrodite and Stryker quickly began attending to and noting changes in thepercentages of different types of fuels over the years available in the visualization. When offered paper andmarkers, they re-arranged the data, grouping by fuel type rather than year and calculating change (Figure 2).Figure 2. The girls’ written work grouped percentages by fuel (left), and computed change over time (right).ICLS 2016 Proceedings935© ISLSThroughout the rest of the interview, the girls treated percentages sometimes as describing relative measures andother times as describing absolute quantities. For example, when she noticed the percent electricity consumptionfeatured in the visualization decreased from 2000 to 2010, Aphrodite was initially surprised and exclaimed “Itgoes down! Ha!” This implies she was expecting the data to reflect a known trend—a rise in total consumptionfrom 2000 to 2010. Stryker, however, pointed out that since a new fuel type, biomass, was introduced in thesimulation “Everything should go down,” which implies that she was attending to the distribution of fuels andhow the total (100%) is distributed among its parts. These interpretations became more explicit later, when Strykersuggested that in 2020 the visualization would feature “green energy” as a new fuel source:Stryker:Aphrodite:Stryker:We're adding in another variable. Which [inaudible] everyone will go down some,to make room for green energy.True.But I think biomass will still go up.Here Stryker again attended to percent as a relative measure; suggesting everything should ‘make room’ for thenew variable. But soon after this, while still discussing how the tree might look in 2020, Aphrodite extrapolateda pattern without attending to that distribution, suggesting a usage of percent as an absolute quantity:Aphrodite:Stryker:Aphrodite:Stryker:Aphrodite:Solid… How much [inaudible]? That's been going down down down down[looking on the screen, browsing along the years].I think we could put solid at 14.14? I feel like it should be a little lower than that.But... [inaudible]13, 12. Cause it's been going down a lot.While the excerpts above suggest that the two different participants leveraged two different treatments, there wasevidence throughout the interview that both participants moved back and forth between both interpretations of thesame data. This is illustrated clearly in the next excerpt:Interviewer:Stryker:Aphrodite:Stryker:This one [refers to biomass] was the… the most stable one?Yeah.2%... 2% increase.Even.. No one really use it, but, it stayed steady.Stryker’s last utterance combined elements of both relative measure and absolute quantity. On the one hand, sheclaimed that ‘no one really’ uses biomass, thus attending to its low percentage in the energy distribution. On theother, she claimed that a 2% increase from 2000 to 2010 meant that biomass ‘stayed steady’, thus treating thesenumbers as representing quantities and 2% implying an insignificant change in its absolute consumption.Re-aligning content knowledge to interpretation of dataThese two interpretations of data introduced tensions: between what the girls argued the data showed, their ownexpectations, and the visualizations’ emphases. This tension was reflected in the girls’ early reorganization of thedata in the visualization, and persisted throughout. The girls stated often that they were concerned about theenvironment. They described decreases in percentages as ‘good’ and increases as ‘bad’, suggested the tree shouldbe heart shaped to encourage users to “love the Earth”, and described the visualization’s underlying message as“The Earth is gonna die soon.” These concerns were not supported by the data, given the girls’ dual interpretation.When asked what they notice in general about the visualization, Stryker and Aphrodite noted:Stryker:Aphrodite:So, these... Most of them sadly... [finding total change on the paper] Em... Two ofthe biggest ones, petrol and solid decreased over the… how long is it?Overall it's gas that's been up the most. [inaudible] And… down the most… solid.So gas went up the most and solid went down the most.Given the participants’ environmental concerns, it seems Stryker was preparing to say “most [fuel consumption]sadly increased”, the use of the word ‘sadly’ highlighting the environmental consequences of fuel consumptionon Earth. When this increase (presumed about absolute quantities) wasn’t reflected in the data (intended as relativemeasure), Stryker paused and changed what she observed about the data, which Aphrodite re-voiced.ICLS 2016 Proceedings936© ISLSThis realignment also happened when the interviewer explicitly highlighted a mathematical conflict thatemerged from the girls’ dual interpretation of the percentages as relative measures or absolute quantities. At somepoint Aphrodite argued that the (absolute) consumption of petrol did not change “compared to the others”, evenwhile both girls argued that car use had increased through the years. The interviewer followed up:Interviewer: So, if they use their cars... if we have more cars, actually, than in 1970s, andwe use petrol mostly in cars, why do you think it didn't change much? Theconsumption?Stryker:There are new ways to power cars now.Stryker invoked her personal content knowledge—alternative sources of fuel for cars—to justify an inconsistencyin their interpretation of the data available, that petrol stayed stable despite increases in car use. Both of theseexamples illustrate adjustments that the girls made to their descriptions of data, and to their descriptions of thecontext in which those data were collected, to better align the two throughout the interview.Discussion and conclusionNarrative visualizations, designed to be visually pleasing and to emphasize stories with data, are animportant part of how information is communicated. These visualizations introduce complexities to theinterpretation process of learners: they involve complex, multivariate data, explicitly organized to emphasize acertain point of view or path for investigation. Thus in addition to coordinating understandings of data and contextas has been explored in the literature, dealing with narrative visualizations requires learners to coordinate multiplepossible patterns embedded within the data, and with designers’ often explicit intentions.In this paper, we explored how one pair of middle school learners, Stryker and Aphrodite, navigated thisterritory. By closely examining the students’ discussion, interactions with the visualization and the way theydecided to reorganize the data, we found that both participants interpreted the data provided in an interactivevisualization of energy consumption by different fuel types in two potentially contradictory ways: as ‘relativemeasures’ describing distribution in terms of percentages, and as ‘absolute quantities’ describing total increasesor decreases in energy consumption over time. These dual interpretations created conflicts between theparticipants’ understanding, the data, the representation, and their knowledge of actual energy consumption trends.They addressed these conflicts by realigning interpretations fluidly—reorganizing and manipulating datapresented, adjusting interpretations of those data, and adjusting justifications for patterns observed. In addition tothe issues of distribution, trend, and conflict emphasized in our analysis, we note that certain interpretations mighthave been triggered by the way the visualization was designed. For example, the size of the tree stayed the same,which could have led the girls to assume that the total energy consumption had remained unchanged.This case represents a first step in work on how learners reason with complex, narratively organized data.It details specific themes—the conflation of distribution and trend, and the adjustment of data and interpretation—as possible starting points in this investigation, and highlights ways these issues may manifest.ReferencesAbelson R.P. (2004). Statistics as Principled Argument, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence ErlbaumAronson, J. (1995). A pragmatic view of thematic analysis. The Qualitative Report, 2(1), 1-3.Ben-Zvi, D., & Aridor, K. (2016). Children’s wonder how to wander between data and context. In D. Ben-Zviand K. Makar. (Eds.), The Teaching and Learning of Statistics: International Perspectives (pp. 24-36).Cham, Switzerland: Springer.EvoEnergy (2011). [Data sourced from 2011 factsheet by UK National Statistics.] The interactive U.K. energyconsumption guide. Retrieved from http://www.evoenergy.co.uk/uk-energy-guide/Lehrer, R. & Schauble, L. (2004) Modelling natural variation through distribution. American EducationalResearch Journal, 41(3), p. 635-679.Schwartz, D., & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare for future learning: The hidden efficiency of encouragingoriginal student production in statistics instruction. Cognition & Instruction, 22(2), 129-184.Segel, E., & Heer, J. (2010). Narrative visualization: Telling stories with data. IEEE Transactions onVisualizations and Computer Graphics, 16(6), p. 1139-1148.AcknowledgmentsThis work is funded by the National Science Foundation Grant IIS-1350282. We thank the youth participants andcollaborators at the after school program in this project for their time and partnership.ICLS 2016 Proceedings937© ISLS