Student Engagement With Resources as Observable Signifiers ofSuccess in Practice Based LearningRose Luckin, UCL Knowledge Lab, University College London, r.luckin@ucl.ac.ukMutlu Cukurova, UCL Knowledge Lab, University College London, m.cukurova@ucl.ac.ukEva Millán, University of Malaga, eva@ lcc.uma.esAbstract. Practice-based learning activities with a focus on Science, Technology, Art, Mathand Engineering (STEAM) are providing new opportunities for teaching these subjects.However, we lack widely accepted ways of assessing and monitoring these practices to informeducators and learners and enable the provision of effective support. Here, we report theresults from a study with 15 teenage students taking part in a 2-day Hack. We present resultsfrom analysis of video data recording collaborative working between groups of students. Theanalysis of the video data is completed using the ERICAP analytical framework (Luckin et al.,2017) based on ecology of resources and interactive, constructive, active and passiveconcepts. The results illustrate the differences between students’ engagement with resourceswhich might be utilized as signifiers of student success in similar learning environments.IntroductionThis paper reports the use of Learning Sciences constructs (Ecology of Resources and ICAP Framework) tosupport the potential analysis of collaborative problem-solving (CPS) in practice based learning (Cukurova etal., 2016). We report an empirical study of teenagers who are using physical computing and design materials into learn about STEAM subjects. Our goal in this study is to explore the ways students interact with the resourcesavailable to them to support their activities. The key question that drives the research we report here is: How canwe assess the effectiveness of a particular instance of students’ group work to inform the future design oftechnology scaffolding for STEAM activities?MethodologyThe participatory design-based study was conducted with 15 secondary school students aged 14-15 years. Arange of data sources were collected during the hack event. In this paper, we only focus on the video data and inparticular upon the interactions of individual learners within their CPS group. Two researchers coded the videoof each group according to the ERICAP framework to identify the resources available and in use by the learners(see Luckin et al., 2017 for the details of the framework). Resource use was recorded at 30 second intervals. Toverify the validity of the video analysis we sought independent verification. An expert from another universitywho had not previously been involved in our study data collection or analysis provided this verification. Weasked her to watch our video data of the 3 groups who took part in the Hack Event as illustrated in Tables 2 and3 there was evidence that the group ERICAP framework overlaps with expert evaluation of students’ CPS.ResultsFigure 1 illustrates a comparison between two learners from the coin sorter project group. It illustrates thechronology of the resources used by each learner over an hour period in the middle of the first day of the Hackevent. The white areas indicate that a resource is not present, the striped areas indicate that a resource is present,but not in use, and the black areas indicate that a resource is being actively used by the learner in focus.Figure 1. Comparison of resource use by individual students in a group.Looking more closely at this data, in particular at the black areas in Figure 1, we can see the resources that wereactively in use by each learner at the same time, indicating a relationship between these resources with respectto that learner. These periods of active engagement are markedly different between L1 and L2 who wereICLS 2018 Proceedings1549© ISLSworking as part of the same group: L1 starts their active engagement with multiple resources 15 minutes into thesession and engages actively with multiple resources for a total of 30% of the session. By contrast, L2 startedactively interacting with multiple resources, much earlier in the fifth minute, and L2 interacted in this way for50% of the session. In order to probe learners’ activity with resources in greater depth, we focus our attention onthe interactions between learners and resources. The ERICAP analysis for L1 and L2 reveals that there is only 1minute, which is less than 2% of the hour-long session in which L1 interacts at levels 4 or 5 (interactive andconstructive engagement), both socially with other learners and physically with the tools required for theproblem-solving activity. This suggests that L1 engages in little CPS activity in this particular hour-long sessionof the Hack Event. By contrast, L2, interacts at levels 4 or 5 both socially with other learners, and physicallywith the tools required for the problem-solving activity for 23 minutes (38%) of the session.Table 1: The % of the session that each learner spent interacting with Constructive or Interactive engagementL1L2L3L4L5Robot Group62.572.54531.6743.33Coin Group65.8372.556.6772.570.83Glove Group9596.6791.6796.6788.33Table 2 shows the variance across all learners in the observable evidence of CPS, which ranges from 31.67% ofthe session for L4 in the Robot group to 96.67% for L2 in the Glove group. To verify the validity of theERICAP video analysis we sought independent verification. An expert from another university who had notpreviously been involved in our study data collection or analysis provided this verification. We asked her towatch our video data of the 3 groups who took part in the Hack Event as illustrated in Tables 2 and 3 andidentify the times during the learners’ interactions when in her judgement there was evidence that the group wasengaged in CPS.Table 2: Average % of the session when learners wereConstructively or Interactively engaged with resourceGroup NameRobot GroupCoin GroupGlove GroupTable 3: The % of the session that an independentexpert rated as consistent with CPS%5167.6793.67Group NameRobot GroupCoin GroupGlove Group%184795The ERICAP framework analysis ranks the groups in the same order as the independent expert. However, thedata concerning the Robot group is at particular variance between the ERICAP analysis and the human expert.The possible explanation for this may lie in the fact the coders using the framework did not code the students’interactions with this ready-made robot as interactions with the prototype, the independent expert did acceptstudents’ interactions with this ready-made robot as interactions with a prototype. It is however important torecognize the significance of such a disagreement, because technology interventions for such evaluations ofCPS would need to be able to cope with such differences.ConclusionsThe ERICAP framework has been informed by theories from the Learning Sciences and used for the analysis ofdata collected from practice-based learning activities involving groups of teenage learners solving problemscollaboratively as parts of a Hack event. Our analysis enabled us to identify that whilst all groups of learnerswere provided with a similar set of resources, the resources that they chose to use in their collaborative problemsolving activity were quite different. There is often a motivation to provide similar types of resources to alllearners taking part in these sorts of collaborative activities. Our findings suggest that these resources are notaccessed in a consistent manner. We illustrated that there were particularly substantial differences betweenlearners in the extent to which their engagement with resources can be categorized as interactive or constructive.ReferencesLuckin, R., Cukurova, M., Mavrikis, M., & Millan, E. (2017). Context and Collaborative Problem Solving(CPS). CSCL17. Philadelphia.Cukurova, M., Avramides, K., Spikol, D., Luckin, R., & Mavrikis, M. (2016). An analysis framework forcollaborative problem-solving in practice-based learning activities: A mixed-method approach. ACM.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1550© ISLS