Connected Making: Designing for Youth Learning in Online MakerCommunities In and Out of SchoolsBreanne K. Litts (chair), University of Pennsylvania, breannelitts@usu.eduYasmin B. Kafai (chair), University of Pennsylvania, kafai@upenn.eduDeborah A. Fields, Utah State University, deborah.fields@usu.eduErica R. Halverson, University of Wisconsin–Madison, erhalverson@education.wisc.eduKylie Peppler, Indiana University, kpeppler@indiana.eduAnna Keune, Indiana University, akeune@indiana.eduMike Tissenbaum, University of Wisconsin–Madison, miketissenbaum@gmail.comSara M. Grimes, University of Toronto, sara.grimes@utoronto.caStephanie Chang, Maker Education Initiative, stephanie@makered.orgLisa Regalla, Maker Education Initiative, lisa@makered.orgOrkan Telhan, University of Pennsylvania, otelhan@upenn.eduMichael Tan (discussant), National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University,michael.tan@nie.edu.sgAbstract: While here is ample research on how youth are connected in online spaces and howyouth participate online via sharing and reviewing artifacts, yet less is known about how thesesocial connections and contributions emerge, especially in the context of physical making andwhat can they contribute to learning and assessment. Thus, our symposium primarily addressestwo questions: (1) How do youth connect and learn in online maker communities? and (2) Howcan we design online maker tools for learning in and out of schools? We share efforts examininghow sharing artifacts, documenting design processes, and providing feedback via online toolscan support young makers in creating physical artifacts and offer insights to new assessmentmodels.IntroductionNew technologies (e.g., mobile devices) and platforms (e.g., Internet forums, social media and other online spaces)are making the Internet not only more accessible but also keeping youth connected with each other across timeand space. These online tools and communities have been dubbed one of the main propellers of the makermovement in education that advocates learning through making, building, tinkering, playing, and creating threedimensional objects and installations (Dougherty, 2012). While there is much research on how youth areconnected in online spaces (e.g., Ito et al., 2008; Jenkins, 2006) and how youth participate online via sharing andreviewing artifacts (e.g., Brennan, Monroy-Henadez, & Resnick, 2010), less is known about how these socialconnections and contributions emerge and how they can be supported for youth engaged in physical making. Inthis symposium, we bring together current efforts to review the critical element of sharing and providing feedback(Paper 1), encourage youth to take ownership over their learning through documentation (Paper 2), supportlearning through sharing, commenting, and connecting (Paper 3), and establish portfolios as an assessment model(Paper 4). The studies are collectively drive by two primary questions: (1) How do youth connect in online makercommunities? and (2) How can we design online maker tools for learning in and out of schools?Our symposium addresses how we can leverage online tools to support young makers’ physical makingin and out of schools. To begin, Fields and Grimes outline the landscape of how youth use online tools in the wild.Their findings survey youth participation in over 120 DIY sites and the tensions of designing online tools foryouth that not only support sharing but also other forms of social networking such as commenting and critiquing.The next three presentations will each showcase a different design-based approach on how to provide essentialsocial networking supports for making: Halverson and colleagues review efforts in public library system thatencourage youth to take ownership over their drop-in work at their makerspaces. Litts and colleagues designed anonline platform to connect makers locally and globally and foster interactions around maker activities withinschool settings. Finally, through the Open Portfolio Project Peppler and colleagues investigate a range of ways todocument making and learning in the making with a particular focus on assessment within the context of acommunity center. Each study sheds light on a different dimension of how to design online maker tools andcommunities for learning by sharing, documenting, and giving feedback on physical maker artifacts.A comparative study of child-inclusive DIY media websitesDeborah A. Fields and Sara M. GrimesICLS 2016 Proceedings1041© ISLSOne of the most important aspects of the do-it-yourself (DIY) media trend is the way it has increased children’saccess to tools of “mass” distribution. Whereas child-made media was once relegated to refrigerator doors andclassroom bulletin boards, it can now be published on shared, public venues. From an educational perspective,this shift has the potential to open up a number of social learning practices for children online, building on longacknowledged aspects of learning including developing technical and artistic skills in community, fosteringidentity creation and self-expression, and encouraging creativity (e.g., Buckingham, 2009; Vygotsky, 2004). Atthe same time, designing websites for children is situated in a number of larger issues that influence those designsincluding legal and policy issues; commercial influences and advertising; and hierarchies of access arising fromdifferent funding models and safeguards (Grimes & Fields, 2012). To date, much of the scholarship on kids onlinehas focused on single websites, some of which were developed under highly unique circumstances—such as outof a university (e.g. Scratch), or through a special funding initiative (e.g. YouMedia)—leaving a dearth ofcomprehensive and comparative research in this area.Now in its second year of research, The Children’s DIY Media Partnership seeks to identify the types ofsupport systems—regulatory, infrastructural, and technical—that most effectively and sustainably foster a rightsbased, inclusive, child-centric approach to addressing children’s cultural participation online. As a first step, weconducted a media scan with the goal of finding all available, English-language websites where children couldmake and share media content that they themselves had created. While this included intergenerational websites,we focused on searching for websites targeting children under age 13 a neglected population in research on kidsonline (Grimes & Fields, 2012). The scan was conducted using multiple search engines (i.e., Google, Bing) andsearch terms by different researchers on multiple browsers. A thorough search identified 140 websites that allowedchildren to share content that they made (see Grimes & Fields, 2015). Of these, 100 were open or public spaces.The remaining 40 were closed to children only, and of these, 20 sites gave us permission to research their websitedesigns (a requirement of our Institutional Review Board). The contents of the 120 sites were recorded using astandardized, 83-item coding protocol, developed collaboratively by the entire research team over the course offour months and several iterations. Three researchers coded the websites after achieving a 93.7% inter-raterreliability. The content analysis included elements of the sites’ designs (particularly the mechanics and featuresinvolved in creating and sharing user-made media), descriptive texts (e.g. About Us pages, instructions),advertisements, funding models, terms of service, and privacy policies.One of the most unexpected findings emerged from the media scan search: relatively few sites that allowchildren contained sharing features. A great number of early search results were ultimately eliminated becausethey failed to provide tools or mechanisms for sharing content. These sites provided media making tools,instructions, or resources to help kids create media without any tools or support systems for distributing or sharingthat media with other users, or with the broader public. In addition to the multitude of websites excluded duringthe scan itself, another 107 sites (nearly half) were eliminated during the early stages of the content analysis.Although sharing was mentioned in the sites’ descriptions, the sites themselves contained no built-in support forpublishing and distributing content. In terms of design, “making” trumped “making and sharing” in the sitesavailable for children.The content analysis revealed a number of interesting trends. As an example we present some of thefindings related to the display and support of community on the main pages of the websites: the very mixed visiblerepresentation of community, community activities (versus individual contributions) and support for communityparticipation. A number of sites had some sort of representation of community participation, mostly in terms ofdisplaying some users’ shared content (65%), featuring individual user profiles (23%), and in a few cases showingthe results of user polls (9%). However, even when other members’ projects were shown, these were not oftendisplayed in ways that made navigating them easy. Features such as tagging, following, or gathering sets ofprojects (for instance in a gallery) were rare. Further, more than a quarter (26%) of the websites surveyed did notdisplay any community features at all on the homepage. About half of the sites featured some sort of communityactivity such as hosting competitions, contests or challenges (49%) or displaying group projects and collaborations(30%). Sites seemed to struggle especially with providing a means for providing community support to users. Themost common form of support was user forums (44%), with a few websites hosting peer reviews, awards for userparticipation, or encouraging in-person meet-ups. Additionally, while most sites (69%) provided tutorials throughrecordings or embedded guides for users but lacked ways to support users socially. All of these findings show thata large proportion of children’s DIY media websites are not well designed to support navigating projects, findingothers, and building interest-driven relationships.Overall the findings show that in many of the sites examined, sharing content with the public and sharingideas with other creators were not sufficiently supported in the sites’ designs. Since sharing and interacting withothers is important to so many of the benefits associated with media-making, from the development of 21st centuryICLS 2016 Proceedings1042© ISLSliteracies to children’s cultural and communication rights, this omission is concerning. At the same time ourresearch did reveal a few unusual sites that explored creative models to socially supporting children’s mediamaking online, including a site that incorporated creative commons licensing, as well as a few sites that facilitatedpeer mentoring among users. This demonstrates a need for discussions with designers, businesses, andpolicymakers about supporting the development of richly designed websites for children’s media making, sharing,and community. Providing a means and support for children to respond to authentic audiences, share ideas, andgive and receive constructive feedback is important to truly making the most of the distribution channels availablein social media.Technologies for learning in library-based makerspacesErica Halverson and Mike TissenbaumLibraries have become sites for pushing the boundaries of informal learning. Once almost exclusively sites foraccessing information, many public libraries are redefining their mission and core services as places for learning,creating, and sharing. The Maker Movement has proved a great catalyst for integrating engaged learningexperiences into libraries; Britton (2012) describes makerspaces as, “a natural extension of library services” (p.32). In a meta-analysis of the relationship between makerspaces and public libraries, Willett (in press) highlightsshared core values including a DIY ethic, open access to peers and information, and an emphasis on attractingtraditionally non-affiliated populations. It is within this context that we are conducting a two-year study with thepublic library system of a mid-sized Midwestern City to understand: a) How to make “making” a core serviceacross the library system and b) What people who participate in the making activities and maker culture of thepublic libraries learn as a result of their engagement. Early findings from our ethnographic research have revealedthree problems with addressing learning in the context of our library makerspaces:● A focus on drop-in programs means that maker experiences are routinely introductory and therefore donot expect participants to connect experiences together;● There is no mechanism for tracking individuals’ work;● Expertise is often contained within the drop-in program and very rarely persists beyond a single space oran experience.Despite these challenges, library staff are motivated to create learning experiences for participants that aregrounded in what we understand about how people learn through making (Bevan, Gutwill, Petrich, & Wilkinson,2015; Peppler, Halverson, & Kafai, in press). As a result, we have worked together to design and integratetechnological tools into a range of maker programs.Connected peer spaces frameworkThe "Connected Peer Spaces Framework" (CPSF) is is a lightweight technology framework that logs an individualparticipant’s presence (using either RFID or Bluetooth) in any makerspace within a network of makerspaces andtracks their current making activity as well as the growth of their personal learning trajectories and “maker skills”acquisition. Participants’ data is represented in the space through a series of ambient dashboards situated in eachof library spaces where maker activities occur. These relatively minimalistic dashboards show the real-timeactivities of the participants across all of the connected spaces, as well as the "maker proficiencies" they havedeveloped over time and enable low-latency low-friction videoconferencing. These representations are designedfor learners to be able to evaluate potential productive peers and easily connect with them. By providing thisinformation CPSF attempts to answer the two main challenges described above: 1) Giving participants insightinto the skills of their peers to help know who to reach out to when they need help with a specific maker-skillrelated problem (e.g., 3D Printing) and; 2) Giving them a sense of the broader making community of which theytake part.As part of this symposium, we will share our findings from the deployment of CPSF at a series of 3-daysummer “maker camps” and through individual workshops at a range of library locations. We find a tensionbetween participants’ desire to be connected with others who are working with the same materials and tools asthey are (e.g. Minecraft, knitting) but a strong distaste for being “tracked”, something that the library hastraditionally avoided. We are continuing to iterate the design of CPSF to afford connections, distributed expertise,and broader sense of community across the city.Build in progressICLS 2016 Proceedings1043© ISLSWe have also worked with libraries to incorporate Build in Progress into more extended maker activities. Buildin Progress (BiP), a web-based-platform for makers to document and share their design process(buildinprogress.media.mit.edu). BiP allows participants to capture their personal experience of developing aproject, including setbacks and changes over time. These iterations and communal commentary are visuallyorganized using a two-dimensional tree structure. Since the BiP website launched two years ago, over 750 projectshave been shared, ranging from “EL Wire Boots” to “Making Soda.” The site has been developed iteratively,building on studies of how users engage in design processes and synchronous and asynchronous communicationas the means to continuously develop BiP’s features (Tseng, in press). The developer’s investigations into howusers understand their motivations for openly sharing their design process, the strategies they use to solicitfeedback from other makers, and the role that visualization can play in encouraging reflection, parallel our work.The emergent themes found in BiP research such as documenting-in-action (using process-orienteddocumentation as a dual planning and reflecting tool), vulnerability in sharing design process (in order to helpothers or seek advice), and documentation as its own form of creative expression and identity representation, areintimately connected to the challenges we have identified in the library makerspaces. Here we share the designfeatures of BiP as well as our pilot efforts to incorporate the tool into digital making experiences at the librariesto scaffold iteration, ideation, and critique encourage participants to extend their making experiences over timeand place. Bringing BiP to library makerspace settings combines the expertise of on-site experts and facilitatorswith documentation software that serves as an ongoing portfolio of project development. From a researchperspective, the software environment allows the tracking of how the use of such software impacts makers’learning, development, and self-efficacy and the role asynchronous documentation might play in the makerspaceenvironment.Library makerspaces are one example of a growing category of “drop-in learning environments”, wherea persistent challenge is how to encourage participants to take ownership over their own learning. As learningscientists, we view learning as involving some kind of change - cognitive, behavioral, distributed, or sociocultural- where participants are different than they were before the experience. Furthermore, we believe that this changeout to be documentable, something that can be shared with others. This research aims to create a sociotechnicalsystem that both values change and provides opportunities for learners to document these changes in a way thatdoesn’t betray the library’s history of providing a safe space for patrons to access information without feelingtracked. We hope this research opens up a conversation about the role of technologies in creating opportunitiesfor ownership over maker learning processes.Designing for connected crafting: Using an online platform to support makeractivities and communitiesBreanne Litts, Yasmin Kafai, and Orkan TelhanMuch of the recent research on online DIY sites, participants, and activities has focused on understanding socialdynamics, motivations and challenges in self-organized online or offline maker communities. Extensive surveyshave examined what motivates members to participate and share projects in DIY sites and communities likeInstructables, Dorkbot, Craftster, Ravelry, Etsy, and Adafruit (Kuznetsov & Paulos, 2010). Other have conductedmore ethnographic observations to understand the contributions of experts in local maker communities (Milne,Rieke & Antle, 2014) or focused on motivations of how and why makers search for craft knowledge on the web(Torrey, Churchill & McDonald, 2009). The findings from these studies reveal that not only producing an artifactbut also sharing the design process and final artifact with others are driving forces for makers’ participation inDIY activities, spaces, and communities (see also Gauntlett, 2011).Research on designing and supporting learning in educationally-oriented DIY efforts and makerspacesis just beginning. Most relevant to our efforts is the earlier design (and failure) of designing a web community,called Lilypond (Lowell & Buechley, 2011), that was intended to offer a home for designs made with the LilyPadArduino. After a three-year run, the site had hundreds of e-textile projects of varying difficulty levels, but mostof these were uploaded with very few of the interactions that make sites like Ravelry or Instructables not onlyrepositories but also social networks of makers. It is not clear how social connections can emerge in the design ofonline DIY communities with an educational focus. So far most popular DIY online communities have evolvedorganically from makers’ interests. While the communities use web portals to communicate and coordinate designactivities, the platforms themselves do not deliberately address the needs for connected making such as allowingmembers to build on each other’s work, share know how, and critique each other’s design to foster new iterations.We created a platform, Ecrafting (ecrafting.org), that affords multiple ways for participants to engagewith one another around making: calls, circles, and projects (Telhan, Kafai, & Litts, in press). The platformfacilities interactions among participants through calls, which are theme-based announcements for maker events,ICLS 2016 Proceedings1044© ISLSactivities, and challenges. This allows members across previously established groups to participate in each other’sevents either by attending in-person or discussing online. Moreover, the calls are mapped onto a timeline so thatmakers can anticipate upcoming events and plan new ones. The circles, a concept inspired by traditional quiltingand knitting circles, can be created either by institutions who support structured curricular activities or by interestgroups or individuals who organize informal gatherings.Our design-based study investigated how aspiring makers can use the Ecrafting platform before, during,and after their activities to facilitate critique-style discussion around students’ projects. We implemented aworkshop with sixteen high school students, between ages 14-15 years, in which they designed a human sensorproject using the LilyPad Arduino, an electronic textile construction kit. During the design process for their humansensor projects, we invited students to share examples of their initial project designs on Ecrafting. Three graduatestudents, who were enrolled in a more advanced in electronic textiles at a university in the western United States,gave online feedback to each project. The high school students continued to work on their projects and integratedthe feedback they received where they felt necessary. When they completed their projects, they shared their finalartifacts with a description on Ecrafting. In interviews after the project, even if students did not explicitly integratethe online feedback into their projects, they all reported that the feedback process was useful and valuable eitherserving as an encouragement, constructive correction, or creative suggestion for the future. For instance, Gannon,a student who remixed the triforce logo from The Legenda of Zelda, reflected on receiving online feedback:It was very encouraging actually. I didn’t actually expect to get my work published online sothat other people who honestly know more about this could see it. I thought it would just be inour little group every day at the [science museum]. It was definitely something that changedme... One of [the comments] was very encouraging saying that this is a great project and Ishould just keep going with it, everything is fine. The second one was saying that my wiringwas confusing, and it was so I flipped the LEDs and I changed my wiring and it looks a lotbetter.Here we saw the critical value that social interactions and feedback can provide to aspiring makers. Thedesign of the Ecrafting platform connected online and offline maker activities. After completing a few of thesetypes of user tests, we began to redesign the platform to support specific forms of interactions, namely, sharingand critiquing maker activities. The redesign is an ongoing effort we are testing with nine graduate studentsenrolled in a maker studio course at a university in the northeastern United States. We are adding and testingseveral new features, but here we highlight project sharing and project iterations. From user testing, we learnedthat there were too many obstacles preventing users from submitting projects in response to calls, so as part of theredesign we are streamlining this process and allowing new users to respond to a call with a project even if theyare not part of a circle. Originally, we designed Ecrafting to start locally and expand or continue online, but weidentified a need to better support participation that begins online. Moreover, we realized that if we wanted tosupport dialogue around projects, then we needed to allow users to easily submit multiple iterations of a singleproject, so that they can report their progress and continue receiving feedback. We want to make sure that anonline platform for a maker community can function not only as a repository, but also as a social networkingforum in the process of making.Maker portfolios: Documenting and assessing makingAnna Keune, Kylie Peppler, Stephanie Chang, and Lisa RegallaT-shirt tucked into jeans, Elliot leaned over Jabari’s computer screen pointing at the village hediscovered in the networked virtual reality game that they and a handful of other makers wereengaged in. When documenting his digital making, Jabari augmented screenshots of the villagewith words: “I feel that everybody contributed equally because we split up the work.”Encouraging peer-reflection of learning through artifacts and evidence of learning is a key catalyst for learningenvironments that foster critical literacy skills (Hetland et al., 2007). This is closely tied to the interest-driven,production-based learning that can be observed when youth make together (Peppler, 2014). More than 20 yearsago, Niguidula (1993) convincingly presented the need for showing the richness of a person’s accomplishments,work, and learning beyond standardized test scores, suggesting that digital portfolios that emphasize student workin context and engender an understanding of what it means to be a graduate could provide this richer picture.Today, the work on portfolios gains new traction in the context of making and youth-serving makerspaces asmakers’ portfolios become important parts of both higher-education and job admissions processes outside of theICLS 2016 Proceedings1045© ISLSart and design tradition (Byrne & Davidson, 2015). With makerspaces serving socio-economically diverse youth(Peppler et al., 2015), espousing maker portfolios promise to broaden access to economic and educationalopportunities. What youth document today can dramatically shape their access to diverse opportunities in futurephases of their lives.To broaden our understanding of high-quality maker portfolios, what they may include, and how theymay be assessed, we conceptualize maker portfolios as a portfolio system, in which makers maintain control overcontent and curation. Challenges for youth to create maker portfolios pertain to policy, practice, and tools.Although we know that learners achieve best when their learning is connected across multiple settings (Ito et al.,2013), we observed that youth are often disenfranchised from their work, with artifacts stranded in systems ownedby schools or in platforms that do not allow for easy or automatic migration over time. Additionally, in the flowof making, makers often want to keep doing what they set out to do, rather than pause for documentation. Thisplaces a core tension on balancing automated and manual documentation with least disruption of making and justenough data collection. These challenges are connected to hardware and software challenges to build on themobility of making. Among others, these challenges prevent youth from creating rich portfolios of their learningand from prompting assessment that could make the youth’s accomplishments relevant for future life phases. Tounderstand successful portfolio practices and assessment, we ask: What practices and types of portfolios lead tohigh quality documentation of making and promote the assessment of rich learning?To answer this question, we observed the native portfolio tools and practices of two makerspaces thathave exceptional portfolio practices in place. Through synchronous and asynchronous engagement with themakerspaces, we selected youth who were particularly engaged in portfolio creation, observed the digitalportfolios of the selected youth, took snapshots at regular time increments, analyzed changes in theirdocumentation over time, and observed their practices on site. To triangulate and complement the observations,we conducted interviews with parents of the focal youth and makerspace educators. The interviews includedquestions related to adult support for documenting, values of portfolios, and hypothetical questions for parentsand educators to imagine themselves in the role of an admissions officer assessing youth portfolios.Looking across observations and interviews, we identified two intersecting axes in relation to which wecharacterize and highlight maker portfolios and the assessments they prompt. The axes stretch from collaborativeto individual making and from collaborative to individual documentation. While all portfolios gave youth a chanceto present their products and processes of making, some painted a richer picture of learning than others. Individualmaking, paired with individual documentation, frequently focused on reflection of the technical aspects of makingrather than rich insights that sprang from peer interactions. This was contrasted by individual portfolios thatcaptured making done collaboratively. Here, technical process reflections were often augmented by displays ofhow small groups of makers worked together and contributed to projects, prompting answers to questions abouthow well a prospective candidate might fit into the culture of a college program or work place. This addressedchallenges of assessing collaborative making that is documented collaboratively, namely the uncertainty of oneindividual’s contribution to the group’s work. While the makerspaces we profiled offered youth the opportunityto create their own personal websites to document making, spaces also integrated the individual sites into a collageof youth projects, representing the collective learning of the space to outside viewers. This gives potentialemployers or higher education institution admissions officers the opportunity to see a youth’s portfolio in thecontext of the overall work done at the applicant’s affiliated makerspace. In the nascent maker movement, wheredefinitions of making expertise diverge, our findings point to the need to take a broader look at assessment, onewhich encompasses ongoing and casual everyday practices by adults and youth at makerspaces. Specifically, ourwork also points to the importance of collaboration in making as a way to lead to higher quality portfolios thatprompt assessment of the rich learning.ReferencesBevan, B., Gutwill, J.P., Petrich, M., & Wilkinson, K. (2015). Learning through STEM-rich tinkering: Findingsfrom a jointly negotiated research project taken up in practice. Science Education, 99, 98-120.Brennan, K., Monroy-Hernández, A., & Resnick, M. (2010). Making projects, making friends: Online communityas catalyst for interactive media creation. New directions for youth development, 2010(128), 75-83.Britton, L. (2012). A fabulous laboratory: The makerspace at Fayetteville Free Library. Public Libraries, 51(4),30–33.Buckingham, D. (2009). Skate Perception: Self-Representation, Identity and Visual Style in a Youth Subculture.In D. Buckingham & R. Willett (Eds.), Video cultures: Media technology and everyday creativity (pp.133-151). New York: Palgrave Macmillan.Byrne, D. & Davidson, C. (2015). Makeschools Higher Education Alliance: State of Making Report. Retrievedfrom http://make.xsead.cmu.edu/week_of_making/reportICLS 2016 Proceedings1046© ISLSDougherty, D. (2012). The maker movement. Innovations, 7(3), 11-14.Gauntlett, D. (2011). Making is connecting: the social meaning of creativity from DIY and knitting to YouTubeand Web 2.0. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.Grimes, S. M. & Fields, D. (2012). Kids online: A new research agenda for understanding social networkingforums. New York. The Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop. Available online athttp://www.joanganzcooneycenter.org/reports-38.htmlGrimes. S. M & Fields, D. A. (2015). Children’s media making, but not sharing: The potential and limitations ofchild-specific DIY media websites for a more inclusive media landscape. Media International Australia,154, 112-122.Hetland, L., Winner, E., Veenema, S. & Sheridan, K (2007). Studio Thinking: The Real Benefits of Arts Education.New York: Teachers College Press.Ito, M., Horst, H., Bittani, M., Boyd, D. , Herr-Stephenson, B., Lange, P. G. , Pascoe, C. J., & Robinson, L. (2008).Living and learning with new media: Summary of findings from the Digital Youth Project. The John D.and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Reports on Digital Media and Learning. Chicago, IL:MacArthur Foundation.Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., Schor, J., Sefton-Green, J., and Watkins,S. C. (2013). Connected Learning: An Agenda for Research and Design. Irvine, CA: Digital Media andLearning Research Hub.Jenkins, H. (2006). Cultural convergence: Where old and new media collide. New York: New York UniversityPress.Kuznetsov, S., & Paulos, E. (2010). Rise of the expert amateur: DIY projects, communities, and cultures. InProceedings of NordiCHI (pp. 295-304) New York, NY: ACM Press.Lowell, E. & Buechley, L. (2011). LilyPond: An online community for sharing electronic textile projects. InProceedings of Cognition & Creativity (pp. 365-366). Atlanta, GA: ACM.Milne, A. P., Riecke, B. E., & Antle, A. N. (2014). Exploring Maker Practice: Common Attitudes, Habits andSkills from the Maker Community. Presented at the FabLearn Conference on Creativity and Fabricationin Education, Stanford University, CA, USA.Niguidula, D. (1993). The Digital Portfolio: A Richer Picture of Student Performance. Studies on Exhibitions, 13,1-12.Ott, M., & Pozzi, F. (2012). Digital games as creativity enablers for children. Behaviour & InformationTechnology, 31(10), 1011-1019Peppler, K. A. (2014). New creativity paradigms: Arts learning in the digital age. New York, NY: Peter LangPublishing.Peppler, K. A., Maltese, A., Keune, A., Chang, S. & Regalla, L. (2015). The Maker Ed Open Portfolio Project:SurveyofMakerspaces,PartI.Retrievedfromhttp://makered.org/wpcontent/uploads/2015/02/OPP_ResearchBrief6_SurveyofMakerspacesPart1_final.pdfPeppler, K., Halverson, E. & Kafai, Y. (in press). Makeology: Makerspaces as learning environments. New York:Routledge.Telhan, O., Kafai, Y. B. & Litts, B (in press). Designing for Connected Making: Supports for Collaboration andCommunity Building in Crafting Activities. In K. Peppler, E. Halverson & Y.B. Kafai M. (Eds.),Makeology: Volume 1. New York, NY: Routledge.Torrey, C., Churchill, E., & McDonald, D. (2009). Learning how: The search for craft knowledge on the internet.In Proceedings of CHI 2009 (pp. 1371-1380). New York, NY: ACM Press.Tseng, T. (in press). Build in progress: Building process-oriented documentation. In K. Peppler, E. Halverson, &Y. Kafai (Eds.), Makeology: Makerspaces as learning environments. New York: Routledge.Vygotsky, L.S. (2004). Imagination and creativity in childhood. Journal of Russian and East EuropeanPsychology, 42(1), 7-97.Willett, R. (in press). Making, makers, and makerspaces: a discourse analysis of professional journal articles andblog posts about makerspaces in public libraries. Library Quarterly.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1047© ISLS