Design-Activity-Sequence: A Case Study and Polyphonic Analysisof Learning in a Digital Design Thinking WorkshopPenny Wheeler, Macquarie University and Australian Catholic University, penelope.wheeler@hdr.mq.edu.auStefan Trausan-Matu, University Politehnica of Bucharest, stefan.trausan@cs.pub.roJonan Phillip Donaldson, Drexel University, jonan.phillip.donaldson@drexel.eduAmanda Barany, Drexel University, amb595@drexel.eduAbstract: In this case study, we report on the outcomes of a one-day workshop on designthinking attended by participants from the Computer-Supported Collaborative Learningconference in Philadelphia in 2017. We highlight the interactions between the workshop design,structured as a design thinking process around the design of a digital environment for designthinking, and the diverse backgrounds and interests of its participants. Data from in-workshopreflections and post-workshop interviews were analyzed using a novel set of analyticalapproaches, a combination the facilitators made by possible by welcoming participants as coresearchers.Keywords: Design thinking, polyphony, design learningDesigning and running the workshopWe present here some results of the experience had by facilitators and participants in a design thinking workshopheld before the Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning conference in Philadelphia in 2017. In structuringthe workshop, the facilitators drew on some of the multiple cognitive and procedural strategies that are interwovenin designerly ways of knowing. Each stage of the design thinking process - framing, ideation, prototyping,deploying, and iteration - was structured as a step in the workshop schedule, and each stage was closed by theparticipants reflecting on their experiences. After the workshop, the facilitators interviewed each participant usinga semi-structured interview protocol, and subsequently invited them to join as research partners in the projectdescribed here.Methodological approachesThe collaborative analysis of data from the one-day workshop combined insights from the analytical methodsused by the different team members: design case, case study, thematic analysis, and polyphony.Design case (Howard & Myers, 2011): The ideation stage of the design thinking process takesparticipants through divergent thinking (idea generation) and convergent thinking (pattern recognition, synthesis,and integration of ideas). Solutions are individually generated and then categorized, synthesized, and integratedby the group, leading to the selection of a target solution. For this workshop, the ill-structured problem of thedesign case was translating this process from a physical to a digital setting. The design move to use all stages ofthe design thinking process did create some difficulties, including blurring where the boundary of the problemwas set. Similarly, the design decision of ensuring that the participants experienced the affordances of physicaltools was made at the expense of using the affordances of digital media that would be a necessary part of a virtualenvironment solution.Case study methodology (Merriam & Tisdell, 2016): The experiences of workshop participants can betaken as one case, and, at the next level, the phases of the design thinking process present multiple cases.Thematic analysis: Transcripts of the interviews and the reflections were entered into the Dedoosequalitative data analysis software (www.dedoose.com/). Three members of the research team each coded all thewritten data. The codebook and the work of other coders was available to the whole team.Polyphony analysis: Built on natural language processing, an analysis of the polyphony of discourse wasused on the interviews only. Collaborating groups sometimes display a kind of spontaneous choreography(Trausan-Matu, 2013) in their interactions, including convergent and divergent inter-animation patterns (TrausanMatu, Stahl, & Sarmiento, 2007). The interactions of the members of the group consist in individual and groupknowledge construction cycles (Stahl, 2006) and this socially built discourse can be considered as containingseveral parallel threads (voices) in a discourse, where a voice is a group of one to three words that appearsemantically connected in the text. These voices demonstrate divergent/convergent inter-animations in movingtowards a shared goal (Trausan-Matu, Stahl, & Sarmiento, 2007).FindingsICLS 2018 Proceedings1663© ISLSEach of the methodologies highlight different aspects of the participants’ responses to the workshop and theirfindings illustrate different implications for replicating or adapting the workshop on digital design thinking forother groups.Thematic coding analysis showed the ties of the design thinking process to group dynamics, identity, anddistributed cognition. The cycles of divergent and convergent thinking were linked with the affordances of aphysical environment (silent individual and group processes) and with productive struggle. Each intervieweerecognized the diversity of the group’s backgrounds, along with the challenges and the benefits of group diversityin enhancing the design thinking process and developing better solutions. The analysis confirms the caution thatBoon, Chappin, & Perenboom (2014, p. 59) draw from the literature that team members should be different, butnot too different.Polyphonic analysis highlighted divergent and convergent cycles between the “voices”. The mostprominent voices, labelled “think, design, thing” and “think, idea, design”, were woven throughout the interviews,along with voices on participation (“talk, communicate, express”; “participate, introduce, enter”).Participant reflections and interviews also indicated the importance of the tools used in the designthinking process. Tools are important supports first for knowledge discovery and then for communicating andpersuading others in the design team. Focusing in on the imagined learning environment, both analyseshighlighted in different ways the participants’ conceptions of a multi-part, configurable space, and theirassessments of the costs and benefits of physical and virtual environments, including the quality of communicationin each environment, and the emotional liberty that an online design thinking space might support.ImplicationsKnowledge production, according to Barry, Born, & Weszkalnys (2008), happens through the dialogue of ideasas much as through their synthesis, and our analysis of this design thinking workshop bear this out. Diversity canprovoke dialogue, and we therefore encourage the organizers of future workshops to seek out the opportunitiesthat diversity provides; to recruit participants from different backgrounds, languages, disciplines and motivationsand connect them through a design thinking process which uses digital tools to build a digital design thinkingenvironment. Diversity can also power the balance between convergence and divergence in a project design (Boonet al., 2014).Despite the special analytical challenges that collaborative design presents (Kapur, Voiklis, & Kinzer,2011; Strijbos & Fischer, 2007), the divergence-convergence cycle emerged in this workshop as an anchor for agroup whose members were new to each other and new to design thinking. Representing and analyzing thedivergence-convergence cycle over time was enhanced by combining qualitative and design perspectives withnewer analytical models, methods, and tools such as computer systems based on polyphony (Trausan-Matu,Dascalu, & Rebedea, 2014).ReferencesBarry, A., Born, G., & Weszkalnys, G. (2008). Logics of interdisciplinarity. Economy and Society, 37(1), 20–49.Boon, W. P. C., Chappin, M. M. H., & Perenboom, J. (2014). Balancing divergence and convergence intransdisciplinary research teams. Environmental Science & Policy, 40, 57–68. Retrieved fromhttp://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1462901114000690Howard, C. D., & Myers, R. (2011). Writing and rewriting the instructional design case: A view from two sides.International Journal of Designs for Learning, 2(1), 40–55.Kapur, M., Voiklis, J., & Kinzer, C. K. (2011). A complexity-grounded model for the emergence of convergencein CSCL groups. In S. Puntambekar, G. Erkens, & C. E. Hmelo-Silver (Eds.), Analysing interactions inCSCL: methods, approaches and issues (pp. 3–23).Merriam, S. B., & Tisdell, E. J. (2016). Qualitative research: a guide to design and implementation (4th ed.). SanFrancisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: computer support for buildings collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, Mass.:MIT Press.Strijbos, J.-W., & Fischer, F. (2007). Methodological challenges for collaborative learning research. Learning andInstruction, 17(4), 389–393. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2007.03.004Trausan-Matu, S. (2013). Collaborative and differential utterances, pivotal moments, and polyphony. In D. D.Suthers, K. Lund, C. P. Rose, C. Teplovs, & N. Law (Eds.), Productive Multivocality in the Analysis ofGroup Interactions (pp. 123–139). Bosston, MA: Springer US.Trausan-Matu, S., Dascalu, M., & Rebedea, T. (2014). PolyCAFe-automatic support for the polyphonic analysisof CSCL chats. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 9(2), 127–156.Trausan-Matu, S., Stahl, G., & Sarmiento, J. (2007). Supporting polyphonic collaborative learning. E-ServiceJournal, Indiana University Press, 58–74.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1664© ISLS