Algebra Learning through Digital Gaming in SchoolJan Arild Dolonen, University of Oslo, Norway, j.a.dolonen@uv.uio.noAnders Kluge, University of Oslo, Norway, anders.kluge@iped.uio.noAbstract: Digital games have sparked research interest into how they can be used in school toenhance learning. This study identifies the variation in engagement and learning outcomeswhen two groups of students use two different digital learning resources for algebra: a gameand a web-based resource. Further, the study explores how the digital learning resourcescreate different conditions for social interaction and learning among students and their teacherin a classroom. The setting includes a class of 75 students (age 13–14) in two groups whoreceive identical instruction from their teacher. Field observations and pretests and posttestsshow that students playing the game are more engaged, yet their performance on posttests aresignificantly worse than the other group. Episodes of interaction between participants andtechnology suggest that they struggle with the symbolic world of the digital game, whichconstrains the mathematical meaning making that is relevant in schools.Keywords: Digital games, algebra, mixed methods, engagement, learning outcomes, meaning makingIntroductionPlay has been noted by several educational psychologists as important in order for children to constructknowledge and learn (e.g., Piaget, 1951; Vygotsky, 1978). Today, a considerable amount of children’s play isdominated by digital gaming on various platforms such as laptops, tablets, and smartphones. Thus, thephenomenon of digital games has sparked research interest in how they can be used in school to enhancelearning (e.g., Gee, 2003; Prensky, 2001). This mixed-method study investigates how two digital learningresources for algebra—an award-winning digital algebra game and a web-based learning resource—createdifferent conditions for social interaction and learning among students and with their teacher in a classroom.Currently, there is no agreed upon definition of what a digital learning game is (Granic, Lobel, &Engels, 2014; Tobias & Fletcher, 2012; Young et al., 2012). Several researchers emphasize that a central aspectin a learning game is that it should be a voluntary activity structured by rules with a defined outcome thatfacilitates comparisons of in-player performances (Young et al., 2012). However, as others (e.g., Arnseth 2006)have noted, such a notion contains a tension because although game playing usually is voluntary, schooling isnot. Thus, because schools are less voluntary, other terms to describe digital learning games have emerged suchas “serious games” and “educational games” (Tobias & Fletcher, 2012).The current debate in game-based learning research focuses mainly on how various types of games orelements from such games can be efficient for learning in classrooms (Tobias & Fletcher, 2012; Young et al.,2012). A meta-analysis provided by Young et al. (2012) indicates that game-based learning can have a positiveeffect on subjects such as language learning, history, and physical education. However, in the case ofmathematics, the results are mixed. According to Young et al. (2012), math games often have a positive effecton engagement but no significant effect on learning outcomes. Nonetheless, there are case studies that showpositive effects in terms of learning outcomes in mathematics (e.g., Habgood & Ainsworth, 2011; Kebritchi,Hirumi, & Bai, 2010). More recently, researchers have begun focusing on game-based learning from a socialand situated perspective on learning in which the effects are downplayed (e.g., Arnseth, 2006; Silseth, 2012;Young et al., 2012). The argument is that we need to know how students and teachers constitute digital gamesinto learning resources in classrooms, and we need to study how students and teachers interact to make the gamemeaningful for their specific learning purposes. In this paper, our aim is to contribute to this debate byinvestigating the following research questions:• Can we identify any variation in engagement and learning outcome when students use the two digitallearning resources—a digital algebra game and a web-based learning resource—for algebra?• How do the two digital learning resources create different conditions for meaning making and socialinteraction among students and their teacher in the classroom?In this paper, we understand learning as socially mediated in and through interpretation and mastery ofhistorical tools and practices (Säljö, 2001; Vygotsky, 1978). Learning is seen as related to the situation that itoccurs in, which includes the institutional and historical frames, specifically in the form of formal and informalnorms and regulations that exist for the activity. In this perspective, the constructive aspects of learning areCSCL 2015 Proceedings252© ISLSstudied, that is, the students’ and their teacher’s activity and how interactions and utterances are expressions ofthe participants’ meaning making.Digital gaming in classroomsAs previously noted, meta-analyses of effect studies in game-based learning have found evidence that gamebased learning generally has a positive effect on school subjects such as language learning and history (Young etal., 2012). However, in the field of mathematics, the results are mixed (Ke, 2008; Kebritchi et al., 2010; Younget al., 2012). Ke (2008) reports on a mixed methods study examining whether digital learning games, incomparison to traditional paper-and-pencil drills, would be more effective in facilitating learning outcomes inmath, and whether alternative classroom goal structures would enhance or reduce the effects of digital games.Ke used eight web-based math games in the ASTRA EAGLE game series during 20 hours over 5 weeks in asummer camp for fourth–fifth graders (age 10–13). Pretests and posttests with a control group show that thestudents significantly improved their attitudes toward math through gameplay, but there were no significanteffects on test performance measured by national test standards. Qualitative data, such as field observations andtalk-aloud protocols, revealed several problematic issues, including the pattern of “wandering mouse andrandom clicking.” This pattern may express guessing and lack of direction. Ke points out that playing a game initself may promote this usage pattern in order to be fun, but it may not contribute to learning. Ke argues thatwhen designing digital learning games, one might consider integrating goals of gameplay with curriculum goals.A suggestion is to integrate these two aspects in the gameplay in such a way that fantasy depends on the practiceof skills, and vice versa.One approach to integrating goals of gameplay with curriculum goals that has gained support in digitallearning games is “stealth learning” (Ke, 2008; Prensky, 2001). In this approach, engagement is emphasized, butformal learning is hidden from the student or player. Through play and engagement, the students take part inproductive interactions from a learning perspective but without elements the students affiliate with didacticinstruction. One study related to this approach is Habgood and Ainsworth (2011) and their concept of “intrinsicintegration” in which they designed a game about fractions in a way that puts the essentials of formal learningcontent inside the critical parts of the gameplay. Compared to games where formal learning is “extrinsic,” thatis, designing the learning elements into the peripheral parts of the game, intrinsic integration is designed tomerge fun with formal learning seamlessly and simultaneously. Habgood and Ainsworth’s mixed methods studyof children (age 7) shows positive results of “intrinsic integration” compared to two control groups, whichplayed the same game but without “intrinsic” versions of the game. A lesson learned from Habgood andAinsworth’s study is that there is a risk of students “staying in the game,” meaning they are unable to break outof the specific condition of the game and cannot apply the knowledge they construct in the game outside gamesettings. Although Habgood and Ainsworth show positive results, they recognize that it is difficult to bridgeactions and what is learned within the game to interactions and procedures normal to a classroom setting. Thisproblem, also noted by Ke (2008), emphasizes the bridging of symbolic interactions within the game withoutside interactions such as talking about and solving standard mathematical problems with other resources suchas textbooks, paper notebooks, and whiteboards.Although Ke (2008) and Habgood and Ainsworth (2011) provide us with important informationregarding to which degree a game may be considered successful in a classroom context, we still need tounderstand how the students’ and the teacher’s understanding of and interactions with a game unfold throughhours of gameplay in a school context. Silseth (2012) explores how the computer game “Global Conflicts:Palestine” becomes a learning resource for working with the complexity of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict inschool. The aim of his study is to understand how interactions in a gaming context constitute a student’slearning trajectory. Silseth applies a dialogic approach to learning, which is an important line within CSCLresearch, and he observes students at an upper secondary school (age 16–17) for four weeks. By analyzingvarious interactional episodes, he documents how a student’s learning trajectory developed and changed duringthe project. Silseth’s findings suggest that the constitution of a computer game as a learning resource is acollaborative project between students and their teacher. The teacher plays an important role in prompting andguiding the students in various ways to make them collaboratively reflect on their viewpoints and choices madein the game, as well as facilitating the students’ adoption of a multiperspective on the conflict. AlthoughSilseth’s study is not within the field of mathematics, it is important to note how he goes beyond mere effects ofgame-based learning to unpack the interactions between students and their teacher and illustrate how the game’sfunction changes over time in a student’s learning trajectory.Our study examines the use of two different digital learning resources, Kikora and DragonBox. Theteacher wanted to use these to vary his teaching. This gave the researchers the opportunity to compare the two interms of engagement and learning, as well as how they create different conditions for meaning making andCSCL 2015 Proceedings253© ISLSsocial interaction among students and their teacher in the classroom. It is a natural setting and the researchers donot manipulate the classroom practices in this study. We will now briefly describe Kikora and DragonBox withan emphasis on what is most relevant for our study.KikoraKikora is a web-based learning resource in which problem solving in algebra is close to the current practice inschools. Kikora follows largely the course found in standard textbooks, with the presentation of tasks andstructures to solve them. The students are presented one task at a time. To answer the tasks, they use aspecialized panel that may resemble buttons on a calculator with the basic arithmetic operators as well as squareroot, exponent, parentheses, and more (Figure 1).When submitting an answer, the students get immediate feedback. This also applies to intermediatesteps in the calculation as they enter the answers to such steps. By clicking a button, the students can ask for ahint for the next step in the calculation or the whole process of solving a problem. A correct submitted answer(or intermediate step) results in a green check mark, whereas an incorrect answer results in a red ‘x’. Whenfinishing a subchapter within a mathematical theme, they receive congratulations, and when finishing a theme,they get a “trophy”.Figure 1. A screenshot of Kikora. The task is in the upper-left corner, and the 'hint' button is in the lower-leftcorner. The intermediate steps are shown above the specialized panel on the right.DragonBox (Algebra 12+)DragonBox is an award-winning game about algebra. In the game, running on tablets, students can manipulateelements in an equation through specific rules. The rules change slightly during the game depending on thestudents’ progress. As they progress, the equations become more advanced, and new rules are introduced andvisualized as new capabilities for interaction. The symbols also develop from figurative to more mathematical.In the beginning of the game, the symbols look like fish, insects, or dice (Figure 2); at the end of the game, thereare equations with x, constants, numbers, and mathematical symbols.The game consists of two large fields corresponding to the two sides of an equation, along with astorage located underneath consisting of objects that can be pulled out and placed within the two fields. Thegame is organized into chapters with increasing difficulty. A level ends when the main symbol—the dragon box(and later an “x”)—stands alone in one field. Other evaluation criteria are whether the player has used thecorrect number of steps and whether there is an excessive number of objects in the other field that could havebeen eliminated. The player gets feedback on whether the criteria for successfully solving a level are met bygetting one, two, or three stars.An object can be moved into a field and inside an equation in accordance with the four basic arithmeticoperations. It may add to or subtract from a side in the equation depending on how the student has assigned aplus or a minus sign to the object in the store, act as a multiplier when placed beside another object in a field,and act as a divisor when it is placed beneath an object and thus creates a fraction bar or a multiplication of anexisting divisor.When an object is drawn into a field, algorithmic rules are activated. When the player adds or subtractsan object on a field (one side of the equation), a dent appears in the other field (the other side of the equation),CSCL 2015 Proceedings254© ISLSwhich shows that a corresponding object should be placed there. The student cannot progress further in thegame until the dent has been filled with a corresponding object.In terms of game-based learning in school, Kikora and DragonBox represent two different approaches.Although Kikora offers rewards, it is close to standard algebraic notation and practices for problem solvingfound in textbooks. DragonBox offers a different approach to algebra compared to textbooks and Kikora. Theaspect of gameplay in DragonBox is evident, and it can be seen as an example of stealth learning (Ke, 2008;Prensky, 2001) because some of the known difficulties of algebra are deliberately hidden. The students arepresented with algebraic rules but mainly through direct manipulation of nonmathematical symbols. Through apoint system and levels, the game gradually moves toward more standardized mathematical symbols. Thestudents also participate in this “translation” through gameplay, and potentially they will see the rules andsymbols as expressions for algebra.Figure 2. A screenshot of DragonBox.Method and settingWe observed a class of 75 students in eighth grade (age 13–14) who worked with algebra through a 4-weekperiod (total of 8 clock hours). The class of 75 students was divided in two; one group used DragonBox in theirgroup, and the other used Kikora. A pretest and a posttest just before and after the trial documented the students’performances in algebra. We conducted a video observation of whole class instruction and of four pairs ofstudents (two pairs in each group), which were followed throughout the process. About half of the time wasspent on plenary teaching, and the rest of the time was spent on work in pairs with the digital learning resources.The plenary teaching for the two groups was conducted by the same teacher and was virtually identical. Theidentical arrangement between the two groups of the class provided opportunities to examine the differentconditions and outcomes provided by the use of the two digital learning resources, Kikora and DragonBox.Our fieldwork resulted in about 25 hours of video material, where about 12 hours related to plenarysessions and about 10 hours showed students working in pairs with either Kikora or DragonBox. We also didinterviews with eight students and the teacher, which resulted in about 3 hours of video material. By analyzingfield observations, field notes, and video material (Derry et al., 2010), we looked for similarities and variationsthat emerged from the tests. We identified typical examples of conversations and activities in the interactionsbetween pairs of students, with their teacher, and with the technology. Two examples are presented below.Detailed qualitative analysis of the activities and conversations related to the identified variations found inperformance of the tests may give researchers a robust understanding of how the technologies create differentconditions for meaning making and social interaction among students and their teacher in the classroom(Dolonen & Ludvigsen, 2012).CSCL 2015 Proceedings255© ISLSResultsPretests and posttestsTo find a variation of learning outcomes during the process, we carried out a test before students began theiralgebra course and a similar test afterward. The tests were developed with the teacher and were based on thenational curriculum targets, the textbook, and TIMSS items (the latter as identified by Naalsund, 2012). Thepretest showed negligible differences between the two groups of the class. Each of the 8 questions gave 0–2points so that the maximum of possible points was 16.Table 1: Results from Pretests and PosttestsPretest Mean Scores(standard deviation)Kikora groupDragonBox groupPosttest Mean Scores(standard deviation)5.17 (2.01)5.21 (3.36)9.91 (2.43)7.76 (3.66)Mean PerformanceIncrease4.742.55As Table 1 shows, there was a relatively large variation in performance between the group of studentswho worked in pairs using Kikora and the group of students who worked in pairs using DragonBox. Using apaired t-test for each group, the variations in performance from pretest to posttest are statistically significant (p<0.01) for both. Using an independent t-test on the variation in performance between the two groups on posttestsonly is also statistically significant (p <0.01). The teacher and one researcher did the scoring with an inter-raterreliability score of 0.918 using Fleiss’s kappa (95.4% pairwise agreement). Thus, we can argue that both groupsshowed significant performance increase from pretest to posttest, but that the Kikora group increasedsignificantly more than the DragonBox group.To give an example of this variation, question 2 in the tests instructed the students to write theexpression 3x + 2x + 6x (in pretest) and 2x + 3x + 8x (in posttest) as simply as possible. Related to thisquestion, the mean improvement in performance for the DragonBox group was 18 percentage points (from 12%to 30% of maximum value), while Kikora students had a mean improvement in performance of 51 percentagepoints (from 20% to 71% of maximum value).The significant variation in performance on the tests was surprising to us for three reasons. First, bothgroups spent 4 hours in plenary sessions in the 8-hour course with the same teacher and identical teaching.Second, we observe that students who used DragonBox expressed far more engagement along the way byenthusiastic discussions with each other as well as intensity in usage patterns. Observations of gameplay showthat in DragonBox the students do not have to write expressions in order to solve equations. The students have astorage with a limited amount of appealing objects that fast and easily can be dragged and dropped unto andwithin the game board. In contrast, to solve an equation in Kikora the students have to write an expression withformal math symbols in a calculator, and check if the answer is correct. If the answer incorrect the students mustrewrite the expression in the panel. As a result, the DragonBox group also spent more time using the learningresource by being far less distracted and doing off-task interactions than the Kikora students did. Third, thetechnology was timely beneficial for the DragonBox group because they worked on tablets while the Kikoragroup used laptops. The tablets were faster to start up than laptops, where much time was spent on plugging themachines in, starting them up, and getting them connected to the Internet. Easier startup gave the DragonBoxstudents working in pairs almost an hour (58 minutes) more time on task compared to the Kikora studentsworking in pairs. These reasons made us analyze what happened in the process between the two tests, and wefocused on situations where students worked in pairs with the learning resources.Interactions when using Kikora and DragonBoxFrom observations and video material from the plenary sessions and video of selected pairs of students, weanalyzed the processes of student interactions in the algebra course. In general, we observed that the work inpairs was goal directed in both groups, and transcripts of the video recordings show that students discussed witheach other and their teacher, and such discussions were aimed at both problem solving and technology use.However, the students and their teacher show variations in talk and interaction when using Kikora andDragonBox. We will now present short excerpts, one from a pair using Kikora and another from a pair usingDragonBox. They are selected as typical examples of interaction between students working in pairs and theirteacher when discussing mathematical concepts using their digital learning resources. In the first excerpt, weobserve the two girls, Irene and Anne, trying to simplify the fraction 2a / a in Kikora. The teacher who walksaround guiding pairs has just arrived at their desk:CSCL 2015 Proceedings256© ISLS1.2.3.4.5.Irene:Anne:Irene:Anne:Irene:(...)6.7.8.9.10.11.Irene:Teacher:Anne:Teacher:Anne:Teacher:Uhm... If we take ... 2Raised by...2...Isn’t that... a? (They get the wrong answer.)No. That was wrong. (Here they click the “hint” button in Kikora and getthe answer: 2.)Only 2?Mmm. (confirming)Yes, but how can that be correct?You can... If you set it up... You could use the paper notebook.We have it.If you use a fraction bar, then you can write it as “2a” and then the fractionbar and then the “a” underneath it. Agree?12. Anne:Yes.13. Teacher:Mmm (confirming). If you have the paper notebook...14. Anne:Yes that's correct but... (opens her paper notebook)15. Irene:(With the keyboard looking at the teacher) Ok, now I've written...16. Teacher:(Addressing Anne and her paper notebook). Now, it is possible to shorten abit when you are dealing with fractions.This excerpt starts with the students using an exponent to solve the fraction. Having requested aresponse from Kikora, they are quick to conclude that using an exponent is not correct (line 5). The unexpectedanswer challenges them (lines 6 and 8), and the teacher recommends that they use the tools they know—paperand pencil—and calculate using a paper notebook (lines 9 and 13). He guides them through the work of settingup the fraction, refers to shortening fractions as a method (and a concept) (line 16), and since they already havethe solution given by Kikora, they eventually find the procedure to correctly solve the problem.By setting up the fraction with a traditional fraction bar and mentioning the concept of shortening afraction, the teacher provides the students with tools that are close to a repertoire of problem solving theyalready know. The teacher attempts to bridge the representation of the problem in Kikora and how it can berepresented and processed using a paper notebook. Thus, the teacher is able to guide them in the right directionby using multiple representations that are close to the students’ cultural and historical practices. The episodeindicates that the total picture of guidance by a teacher using concepts and standard notation in algebra throughculturally well-known aids such as paper notebooks together with Kikora showing the answer provides adevelopmental zone that brings the student from an incorrect procedure using exponents to an understanding ofthe method that will produce the correct answer. We observed this repeatedly for pairs using Kikora.Now, let’s turn the attention to an excerpt in which students use DragonBox. It exemplifies what weobserved when students used the game in the classroom. In the excerpt, the students try to solve an equation inwhich the dragon box (representing the unknown in standard algebra) is under a fraction bar in the right-handfield by eliminating a black fish symbol above the fraction bar. When a white fish symbol is dragged from thestore and laid on the black fish symbol, it is eliminated and turns into a dice with one dot (representing thenumber 1).1. Teacher:Remember what you did when you wanted to, in a way, move and change(points at the symbols in the expression in the right field) to make thingsappear in other places.2. Ellie:Yes but... When we do it becomes like a circle or a dot.3. Lilly:Dice.4. Ellie:Dice, yes, with one dot.5. Teacher:Mmm. (confirming)6. Ellie:And then there appears another one. (It is the mechanism that shows thatthey had to add a similar dice to the left field in order to balance theequation.)7. Teacher:Yes.CSCL 2015 Proceedings257© ISLS8.9.10.11.Ellie:Teacher:Ellie:Lilly:And then it won’t go away.No.No. (both girls laugh) Uhm...Should we just try something like this then? (The girls try to move somesymbols from the storage to both fields, but they seem helpless.)In this episode, the teacher tries to apply a mathematical concept in algebra that he knows the studentsknow (line 1: “move and change” is a local concept for changing the sign of an integer when moving it from oneside of the equation to the other). Later, however, neither he nor the students use standard math concepts such asfraction bars or numbers as we observed when using Kikora. For example, they do not talk about “the sides ofthe equation” that must be subjected to the same operations, which are relevant here. DragonBox has a symboliclanguage and problem-solving methods that represent a new world of mathematics for students and teachers.This mathematical world transforms gradually into more formal symbols and methods, as we know them fromstandard textbooks. The variety of symbols and methods for each task and each level makes it difficult forstudents and their teacher to be precise in their use of concepts when talking math. The teacher utters “things”(line 1), the students “like a circle” (line 2: a circle looking like a portal represents the 0 symbol in the gameoften used in addition and subtraction), “dot” (line 2), and “dice” (line 3). Eventually, we see that the teachergoes over to short utterances such as “Yes” or “No” (lines 5, 7, and 9), suggesting that he struggles to create adevelopmental zone for the pair. The field observations we made also suggest that some of the students, but notall, enter into a game-like mode characterized by unreflected trial and error. The students and their teacher donot use established practices in mathematics when they use DragonBox. The excerpt, which was representativeof how the teacher guided students working in pairs, suggests that this symbolic world is difficult to talk aboutconceptually and is not easily transferred to paper notebooks or the whiteboard.DiscussionOur aim with this mixed-method study is to contribute to the research and debate on game-based learning inclassrooms. Our first research question concerns whether we can identify any variation in engagement andlearning outcome when students use the two digital learning resources for algebra: a digital algebra game(DragonBox) and a web-based learning resource (Kikora). Our results show that there were obvious variationsin student engagement and the results achieved using DragonBox and Kikora. The pairs using DragonBoxshowed a high degree of involvement and enthusiasm, almost continuously. It is rare to observe in mathematicsclassrooms that all students remain focused throughout the school hour and even in some cases want to work onlonger. In contrast, the use of Kikora was not very different from ordinary problem solving in mathematicsclassrooms with paper and pencil, and it did not create any particular engagement or enthusiasm. Thus, it issurprising that the variation in learning outcomes as measured in tests was strongly and significantly in favor ofpairs working with Kikora, although they were far less engaged and used less time on tasks.Our second research question concerns how the two digital learning resources create differentconditions for meaning making and social interaction among students and their teacher in the classroom. In thisstudy, we observe how Kikora and DragonBox made possible but also constrained the interactions amongstudents, their teacher, and the technology. The symbols and methods of problem solving applied in DragonBoxdid not support students and their teacher in terms of the formal language that exists for algebra, which is whatis tested at school. Both the students and their teacher struggled to apply their repertoire for mathematicallanguage using DragonBox, thus the teacher was unable to orchestrate a developmental zone between thestudents’ existing knowledge and concepts and forms of symbolic interactions in DragonBox. Instead, thestudents’ problem-solving were characterized by trial and error, indicating guessing and lack of direction. InKikora, however, the teacher could apply a well-known mathematical language and a repertoire for helpingstudents when they were struggling, but the learning resource did not add much compared to regular exercises inalgebra.This study has both practical and theoretical implications. In terms of practice, this study highlights thedebate about the possibilities for using games in schools. The challenge is to design games that not only makestudents better at playing games but that also may be included in a school context and promote school-relevantlearning. One aspect is that there is an inherent tension between the voluntary element of gaming and theinvoluntary element related to school. Another aspect is that the introduction of new games with novel symbolicworlds can create practical problems for teachers wanting to guide their students into algebra. It takes time tomaster a novel symbolic world and make it relevant in a school context. Theoretically, this study does notstrengthen the DragonBox approach to algebra learning, which can be categorized as stealth learning (Habgood& Ainsworth, 2011; Ke, 2008; Prensky, 2001). The game provides engagement, but the results suggest thatCSCL 2015 Proceedings258© ISLSsymbolic interaction in the game constrains the participants’ use of a well-known mathematical repertoire.Although students potentially learn a practice in and through DragonBox, it does not fit in terms of the school’spractice of algebra. Further, this study also shows how important it is to go beyond reporting statistical effects ofa practice. When we analyze the interaction of the participants, we may observe the aspects that createopportunities and constraints when participants try to make meaning out of technology and make it relevant forthe context they are in (Silseth, 2012).To conclude, this study addresses the debate and research of games in schools. It has been argued that itis important for the teacher to be able to bridge the gap between engagement in gameplay and curriculum goals(e.g., Habgood & Ainsworth, 2011; Young et al., 2012). However, to do so, it is important to understand that agame and a school are potentially two different activity systems, often with different symbolic interactions andpurposes, which make it challenging for students and teachers to make meaning out of the game that is relevantto the school’s norms for what it takes to know a discipline.ReferencesArnseth, H. C. (2006). Learning to play or playing to learn: A critical account of the models of communicationinforming educational research on computer gameplay. Game Studies: The International Journal ofComputer Game Research, 6(1).Derry, S. J., Pea, R. D., Barron, B., Engle, R. A., Erickson, F., Goldman, R., Hall, R., . . . Sherin, B. L. (2010).Conducting video research in the learning sciences: Guidance on selection, analysis, technology, andethics. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(1), 3–53.Dolonen, J. A., & Ludvigsen, S. R. (2012). Analysing students’ interaction with a 3D geometry learning tooland their teacher. Learning, Culture and Social Interaction, 1(3–4), 167–182. doi:10.1016/j.lcsi.2012.08.002Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York, NY: PalgraveMacmillan.Granic, I., Lobel, A., & Engels, R. (2014). The benefits of playing video games. American Psychologist, 69(1),66–78. doi: 10.1037/a0034857Habgood, M. P. J., & Ainsworth, S. E. (2011). Motivating children to learn effectively: Exploring the value ofintrinsic integration in educational games. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20(2).http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10508406.2010.508029Ke, F. (2008). A case study of computer gaming for math: Engaged learning from gameplay? Computers &Education, 51(4), 1609–1620. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2008.03.003Kebritchi, M., Hirumi, A., & Bai, H. (2010). The effects of modern mathematics computer games onmathematics achievement and class motivation. Computers & Education, 55, 427–443.doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2010.02.007Naalsund, M. (2012). Why is algebra so difficult? A study of Norwegian lower secondary students’ algebraicproficiency. PhD thesis, Department of Teacher Education and School Research, Faculty ofEducational Sciences, University of Oslo, Norway.Piaget, J. (1951). Play, dreams and imitation in childhood. Melbourne, Australia: Heinemann.Prensky, M. (2001). Digital game-based learning. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.Säljö, R. (2001). Læring i praksis (Learning in practice). Oslo, Norway: J.W. Cappelens Forlag A/S.Silseth, K. (2012). The multivoicedness of game play: Exploring the unfolding of a student’s learning trajectoryin a gaming context at school. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning,7(1), 63–84.Tobias, S., & Fletcher, J. D. (2012). Reflections on “a review of trends in serious gaming.” Review ofEducational Research, 82, 233–237. doi:10.3102/0034654312450190Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Young, M. F., Slota, S., Cutter, A. B., Jalette, G., Mullin, G., Lai, B., . . . Yukhymenko, M. (2012). Our princessis in another castle: A review of trends in serious gaming for education. Review of EducationalResearch, 82, 61–89. doi:10.3102/003465431243698010.3102/0034654312436980AcknowledgmentsWe thank the participating students and their teacher. This work is a part of the project ARK&APP at theUniversity of Oslo and is funded by the Norwegian Directorate for Education and Training.CSCL 2015 Proceedings259© ISLS