“If You Add Too Much Science, It Gets Boring.” Exploring Students’Conceptual Change Through Their Game Design IterationsChristopher M. Hovey, Camillia Matuk, and Talia Hurwichchris.hovey@nyu.edu, cmatuk@nyu.edu, th1425@nyu.eduNew York UniversityAbstract: Game design offers many opportunities for facilitating and understanding learning.We facilitated a 5-day game design workshop for eleven grade 7 students to designeducational board games about virology. Through analyses of field notes, audio recording, anddesign artifacts, we illustrate conceptual change of virology through two student teams’ gamedesign iterations. Findings show how the design process facilitates conceptual change, andhow games can be used as assessments of student thinking.Background and objectivesGames are dynamic systems, and models of their designer’s understanding of that system. When students designgames to teach domain content, their games become sites for assessing their understanding (Ackerman, 2001).However, some argue that the educational value of design is in the process, and not in the product (Dancz et al.,2017). Indeed, student designers can learn content even when their designs are not effective at teaching it totheir peers (Harel & Papert, 1990). Game design engages valuable skills of inquiry, problem-solving, reflection,explanation, critique, refinement, and collaborative knowledge construction. In particular, designing games forlearning requires integrating knowledge of games, of relevant domain content, and of how people learn (Khaled& Vasalou, 2014). We argue that the iterative process of game design embeds opportunities for designers to testand get feedback on their current understanding, and to identify and correct misconceptions. Doing so canultimately lead to better game designs as well as to better learning outcomes for designers and their players.Based on two student teams creating games to teach players about the measles virus, we ask: (1) Howdo students approach the challenge of designing games for learning? and (2) What do students’ game designiterations reveal about their science understanding? Findings from this study have implications for using gamedesign as an activity to support and assess science learning.Methods and data analysisWe created a 5-day long elective game design workshop for eleven grade 7 students from a diverse publicschool in the eastern United States. The workshop occurred during the final week of the academic year, and waspart of an effort to explore the opportunities of transmedia game design for shaping students’ scientific anddesign dispositions. Five graduate student facilitators and two accompanying teachers guided three studentteams in designing games to teach players about measles, based on the comic book Carnival of Contagion (Hall,West & Diamond, 2017, worldofviruses.unl.edu/carnival-of-contagion). This comic tells of a dream shared by agroup of unvaccinated youth as fall ill with measles. We asked students to create games to teach players thescience covered in the comic, including the transmission and symptoms of measles and the importance of herdimmunity. Here, we focus on contrasting episodes from two of the three student groups—The Musketeers (3boys), and The Weirdos (4 girls)—to illustrate the ways that game designs can be evidence of learning.We collected field notes, research reflections, and audio recordings of all activities, including withinteam and student-facilitator discussions; students’ final game design artifacts; and documentation of theiriterations. We then conducted a thematic analysis of the data (Vaismoradi, Turunen, Bondas, 2013), and metregularly to discuss, define, and refine emergent themes.FindingsStudents’ understanding of vaccines and of viral transmission was reflected in their design iterations. Creatingthe alignment between player actions (e.g., jumping, collecting objects) with learning actions (e.g., solvingproblems), which characterizes effective games for learning (Plass et al., 2011), was a chance to grapple withscience concepts. In general, students easily identified misalignments within existing games. As one malestudent noted about a poorly designed digital mathematics game, “you just shoot things… adding (numbers)doesn’t have anything to do with shooting (those things).” Comparing this to a better designed math game, henoted that the player’s action “actually has something to do with (…) actually solving (math problems).”However, students struggled to varying extents to embody this alignment in their own games. Forexample, when encouraged to incorporate more science into their path-based board game, The Weirdos addedICLS 2018 Proceedings1575© ISLS“fun fact cards” about measles, from which players selected on landing on marked squares. While the teamlearned content by making the cards, these were purely informational, and did to advance gameplay. Their cardsrepresented an extrinsic integration (Kafai et al., 1998), wherein learning goals were not a component of themechanics, but exist alongside them. Their superficial treatment of the science through this simple game designdecision may have been a missed opportunity for the Weirdos to engage more deeply with the science.In contrast, the Musketeers began with a misconception about vaccines that ultimately changed throughtheir attempts to align learning with player actions. Initially, they proposed a game concept in which players“vaccinate the sick” to “cure” them or to “remove symptoms,” an idea that reflects their misunderstanding thatvaccines are curative rather than preventive. By their third iteration, this misconception had transformed. Adam(pseudonym) of the Musketeers described a game concept in which players “get chances to get differentvaccines to prevent different diseases….some prevent one, some prevent three or four.” However, the teamstruggled to integrate the preventive (vs. curative) nature of vaccines into an engaging game mechanic thatwould have the desired impact on players (damage to health) without the players’ characters dying and causingthe game to end prematurely. Through playtesting with facilitators, the Musketeers eventually formulated asolution in which each player controlled a party of characters who would not become infected all at once.The Musketeers’ solution and approach to incorporating the making and use of vaccines into theirgame mechanics reflects an intrinsic level of integration (Kafai et al., 1998), and their nuanced understanding ofthe alignment between player and learner actions. Their decision also showed the team’s ability to incorporateaccurate science into engaging game mechanics without needing to sacrifice one for the other, and effectivelybalancing fun and education in their design. As Adam noted, “The whole point is, we just want our gameboardto be fun, but like science. (…) If you add too much science, it gets boring.”Conclusions and implicationsDesigning games for learning requires integrating various skills and knowledge that students have yet to master.Our findings suggest that the process of designing such games offers a unique context for observing howstudents think about science concepts, and about a design practice. However, students’ games may not reflectthe extent of their understanding. Thus, continued research might expand on our sample size and seek ways todistinguish students’ science understanding from their game design abilities, and the impact of designing gameson science understanding. Future research might identify individual, social and contextual influences on theinteractions between science understanding and design decisions.ReferencesAckermann, E. (2001). Piaget’s constructivism, Papert’s constructionism: What’s the difference. Future oflearning group publication, 5(3), 438.Dancz, C. L., Parrish, K., Bilec, M. M., & Landis, A. E. (2017). Assessment of Students’ Mastery ofConstruction Management and Engineering Concepts through Board Game Design. Journal ofProfessional Issues in Engineering Education and Practice, 143(4), 04017009.Hall, B., West, J. & Diamond, J. (2017). Carnival of Contagion. Lincoln, NB: University of Nebraska Press.Harel, I., & Papert, S. (1990). Software design as a learning environment. Interactive learning environments,1(1), 1-32.Kafai, Y. B., Franke, M. L., Ching, C. C., & Shih, J. C. (1998). Game design as an interactive learningenvironment for fostering students' and teachers' mathematical inquiry. International Journal ofComputers for Mathematical Learning, 3(2), 149-184.Khaled, R., & Vasalou, A. (2014). Bridging serious games and participatory design. International Journal ofChild-Computer Interaction, 2(2), 93-100.Plass, J. L., Homer, B. D., Kinzer, C. K., Frye, J., & Perlin, K. (2011). Learning mechanics and assessmentmechanics for games for learning. G4LI White Paper, 1, 2011.Vaismoradi, M., Turunen, H., & Bondas, T. (2013). Content analysis and thematic analysis: Implications forconducting a qualitative descriptive study. Nursing & health sciences, 15(3), 398-405.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the students and teachers who participated in our research. We are also grateful to Juan PabloSarmiento, Jiayuan Zhang, Shashank Pawar, Yael Ezer, Matthew Cirigliano, and Ralph Vacca, who helped toorganize and facilitate the workshop.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1576© ISLS