Opening the Door to Algebra: The Role of Fraction Knowledge inAlgebra LearningJulie L. Booth, Temple University, julie.booth@temple.eduKristie J. Newton, Temple University, kkjones@temple.eduLaura H. Pendergast, Temple University, lhpendergast@gmail.comChristina Barbieri, University of Delaware, barbieri@udel.eduAbstract: We examine 6th, 7th, and 8th grade classes in order to determine how fractionknowledge improves naturally during business as usual instruction and whether naturallyoccurring improvements in fraction knowledge are related to improvements in algebrareadiness/achievement outcomes.SignificanceRecent research has confirmed speculation of scholars and practitioners alike: Students’ knowledge aboutfractions is predictive of their Algebra readiness (Booth & Newton, 2012), and performance and learning inalgebra (Booth, Newton, & Twiss-Garrity, 2013). However, the mechanisms underlying the relation betweenfraction knowledge and improved algebra performance and learning are yet unclear, especially as the benefits offraction knowledge appear even when students solve problems that do not involve fractions. In the presentstudy, we examine naturally-occurring changes over the course of a school year in different types of fractionknowledge (magnitude knowledge, comparison, and arithmetic) and investigate whether and how those changesare predictive of changes to different types of algebra knowledge. This project fills a critical gap in the presentknowledge on how fraction knowledge is related to Algebra performance and learning, including which types offraction knowledge are critical for improving algebra learning and the mechanisms underlying these effects.Theoretical backgroundSeveral mechanisms have been proposed to explain why fraction knowledge impacts algebra performance andlearning. The most straightforward hypothesis is that lack of conceptual understanding of fractions “…limitsstudents’ ability to solve problems with fractions and to learn and apply computational procedures involvingfractions (p. 6)” (Siegler et al., 2010). This would necessarily lead to difficulty solving problems in algebra, asthey frequently require manipulation of fractions and other rational number representations. However, recentevidence demonstrated that the correlations between fraction knowledge and equation-solving skill were notlimited to equations that contained fractions (Booth & Newton, 2012). This suggests that, while proficiencywith fraction computation may certainly be one mechanism behind the connection between fractions and algebralearning, it may not be the only one.Some scholars argue that, in addition to facility with computation, students need a deep understandingof the number system, including the place of fractions in that system, in order to succeed in algebra (Empson &Levi, 2011; Wu, 2001). Central to such a deep understanding of numbers is knowledge about magnitude(Siegler, Thompson, & Schneider, 2011). In particular, students’ understanding that the magnitude of fractionsis determined by a relationship between two numbers (a notion that is unfortunately difficult to grasp (Siegler &Pyke, 2012) is crucial for development of strong concepts of fraction equivalence and proportionality. Suchproportional reasoning is thought to play an important role in algebra learning. For example, Empson & Levi(2011) suggest that understanding that “all fractional representations of 1/3 will fit into the equation, x/y = 1/3,which is equivalent to the equation y = 3x” (p.134) will help students to comprehend algebraic equations.Further, Wu (2001) suggests that rules and ideas learned when dealing with fractions are often applicable toalgebraic topics, thus making that foundation knowledge about the rational number system crucial for algebra.Here, we examine both student knowledge of fraction computation and knowledge of fractionmagnitudes to determine whether changes in either or both are predictive of changes in algebra readiness orlearning.MethodParticipants in this study are students in intact 6th, 7th, and 8th grade mathematics classrooms (N=45 classrooms)in diverse school districts. All students in participating classrooms are undergoing business as usual instructionat their grade level during the term. They completed fraction and algebra measures at the beginning of the year,and will complete those measures again at the end of the year, as well as a measure of grade-level mathematicscompetence. Demographic information is supplied by the school district.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1581© ISLSTwo fraction knowledge measures are used. Fraction magnitude knowledge is assessed using a numberline estimation task (e.g., Siegler & Opfer, 2003). Students are presented with blank number lines with 0marked at the left endpoint and 1 marked at the right endpoint. A fraction with a magnitude between 0 and 1 isprinted on top of each line and students are asked to place a mark on the number line where they believe theindicated fraction belongs. Fraction computation knowledge is measured using items representative of the typesof problems found in fraction arithmetic lessons (i.e., ½ + ¼; ⅔ x ⅝; 6 ⅓). Addition, subtraction,multiplication, and division with fractions are included.Three algebra knowledge measures are used. Equation Encoding is assessed using a reconstruction task(e.g., McNeil & Alibali, 2004) in which students are presented with an equation or expression briefly and thenasked to reconstruct the problem from memory immediately after it disappears from view; students completethis task for a series of equations with different structural formats and different placements of key problemfeatures. Feature knowledge is assessed using previously established items designed to address students’understanding of concepts that have been identified in previous research as crucial for success in Algebra (e.g.,the meaning of the equals sign, the significance of negatives in terms, identification of like terms, etc (Booth &Newton, 2012). Finally, problem-solving is assessed using items that measure students’ ability to effectivelycarry out procedures to solve problems. These items are representative of the types of problems found inAlgebra I textbooks and taught in Algebra I courses (i.e., 6x – 8 = 12; 7x + 4 = 10x – 5; 4 = 2/3x).General mathematics competence will be assessed using grade-specific mathematics ability testscomprised of items from that grade’s mathematics textbooks aligned with that grade’s CCSS-M contentstandards.Anticipated resultsWe will assess how fraction knowledge related to improvements in various facets of algebra readiness andperformance through a series of multiple regression analyses, regressing each end of year algebra score (#conceptual encoding errors, % correct on feature knowledge, and % correct on problem-solving) on students’start of year fraction and algebra measures, improvement on each of the fraction measures over the course ofthe school year, students’ end of year math ability score, and relevant demographic variables (e.g., gender,ethnicity, SES). This will allow us to determine how initial fraction knowledge and improvements that resultfrom traditional instruction are predictive of improvements in students’ algebra readiness or performance.ReferencesBooth, J. L., & Newton, K. J. (2012). Fractions: Could they really be the gatekeeper's doorman? ContemporaryEducational Psychology, 37, 247-253Booth, J.L., Newton, K.J., Twiss-Garrity, L. (2014). The impact of fraction magnitude knowledge on algebraperformance and learning. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,118, 110-118.Empson, S. B., & Levi L. (2011). Extending children’s mathematics: Fractions and decimals. Portsmouth, NH:Heinemann.McNeil, N. M. & Alibali, M. W. (2004). You’ll see what you mean: Students encode equations based on theirknowledge of arithmetic. Cognitive Science, 28, 451-466.Siegler, R., Carpenter, T., Fennell, F., Geary, D., Lewis, J., Okamoto, Y., et al. (2010). Developing effectivefractions instruction: A practice guide (NCEE #2010-009). Washington, DC: National Center forEducation Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department ofEducation.Siegler, R. S., & Opfer, J. E. (2003). The development of numerical estimation: evidence for multiplerepresentations of numerical quantity. Psychological Science, 14, 237-243.Siegler, R. S., & Pyke, A. A. (2012). Developmental and individual differences in understanding of fractions.Developmental Psychology, 49(10), 1994-2004.Siegler, R. S., Thompson, C. A., Schneider, M. (2011). An integrated theory of whole number and fractionsdevelopment. Cognitive Psychology, 62, 273-296.Wu, H. (2001). How to prepare students for algebra. American Educator, 25(2), 10-17.AcknowledgmentsThe research reported here was supported by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education,through Grant R305A170226 to Temple University. The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do notrepresent views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Education.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1582© ISLS