Learning to Model Ecosystems With Interaction Food Websin Middle School ClassroomsMichelle Lui and Tom Mohermmylui@uic.edu, moher@uic.eduUniversity of Illinois at ChicagoAbstract: Modeling is an important part of scientific practice that represents phenomenon butalso allows for prediction and reasoning about systems. While students typically do not haveissues with understanding simple linear relationships, difficulties arise when more complexrelationships are introduced. Richer representational diagrams make visible the complexitieswithin ecosystems and can help students better understand interacting forces. We co-designedan instructional sequence with software applications to support middle school studentsbuilding interaction food webs as models of ecosystems. 48 students participated in thelessons and used the applications in groups of three to four students. 87% of groups were ableto successfully produce an interaction food web. Posttests found that over 80% of studentsgave a completely or partially correct explanation, demonstrating reasonable proficiency inunderstanding interaction food webs. The results from each step of the instructional sequenceare discussed with respect to the curriculum and technology design.IntroductionModeling is increasingly being recognized as an important aspect of scientific literacy and practice. Accordingto the Next Generation Science Standards (NRC, 2012), students can begin developing and using models asearly as Kindergarten (at age 4-5). They recommend that by middle school (age 11-12), students progress toconstructing, using, and revising conceptual models to communicate their understandings and makingpredictions about more abstract phenomena. Used to represent real-world phenomena (yet not correspondingcompletely), models are abstractions that allow scientists and students to test theories and develop a betterunderstanding of complex systems (Schwarz et al., 2009). Expressed models (as opposed to mental models) cantake on several different forms, including schematic diagrams, physical replicas, mathematical representations,analogies, and computer simulations (Baek et al., 2011; Gobert & Buckley, 2000). Examples of scientificmodels include molecular models, weather systems for predicting weather patterns, the water cycle model, andfood web models that highlight interactions between organisms. All of these not only represents phenomena butalso allows for prediction and reasoning about real-world systems (Schwarz et al., 2009; Soloway et al., 1995).For example, building a food web that models an ecosystem not only demonstrates student understanding aboutan ecosystem, it can also foster deeper understanding of how different organisms relate to one another duringthe construction process. Once created, students can use the food web to make predictions about how onespecies' population can affect others within the model. However, studies have demonstrated difficulties learnersencounter with understanding relationships within systems (Gallegos, Jerezano & Flores, 1994; Mandinach &Cline, 1994). While students typically have no trouble understanding single causal and linear connections,relationships within systems pose a bigger challenge (Ben-Zvi Assaraf & Orion, 2005; Grotzer & Basca, 2003;Hmelo-Silver, 2007). In the case of food webs and ecosystems, students generally understand predator-preyfood chains quite well but have difficulty interpreting food web dynamics if two populations are indirectlyrelated (Gallegos, Jerezano & Flores, 1994). When examining food webs some students think about speciesrelationships on an individual level rather than on a population level (Griffiths & Grant, 1985).Richer representational diagrams can make visible the complexities within ecosystems and havepotential to help students attend to multiple interacting forces within the system. Some ecologists use interactionfood webs to represent relationships amongst species (Hui, 2002). In traditional food webs, arrows betweenspecies indicate the direction of energy transfer, whereas in interaction food webs, each set of relationship isdepicted by a pair of arrows, with each arrow accompanied by + or – symbol (Figure 1). The symbol denotes theresulting population effect of the species the arrow is pointing at, should the population of the species the arrowis pointing from increases (e.g., Rabbit —(+) Wolf may be translated as, if the rabbit population increases, itwill have a positive effect on the population of wolves). Not only can an interaction food web represent feedingrelationships, it can also express competition and mutualistic relationships within ecosystems. Since thesemantic meaning of the arrows are tied directly to population effects, the building and using of interaction foodwebs are coupled tightly to the practice of making predictions. Once students learn how to read and buildinteraction food webs, the representation has potential for supporting students’ reasoning around complexCSCL 2017 Proceedings495© ISLSecosystems. Along with science teacher partners, we co-designed an instructional sequence and accompanyingsoftware applications for middle school students in order to support students’ reasoning around interaction foodwebs. This paper describes the curriculum design, technology design, and the outcomes of student learning.Figure 1. Example of traditional food web (left) and interaction food web (right).Related workA number of prior studies have addressed modeling for students to understand ecosystems. The ScienceWareModel-It is a learning environment that allows high school students to study natural phenomena (such as astream ecosystem) for building dynamic qualitative and quantitative models (e.g., visualizing relationshipsbetween phosphate on stream quality) in planning, building, and testing modes (Jackson et al., 1996).Qualitative results showed that scaffolding within software design supported model construction and thatstudents created models of reasonable complexity and sophistication expected of their grade level. In anotherstudy, authors found that most students engaged in cognitive strategies such as analyzing, relational reasoning,synthesizing, testing and debugging, and explaining while using Model-It, however additional support is neededfor all students to progress beyond superficial relationships (Stratford, Krajcik, & Soloway, 1998). In AquaticEcosystems, a two-week intervention with 311 middle school students, students participated in a technologysupported inquiry unit organized around structure, behavior, and function (SBF; Hmelo-Silver et al., 2014).Modeling technology supports included NetLogo simulations, and an Aquarium Construction Toolkit modelingapplication. Students significantly improved their understanding of the aquarium ecosystem in terms ofstructure, behavior, and function, as well as micro and macro relationships. Authors attribute the success of theirunit in part to the use of a distinct conceptual representation that allows students to adopt the SBF conceptualframework into their language for expressing complex ideas about ecosystems. While the Model-It studieshighlight the need for scaffolding and curricular support around modeling, research on Aquatic Ecosystemsdemonstrate success with representations that reinforce language for expressing complex ideas. Ourinstructional sequence and technology design takes the above findings into consideration, and is an example ofan additional curricular support designed around providing students with representations and language formodel building and reasoning.WallcologyThe designs described in this paper are created as part of the Wallcology unit, in response to challenges studentsencountered in a previous iteration (Slotta, Lui, Cober & Moher, 2017). The larger project centers on a complexphenomenon embedded in the physical classroom environment (e.g., walls), providing an evidentiary base forstudent inquiry. In the Wallcology phenomenon, simulations of fictitious organisms are “embedded” in theclassroom walls. “Wallscopes” (i.e., computer monitors) provide internal views of the walls that reveal differentecosystems of varying abiotic (wood, plaster, and brick) and biotic components (vegetation, herbivores andpredators). An underlying computational model developed in consultation with an expert population biologistgoverns these species and their environmental conditions. Student groups observe and perform investigationson specific ecosystems, with each ecosystem inhabiting a subset of species (e.g., 4-5) that make up a cohesivecommunity of species (e.g., 11 species). Students are guided by collective inquiry activities (Cober et al., 2012)in order to model all of the species’ relationships as a class – with the complete set of relationships across all ofthe species in the community discoverable only by aggregating everyone’s observations and investigationfinding. In the previous iteration, students had difficulties creating food webs and models, which took curriculartime intended for students to actually work with their models.CSCL 2017 Proceedings496© ISLSBuilding upon prior research on modeling ecosystems and our own past experiences implementing theWallcology unit, we designed explicit supports for modeling, including tablet applications where studentsexplore feeding relationships, competition and indirect relationships (e.g., effects along a trophic cascade)before they begin engaging with the Wallcology simulation. Understanding that food chains must be taught notas a simple set of isolated organisms, but as an interactive population embedded in an ecological context(Gallegos, Jerezano & Flores, 1994), and that elementary-school students have capability to develop systemsthinking skills (Evagorou et al. 2009), we developed an instructional sequence for modeling ecosystems basedon an interaction food web representation. This paper describes this curriculum and technology. Our aim is tohelp students understand complex ecosystems, and to give students the tools to successfully make predictionsand reason around food web models. The research questions that drive the current study include: (1) how wellcan middle school students understand and build interaction food webs? And (2) to what extent can they makepredictions and reason around relationships depicted within interaction food webs?MethodsThis research employs a design-based methodology, characterized by iterative cycles of design, evaluation andrevision of an intervention for study in authentic classroom settings (Brown, 1992; Design-Based ResearchCollective, 2003). Researchers and two high school teachers developed curriculum activities, content materialsand specialized software using a co-design method (Penuel, Roschelle, & Shechtman, 2007). The studydescribed in the current paper took place in private urban middle school in Chicago across three Grade 6Science classes, which were taught by one of the co-design teacher partners. A total of 48 students (aged 11-12,with 16 students per class) participated in the lessons in groups of three to four during their regular science classover a period of two days. Each class period ranged from 50 minutes to 1 hour and 50 minutes, depending onthe class and day. A posttest was conducted in the class period following day 2. Several data sources were usedin the analysis: the models the students constructed, software-generated log files of each group’s activities withthe application, and audio and videotapes of student discussions and class activity.DesignDay 1: Introduction to interaction food websOn day 1, students worked in groups of three to four (five groups per class) to learn about the interaction foodweb representation using a custom software application. Each group was provided with a laptop computer.There are four stages in the program, taking groups through successively complex relationships (Table 1). Thefirst two stages guided students through with step-by-step instructions, while the latter two stages allowedstudents more latitude to explore various relationships and meaning of + and – symbols. At each stage, a paletteon the left is populated with recognizable species (e.g., lion and zebra). As students dragged species into thework area, a graph depicting its population over time is revealed. When species that are related to one anotherare placed on the work area, arrows are automatically established. The work of the student then, is to makechanges to species populations. Up and down arrows for each species are made available (i.e., increase ordecrease populations respectively). When a population manipulation is attempted, students are tasked withmaking predictions about the population effects on the other species in the work area. Only then will thepopulation graphs reveal the resultant effects (Figure 2).Table 1: Stages in introduction to interaction food web application (day 1)Level1234AimTo explore population effects with food chainsTo explore population effects with interaction food webs notationTo explore population effects with interaction food webs(feeding relationships only)To explore population effects with interaction food webs(feeding and competition relationships)CSCL 2017 Proceedings497Species AvailableLion, zebraLion, zebraLion, zebra, leopardLion, zebra, grass, acacia tree© ISLSFigure 2. Introduction to interaction food webs software interface (level 3). The application shows a predictionpanel (which pops up from bottom) when students select a manipulation of species population. In the screenabove, the red ‘down’ arrow below the leopard has been selected, indicating that an attempt was made todecrease the leopard population. Once predictions about lion and zebra population have been made, students cancompare their answers with the animated population-over-time graphs (top right).Day 2: Modeling with interaction food websOn day 2, students worked in newly formed groups of three to four (five groups per class) to build their owninteraction food webs using a modeling application on a tablet computer (Figure 3). The modeling application isbased on the software design from day 1, with differences being that: (1) students could choose the relationshipsthey wished to depict and (2) non-specific “species” (i.e., shapes to represent species) were used in place ofrecognizable species. Similar to the application on day 1, up and down arrows were made available for eachspecies, and when a population manipulation is attempted, students were tasked with making predictions aboutthe population effects of other species in the work area. Once completed, the population graphs reveal theensuing effects. Students explored the meaning of + and – of relationship arrows through an iterative process ofprediction and revision. Each group was assigned four different sets of species examined during their recentfield trip to a local ecosystem (e.g., sanderling, Karner blue butterfly, butterfly milk weed) and was asked tocreate a traditional food web (with energy transfer arrows). Then, using the modeling application, they were todetermine the correct relationship representations and expand the basic food web into an interaction food web.The instructional sequence concluded with group presentations of population interaction web and classdiscussions about population effects of the species.Figure 3. Students working with the modeling application on day 2.CSCL 2017 Proceedings498© ISLSResults and discussionDay 1: Introduction to interaction food websAs groups (n=15) worked through each level, they made predictions about population effects when theymanipulated another species' population. The accuracy of groups' predictions was used to evaluate theirperformance. The mean prediction accuracy was 81.27% (SD = 13.35%), broken down by level in Table 2.Table 2: Prediction accuracy on day 1Level1234AveragePerformance Accuracy (%)86.7191.2279.7376.0681.27SD (%)18.6616.5821.6817.7213.35Given the difficulty of the tasks, taking into consideration the relative young age of the learners, theseresults are promising. Prior studies noted that the concept of populations of organisms in the wild is establishedin children older than age 13, but remains challenging for them to reason about how populations depend uponeach other and compete with one another (Driver et al., 1997).Further examination of students' performance pattern over successive levels, reveals that groups withthe highest accuracy scores in levels 3 and 4 also attained 100% in the first two levels (top four groups).However for groups with the lowest scores in levels 3 and 4, their averages in levels 1 and 2 ranged from 60%to 100% (bottom four groups). Students’ group discussions during the activity suggested that they were usingwhat they know about the species to discuss population changes (e.g., “lions eats zebras, so when there are morelions there are less zebras”). They had to make predictions, and were excited when their population relationshipsmatched what the population graphs showed. There was little evidence of students attending to the arrows or thesymbols on day 1, but additional video analysis is underway to understand groups’ performance patterns overthe course of the activity.Day 2: Modeling with interaction food websStudents presented their final interaction food webs in groups, with each student taking a turn at explaining whatwould happen to the population of one species if the population of another species increased or decreased. Moststudents were able to correctly explain population effects. With respect to the interaction food webs that groupspresented (Figure 3), 87% of the groups were able to produce a completely correct or partially correctinteraction food web, 67% (10 of 15 groups) produced completely correct interaction food webs, 20% (3groups) had minor errors, 2 groups neglected to include a symbol on one of the arrows but the representationwas otherwise correct. 1 group reversed the symbols for one set of relationship, and 13% (2 groups) were unableto produce an interaction food web, instead presenting a traditional food web (Figure 4).During class discussions, several students were active in debating the validity of their models. In onescenario, students discussed what would happen if one of two prey populations of a predator suddenlydisappeared? One student suggested that the predator population would also decrease which would lead to theremaining prey population to thrive (since their predator population decreased). Another suggested that thepredator population would simply make up more of its diet with the remaining prey population, which wouldresult in a decreased population of the remaining prey population. This discussion led to the class discussingissues about the model being a simplified representation of the actual system, and that in reality, there would beother factors involved (such as how prevalent are each of the species’ populations? How much of the predator’sdiet is made of one prey species vs. the other?). These discussions further demonstrated the students’sophistication in understanding interaction food webs as models of ecosystems and their ability to reason aroundthem. Furthermore, the language that students used throughout their presentations and class discussions wasindicative of their thinking about ecosystems on a population level rather than on an individual species level.CSCL 2017 Proceedings499© ISLSFigure 4. Examples of group interaction food webs. Correct version (left). Incorrect version (right).Figure 3. Accuracy performance of group interaction food webs.Posttest41 students completed the posttest, in which students were asked to build a model of an interaction food webconsisting of square, triangle, circle and diamond "species" and explain population effects from changes in twodifferent populations. For example, if the population of triangles suddenly disappeared, what would happen tothe square population?A composite scoring was assigned based on whether both answers were correct, incorrect, orincomplete. The test was scored as correct if both explanations were correct, partially correct if one of theanswers was correct, incomplete if explanations were not provided in both answers, incorrect if bothexplanations were incorrect. Results showed that over 80% of students gave a completely or partially correctexplanation, demonstrating some level of understanding. Further breaking down results, 60.98% offered correctexplanations, 19.51% offered partially correct explanations, 9.76% of the explanations were incomplete, andanother 9.76% of explanations were incorrect (Figure 5).CSCL 2017 Proceedings500© ISLSFigure 5. Frequency of explanation performance of posttest questions (n=41).Of the students who produced incorrect or incomplete explanations (n=8), only one belonged in lowperforming groups on both day 1 and day 2 (defined as groups with lower than average performance scores onday 1, and groups who were unable to complete an interaction food web on day 2). Three students belonged inlow performing groups on day 1, and the remaining students in this cohort belonged in high or averageperforming groups on both days. This suggests that these students may have missed core concepts learned onday 1.Of the students who produced partially correct explanations (n=8), three students belonged in averageperforming groups on day 1, with the remaining students belonged in high performing groups on both days,echoing possibility that these students may have missed core concepts learned on day 1. Of the students whoproduced correct explanations (n=25), the majority 76% (n=19) belonged to high or average performing groupson both days. More than half (56%) belonged in high performing groups, however there were still some studentswho belonged to low performing groups, including: 3 (12%) who belonged in low performing groups on day 1and 3 (12%) who belonged in low performing groups on day 2. It is possible that these students gleanedimportant information from the discussions that occurred during presentations, but further analysis will beconducted in order to understand these students’ learning progressions.ConclusionsThe majority of groups were able to successfully produce an interaction food web and analysis of posttestexplanations found that over 80% of students were able to give completely or partially correct explanationsabout population effects along a trophic cascade. These results demonstrate that middle school students wereable to attain reasonable proficiency in understanding and building interaction food webs. Students adoptedappropriate language in discussing their interaction food webs, highlighting their predictions of populationchange throughout their presentations and class discussions. Given the complexity and abstract nature of thesymbols at the heart of interaction food webs, these results suggest that, with proper scaffolding, middle schoolstudents may be capable of even more sophisticated systems thinking. A follow-up study of the Wallcology unitwill reveal if students were successful in translating what they learned with the instructional sequence andtechnology applications described in the current study – to effectively build models and make predictions aboutmuch more complex ecosystems.ReferencesBaek, H., Schwarz, C., Chen, J., Hokayem, H., & Zhan, L. (2011). Engaging elementary students in scientificmodeling: The MoDeLS fifth-grade approach and findings. In Models and Modeling (pp. 195–218).Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-0449-7_9Ben-Zvi Assaraf, O., & Orion, N. (2005). Development of system thinking skills in the context of earth systemeducation. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42, 518- 560.Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.Cober, R., Fong, C., Gnoli, A., López Silva, B., Lui, M., Madeira, C., McCann C., Moher, T., Slotta, J., &Tissenbaum, T. (2012). Embedded Phenomena for Knowledge Communities: Supporting complexpractices and interactions within a community of inquiry in the elementary science classroom.CSCL 2017 Proceedings501© ISLSProceedings of the 10th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) - Volume 2, (pp. 6471). International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS).Design-Based Research Collective. (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educationalinquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5-8.Driver, R., Squires, A., Rushworth, P., Wood-Robinson, V. (1997) Making Sense of Secondary Science:Research into Children’s Ideas. New York, Routledge.Evagorou, M., Korfiatis, K., Nicolaou, C., & Constantinou, C. (2009). An investigation of the potential ofinteractive simulations for developing system thinking skills in elementary school: A case study withfifth‐graders and sixth‐graders. International Journal of Science Education, 31(5), 655–674.http://doi.org/10.1080/09500690701749313Jackson, S., Stratford, S. J., Krajcik, J. S., & Soloway, E. (1996). Model-It: A case study of learner-centeredsoftware design for supporting model building. National Science Foundation, Arlington, VA. Retrievedfrom: http://tccl.rit.albany.edu/knilt/images/6/66/case_study_student_centered_use_of_models.pdfGallegos, L., Jerezano, M. E., & Flores, F. (1994). Preconceptions and relations used by children in theconstruction of food chains. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 31(3), 259–272.http://doi.org/10.1002/tea.3660310306Gobert, J. D., & Buckley, B. C. (2000). Introduction to model-based teaching and learning in science education.International Journal of Science Education, 22(9), 891–894. http://doi.org/10.1080/095006900416839Griffiths, A. K., & Grant, B. A. C. (1985). High school students' understanding of food webs: Identification of alearning hierarchy and related misconceptions. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 22(5), 421–436. http://doi.org/10.1002/tea.3660220505Grotzer, T., & Basca, B. B. (2003). How does grasping the underlying causal structures of ecosystems impactstudents‟ understanding? Journal of Biological Education, 38, 16-35.Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2014). Technology-supported inquiry for learning about aquatic ecosystems. EurasiaJournal of Mathematics, Science & Technology Education, 10(5), 405–413.http://doi.org/10.12973/eurasia.2014.1170aHmelo-Silver, C., Marathe, S., & Liu, L. (2007). Fish swim, rocks sit, and lungs breathe: expert-noviceunderstanding of complex systems. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16, 307- 331.Hui, D. (2012) Food web: Concept and applications. Nature Education Knowledge 3(12):6.Hogan, K., & Thomas, D. (2001). Cognitive comparisons of students' systems modeling in ecology. Journal ofScience Education and Technology, 10(4), 319–345. http://doi.org/10.1023/A:1012243102249Leach, J., Driver, R., Scott, P., & Wood-Robinson, C. (1996). Children's ideas about ecology 2: ideas found inchildren aged 5-16 about the cycling of matter. International Journal of Science Education, 18, 19-34.Mandinach, E. B., & Cline, H. F. (1994). Classroom dynamics: Implementing a technology-based learningenvironment. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,core ideas. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Penuel, W. R., Roschelle, J. & Shechtman, N. (2007). Designing formative assessment software with teachers:An analysis of the co-design process. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 2(1),51-74.Schwarz, C., Reiser, B., Fortus, D., Shwartz, Y., & Acher, A. (2009). Models: defining a learning progressionfor scientific modeling. Presented at the Learning Progressions in Science LeaPS Conference, IowaCity, IA. Retrieved from: https://www.sensepublishers.com/media/593-learning-progressions-inscience.pdfSlotta, J. D., Lui, M., Cober, R., Moher, T. (April, 2017). Modeling Wallcology: Technology scaffolds forbuilding, predicting and reasoning around models of simulated ecosystems. In Karan, A. (Chair),Supporting Science as a Modeling Practice in the Classroom through the Lens of NGSS. Paperpresented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association (AERA), SanAntonio, TX.Soloway, E., Krajcik, J., & Finkel, E. A. (April, 1995). The ScienceWare project: Supporting science modelingand inquiry via computational media & technology. Paper presented at the annual meeting of theAmerican Educational Research Association. San Francisco, CA. Retrieved from:http://www.uqac.ca/deptdse/3ped124/foundation/science.pdfStratford, S. J., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (1998). Secondary students' dynamic modeling processes: Analyzing,reasoning about, synthesizing, and testing models of stream ecosystems. Journal of Science Educationand Technology, 7(3), 215–234. http://doi.org/10.1023/A:1021840407112CSCL 2017 Proceedings502© ISLS