How Does Expansive Curricular Framing Support ProductiveEpistemological Framing of Computational Modeling Activities?Aditi Wagh, Department of Education, Tufts University, Aditi.wagh@tufts.eduJulia Gouvea, Department of Education, Tufts University, julia.gouvea@tufts.eduAbstract: Computational modeling can be generative for sense making of scientificphenomena. However, because models are abstractions of real world phenomena, makingconnections beyond them may not be straightforward. In this paper, we argue that expansivecurricular framing can support productive epistemological framing of modeling, and influencehow learners see their model exploration as relevant to their ongoing investigations. Wepresent an analysis of two groups of undergraduate students investigating relative fitness oflow and high mutating bacterial strains in a computational model. We demonstrate that eventhough the groups are comparable in the quality of work within the model, expansivecurricular framing impacts students’ epistemological framing of the activity and whetherstudents see ideas from the model as relevant in a broader scope of their investigations.IntroductionComputational modeling technologies provide generative contexts for sense making of scientific phenomena,enabling students to explore dynamics, and supporting reasoning about mechanisms underlying phenomena(e.g., White, 1984; Wilensky & Reisman, 2006). However, because computational models are abstractions,determining their relevance to other contexts may not be a straightforward task (Goldstone & Wilensky, 2008).This may especially be true when learners investigate pre-built models. Constructing models involves makingdecisions about abstracting aspects from real world phenomenon to represent (Wilkerson, Gravel, & Macrander,2014). However, when investigating pre-built models students may be less familiar with underlying abstractionsand need help making connections to other contexts. In this paper, we argue that expansive curricular framing(Engle, 2006) can influence whether and how learners see their modeling investigations as relevant to theirongoing inquiry. To make this claim, we present a contrasting case study (Yin, 1994) of two groups ofundergraduate students. We argue that even though both groups engage with the model in productive ways, theyframe the activity differently, and this difference in framing impacts whether and how they see ideas from themodel as relevant to their larger inquiry.Expansive framing and intercontextualityExpansive framing involves framing the boundaries of a learning context “as being wide-ranging andpermeable, increasing the number of contexts that can become intercontextually linked with them” (Engle,Nguyen, & Mendelson, 2011, p. 605). Engle and colleagues (2006; 2011) have argued that expansively framedlearning environments help learners see ideas as applicable in a wider range of contexts – creatingintercontextualities. We draw on the construct of intercontextuality to explain differences in how students saw acomputational modeling activity as connected to a broader scientific investigation.Epistemological framingFraming is an individual’s sense of “what is it that’s going on here” (Tannen, 1993). Epistemological framing isa student’s interpretation of an activity with respect to knowledge and learning (Hutchison & Hammer, 2010).For instance, students may frame science class as for learning scientific terminology or for investigating how theworld works. These different frames can impact what students do in science class, and ultimately, what theylearn. Research has found that student behaviors can provide important cues about their epistemological framing(Scherr & Hammer, 2009). However, these frames are dynamically constructed and sensitive to contextual cuessuch as teacher moves (Hutchison & Hammer, 2010) and curricular design (Hayes, Wagh & Gouvea, Inpreparation).Research goalsThis work was done as part of a design-based research (Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004) project calledHybrid Labs. The project aims to integrate physical experimentation and computational modeling for studentinvestigations of complex biological systems. In this paper, we examine factors that enable students tocontextualize and connect their model investigations to their ongoing scientific investigation.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1137© ISLSMethodsData collectionThe Hybrid Labs curriculum was designed for introductory undergraduate biology labs. Data comes from Years1 and 2 of the first lab. Lab 1 consisted of 3 3-hour long lab sessions over which students conducted experimentsand engaged in model explorations to investigate relative fitness of a low and high mutating bacterial strain. Ineach year, we collected data in two lab sections, each consisting of about 25 students. In each section, werecorded data from 3 groups: Video recordings of in-group work and Camtasia video data. We also collectedstudents’ lab reports, in which they were asked to make a claim for the question, Is it better to be a high mutatoror a low mutator?.Data analysisInitial analysis involved repeated viewing (Jordan & Henderson, 1995) of videos from Lab 1 of student groupsfrom both years. We discussed initial themes for analysis with the larger research group. We also read throughstudents’ lab reports to inspect how students referred to activities from the lab to make an argument. One themethat stood out from this initial work was that though students engaged productively with the modeling activity inboth years, fewer students drew on ideas from their model exploration in Year 1 in other parts of the lab. Thistrend was also reflected in student interviews. This led us to want to explain why this happened.We selected an exemplary group that engaged most productively in the computational modelingactivity each year. We analyzed their Camtasia videos and identified three practices that were salient instudents’ work: 1) Manipulating parameters to create conditions to produce a specific outcome or investigatinghow parameter changes would impact outcomes; 2) Attending to a specific outcome or trend in the populations;3) Justifying or accounting for an observation or prediction. We coded the transcript synced with video toidentify occurrences when student utterances reflected engagement in these practices. We also analyzed videosto investigate students’ framing - how they interpreted the purpose of the activity and where they locatedepistemic authority (Hammer, Elby, Scherr & Redish, 2005). Based on prior work (Scherr & Hammer, 2009),we identified 3 framing modes: 1) Sense making mode: Indicators included authentic engagement with themodel such that students engaged in noticing and talking about the model, often accompanied by surprise,confusion, and persistence. Students positioned themselves as agentive in the work. Students’ gaze was largelyfocused on the model in this mode; 2) Worksheet mode: Indicators included gazing down at their worksheet forextended periods of time, enacting actions for the sake of filling out the worksheet, and positioning theinstructor as being an authority of their investigation; and, 3) Hybrid mode: Indicators involved a combinationof the two that made it hard to surmise student framing. We coded videos for engagement in these frames.Finally, we analyzed lab reports (N = 3 in G1, and 4 in G2) to inspect whether and how students drew on theirmodel investigations in their discussion of results.FindingsOur argument is that intercontextuality impacts students’ epistemological framing of the activity and whetherstudents see ideas from the model as relevant in a broader scope of their investigations. We compare fouraspects of the groups’ work: 1) Practices for engaging with the model; 2) Epistemological framing of theactivity; 3) Connecting ideas within and across the lab; and, 4) Use of the model to make an argument in labreports.Groups’ practices of engaging with the modelBoth groups engaged with the model in different ways. G1 tried to create specific trends in the model, andchanged the parameters multiple times to generate them. They also frequently attended to trends in the model,and tried to explain and justify those trends. G2 asked questions about what would happen when the parametersettings were at particular points (e.g., what would happen when metabolic benefit is high and lethal is low), andthey ran six runs for each of their six questions. They ran the model for much longer than G1, and closelyattended to trends in the model. However, they did not engage in explaining trends or justifying their predictionsas frequently as G1.Table 1: Practices engaged with in the model (number of occurrences)Group 1 (Year 1)ICLS 2018 ProceedingsManipulating parameters261138Attending to21Justifying/ explaining27© ISLSGroup 2 (Year 2)6205How the groups epistemologically framed the modeling activityThough both groups engaged productively with the model, we found differences in how they framed theactivity. The groups framed their interactions with the model in different ways (See Tables 2 and 3). G1 wentback and forth between a worksheet mode and a sense-making mode. During moments of sense-making, theirconversations, gestures and affect reflected authentic engagement around their investigation. However, theyrepeatedly switched back to a worksheet mode, positioning the TA as an epistemic authority (e.g., when theynoticed a trend in their model that seemed stable, they asked the instructor if it “counted as stable”). In contrast,G2 framed their work more consistently in a sense-making mode – using the model to understand theirexperimental results.Table 2: Epistemological framing of the activity in Groups 1 and 2Group 1Group 2Worksheet mode25.87%0Sense making mode55.97%98%Hybrid mode1.15%2%Table 3: How Groups 1 and 2 framed the task of recording data from their modelsGroup 1’s Worksheet mode(S1 asks as they fill out the worksheet)S1: Do you guys write down the numbers for the pastones?S2: Uhh, I did but I don't really know why. I didn'tknow what else to write down so. If we need them,I'll, I have them if we need them.S1: (unclear) I might ask you.Group 2’s Sense-making mode(D & W are asked to share data from their model)D: Which one do you want me to put in of the three?W: Um the first one, wait not that one, yeah that one.(Scrolling through captured screenshots of themodel)D: I can put in all 3A: Yeah because I think all 3 really say a lotHow the groups made connections between the modeling activity and theexperimentOur conjecture is that these epistemological frames were cued by an expansive framing of the modeling activity.Intercontextuality provides opportunities for connecting across contexts. This conjecture is based on ouranalysis of transcripts - we identified moments when students referred to their experiments or other ideas fromclass to help make sense of the model. G2 explicitly tied observations and sense-making in the model to theirexperiment more frequently than G1 (9 times v/s once). This was evidence of intercontextuality – students sawother components of lab as relevant and applicable to ideas they were exploring in the model.In both years, the model was presented as a tool to make sense of their experimental data. However, inY1, the connections were not framed explicitly. For instance, the TA introduced the model by simply listingparameters from the model as available features to try out. As a result, the students experienced the model asisolated from their ongoing investigation, and did not tie it back to their experiment. In contrast, in Y2, the TApositioned the model as a way to make sense of experimental data: “I want you to try to model something that isrelatively close to the experiment … set up a model that gets at the question that you asked .. [and] really watchthose patterns for a while .. and think about how that might relate to some of the data that you actually saw inour experiments.” This orienting helped students view the model as a space to make sense of their experiment.Students in G2 repeatedly referenced the experiment during their model investigation, and made attempts tomap their experiment and the model.How students draw on ideas from the model in their lab reportsOf the three students in G1, only one student referenced the model in her lab report. She used her modelobservations to validate her experimental results, specifying conditions in the model that supported herexperimental results. However, she did not provide reasoning to support this claim. All students in G2 used theirmodel exploration in their discussion of the investigation. One reason for this was that in Y2, we explicitlyasked students to discuss their model explorations in their lab reports. However, students went much furtherthan simply mentioning the model exploration. In lab reports, we found students meaningfully mappingconditions in the simulation with experimental conditions, drawing out similarities and contrasts between theICLS 2018 Proceedings1139© ISLStwo as mechanisms to explain their observations in each. We also found students in G2 comparing temporalaspects of the simulation and the experiment: Describing how the experiment had been conducted over only afew generations relative to the number of generations that had played out in the simulation. This makes sensegiven that G2 ran their model for much longer periods of time than G1, which made the temporal dynamics overtime salient to them.DiscussionThis work calls attention to the importance of fostering intercontextuality between modeling activities and othercomponents of student inquiry. In our data, both groups engaged in productive practices with the model - theymanipulated parameters, attended to and explained how parameter changes impacted survival of the two strains.One might expect that engaging productively with the model itself would help students see the relevance ofideas beyond the model. However, these findings suggested that this was not the case. The model needed to beframed expansively more explicitly for students to be able to see relevance of ideas beyond the model. We triedto create intercontextuality in a few different ways: One, as previously mentioned, the TA explicitly framed themodeling activity as being intended for students to make sense of their experiments. Second, in Y2, weencouraged students to explore the model multiple times through the lab. Students also explored the model as aspace for experimental design. The expansive framing created supported students in connecting their workoutside the model into their model investigations as well as connect ideas from their model to the larger inquiry.ReferencesCollins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design Research: Theoretical and Methodological Issues. TheJournal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15–42. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327809jls1301Engle, R. A. (2006). Framing Interactions to Foster Generative Learning: A Situative Explanation of Transfer ina Community of Learners Classroom. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(4), 451–498.Engle, R. A., Nguyen, P. D., & Mendelson, A. (2011). The influence of framing on transfer: initial evidencefrom a tutoring experiment. Instructional Science, 39(5), 603–628.Goldstone, R., & Wilensky, U. (2008). Promoting transfer by grounding complex systems principles. TheJournal of Learning Sciences, 17(4), 465–516.Hayes, R., Wagh, A., & Gouvea, J. (In preparation). Reproducing or Investigating: Examining stability instudent framings of activity, epistemology, and affect in a laboratory.Hutchison, P., & Hammer, D. (2010). Attending to student epistemological framing in a science classroom.Science Education, 94(3), 506–524. https://doi.org/10.1002/sce.20373Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction Analysis: Foundations and Practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39–103. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327809jls0401_2Scherr, R. E., & Hammer, D. (2009). Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing: Examples fromCollaborative Active-Learning Activities in Physics. Cognition and Instruction, 27(2), 147–174.https://doi.org/10.1080/07370000902797379Tannen, D. (1993). Framing in Discourse. Oxford University Press.White, B. Y. (1984). Designing Computer Games to Help Physics Students Understand Newton’s Laws ofMotion. Cognition and Instruction, 1(1), 69–108. https://doi.org/10.2307/3233521Wilensky, U., & Reisman, K. (2006). Thinking like a wolf, a sheep, or a firefly: Learning biology throughconstructing and testing computational theories- An embodied modeling approach. Cognition andInstruction, 24(2), 171–209.Wilkerson, M. H., Gravel, B. E., & Macrander, C. A. (2014). Exploring Shifts in Middle School Learners’Modeling Activity While Generating Drawings, Animations, and Computational Simulations ofMolecular Diffusion. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 24(2–3), 396–415.https://doi.org/10.1007/s10956-014-9497-5ICLS 2018 Proceedings1140© ISLS