Learning to Think Computationally: ComparativeOutcomes of a Robotics Workshop for GirlsFlorence R. Sullivan, Kevin Keith, Ali Söken, and Duy Phamflorence@umass.edu, pkkeith@umass.edu, asoken@umass.edu, dpham@umass.eduUniversity of Massachusetts, AmherstAbstract: This paper reports quantitative results derived from a larger exploratory case studydevoted to examining the development of computational thinking (CT) in students during aone-day, all-girl robotics workshop. Here we report on the relationship of CT conversations toprogramming outcomes. Results indicate that groups who engaged in more frequentalgorithmic thinking and debugging conversations attempted more difficult missions thanthose who engaged in these conversations less frequently.Dearth of women in computer scienceDue to societal bias, girls and women have less exposure, access, and experience with important domains oflearning, such as computer science (Cheryan, Ziegler, Montoya, & Jiang, 2017). Therefore, their entrance intothese fields is hindered. Indeed, the lack of women entering the field of CS in college and as a career is a wellknown phenomenon (National Science Foundation, 2015). Providing girls with opportunities to achievepersonal accomplishments in the area of computer science is an important means of supporting their entranceinto the field. Moreover, developing a clear understanding of how girls learn in computer science based learningenvironments, such as robotics, is a key aspect of creating meaningful opportunities for them. Here we examinegirls’ computational thinking as they work in collaborative groups to solve robotics missions in the context of aone-day introduction to the FIRST LEGO League ® workshop. Our overarching research goal in this work is toidentify which aspects of computational thinking novice girl programmers engage with as they “do” roboticsand examine how these ideas develop, collaboratively, over time.Computational thinking and doing with roboticsRobotics kits are computational manipulatives that enable student engagement in computational thinking anddoing (Sullivan & Heffernan, 2016). Students working with robotics, typically enact a troubleshooting cycle(TSC) that consists of designing, programming, testing, and debugging their creations (Sullivan, 2011).Engagement in this TSC is the essence of computational thinking and doing for students and includes thecreation of algorithms and systems analysis (Sullivan, 2008).MethodsResearch design, participants, and data collectionThis observational case study took place at a one-day, all-girl introduction to robotics event called “GirlsConnect.” The workshop featured the FLL’s 2011 challenge: “Food Factor.” This challenge features 11missions of varying degrees of difficulty. The students were allowed to select the mission(s) they wished tosolve. The participants in this study included 17 girls, ages 8-13 (M = 11.725) who attended 5 different schoolsin New England. The students were divided into six teams (five teams of 3 and one team of 2); girls from thesame schools were on the same team and wore t-shirts of the same color. We collected audio and video data atthe one-day event. Each group of girls had their own worktable, a LEGO Mindstorms EV3 robotics kit and alaptop computer. Two challenge arenas were set up in the room so that the girls could test their solutions. Wecreated a video and audio recording of each group’s activity and discussion for the day as they moved betweentheir individual worktables and the challenge arenas. We also ran a screen capture program on each groups’laptop. In this way, we collected all of the robotics programming activity engaged in by each group. This dataincludes the final robotics program(s) created by each group.Data analysisThis study features three units of analysis, including the TSCs the students enacted, the utterances that werespoken during each TSC, and the final programs created by each group. We first segmented the data into TSCs,we then coded student talk in each TSC using a CT coding scheme derived from our own prior research(Sullivan, 2008; Sullivan, 2011) and from definitions of computational thinking created by other researchers asICLS 2018 Proceedings1503© ISLSsummarized in Grover and Pea (2013). Simple interrater reliability was calculated at 94% between two raters.Next we developed a rubric to score student programs. This rubric is based on the difficulty of the mission taskspresented on the FLL challenge arena. Once we had segmented, coded, and scored the data, we tabulated theinstances of the CT codes in each TSC for each group. In the next step, we focused on examining therelationship between the frequency of the discussions that are the most relevant to computational thinking andthe overall difficulty scores for the groups.Results and discussionOur results are encapsulate in this scatter plot, which visualizes the relationship of student scores on their finalprograms (y-axis) and the amount and type of CT talk each group engaged in during each TSC (x-axis). Thescatter plot is presented in Figure 1.Figure 1. Scatter Plots for the Most Frequent CT Codes and Program ScoresThe scatter plot indicates that the dark blue team, who had the highest programming score, also had thehighest mean for the analysis and algorithmic thinking variable codes. They also had the second highest meansfor both algorithmic thinking operation and debugging operation codes. The dark blue team had the lowest meanrelated to discussion of the physical design of the robotic device. We also notice that the dark blue groupdiscussed variables at a higher level than operations, in terms of algorithmic thinking. We argue this issignificant, as discussion of the variables indicates increasing conceptual understanding of the programmingblock being used. Our next steps with this data set is to examine the nature of the actual conversations of eachgroup to identify the qualities of the conversations that support conceptual understanding.ReferencesCheryan, S., Ziegler, S.A., Montoya, A.K., & Jiang, L. (2017). Why are some STEM fields more genderbalanced than others? Psychological Bulletin, 143(1), 1-35. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/bul0000052.Grover, S. & Pea, R. (2013). Computational thinking in K-12: A review of the state of the field. EducationalResearcher, 42(38), 38-43, DOI: 10.3102/0013189X12463051.National Science Foundation, (2015). Women, minorities and persons with disabilities in science andengineering 2015. National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics. Retrieved fromhttp://www.nsf.gov/statistics/wmpd/Sullivan, F.R. (2008). Robotics and science literacy: Thinking skills, science process skills, and systemsunderstanding. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 45(3), 373-394.Sullivan, F.R. (2011). Serious and playful inquiry: Epistemological aspects of collaborative creativity. Journalof Educational Technology and Society, 14(1), 55-65.Sullivan, F.R., & Heffernan, J. (2016). Robotic construction kits as computational manipulatives for learning inthe STEM disciplines. Journal of Research in Technology Education, 49(2) 105-128. doi:10.1080/15391523.2016.1146563AcknowledgementsThe research reported in this manuscript was supported by a grant from the National Science FoundationDRL#1252350. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material arethose of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1504© ISLS