The Interaction of the Need for Cognitive Closure With Implicit andExplicit Guidance in Wiki-Based LearningSven Heimbuch and Daniel Bodemer,sven.heimbuch@uni-due.de, bodemer@uni-due.deUniversity of Duisburg-Essen, GermanyAbstract: One purpose of wikis is the collaborative generation of content. During generationprocesses, controversies about content can emerge that authors might elaborate on the article'stalk page. Research suggests that controversies based on opposing points of view andcontradictory evidence can be fruitful to trigger individual elaboration processes. However,research also showed that many wikis are not necessarily suited to highlight relevant discussioncontents and thus users could need guidance as support. In an experimental study (N = 181) onwiki talk pages, we investigated two scaffolding measures in conjunction with the Need forCognitive Closure: (1) visual markers to highlight controversy status (implicit) and (2) acollaboration script that directs users towards discussions (explicit). The results show that bothguidance types in interaction with the Need for Cognitive Closure can affect learning outcomes.IntroductionRegarding the effects of modified wikis for learning activities, studies on implicit and explicit guidance measureshave shown that they can trigger intended behaviours. Implicit guidance with controversy awareness highlightscan lead to a more focused selection of relevant content-related topics and explicit guidance with a discussioncentric collaboration script can lead to more meaningful a-priori discussion of proposed article changes(Heimbuch & Bodemer, 2017). Such cognitive group awareness tools as implicit guidance are focused ongathering and visualising knowledge-related contextual cues and have been successfully implemented as helpfulaids to structure collaborative learning processes (Bodemer & Dehler, 2011). Research has also proposedalternative measures such as explicit guidance to incorporate in wiki-based learning environments to improve theoverall quality of knowledge artefacts and for better coordination processes of students. The implementation ofone possible measure for explicit guidance are collaboration scripts where the activities of writers and editorswithin a social system are coordinated and optimised. A collaboration script is essentially a set of instructions thatspecifies the group formation, modes of interaction and task management between collaboration partners(Dillenbourg, 2002). Research has also shown that individual differences can have an impact on learning-relatedprocesses and outcomes. There are indications that the effort a learner is willing to invest in searching for solutionsto a problem can be influenced by the individual’s Need for Cognitive Closure (NCC) (Webster & Kruglanski,1994). This cognitive construct is a motivational continuum between the need to get a clear answer in anambiguous situation and the avoidance of quick and unambiguous answers. Various empirical results anddiscussions illustrate that it can be regarded as a relevant construct in knowledge creation processes. Althoughthere are close ties between the Need for Cognitive Closure and inter-individual differences in learning andknowledge construction, there are only few studies in technology-enhanced learning addressing this construct. Tofurther support and extend on earlier findings, we wanted to compare the effects of one implicit and one explicitguidance measure for wiki environments in interaction with the individual NCC of learners.MethodsWe used an experimentally controlled laboratory setting with individual participants (N = 181) in a betweensubjects design to investigate the interplay between different guidance types and NCC in wiki-based learning. Thefirst independent factor was the type of talk page guidance (implicit vs. explicit). The second factor of interestwas the individual NCC, which we factorised in two levels (low vs. high). According to the original literature onthe scale 16-NCCS that we used in this study, post-hoc median splits were applied for classifying low NCC andhigh NCC participants (Schlink & Walther, 2007). As main dependent variables, we measured individual learningoutcome, metrics of article and discussion contributions, and process log data. Participants performed theexperiment's stages individually in their own wiki instance. We surveyed their interest in and prior knowledge ofthe study's subject matter (forms of energy). Both groups had the same task of contributing to a Wikipedia-likebase article about different forms of energy and taking part in up to three of the corresponding discussions.Participants received the information that the discussions hold enough arguments and evidence to enrich theoriginal article, since we did not give any other added material about the subject matter elsewhere. We gave nofurther instructions on how to start their wiki task (e.g., reading the article or any discussion first) or what kind ofICLS 2018 Proceedings1389© ISLSreply they should make to a self-selected discussion. After the wiki contribution phase, participants were asked tofill out several questionnaires to some of the study’s dependant variables.ResultsIn the knowledge test, participants in the implicit controversy highlight group achieved an average score of M =15.84 (SD = 3.43) in comparison to M = 15.47 (SD = 3.60) in the explicit scripting group. A mean test scoredifference between both guidance groups of 0.37 points is equivalent to zero in a 90% CI [-0.50, 1.23] and notsignificantly different from zero in a 95% CI [-0.66, 1.40]. This result gives evidence that no group outperformsthe other per se. In the knowledge test, low Need for Cognitive Closure participants scored on average M = 16.05(SD = 3.29) in comparison to an average score of M = 15.24 (SD = 3.70) of high Need for Cognitive Closureparticipants. A mean test score difference between both guidance groups of 0.82 points is equivalent to zero in a90% CI [-0.04, 1.68] and not significantly different from zero in a 95% CI [-0.21, 1.85]. This result gives furtherevidence for equivalence in learning outcomes when only one factor is analysed in isolation. Regarding thepotential effects of the guidance type and the NCC on the learning outcome, with a 2x2 ANCOVA a small tomoderate effect was found, F(2, 175) = 5.30, p = .023, η² p = .03. Using the full Need for Cognitive Closure dataspectrum with a hierarchical linear regression model, the effect of the interaction itself was weakened, b = -0.03(SE = 0.05), t(176) = -0.67, p = .502 within a moderate total effect model, F(4, 176) = 3.20, p = .014, R² = .07.DiscussionIn earlier wiki-related research individual cognitive differences of learning-related variables were often measuredonly as secondary variables (Notari, Reynolds, Chu, & Honegger, 2016). Therefore, we wanted to focus on oneof these constructs that had been previously found as potentially relevant for learning scenarios with ambiguousinformation, namely the Need for Cognitive Closure. At first, we analysed the equivalence of implicit and explicitguidance in the overall sample, since we had no reason to believe that one measure alone should outperform theother. The results show that participants do not differ between the kinds of guidance in the test scores.Additionally, there were no meaningful differences between participants in the two categorised levels of theirNeed for Cognitive Closure on any of the measured process variables or in the learning outcome. When analysingthe learning outcome, the interaction of guidance type and Need for Cognitive Closure was following an expectedpattern. Participants with a high Need for Cognitive Closure scored higher in the knowledge test when workingin a wiki enriched with implicit guidance rather than explicit guidance. The pattern reversed for low Need forCognitive Closure participants. As persons with a high Need for Cognitive Closure have the desire to resolveambiguity as quickly as possible and care less for the best possible solution they tend to rely on simpler heuristicsto select and process information (Webster & Kruglanski, 1994). Implicit guidance with our visual highlights forcontroversy awareness gives them exactly this, a quick possibility to assess and to decide how to proceed further.In contrast to that, persons with a low Need for Cognitive Closure prefer to elaborate in discussions and resolveambiguity by finding better solutions than just the quickest (Dreu, Koole, & Oldersma, 1999). Thus, a moreexplicit guidance like the used discussion-centric script that tries to motivate the participation in discussion isbetter suited for these persons.ReferencesBodemer, D., & Dehler, J. (2011). Group awareness in CSCL environments. Computers in Human Behavior,27(3), 1043–1045. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2010.07.014Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructionaldesign. Three Worlds of CSCL. Can We Support CSCL?, 61–91.Dreu, C. K. W. de, Koole, S. L., & Oldersma, F. L. (1999). On the Seizing and Freezing of Negotiator Inferences:Need for Cognitive Closure Moderates the Use of Heuristics in Negotiation. Personality and SocialPsychology Bulletin, 25(3), 348–362. https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167299025003007Heimbuch, S., & Bodemer, D. (2017). Controversy awareness on evidence-led discussions as guidance forstudents in wiki-based learning. The Internet and Higher Education, 33(2017), 1–14.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iheduc.2016.12.001Notari, M., Reynolds, R. B., Chu, S., & Honegger, B. D. (2016). The wiki way of learning: creating learningexperiences using collaborative web pages.Schlink, S., & Walther, E. (2007). Kurz und gut: Eine deutsche Kurzskala zur Erfassung des Bedürfnisses nachkognitiverGeschlossenheit.ZeitschriftFürSozialpsychologie,38(3),153–161.https://doi.org/10.1024/0044-3514.38.3.153Webster, D. M., & Kruglanski, A. W. (1994). Individual differences in Need for Cognitive Closure. Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology, 67(6), 1049–1062. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.67.6.1049ICLS 2018 Proceedings1390© ISLS