LGBT+ in STEM: The Transgender ExperienceVanessa S Webb, Northern Virginia Community College, vasowe13@gmail.comApriel K Hodari, Eureka Scientific, Inc, akhodari@gmail.comAngela Johnson, St. Mary’s College of Maryland, acjohson@smcm.eduElizabeth Mulvey, St. Mary’s College of Maryland, eamulvey@smcm.eduRose Young, St. Mary’s College of Maryland, rnyoung@smcm.eduAbstract: It has been widely reported that youth are more accepting of LGBT+ identities, andan increasing number of colleges and universities allow students to use gender-neutralpronouns. Yet, research on how inclusive STEM educational cultures are of sexual identityand gender fluidity is meager. In this poster, we present interview results on the livedexperiences of transgender undergraduates in physics, mathematics, and computer science atinstitutions that have achieved inclusion by gender and race.According to a Human Rights Campaign survey, 75 percent of LGBT+ youth report that most of their peershave no problem with their LGBT+ identity, yet 4 in 10 say the community in which they live is not accepting(HRC, 2012). Yet research in LGBT+ experiences across Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics(STEM) disciplines describes of the lack of belonging (The American Physical Society (APS), 2016; Stout andWright, 2016); which also characterizes the experience of women of color in these fields (Johnson et al, 2017;Leslie et al, 2015; Moss-Racusin et al, 2012; Ong, Smith, and Ko, 2017). In this poster, we explore theexperiences undergraduate trans students have in physics, mathematics and computer science, and whetherinstitutions that are more inclusive for women of color in these disciplines are also inclusive for trans students.Theoretical frameworkTo frame our research, we apply Patricia Hill Collins’ Domains of Power, comprising the interpersonal, thecultural, the disciplinary and the cultural (Collins, 2009). In comparison to one co-author’s previous writing onscience identity for women of color in STEM (Carlone and Johnson, 2007; Johnson et al, 2011), Collins’ modelframes these experiences as setting features rather than internal individual experiences (Johnson, in preparation).In the interpersonal domain, where power is expressed between individuals, transgender physicistsfeel exclusion and isolation, as well as pressures to perform heteronormativity (APS, 2016). This aligns withfindings for women of color whose interactions with peers and professors were characterized, “regardless oftheir actual abilities as measured by exam performances, grade point averages, and research mentor evaluations,… perceived nearly consistent messages--with some rare exceptions--that because they lack the standardappearance of a scientist, they also lack the intellectual competence associated with such an appearance” (Ong,2005). This struggle with whether their bodies fit in STEM, and resultant performative impacts, is common tothe experiences of women of color and trans students.In the cultural domain, “where a group’s values are conveyed (or contested),” power determines whatit means to be a good scientist. Such beliefs lead to differential outcomes for job applicants who vary only bytheir identities (Moss-Racusin et al, 2012), with decisions interpreted as individual choices rather than culturalinfluences. Such beliefs are reified into rules and policy in the disciplinary domain, or when power isdistributed via large social structures, like state and federal law, or the unintended consequences of clashingpractices in the structural domain, we see “uneven”, “lacking”, or “discriminatory” policies, including thoseinvolving health care and bathroom access (Ackerman et al, 2012).When analysed from this framework, the failure of these marginalized students to thrive rests not onlack of interest or ability, but on the need to face extra obstacles above and beyond the challenges all studentsface due to the difficulties of the science itself.Data and methodsThe research featured in this poster is part of a project entitled Centering Women of Color in STEM:Identifying and Scaling Up What Helps Women of Color Thrive (CWCS), which explores physics,mathematics and computer science educational settings to find the features that allow all kinds of students tothrive and learn, despite how profoundly non-representative these disciplines are for most women of color. Ourinterdisciplinary team is made up of a physicist, an anthropologist, 2 physics undergraduates, and a chemistryundergraduate.CWCS applies the broad definition of gender articulated by the Athena SWAN criteria, which includesa consideration of transgender identity. To identify what the departments under study do to create environmentsICLS 2018 Proceedings1665© ISLSin which women of color thrive, we are conducting case studies that comprise student and staff interviews,observations of classrooms, and ethnographic field notes (e.g., community spaces, meetings, conferences,collaborative spaces). In additional to making a specific appeal to trans students in each department we arestudying, we are working to build relationships with the campus organizations that support trans students. Ourgoal is to create as full a picture of the trans experience in context as possible.Interviews are semi-structured, open-ended, hourlong, audio-recorded and transcribed. Participantswere asked a broad set of questions about their academic background and interests, a challenging time and howthey overcame it, factors that promote their success, advice for institutions, and advice for people likethemselves. CWCS uses narrative analysis for coding and analysis, combining systematic methods and multipleresearchers, to triangulate our understandings of the lived experiences of transgender students.FindingsAt ICLS 2018, we will present findings from our interviews with transgender undergraduates at three verydifferent institutions (a small liberal arts college, a large research university, and an enormous open-enrollmentuniversity), whose commonality is that they have created environments in which women of color thrive inphysics, mathematics, and computer science.Our findings will be presented in the actual voices of our interview participants, with the expectationsthat poster visitors will have the opportunity to consider how they can increase inclusion for transgender STEMstudents at their home institutions. These conversations will identify ways in which physics, mathematics, andcomputer science settings can be extended to a wider diversity of learners.ReferencesAckerman, N, Atherton, T, Deconinck, W, Falk, M, Garmon, S, Henry, E, and Long, E. (2012). Gender andSexual Diversity Issues in Physics: The Audience Speaks. arXiv: 1206.4112.APS. (2016). LGBT Climate in Physics: Building an Inclusive Community. College Park: American PhysicalSociety.Carlone, H. and Johnson, A. (2007). Understanding the science experiences of successful women of color:Science identity as an analytic lens. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 44(8), 1187-1218.Collins, P H. (2009). Another Kind of Public Education: Race, Schools, the Media, and DemocraticPossibilities: Beacon Press.Human Rights Campaign. (2012). Growing Up LGBT in America: HRC Youth Survey Report: Key Findings.Washington, DC: Human Rights Campaign.Johnson, A. C. (In preparation).Johnson, A, Ong, M, Ko, L, Smith, J, and Hodari, A. (2017). Common challenges faced by women of color inphysics, and actions faculty can take to minimize those challenges. The Physics Teacher, 55, 356-360.Johnson, A, Brown, J, Carlone, H, and Cuevas, A. (2011). Authoring identity amidst the treacherous terrain ofscience: A multiracial feminist examination of the journeys of three women of color in science. Journalof Research in Science Teaching, 48(4), 339-366.Leslie, S-J, Cimpian, A, Meyer, M, and Freeland, E. (2015). Expectations of brilliance underlie genderdistributions across academic disciplines. Science, 347(6219), 262-265.Moss-Racusin, CA, Dovidio, JF, Brescoll, VL, Graham, MJ, and Handelsman, J. (2012). Science faculty’ssubtle gender biases favor male students. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(41),16474-16479.Ong, M. (2005). Body projects of young women of color in physics: Intersections of gender, race, and science.Social problems, 52(4), 593-617.Ong, M, Smith, J, and Ko, L. (2017). Counterspaces for women of color in STEM higher education: Marginaland central spaces for persistence and success. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 54, 1-40.Stout, J. G., & Wright, H. M. (2016, May/June). Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer Students'Sense of Belonging in Computing. Computing in Science & Engineering, pp. 24-30.AcknowledgementsThis material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation, Grant No. DUE-1712531; as wellas the Fulbright Scholars Program. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations are those ofthe authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation, Fulbright United StatesUnited Kingdom Educational Commission or the Council for International Exchange of Scholars.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1666© ISLS