Real-Time Visualization of Student Activities to Support ClassroomOrchestrationMike Tissenbaum (co-chair), University of Wisconsin-Madison, miketissenbaum@gmail.comCamillia Matuk (co-chair), New York University, cmatuk@nyu.eduMatthew Berland, University of Wisconsin-Madison, mberland@wisc.eduLeilah Lyons, University of Illinois, Chicago/New York Hall of Science, llyons@uic.eduFelipe Cocco, New York University, fc1167@nyu.eduMarcia Linn, University of California, Berkeley, mclinn@berkeley.eduJan L. Plass, CREATE, New York University, jan.plass@nyu.eduNik Hajny, CREATE, New York University, hajny@nyu.eduAl Olsen, CREATE, New York University, al.olsen@nyu.eduBeat Schwendimann, École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne, beat.schwendimann@epfl.chMina Shirvani Boroujeni, École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne, mina.shirvaniboroujeni@epfl.chJames D. Slotta, Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, University of Toronto, jslotta@gmail.comJonathan Vitale, University of California, Berkeley, jonvitale@berkeley.eduLibby Gerard, University of California, Berkeley, libbygerard@berkeley.eduPierre Dillenbourg (discussant), École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne, pierre.dillenbourg@epfl.chAbstract: Data logged within technology-based learning environments have the potential tosupport instructors’ orchestration of learner activities. Whereas many learning environmentsnow feature student and teacher dashboards, which promote reflection on activities after thefact, the affordances of displaying these data in real time is only beginning to be explored. Tobe useful, however, these data must be made accessible and actionable. This interactivedemonstration will showcase designs for technologies that visualize student activities in realtime during technology-enhanced activities, with the aim of supporting instructors’orchestration. Together, they projects from various contexts with similar goals, it highlightscommon challenges, issues, and strategies with regard to the design and implementation of thesetools.Keywords: classroom orchestration, design, information visualization, real-time data, teachers,technologyIntroductionThe trend toward technology-enhanced, open-ended inquiry-based curricula (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006; Engle& Conant, 2002; Slotta & Linn, 2009) is placing a higher orchestrational load on teachers (Dillenbourg 2012;Tissenbaum & Slotta, 2015a). As students engage in more self-paced, choice-driven, and collaborative learningenvironments, the task of guiding student progress grows more complex. While telemetry data―that is,measurements captured and displayed for the purposes of monitoring―are proving advantageous for research intostudent learning (Baker & Siemens, 2014), solutions for harnessing this data as a tool for teachers have only begunto be explored. In spaces where learners’ knowledge evolves at different paces and across multiple trajectories,teachers are faced with such decisions as when, who, and how to help (Tissenbaum & Slotta, 2015b); how to pacewhole class and individual progress (Nussbaum, Alvarez, McFarlane et al., 2009; Roschelle, Rafanan, Estrella etal., 2010); how to distribute materials (Simon et al., 2004); and how to organize and manage the social structuresamong students across online and face-to-face settings (Dimitriadis, 2012). This orchestration of classroomactivities (Dillenbourg, Jarvella, Fischer, 2009) has been highlighted as a major research design challenge withinthe learning sciences community (STELLAR, 2011).In response, there has been increased interest in the affordances of technology-enhanced environmentsto support learning activities in real-time through automated scoring and guidance, real-time mining of telemetrydata, and adaptive feedback (VanLehn, 2011; Berland, Davis & Smith, 2015; Leacock & Chodorow, 2003). Whilethese technological solutions can reduce teachers’ orchestrational load, it is important to ensure that teacherscontinue to have active roles as conductors of classroom activities rather than as “guides-by-the-side” (Koller etal, 2011; Roschelle & Pea, 2002). To this end, we investigate technologies that can provide teachers with morecontrol over class progression and actionable real-time insight into the state of knowledge at the individual, group,and whole class levels. Generally termed orchestrable or orchestable technologies (Tchounikine, 2013), theseICLS 2016 Proceedings1120© ISLStools provide teachers with specific insight into the state of the class and provide and an added layer of flexibilityin how classroom activities unfold. An important feature of such technologies is that they do not require theteacher to take action, nor does the system itself take action, rather they give the teacher better information to helphim or her make decisions (Tissenbaum, 2014). These technologies take on many forms, including tablet-baseddashboards, ambient displays, and other similar aggregated visualizations.While these technologies are growing in popularity, the various ways they have been implemented anda thoughtful comparison of their relative successes (and where they have fallen short) has not been presented in aunified way. To address this need within the learning sciences community, this symposium brings together fiveprojects that are investigating the role that orchestrational technologies can play in giving real-time classroomsupport. During the symposium, participants will discuss the curricular context in which it is situated, theorchestrational needs they aimed to address, and the successes and shortcomings of their implementation.ObjectivesTogether, these contributions aim to start conversations about issues involved in designing and implementingthese systems: What data should be captured, and who should make this decision (Matuk, Cocco & Linn;Tissenbaum, Berland & Lyons)? What activities should these data support (Schwendimann; Tissenbaum &Slotta)? How should these technologies be integrated into teachers’ practices (Matuk, Cocco & Linn; Vitale,Gerard & Linn)? How should these data be visualized (all)? These works also investigate affordances oftechnology and information visualization for supporting sociality, collaboration, decision-making, and inference.This symposium will create opportunities to examine commonalities and divergences in strategies, theoreticalframeworks, and pedagogical goals of efforts to harness data in support of in-the-moment teaching. It will fueldiscussions among the Learning Sciences community of concrete solutions to the problem and advantage of datain education.Contexts, settings, and fociThe contributions represent different pedagogical contexts, including game-based learning (Plass), workplacetraining (Schwendimann & Boroujeni), and science inquiry (Matuk, Cocco & Linn; Tissenbaum & Slotta; Vitale,Linn & Gerard). They also cross physical settings, from formal (e.g., K-12 classrooms) to informal spaces (e.g.,workplaces and museums). The foci of contributions range from understanding how such tools can support theseamless transition of learners’ activities between learning settings; to justifying design decisions and exploringassociated student learning gains; to investigating how technology can alert teachers and/or mentors of criticalmoments for intervention. All contributions place an emphasis on teacher-centered design, valuing teachers’existing practices, and investigating ways technology can enhance those practices.Session formatTo promote active and productive discussion, the format of this symposium will be an interactive demonstration.Following brief teaser presentations on each project, the audience will be invited to explore stations at whichpresenters will have set up demonstrations of their technologies. They will have a chance to explore and critiquethese designs in terms of their value for orchestrating learning activities. During the final portion of the session,we will return to a whole group format. Our discussant will offer insights, and the audience will be invited to askquestions, and to contribute reflections on their own and the presenters’ work.Designing a real-time intelligent support for museum interpretersMike Tissenbaum, Matthew Berland, and Leilah LyonsWith the increasing inclusion of technology rich interactive and immersive exhibits in museums there is a growingchallenge to supporting docents in knowing when participants are struggling at an exhibit and if they are close to"giving up." This is especially true in exhibits where multiple participants can engage at the same time and canenter or exit the exhibit within the flow of activities (rather than a simulation or activity having clear start and endpoints).In response to the challenge of supporting museum docents within open-ended museum exhibits, wehave developed a tablet application for an interactive tabletop exhibit (called Oztoc) at the New York Hall ofScience (Lyons et al., 2015). The tablet application (Figure 1) collects the real-time logs of participants' actions,and based on their emergent patterns, alerts the docent when a participant is engaged in "unproductiveperseverance" (continuing to repeat the same pattern over and over) or is close to a "frustration point" (i.e., aboutto give up). In order to recognize which patterns were most indicative of participants engaging in either condition,ICLS 2016 Proceedings1121© ISLSwe used a combination of grounded theory stemming from video observations of participants engaged around thetable and sequential data mining (an educational data mining technique that highlights underlying patterns incomplex data sets).As part of this symposium, we will show how patterns for intervention are identified and selected,museums docents' feedback on the use of the tablet, and an analysis of data from a live museum context. We willalso make the tablet application and source available for those interested.Figure 1. Oztoc real-time docent tablet application screen.A teacher-centered approach to designing a real-time display of classroomactivityCamillia Matuk, Felipe Cocco, and Marcia LinnOnline learning platforms, such as the Web-based Inquiry Science Environment (WISE, wise.berkeley.edu), areevolving to capture nuanced pictures of the processes, in addition to the outcomes, of student learning. As such,they make it possible for teachers to quickly ascertain patterns in students’ thinking, and to devise more timelyand targeted guidance. However, many questions remain about how to best make this information accessible anduseful to teachers, as well as about how to integrate the resulting tool into teachers’ existing practices.We describe the design of a real-time summary report that displays students’ progress based on datalogged by WISE (Figure 2). Information boxes display averages of such information as the time spent on a stepin a unit, the number of visits to each step, and the number of revisions per step. These boxes include a snapshotof ranked data (e.g., a list of the top three steps on which the most time was spent), which on clicking, lead toexplorable visualizations of whole class data. With this information, teachers can streamline instruction, promotestudent reflection and motivation, identify students in need of help, identify areas in the unit for improvement,and manage students’ progress (Matuk et al., 2016).Audience members will be invited to explore a live summary report and associated data displays. Wewill discuss how, through classroom observations, teacher interviews, and participatory design workshops, wecome to determine and refine visualizations appropriate for their anticipated functions. Building on prior work,which reveals which logged data teachers prioritize for which decisions (Matuk et al., 2015, 2016), we discussour explorations into the display of new information, with the aim of supporting evidence-based instructionranging from planning logistics (e.g., how to pace progress given the steps students may have skipped); toselecting guidance strategies (e.g., what feedback is most effective based on students’ improvement throughrevision); allowing teachers to draw on archived data from their own and others’ past curriculum implementationsto inform current implementations; and making correlations among available data to answer their own questionsabout student learning.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1122© ISLSFigure 2. WISE’s classroom summary report.Real-time visualization of student activities during learning with simulationsand games in the Digital Reference, Experiment, and Assessment Manager(DREAM)Jan L. Plass, Nik Hajny, and Al OlsenThis demonstration will show how we present real-time information of student activities during learning withsimulations and games to instructors. In order for real-time information to be useful for classroom orchestration,it needs to be current yet not updated too frequently; aggregated enough to be easily comprehended, yet detailedenough to be informative; and actionable without being too prescriptive.Based on our previous work investigating how teachers use games as tools for formative assessment inthe classroom (Fishman, Snider, Riconscente, Tsai, & Plass, 2015), we are designing a visual dashboard forsimulations and games in our Digital Reference, Experiment, and Assessment Manager (DREAM) platform thatmakes key information available to instructors in ways that meet the above requirements. Based on this research,this dashboard (1) links the game’s incentive structure (points, scores, stars) to learning outcomes, (2) provideslearning progress for either individual students or groups of students, (3) incorporates outcomes from other, relatedactivities students performed concurrently or in the past, and (4) allows teacher to configure the display of theinformation to meet their needs (Figure 3). In particular, teachers are able to switch among views with differentlevels of granularities of the data. This could be as coarse as visualizations of the overall progress of the class onspecific learning objectives or standards, or more detailed showing class progress on specific sub-standards. Othervisualizations show the overall class progress on performing a specific task or activity, progress of an individualon performing this activity and their comparison to the class average, or specific information of individual ingame events and student responses. Figure 3 shows the top level page from which this information will beaccessible.Figure 3. The DREAM dashboard.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1123© ISLSAt the symposium we will discuss how our research with teachers using games for formative assessmentinformed our design of the DREAM dashboard and will show how instructors can use the different views to informtheir decision-making in class.REALTO teacher dashboard to support the integration of school andworkplace experiencesBeat Schwendimann and Mina Shirvani BoroujeniLearners moving between different contexts, such as school and workplace, often struggle to integrate differentlearning experiences. As a result of the separation of different learning contexts, knowledge is often situated inone of these contexts and does not get used in others. The multi-context approach often leads to disconnected,inert, and fragmented knowledge that cannot be applied to solve problems. Our pedagogical model(Schwendimann et al., 2015) builds on the idea of capturing learning experiences to make them available fororchestrated reflection activities at a later time. The REALTO platform is being developed to support learners tocapture, annotate, and share their rich experiences through different media (text, audio, photos, and videos)through mobile and desktop devices. REALTO aims to be a social learning space for sharing experiences acrossvarious learning spaces by connecting learners and teachers. Teachers can build on these captured experiences tointegrate knowledge across context contexts by orchestrating different classroom activities. Two differentelements of REALTO support teachers’ classroom orchestration. First, interactive learning analytics dashboardsallow teachers to monitor students’ activities and identify patterns (Figure 4). Teachers can distinguish differentengagement levels by tracking posts, comments, tags, and annotations. These indicators allow tracking studentactivities inside and outside of the classroom in real-time. Second, the REALTO notification system informsteachers (and learners) of new submissions, late submissions, and recent social annotations. Teachers can set upand track activities with deadlines. Research and development of REALTO aims to provide teachers with tools toorchestrate blended activities that support the integration of learning experiences from different contexts.REALTO is currently being used in several schools in a co-design process involving teachers, learners, andresearchers.As part of this symposium we will present audience members with samples of data captured within theREALTO platform to show how REALTO: 1) uses learning analytics to generate interactive visualizations thatsupport teachers to monitor the class; and 2) can help teachers identify student engagement patterns in real-time.Figure 4. Real-time teacher dashboard showing learner's activities in an online environment (REALTO).ICLS 2016 Proceedings1124© ISLSSupporting real-time teacher orchestration in a smart classroom settingMike Tissenbaum and James D. SlottaThere is growing interest in the learning sciences community in “smart classrooms” - technology mediated spacesin which the physical space itself becomes a mediator of student learning. In smart classrooms students are notsimply browsing information passively, but are also creating, attaching, connecting, and taking data with themfrom one location to another, and from one group to the next. However, these immersive and interactiveenvironments are likely to be more complex and dynamic than previous generations of computer supportedlearning environments (Slotta, 2010), placing additional load on teachers to track the milieu of actions takingplace, the growth of students knowledge, and where and when they are most needed, most of which would beinvisible or excessively time consuming for teachers to compile themselves (Tissenbaum & Slotta, 2013).In order to understand the role orchestrational supports could play in such a curriculum, using the SAILSmart Space (S3) architecture, we developed a specialized tablet application (Figure 5) that provided a teacherwith control over the flow of activities and a real-time alert when he was needed. In order to provide the teacherwith critical prompts and information, a central part of the development of this tablet was the development ofintelligent software agents that could track the “state of the class” and respond to emergent patterns. In order toevaluate the effectiveness of the tablet application, we engaged four sections of high school physics students in areal-time smart classroom activity. When students reached a critical moment at the activity (as set by the teacherduring co-design), an S3 agent sent a message to the teacher on his tablet to inform him he needed to review thegroup’s work. He could then either approve the work and let them progress to the next step, or ask them to furtherrefine their ideas and resubmit them. Across all four sections, the teacher approved the work of all 16 groups (fourin each section), but asked six (38%) to resubmit their work for approval (with one group being asked to re-submittwice. To assess the effect of the teacher’s reviewing and approving of groups’ work on their final completenessscore (a rubric co-develop with the teacher) we went back and rescored the work of all the groups the teacherasked to resubmit (i.e., before their edits). In total, the groups re-submitted seven times, resulting in an averagechange of .67 in their assessed score - indicating that alerting the teacher when and where to best intervene had ameaningful effect on groups’ knowledge construction. As part of the symposium, this paper will discuss thedesign-based iterations that led to the teacher tablet application used in this scenario (including previous designsthat were less effective for real-time interventions) and show video of the tablet being used by the teacher duringthe live smart classroom activity.Figure 5. The Teacher Orchestration Tablet. The tablet (1) Enabled the teacher to start an activity; (2) Showedeach group’s progression through the activity; (3) Alerted the teacher when a group reached a point forintervention (pre-defined by the teacher); and (4) Let the teacher advance the class to the next step.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1125© ISLSVisualizing data from automated scores to help teachers guide inquiry withscientific visualizations in diverse classesJonathan Vitale, Marcia Linn, and Libby GerardInquiry-based science instruction promotes meaningful, self-directed student interaction with content. Teacherguidance helps students to make meaning from these interactions. Guiding struggling students who are workingasynchronously can be a challenge for teachers. To help teachers determine which students would most benefitfrom their guidance, we have developed and tested a series of indicator tools within the Web-based Inquiry ScienceEnvironment (WISE). We use automated scoring for essays and concept maps to analyze student thinking andprovide relevant visualizations to teachers to facilitate instruction. We have explored a series of visualizations ofthis data for teachers, including a progress monitor, student response viewer, and real-time alerts. In thisdemonstration, we detail the development and use of the real-time alerts (Figure 6) in diverse classrooms, drawingon data from classroom observations, teacher and student interviews, student science learning outcomes, anddesign iterations. We studied 6 teachers who used the real-time alerts in 3 schools with over 700 students. Wecompared different automated indicators of student progress to inform the alert system, including the time studentsspent on given activities, and the artifacts they generated. Additionally we compared teacher alerts to automated,text-based guidance. Results indicate that the teacher score-based alerts can be more effective than automatedguidance, but require active teacher participation and high familiarity with student ideas. In interviews the teacherspraised the teacher alerts and also indicated a desire for professional development to help them anticipate studentdifficulties and to plan guidance that facilitates inquiry. As part of this symposium, visitors will be invited to trythe real-time alert system from both the students’ and teachers’ perspectives.Figure 6. Left: The alert banner within the WISE environment. Right: The standard (top) and alert (bottom)banners.Conclusions and implications of the symposiumThis symposium comes at an important point in the learning sciences. Increasingly, learning interventions areinfused with technology and bring with them new kinds of information that instructors need to keep track of andrespond to in real-time. Despite this shift, there have been few frank discussions about what actually works andhow instructors actually use the tools provided to them. This symposium brings together a set of projects that sitat the forefront of this research by examining the role that orchestrational technologies can play in highlightingpatterns in student work, alerting instructors at critical moments in live activities, tracking student progress acrossformal and informal activities, and developing complex visualizations of student engagement and learning in realtime. Through these examples, this symposium aims to advance the discourse and understanding of such supportsand to provide a clear set of exemplar cases to support members of the broader learning sciences community inadvancing their own designs.ReferencesBerland, M., Davis, D., & Smith, C. P. (2015). AMOEBA: Designing for collaboration in computer scienceclassrooms through live learning analytics. International Journal of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning, 1-23.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1126© ISLSBaker, R., & Siemens, G. (2014). Educational Data Mining and Learning Analytics. In Cambridge Handbook ofthe Learning Sciences (pp. 253–272).Dillenbourg, P. (2012). Design for classroom orchestration, position paper. In P. Dillenbourg, Y. Dimitriadis, M.Nussbaum, J. Roschelle, C. K. Looi & J. Asensio (Eds.), Design for classroom orchestration. Computers& Education.Dillenbourg, P., Jarvela, S., & Fischer, F. (2009). The evolution of research on computer-supported collaborativelearning. In N. Balacheff, S. Ludvigsen, T. Jong, A. Lazonder & S. Barnes (Eds.), Technology-enhancedlearning (pp. 3-19). Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.Dimitriadis, Y. (2012). Supporting teachers in orchestrating CSCL classrooms. Research on E-Learning and ICTin Education, (September), 33-40.Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition andInstruction, 20(4), 399-483.Fishman, B., Snider, R., Riconscente, M., Tsai, T., & Plass J.L. (2015). How Teachers Use Digital Games forFormative Assessment: Exploring Gaps Between Design and Practice. Poster presented at the AnnualMeeting of the American Educational Research Association (AERA), Chicago, IL.Kollar, I., Hämäläinen, R., Evans, M., De Wever, B., & Perrotta, C. (2011). Orchestrating CSCL–More than ametaphor. In Connecting computer-supported collaborative learning to policy and practice: CSCL2011conference proceedings (Vol. 2, pp. 946-947).Leacock, C., & Chodorow, M. (2003). C-rater: Automated scoring of short-answer questions. Computers and theHumanities, 37(4), 389-405.Lyons, L., Tissenbaum, M., Berland, M., Eydt, R., Wielgus, L., & Mechtley, A. (2015). Designing VisibleEngineering: Supporting Tinkering Performances in Museums. In Proceedings of Interaction Design andChildren 2015 (IDC 2015) (pp. 49–58).Matuk, C., Gerard, L., Lim-Breitbart, J., & Linn, M. C. (2016, April 8-12). Teachers' reflections on the uses ofreal-time data in their instruction. Poster presented at the Annual Meeting of the American EducationalResearch Association, Washington, DC, USA.Matuk, C., Gerard, L., Lim-Breitbart, J. & Linn, M. C. (2015, April 16-20). Gathering Design RequirementsDuring Participatory Design: Strategies for Teachers Designing Teacher Tools. Paper presented at theAmerican Educational Research Association Meeting, Chicago, IL, USA.Nussbaum, M., Alvarez, C., Mcfarlane, A., Gomez, F., Claro, S., & Radovic, D. (2009). Technology as smallgroup face-to-face collaborative scaffolding. Computers & Education, 52(1), 147-153.Pea, R. D., & Maldonado, H. (2006). WILD for learning: Interacting through new computing devices anytime,anywhere. The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences, 852-886.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. The Cambridgehandbook of the learning sciences, 97-115.Roschelle, J., Rafanan, K., & Estrella, G. (2010). From handheld collaborative tool to effective classroom module:Embedding CSCL in a broader design framework. Computers & Education, 55(3), 1018-1026.Roschelle, J., & Pea, R. (2002). A walk on the WILD side: How wireless handhelds may change CSCL. TheInternational Journal of Cognition and Technology, 1(1), 145-168.Schwendimann, B. A., Cattaneo, A. A. P., Dehler Zuffrey, J., Gurtner, J. -L., Bétrancourt, M., & Dillenbourg, P.(2015). The 'Erfahrraum': A pedagogical model for designing educational technologies in dual vocationalsystems. Journal of Vocational Education and Training (JVET).Slotta, J. D., & Linn, M. C. (2009). WISE science: Web-based inquiry in the classroom Teachers College Press.STELLAR. (2011). Trends in orchestration second research & technology scouting report.Tchounikine, P. (2013). Clarifying design for orchestration: orchestration and orchestrable technology, scriptingand conducting. Computers & Education, 69, 500-503.Tissenbaum, M. (2014). Supporting Collective Inquiry: A Technology Framework for DistributedLearning (Doctoral dissertation, University of Toronto).Tissenbaum & Slotta (2015a) Scripting and orchestration of learning across contexts: A role for intelligent agentsand data mining. In Milrad, Wong & Specht (eds.) Seamless Learning in the Age of Connectivity.Tissenbaum, M. & Slotta, J. D. (2015b, April). The Role of a Technology Framework in Orchestrating Real-TimeInquiry: SAIL Smart Space (S3). Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American EducationalResearch Association, Chicago, IL.VanLehn, K. The relative effectiveness of human tutoring, intelligent tutoring systems and other tutoring systems.Educational Psychologist, 46, 197-221 (2011).ICLS 2016 Proceedings1127© ISLS