The Effects of the Productive “Visible-Annotation Tool” (P-“VAT”)for Collaborative Knowledge Construction on Higher-OrderInteraction and Collaborative OutcomeYoonhee Shin, Hanyang University, shinyoonhee06@gmail.comAbstract: This abstract reports a design-based experimental study that evaluates the effects ofthe revised tool (P-“VAT”) on higher-order interaction and level of collaborative outcome. Toachieve this purpose, research was carried out to revise the previous version of the VAT throughcomparison of the effects of two types of learning strategies in P-VAT. Results will lead to indepth and systematic verification of the research questions.Research background and visionWith the proliferation of network technologies, computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) is currentlybeing implemented at all levels of education (Fu, Aalst, & Chan, 2016). In particular, an asynchronous onlinediscussion tool is a valuable means of engaging students for the knowledge construction in the complex task.Many researchers have designed asynchronous discussion tools with various functions (Fransen, Weinberger, &Kirschner, 2013). Regrettably, however, the realization of the productive learning process from the precise sharingof ideas to the successful integration of diverse ideas has proven to be difficult in educational practice (Kirschner& Erkens, 2013). Despite the increase in research on various scaffolding strategies for CSCL, there is still a lackof effort in designing scaffolding, especially considering the sequential nature of the knowledge constructionprocess (Rienties, Giesbers, Tempelaar, & Lygo-Baker, 2012; Shin et al., in press). In addition, given that thefundamental goal of CSCL is learner-centered reflective thinking, some strategies should be provided in a formthat increases the autonomy of the learner (Ludvigsen, 2016). Toward these issues, this study suggested that thesuccessful completion of complex tasks requires a productive CSCL environment that combines severalscaffolding strategies implemented at different phases of knowledge construction (Resier, 2004). This study aimsto improve the previously proposed VAT by providing a negotiation script during the opinion-sharing phase andcombining peers’ feedback activities to enable learner-directed flexible interaction during the problem-solvingphase, thereby fading internalized negotiation scripts (Bouyias & Demetriadis, 2012). In particular, productiveVAT (P-VAT) as the improved tool focused on problem solving phase can promote a reflective discourse basedon dynamic interaction and then can lead to a fruitful collaborative solution. Through these effects, P-VAT willhelp to realize productive knowledge construction from building exact common ground to describing the fruitfulsolution through the higher-order interaction. In addition, the study expects to contribute to the field of CSCLresearch by combining, within a series of productive knowledge construction processes, key scaffolding strategiesthat have been shown consistently to be important to CSCL.ReferencesBouyias, Y., & Demetriadis, S. (2012). Peer-monitoring vs. micro-script fading for enhancing knowledgeacquisition when learning in computer-supported argumentation environments. Computers & Education,59(2), 236-249.Fransen, J., Weinberger, A., & Kirschner, P. A. (2013). Team effectiveness and team development in CSCL.Educational Psychologist, 48(1), 9-24.Fu, E. L., van Aalst, J., & Chan, C. K. (2016). Toward a classification of discourse patterns in asynchronousonline discussions. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 11(4), 441478.Kirschner, P. A., & Erkens, G. (2013). Toward a framework for CSCL research. Educational Psychologist, 48(1),1-8.Ludvigsen, S. (2016). CSCL towards the future: The second decade of ijCSCL. International Journal ofComputer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 11(1), 1-7.Reiser, B. J. (2004). Scaffolding complex learning: The mechanisms of structuring and problematizing studentwork. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 273-304.Rienties, B., Giesbers, B., Tempelaar, D., Lygo-Baker, S., Segers, M., & Gijselaers, W. (2012). The role ofscaffolding and motivation in CSCL. Computers & Education, 59(3), 893-906.Shin, Y., Kim, D., Jung, J., (in press). The effects of representation tool (Visible-annotation) types to supportknowledge building in computer-supported collaborative learning. Educational Technology & Society1886