Developing Professional Competency in a CSCL Environment forTeamwork: Two TPACK Case Studies of Teachers as Co-DesignersElizabeth Koh, National Institute of Education, Singapore, elizabeth.koh@nie.edu.sgHelen Hong, National Institute of Education, Singapore, helen.hong@nie.edu.sgAbstract: Teachers play an important role as co-designers in the development of learninginterventions in blended CSCL environments. However, when new pedagogy and technologyare introduced, it may not be easy for teachers to thrive in such complex environments. It istherefore important to identify key knowledge bases required for teachers to teach effectivelyin new CSCL environments. Using the lens of Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge(TPACK), the paper will examine two case studies of teachers who co-designed a CSCL toolfor teamwork with a research team and implemented it in their classrooms. The paper revealsthe interacting components of technology, pedagogy and content knowledge, and highlightsstrengths as well as growth areas for the teachers’ further professional development. Throughidentifying and then building these knowledge layers, teachers will be able to harness toolsand co-design proficiently and successfully in technological environments.IntroductionTeachers play an important role as co-designers in the development of learning interventions in blended CSCLenvironments. Teachers not only provide the authentic realities of the classroom and the workable designs forthe curriculum, they also implement the lessons and adapt the CSCL environments accordingly. Teachers havefirsthand contextual understanding of student backgrounds, school curriculum requirements and eveneducational policies. However, in the process of making these pedagogical changes, teachers, as with alllearners, have their own trajectory of growth and change. Teachers may feel challenged in different areas asthey leverage affordances of the CSCL environments for teaching and learning, such as the use of thetechnological tool or in the teaching of content. Especially when new pedagogy and technology are introduced,it may not be easy for teachers to harness the affordances of new CSCL environments. It is therefore importantto identify key knowledge bases required for teachers to teach effectively in these new environments. Intechnological environments, the Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge (TPACK) framework is anestablished lens to illustrate the content, pedagogy, and technology knowledges as well as their interactions(Mishra & Koehler, 2006). It recognizes that teachers face complex issues in the blended learning classroomand seeks to make known the knowledges and skills that teachers should have in order to thrive in theseenvironments. TPACK has been used in many ways such as for teaching teachers and developing courses(Tokmak et al., 2013), and in the analysis of teacher practices (Powell et al., 2015) in technology integration.In a similar manner, this paper will utilize TPACK to draw out crucial knowledges and practices in onesuch CSCL environment. Besides connecting the CSCL tool with teaching practices, the TPACK lens also helpsto identify needful areas for further professional development. In this paper, our research context involves aCSCL tool, My Groupwork Buddy (MGB), which was co-designed with a team of teachers, researchers, andweb developers, in order to help students grow their teamwork competency and also to enable teachers todeepen their professional competency in teaching and facilitating teamwork competency in students. This paperreports on the first year of the project and focuses on the teacher enactments and adaptations of MGB in theclassroom. Specifically, using the TPACK lens, we will examine the teacher practices of two cases of teachersfrom two different schools and classrooms. We ask, to what extent do teachers show professional competency(TPACK) in teaching and facilitating teamwork competency with MGB?Technological Pedagogical Content KnowledgeTPACK arose from Shulman’s (1986) research on pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) required for effectiveteaching. Shulman argued that successful teachers possessed PCK, which is a specialized form of knowledgethat combined particular understandings and knowhow about teaching the content matter. Mishra and Koehler(2006) subsequently extended the work for technological contexts to include technological knowledge and howall these knowledges interact. In essence, TPACK has three foundational forms of knowledge: technologicalknowledge (TK), pedagogical knowledge (PK) and content knowledge (CK). Notwithstanding, intermediateforms of knowledge are also needed; these are the interacting knowledges: technological pedagogicalknowledge (TPK), technological content knowledge (TCK) and pedagogical content knowledge (PCK), andtechnological pedagogical content knowledge (TPACK). Particularly, TPACK recognizes that a deepCSCL 2017 Proceedings672© ISLSunderstanding of all three types of knowledges is needed in order to integrate and teach effectively intechnological environments.The CSCL tool and environment: MGBMGB is developed as part of a larger 2.5 year project using a design-based research approach to grow students’teamwork competency. Technically, it is a Single-Page Application with a student team chat, lesson pages,student rating and teacher monitoring features. Pedagogically, it is underpinned by the Team and SelfDiagnostic Learning (TSDL) Pedagogical Framework which is grounded in key theories such as experientiallearning and the learning analytics process model (Koh et al., 2016; Kolb, 1984; Verbert et al., 2013). TheTSDL employs a four stage cycle: (1) immersing students’ in concrete collaborative experiences, (2) buildingstudents’ awareness of their teamwork competencies primarily through self and peer teamwork ratings, (3)engaging students in reflection and goal-setting, and, (4) monitoring students’ teamwork competency changes.The project has also developed a measure for teamwork consisting four teamwork competency dimensions:coordination, mutual performance monitoring, constructive conflict, and team emotional support (Refer to Kohet al., 2016 for more details).TPACK and MGBAdopting the TPACK lens, we will analyze the teachers’ knowledges and skills in the CSCL environment.Specifically, we will refer to teamwork as the content matter, MGB as the technological environment, andTSDL as the pedagogy. Each component of TPACK is elaborated below:• CK: knowledge about teamwork concepts, i.e., teamwork dimensions.• PK: knowledge and skills in applying teamwork strategies, facilitation strategies of group work, groupdiscussion and reflections (both individually and team based), notably the TSDL framework.• TK: knowledge and skills about the use of MGB, its affordances and constraints.• PCK: knowledge and skills of how to apply TSDL to teach particular teamwork dimensions (content).•••TCK: knowledge and skills of representing teamwork concepts in MGB.TPK: knowledge and skills of how to use MGB with respect to the pedagogy of TSDL.TPACK: knowledge and skills of teaching and facilitating teamwork with MGB using TSDL.MethodologyA case study approach is employed to address the research question. This provides a richer understanding of theuse of the CSCL tool by the two teachers. Qualitative data pertaining to the teachers during the first year of codesigning and implementation was collected. The data sources are: lesson observations (including field notes oflessons and photographs and/or videos taken during lessons), teacher prepared slides (including modificationsmade by teachers from the researcher prepared slides), teacher email interviews, and meeting notes from faceto-face meetings between teachers and researchers. The data was thematically coded according to the TPACKlens for each case. This was followed by a cross-case analysis with iterative discussions by the authors to drawout the larger themes.Study background: Case A and BDuring this first year, two different teachers from two different co-ed Secondary schools were involved inimplementing this project, teacher A and B. In both cases, the research team had several meetings with theteachers before the implementation to co-design the use of the CSCL tool in the curriculum specific to theirschools. During the school term, the research team also touched base with each teacher at appropriate juncturesto support the teacher’s implementation.Case ATeacher A teaches the subject, Design and Technology, where student teams have to create a physical prototypeof a useful device for a welfare organization. This project was 1 year long, and the teacher was observed for keylessons throughout the year, for the four terms. Two classes of 14 year old students were involved in the project.Teacher A is also the ICT subject head, and has been in this position for 4 years, having previously been ateacher for 6 years. He is a subject specialist, and not the students’ form teacher.Case BCSCL 2017 Proceedings673© ISLSTeacher B teaches the subject, Integrated Project Work, which is an inter-disciplinary subject combiningGeography and English. This subject also emphasizes collaborative learning. Student teams have to complete aseries of investigations related to water and one of the final outputs was the creation of a product or activity tohighlight the issues of water shortage and water conservation. This project was 6 months long (Term 3 and 4),and the teacher was observed for 6 lessons. One class of 13 year old students was involved in the project.Teacher B was a relatively new teacher with 3 years of experience. This was the first time she was teaching thissubject at Secondary 1. She is also the students’ form teacher.AnalysisTable 1 provides the individual and cross-case comparison.Table 1: TPACK of the two cases.CKTeacher ATook some time to learn what the 4 teamworkdimensions are. But could explain them well at Term 4with examples.PKIs familiar with teamwork awareness but not thereflection aspect. Utilizes the design thinking approachin his pedagogy.TKVery knowledgeable. Uses technology pervasively inclasses. Very comfortable using ICT to teach.Thought about the delivery of the lesson, created andmodified slides to suit the implementation. However,did not hold tight to the “product” aspect of thereflection, but approached it more as a process. Warnedstudents that they might have to stay back if they didnot do the activity properly, although this was justonce.Understood teamwork concepts in MGB andproactively instructed students to write specific andtimely targets for their teamwork goal-setting (personaland team).Some aspect was developed such as knowing how toget students to rate self and peers. During the teamworkreflections, the teacher emphasized the process,informing students to “refine” reflections wherenecessary. A similar approach was adopted for thegoal-setting. However, this teacher did not use MGB tohelp monitor students’ teamwork. He was not sure howserious students would be toward responding to theactivity.As a whole, generally competent by Term 4. Also, fromthe start of the implementation emphasized the totalintegration of MGB in the curriculum. “When studentsthink of the subject, they should think of MGB”.PCKTCKTPKTPACKTeacher BTook some time to learn the 4 teamwork dimensions. Bythe end of the 6 months, could explain the dimensionsbriefly but got mixed up at times, and the dimensionswere not understood at a very deep level.More comfortable with facilitation of group work in theclassroom as compared to the computer lab (the latterpoint will be addressed in TPK). Taught in a structuredway to scaffold and guide students to produce “goodreflections”Keen to use and explore the affordances of MGB.Reflection is treated as one of the “products” oflearning, used for summative assessment. Therefore, theteacher scaffolded and explicitly taught students how toreflect and write reflections.Used MGB to monitor students’ individual and teamprogress.Faced difficulty in classroom management at thecomputer lab, compared to the classroom. Was not ableto use the curriculum time efficiently, resulting instudents having to wait and not being engaged wheninstructions were given. When facilitating the reflectionon the system, emphasized that students can “re-do”their reflections if they did not do it well the first time.Competent but viewed MGB from summativeassessment lens and an add-on to the curriculum insteadof integration.Discussion and conclusionBearing in mind the contextual differences of the two cases, our cross-case analysis illustrates learningchallenges and differing trajectories for both teachers as they embark on the process of co-designing andimplementation. Both teachers had gap areas of knowledges which were subsequently shown to be picked up asthe project went on. Though it took them a while to learn the four teamwork dimensions and use the rightterminology in their lessons, both teachers were able to explain the dimensions to their students by the end ofthe project. However, this was weaker in Teacher B; her understanding of teamwork could be deepened.When there is wider misalignment of TPACK understanding, we found the teacher experiencing asteeper learning curve. For example, though both teachers were familiar with the use of technology for teaching(TPK), Teacher B was less adept at orchestrating a class of 40 students to use the system in the computer lab,CSCL 2017 Proceedings674© ISLSresulting in some time loss due to classroom management issues. This can be attributed to her lack ofknowledge and experience and highlights an area for further professional development.Interestingly, in the same CSCL environment, different practices were exhibited by teachers in the codesigning process. Teacher A was proactive in giving suggestions to improve MGB while Teacher B focused onharnessing the current affordances of the existing tool e.g., tracking and monitoring students’ progress andworking as a team.Although both teachers followed the TSDL framework, their PCK and TPK showed different teachingemphasis, which also reveals their teaching beliefs. Teacher A is more focused on the process of the activity,while Teacher B emphasized the product of the artefacts created by students during the activity. These twoemphases have their own strengths and weaknesses. More importantly, both approaches meet the needs of theteachers employing them, as teachers have first-hand and crucial contextual understanding of their classroomand the curriculum outcomes of the school. On the same note, teachers’ interpretations of their ownaccountability and their students’ autonomy, likewise influences their emphasis in co-designing and lessonimplementation. In Case B, it was a focus on summative instead of formative assessment, holding studentsaccountable for their reflections and scaffolding their learning to write reflections while in Case A it was to givestudents room to make changes along the way.As a whole, Case A demonstrated greater TPACK, with the emphasis of total integration rather thanseparating the tool and activity from the rest of the curriculum. Nevertheless, different aspects of TPK could bestrengthened such as harnessing the monitoring features of MGB. For Case B, while there are several gapknowledge areas, we acknowledge that this teacher had less time to develop her professional competency.Giving the teacher time and support with relevant TPACK training would help her trajectory of growth.The TPACK lens has been useful for identifying the areas of challenges and growth in the two cases.This systematic approach helps to highlight areas in which the research team can provide greater professionaldevelopment support and enhance the design of the CSCL tool. This recognition of the interacting componentsof technology, pedagogy and content knowledge testaments to the complexities that teachers face in effectivetechnology implementation. Yet, through building these knowledge layers, teachers will be able to harness toolsand co-design proficiently and successfully in technological environments.ReferencesKoh, E., Shibani, A., Tan, J. P.-L., & Hong, H. (2016). A pedagogical framework for learning analytics incollaborative inquiry tasks: An example from a teamwork competency awareness program. InProceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Learning Analytics & Knowledge (pp. 74-83).Edinburgh, United Kingdom: ACM.Kolb, D.A. (1984). Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning and development. EnglewoodCliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.Mishra, P., & Koehler, M. J. (2006). Technological pedagogical content knowledge: A framework for teacherknowledge. Teachers College Record, 108(6), 1017-1054.Powell, A. B., Alqahtani, M. M., & Weimar, S. (2015). Examining teachers’ support of students’ learning ofdynamic geometry in a CSCL environment. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference onComputer Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 671-672). Sweden: The International Society of theLearning Sciences.Shulman, L. S. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational Researcher, 15(2),4–14. doi:10.3102/0013189x015002004Tokmak, H.S., Yelken, T.Y., & Konokman, G. Y. (2013). Pre-service teachers’ perceptions on development oftheir IMD competencies through TPACK-based activities. Educational Technology & Society, 16(2),243–256.Verbert, K., Duval, E., Klerkx, J., Govaerts, S., & Santos, J. L. (2013). Learning analytics dashboardapplications. American Behavioral Scientist, 57(10), 1500-1509.AcknowledgementsThis paper refers to data and analysis from the research projects NRF2015-EDU001-IHL08, funded by theeduLab Funding Programme, MOE-NIE initiative, and OER 09/15 EK, funded by the Education ResearchFunding Programme, NIE, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. The views expressed in this paper arethe authors’ and do not necessarily represent the views of NIE.CSCL 2017 Proceedings675© ISLS