Creating Parentopia: Design-Based Research to Develop anInterface for Parent Learning Communities and NetworksSusan K Walker, University of Minnesota, skwalker@umn.eduAbstract: Participatory design research was employed to create a virtual support and learninginterface for parents and staff in an educational program for families and young children.Social constructivist perspectives on learning specific to the parenting role providedtheoretical foundation for development. Platform design research validated user interest acomplementary space for learning within class and wider program communities, and thatintegrated involvement of parents’ personal social networks. An iterative design processidentified tools and activities for initial prototype development, implementation and redesign.The time to identify platform and implementation features necessary to ensure further researchproved a benefit. The natural evolution of system roles and supports, comfort with aninnovation by parents and staff, and communication about the innovation over time hasresulted in a shift in expectations about how learning and support takes place in the program.IntroductionInformation and communication technologies (ICT) offer parents new ways and a virtual environment forgathering information, problem-solving, forging alliances for support and connecting with experts (Wartella,Rideout, Lauricella, & Connell, 2013). Research suggests that personal and professional connections facilitatedby technology benefit parents’ emotional well-being, problem-resolution and skill acquisition (e.g, Plantin &Danebeck, 2009). Although short term online educational programs and specific applications (e.g., texts) areeffective at strengthening parenting behaviors and knowledge (Hughes, Bowers, Mitchell, Curtiss, & Ebata,2012; Nieuwboer, Fukkink & Hermanns, 2013), unexplored is the strategic use of technology as an interface forparents’ learning communities and that integrates their natural networks that support the childrearingexperience. This paper describes the design research behind Parentopia– an online complement to a communitybased program for collaborative learning by parents and children in early childhood.Design considerationsTheoretical foundationsSocial constructivist, ecological orientations (Bronfenbrenner, 1995; Rogoff, 2003; Vygotsky, 1978) whenapplied to parent learning and adult development in the parenting role demonstrate the importance ofmeaningful relationships through which parents can reflect and explore cognitions about childrearing (Azar,2004; Marineau & Segal, 2006). Learning to parent and about children’s development is largely informal andexperiential, fueled by cooperative interactions with trusted, familiar and proximal others who share childrearingroles, interests and identities. For some learning is aided by participation in informal parent supportcommunities or more structured education opportunities. In the hands of skilled facilitators, guided interactionsfor collaborative learning with peers offer the parent critical reflection, validation of the parenting experience,and a deepened identity in the parenting role (Azar, 2004; Belsky, 1984), and identification of diverseperspectives and new strategies for parenting (Campbell & Palm, 2004; Thomas, 1996).Ecological orientations also promote parent learning as occurring across multiple communities throughnetworked associations (Barron, 2006). Within one’s learning ecology the individual self-initiates activities thatfacilitate learning from one community to another. Repeated exposure to content in multi-communityinteractions deepens knowledge and improves confidence. And, although parents may rely primarily onproximal, shared identity communities for learning and support, peripheral, weaker tie connections providenovel perspectives and specialized information, and may broker connections to wider networks. Expandednetwork size, and diversified membership enhances parents’ access to a breadth of information and access tosocial capital that promotes competent parenting (Cochran & Walker, 2005).These socio-ecological foundations of parent learning offer new directions for technology design.Parents employ a range of technologies to maintain close ties, and to access a range of supports (e.g., Rudi,Dworkin, Walker & Doty, 2014; Stern & Messer, 2009). Connectivity functions of new media can also exposethe parent’s proximal communities to wider networks. Online communities for parents show promise forlearning when it is facilitated in ways that promote safe spaces, and encourage deeper understanding throughshared perspectives (Farmer & Reupert, 2013; Gray, 2004; Guldberg & Pilkington, 2006). For parents,CSCL 2017 Proceedings367© ISLStechnology can play a critical role as an interface and mediator of multiple community and network memberinfluences.Hypothetically then, parent learning can be enhanced when social technology:1. Provides continuity and enhances parents’ experience with a community-based, program built oncollaborative learning principles through online affordances,2. Encourages parents’ access to their personal social networks to share program content and engageparticipation in online activities, and3. Diversifies, increases and strengthens the parents’ wider program community for collaborative learningby expanding parents’ program connections and affiliations.ECFE as a parent learning community for technology design researchMost group parent education delivery models are structured toward improving the parents’ knowledge orbehavior through short-term experiences (Campbell & Palm, 2004). Some however, are built on relationshipbased principles that foster a culture of sharing and sustained support for parents (i.e., knowledge networks) asthey evaluate their beliefs and practices (Thomas, 1996). Ties developed through community interactions andresponsibilities to the group foster parent self-efficacy and high community collective efficacy. As a result,social bonds are stronger and individuals gain empowerment. Ties developed through learning communityinteractions also foster collaborative problem solving and a shift in perspective from deeper understanding ofdiverse viewpoints and experiences.A program that exemplifies this type of community-orientation to parent learning and support is EarlyChildhood Family Education (ECFE) in Minnesota (ecfe.info). Since 1984, ECFE has operated through localschool districts, primarily through no/low cost adult learning and enrichment classes known as CommunityEducation. ECFE is open to all parents of young children from birth through age five. Participation isencouraged throughout the children’s first five years, providing families with continuity in learning, peerrelationships for support and community resource connections. Weekly two-hour classes are held during theschool year. Unlike other group parent education, ECFE does not use an established curriculum; learning goalsare tailored to individual classes. Communication fostered through comfortable and trusting relationships movesthe group toward synergy characteristic of a learning community (Wenger, 1998). Collaborative learning forparents in ECFE means transformation in perspective from reflective group dialogue. This technique brings thegroup to shared understanding of the problem, collective determination of alternatives, and individualapplication to fit unique parenting, child and family needs (Campbell & Palm, 2004; Thomas, 1996).With multiple classes per site, parents who attend at one class time have the potential to expand theirneighborhood/parenting communities through ties with those who attend other classes. ECFE’s multi-facetedcommunity-orientation and open systems framework to parent learning, and the program’s own lack of presenceon the Internet (other than for administrative or marketing purposes) offered a unique opportunity to create aplatform that explores technology’s role in extending community learning processes among parents, andcapitalizes on networking affordances to build larger connections.Design tensionsTo design an online space for ECFE that would offer, as Preece observes “the virtual as a continuity of the real”(2000, p. 249), means to address the tensions, or endemic dualities and challenges for parents and staff withusing online tools in concert with program participation. Introducing an innovation means identifying factorsand the process for successful adoption (Rogers, 2003). A significant tension rests with the culture of learningand participation in a 40 year old program that has only operated face to face and challenges to program deliveryexpectations by parents, staff and administration. A related tension rests with the trust and security felt in a faceto face program that protects the sensitivity of parenting discussions and parent fear of judgment.Another relevant tension is between individual participation and group cohesion important tocommunity learning and engagement. For parents of young children especially, whose attention is divided withlife demands, identification with a learning community alone, and one that continues in an online space, ishighly variable. Participation in organized instruction by adults is voluntary, and information and socializationneeds may be satisfied by other sources. Parent participation with an online platform will vary by perceptions ofusefulness to meet needs, application experience (e.g., social media as a successful resource for learning aboutparenting), and sophistication of technology use (e.g., Rothbaum, Martland & Jannsen, 2011). And whileparents may be attracted to continue communication with their class communities, engaging with those in theprogram who are less familiar may take particular encouragement.CSCL 2017 Proceedings368© ISLSTherefore, given the hypothetical value of social technology to parent community-based collaborativelearning, and the challenges posed by introducing innovation to an existing learning culture, the researchquestions driving this project were are follows:1. Would a virtual platform for the engagement of communities and personal networks be viewed ascomplementary to existing ways that parents learning through a face to face program?2. What are the design features that would make a platform useful and used by parents and staff?3. What is necessary for the implementation and adoption of innovation?Design researchThe innovative nature of this project required a design assessment method to identify platform components thatwould convey ECFE principles, reflect parents and staff as users, and accomplish theoretical aims. Design-basedresearch for technology enhanced learning environments (e.g., Wang & Hannafin, 2005) was selected. Thismethod is grounded in relevant research, theory and practice, works with participants interactively and throughiterative cycles of analysis and redesign, integrates mixed methods for data collection and analysis and connectsresults to the specific context.The neighborhood site for platform development is in an urban Minnesota city, selected due to its‘readiness’ for virtual adaptation and adoption by participants. The selected site is an established, familiarpresence in the neighborhood, and offers seven classes each week (two are in Spanish). Data collected for thisproject in year 1 revealed that the majority of those attending this ECFE program are women (26% are fathers),ranging in age 26-58 (M=34.2, SD=5.5), with slightly more than half (55%) possessing a college degree andmost reporting family incomes between $40K and $80K. Families have between one and four children; halfreport two children. The site is in a racially and ethnically mixed neighborhood; 21% of parents report nonwhite racial identity and although most parents report speaking English (85%), this amount includes parentswho are bilingual. Participation in ECFE ranges, with a fairly equal distribution of parents attending their first,second, third, or fourth year. Staff include two licensed parenting educators (each with an average of 20 years ofexperience), one early childhood educator (with 10 years experience), and three classroom assistants.MethodTo answer the first research question and identify features for platform design, focus groups and a survey withparents, and staff interviews were conducted. These gathered in depth information on the ways that ECFE helpsparents learn as a community, the intersections of parents’ personal and ECFE worlds that provide learning andsupport, and ways that technology might extend ECFE’s benefits. Focus group sessions were recorded thentranscribed to text for coding, and transcription accuracy validated. Three coders independently coded transcriptsamples then cross-validated a coding scheme to be used for thematic analysis (Silverman, 1993). A primarilyforced-choice survey elicited data on parenting supports, perceptions of value for ECFE, and on technology use.Quantitative analysis included descriptive reporting and internal comparisons.Within the total sample 52 responded to the survey and 55 participated in the focus groups,representing 83% of the parents registered for classes at the site. Four instructional staff were interviewedResults of all analyses were shared back for validation and interpretation with staff and parents.Following build of the prototype, usability testing with 8 parents (5 English speaking and 3 Spanishspeaking) provided data for the second research question. Further data on was secured through a survey given toparents in all classes at the end of a 9 month school year (year 3) on site use, and site analytics were tracked toexamine pages visited. Forty eight (of 56, or 85.7%) parents completed surveys representing those in Englishspeaking and Spanish speaking classes. Staff interviews provided information for the third research question.All three teachers and three program assistants participated in the interviews. Data from the interviews wastranscribed and coded for thematic analysis.ResultsValidating assumptions about community learning and network involvementAnalysis revealed that parents do view ECFE as a community for learning and use their personal networks asproximal supports for parenting. Word frequency in focus group descriptions of ECFE indicate the programviewed for ‘community’ ‘learning’ and ‘support.’ Further analysis identify the setting as being ‘comfortable,’‘trusted,’ ‘nonjudgmental’ and ‘safe,’ and even for some, like their ‘church.’ More than half (55.6%) identifiedECFE as a source of emotional support; nearly all (94%) identified it as a valuable source of parentinginformation. Survey data revealed that discussion with other parents (4.56 out of 5) and expressing views onCSCL 2017 Proceedings369© ISLSparenting (4.33) as most highly rated learning methods. Also valued was getting information on childdevelopment (4.15), information on community resources (4.10), and learning activities to do with the child(3.94). The parenting educator was notable for facilitating collaborative discussion and access to expertinformation. Half (29, 56%) reported knowing no other parents at the site, not in their class well enough to askfor information or advice. Others reported knowing between one and four other parents. Staff interviewsindicated that a variety of program-wide activities (e.g., clothing donations for families), events (e.g., springfestival, fund raisers) documents (e.g., program handbook, area guide) and physical spaces (e.g., site building,parent and child classrooms, and the neighborhood) represent an culture of program community engagement.ECFE parents’ personal social network connections represent proximal, strong ties (e.g., family) anddistant, weak ties (e.g., professionals). Tie strength was indicated by the frequency of network member mentionsduring the focus groups, and by survey responses on the range of types of supports offered. Family, the coparent and friends offer emotional, practical and informational support. Parents verbally shared informationfrom ECFE with others; 81% share with their partner, 57% with a friend and 43% with their own mother/father.Discussion with the co-parent and other parents (in real life and online) helped parents validate beliefs, resolveconflict, boost confidence and get new ideas. Experts (like the pediatrician, and books) were popularinformation sources for specific topics, though sometimes information conflicted with what was gathered frommore familiar sources.ECFE:Parents indicated that these network sources provide information that intersect with what is learned in[parent 1] "...and the same with the people that you come in contact outside of ECFE, they're bringingthe knowledge that they have from other sources and experiences that they have..." "[parent 2]: And it's definitely expanding your knowledge because we're not talking here, we're nottalking about right and wrong, we're talking about..."[parent 1] Ways to deal with situations."[parent 2]: "ways to deal, could be a different idea sometimes and we exchange that and we might goand we go enriched out of the class because what we do, we live relationships wherever we go, youknow, we bring that in, in and out. Dynamic."These results reinforce the value of collaborative learning through membership in ECFE, and thatparents’ personal networks and ECFE operate as parallel and intersecting ecologies for their learning. They alsovalidate parents’ interest and their role as a conduit for information sharing across communities. And theysuggest that the culture of the program offers a foundation for further program-community-family engagement.Identifying online engagement activitiesAnalysis of survey items regarding technology use revealed that nearly all parents and staff were comfortablewith and had access to computers, the Internet and cell phones (over 90% reported each). Just under threequarters (74.5%) owned smart phones); few (23%) had tablets. Texting and email were daily activities, andabout half (48%) reported videoconferencing weekly (especially with extended family). Social networking(specifically Facebook and Pinterest), sending pictures and using mapping tools daily was reported by just overhalf. Participants were positive about technology being easy to use (4.25 out of 5), the value of technology toconnections with family and friends (4.12) and the general usefulness of technology to their lives as parents(3.96). Analysis of parent and staff technology use and comfort supported use of applications that would beaccessible and easy to use, and with English/Spanish translation options. A high need for privacy features (e.g.,account approval, restricted access to classes) safety, and convenience (integration with existing social mediaaccounts, mobile access) were recurring themes from focus group analysis of items on technology preferences.When asked how technology could enhance ECFE’s benefit, parents resoundingly asked for ways tomaintain peer connections between weekly classes, and to access content about parenting and their child’slearning shared by teachers. Activity interests for extending group class-based learning online included opendiscussion and document sharing, and member lists to connect with other parents. Parents voiced that virtualattendance and participation by the non-ECFE parent is particularly important to boost familiarity with theprogram and experiences that benefit the child. Parents also wanted easy ways to share the documents andcontent with others close to the childrearing experience (e.g., child care providers, extended family members).And they wanted easy ways to share information from others to the ECFE community (such as a websiteadvised by a pediatrician).CSCL 2017 Proceedings370© ISLSStaff admitted little experience or familiarity with using online platforms for parent or childengagement, though they expressed open attitudes to learning and trying new approaches. They wereparticularly interested in a platform that encouraged wider program engagement and that would includeefficiencies to their practice (e.g., staff to parent communication). They reinforced the need for technology thatwould secure confidentiality and the privacy of conversations, and underscored the value for technology thatwas easy to use and language flexible. Adherence to school district policies (e.g., use of release forms) was alsomentioned.The findings on technology use and preferences validated the social mechanisms of learning by parentsin ECFE, and the value of a virtual platform that would enhance social connectivity to the class learningcommunity, and integrate involvement by personal social network members, offering a clear yes to the firstresearch question.Feature usability and usefulnessBased on these findings, platform design considerations leaned on community orientations (Wenger, White andSmith, 2009) of individual participation, relationship building, access to expertise, content, open-endedconversations, cultivating community and serving the context to inform tool selection (Table 1).Table 1: Design aims, considerations and components of Parentopia 1.0 and 2.0Platform aimsDesign ConsiderationsCommunityOrientations1Facilitate classcommunitylearning andsupportMaintain preferredactivitiesRelationship buildingConvey felt context oflearning and communityProvide easy connections toclass membersInvolve thepersonal socialnetworkOpen-endedconversationContentAccess to expertisePlatform components2••••••Privacy and confidentialityIndividual participation•Facilitate participation bynon-attending parent andclose othersRelationship building•Easy content sharing outand inAccess to expertiseIndividual participation••••Build the widercommunityCreate a public face for thecommunityReplicate the look and feelof program participationCollaborative activities thatappeal to range of personalinterestsProgram information andorganizationRelationship building•Open-endedconversation•ContentAccess to expertiseServing the contextIndividual participation••••Multi-topic discussion forum (R)Chat tool (text, video)Advice wiki: “Suggestion Circle”Member directory (R)Class identity (logo, pictures) (R)Instructor moderation and presence(R)Controlled access to class pages (R)Policies on platform roles andaccess (R)Co-parent full access (R)Account Moderation (R)Visitor participation on programfeaturesContent sharing through email,social media interfaceMulti-topic discussion forum (allprogram) (R)Resource area (document library,wiki, marketplace/exchange)Filtered search tool (R)Shared (Google) calendar w/mapping, personalization (R)Family photo sharing (R)Staff and program information (R)Security1 . Wenger,2.White and Smith (2009).R = Features included in Parentopia 2.0Initial system design occurred through an iterative process with parents and staff over a nine month school year.Design features for the overall platform layout, individual components, visual appeal, and usability were createdand refined with participant feedback and testing. The domain parentopia.org was selected for the platform toidentify its unique role for the program, and as a potential domain home for future adaptations by ECFE sites(there are over 330 school districts with ECFE programs in the state). The designed prototype was built onWordpress CMS with a customized social networking package to provide enhanced social interactionCSCL 2017 Proceedings371© ISLScapabilities (e.g., forums, chats, wikis, Fig 1a). A public landing page provided basic program information,account creation and log in; account moderation approves and directs further access to the site as visitor, parent,staff and administrator. All accounts access a program home page that presents program-wide images,information and distributed communication activities (e.g., calendar, access to class pages, announcements).Individual class pages include areas for open-ended discussion, member directory, and content contributions.Class page access requires a secondary approval to ensure privacy and safety. The site’s static content can beautomatically translated into English or Spanish. Parents and staff established policies on inviting non-ECFEmembers and partners to create accounts at visitor or parent levels thereby gaining read-only or interactiveaccess to program-wide content.The prototype was employed for an academic year to identify implementation issues and feature useand usability. Staff introduced the platform at the beginning of year and encouraged parent account creation andclass membership. The platform was introduced to parents in classes, highlighting features of the full platform,individual class pages and user accounts. Staff were encouraged to begin using discussion forums to continueconversations about class topics, and parents were encouraged to use the class and full program discussionforums to share parenting information.Figure 1a. Parentopia 1.0 main page site design.Assessment of the prototype revealed that, as expected, the discussion forums were the componentused most often; most other components (e.g., wikis, libraries) and individual content pages, were rarely visited.The majority reported using Parentopia a few times a month or a few times a year. Parents reported usingspecific features, like the calendar or viewing pictures of their children. Barriers to use included its lack offlexibility on mobile platforms, the distraction of many features, and users forgetting logins. Despite limited use,most however (62%) commented positively about the ability to connect outside of class. They expressedexcitement over a mechanism that enabled their connections with other ECFE parents and staff and that couldinvolve the co-parent and other family members.Staff reported that parents varied greatly in their comfort with account creation and use, whichprevented some from logging in. They felt that certain features hampered engagement (e.g., click through emailnotification of discussion posts). Because parents needed assistance and forgot logins, staff felt they needed totake time away from teaching to assist. Additional personnel or volunteers were unavailable to assist. Most staffalso felt time-challenged to lead parent use of discussion forums and other features in their teaching, and on sitemanagement to maintain content. Despite these drawbacks, staff were very positive about having access to acomplementary platform for engagement with parents.Implementation and usability testing of the prototype informed a redesign of a streamlined, socialnetworking prominent version (Table 1, Figure 1b), designed collaboratively with site staff and parents. Uniqueprogramming using JavaScript and web sockets mimics a Facebook like interface for familiarity, centralizingthe main page as a news feed to feature posts, with side bar area for announcements, the shared calendar, photoalbum and filtered search tool. The user account retains avatar personalization, contacts, notifications, andprivate messaging. Access to class-only posts, announcements and images remains. While the 2.0 versionheavily emphasizes the social media interface and mobile device integration, it retains the essential elements ofthe original prototype: integrity to user privacy and confidentiality, layout that facilitates ECFE programoperations and the relationship-based, supportive nature of ECFE (e.g., affirmations to parents by staff).CSCL 2017 Proceedings372© ISLSFigure 1b. Revised Parentopia (2.0) site design.Implementation insightsAt the end of the school year of prototype use, teachers reported using a variety of techniques to encourage useby parents. The most frequently identified effort was posting in the class discussion forum following a classwith a brief summary, question or sharing photos from the children’s classroom. Instructors met together as agroup through a Professional Learning Community monthly, and individually with assistants weekly andidentified topics for posting. They also made an intentional effort to respond to posts made by parents toreinforce activity. By building in platform use as part of their regular instruction, over time the teachers felt thattheir interest and comfort in adopting the innovation increased. They observed that increasingly parents wouldnote that an idea raised in class would be a good one to discuss through Parentopia. Or, parents would tell othersto find a program event on the calendar. These indications of interest by parents were motivating to staff tocontinue, increase use and find additional ways to integrate into teaching.ConclusionThis design research to develop Parentopia as a platform to complement social, collaborative learning in ECFEis both promising and realistic. Exploration of learning and social connectivity by parents and staff in ECFEvalidated social constructivist theories of parent learning as members of ECFE, and as ECFE can integrate withmembers of the parents’ personal social network. And it validated parent and staff interest in an onlinemechanism to maintain learning and build wider, stronger connections for learning and family life. The designprocess revealed essential elements to execute the theoretical aims and essential context features in the programfor implementation: technology that places social interaction as the centerpiece of the application, is mobilefriendly, and offers privacy. Although it is not a unique application in its construction – the revised applicationlooks and feels a bit like Facebook – introducing the innovation of a virtual space for parent engagement to aprogram that reaches busy and distracted parent users requires that it start with something simple and familiar(Milheim, 2007). A user-friendly friendly interface is also an essential ingredient for a publicly fundednonformal education program with limited staff time, money and resources for technical support.The participatory, iterative process of design and testing offered another critical dimension to adoptinginnovation in this traditional program: time (Rogers, 2003). In short, the design research over four yearsstimulated the cultural shift and expectations of how ECFE helps parents learn while at the program and awaythrough virtual social interaction, and how ECFE needs to support use of a virtual platform. Parents’ idea of avirtual space, interaction with it, and feeling its benefits, and staff comfort with how to integrate it intoinstruction on balance with costs and challenges developed over time. The resulting acceptance and desire for acomplementary, virtual space for continued engagement as a class and as a community holds great promise forcreating a true collaborative learning ecology to strengthen and support parenting. And with this capital, furtherresearch on the actual benefits to parent social learning through their communities and networks has a firmerfoundation to occur.ReferencesAzar, S. T. (2003). Adult development and parenthood: A social-cognitive perspective. In J. Demick & C.Andreoletti (Eds.), Handbook of adult development (pp. 391-415). New York: Springer.Barron, B. (2006). Interest and self-sustained learning as catalysts of development: A Learning EcologyPerspective. Human Development, 49, 193-224Belsky, J. (1984.) The determinants of parenting. Child Development, 55 (1), 83-96.CSCL 2017 Proceedings373© ISLSBronfenbrenner, U. (1995). Developmental ecology through space and time: A future perspective. In P. Moen,G. Elder Jr. and K. Luscher (Eds), Examining lives in context: Perspectives on the ecology of humandevelopment. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, pp. 619-647.Campbell, D & Palm, G. (2004) Group parent education: Promoting parent learning and support. NY: Sage.Cochran, M. & Walker, S. (2005). Parenting and Personal Social Networks. In T. Luster and L. Ogakaki, Eds.Parenting: An Ecological Approach. Mahwah, NJ: Earlbaum.Cui, G., Lockee, B. and Meng, C. (2013) Building modern online social presence: A review of social presencetheory and its instructional design implications for future trends. Education and informationtechnologies 18 (4). 661-685.Farmer, J., & Reupert, A. (2013). Understanding autism and understanding my child with autism: An evaluationof a group parent education program in rural Australia. Australian Journal of Rural Health, 21, 20-27.Gray, B. (2004). Informal learning in an online community of practice. Journal of Distance Education, 19, No1, 20-35.Guldberg, K. & Pilkington, R. (2006). A community of practice approach to the development of non-traditionallearners through networked learning Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 22, 159–171.Hughes, R., Bowers, J., Mitchell, E., Curtiss, S. and Ebata, A. (2012). Developing online family life preventionand education programs. Family Relations, 61, 711 – 727.Marienau, C. & Segal, J. (2006). Parents as developing adult learners. Child welfare, 85(5), 768-784.Milheim, K. 2007. Influence of technology on informal learning. Adult Basic Education and Literacy Journal, 1(1), 21-16.Nieuwboer, C. C., Fukkink, R. G., & Hermanns, J. M. A. (2013). Online programs as tools to improveparenting: A meta-analytic review. Children and Youth Services Review, 35(11), 1823-1829.Plantin, L. & Daneback, K. (2009). Parenthood, information and support on the Internet. A literature review ofparents and professionals online. BMC Family Practice, 10Preece, J. (2000). Online communities: Designing usability, supporting sociability. Wiley: NY.Rogers, E. (2003). Diffusion of Innovations, 5th Edition. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster.Rogoff, B. (2003). The cultural nature of human development. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.Rothbaum, F., Martland, N, & Jannsen, J. (2008). “Parents' reliance on the Web to find information aboutchildren and families: Socio-economic differences in use, skills and satisfaction.” Journal of AppliedDevelopmental Psychology 29, 118–128Rudi, J., Dworkin, J., Walker, S., & Doty, J. (2014). Parents’ use of information and communicationstechnologies for family communication: Differences by age of children. Information, Communication& Society, 18, 78–93.Silverman, D. (1993) Interpreting Qualitative Data: Methods for Analyzing Talk, Text and Interaction. London:Sage.Stern, M. J., & Messer, C. (2009). How family members stay in touch: A quantitative investigation of corefamily networks. Marriage & Family Review, 45, 654–676.Thomas, R. (1996). Reflective dialogue parent education practice: Focus on parent development. FamilyRelations, 45 (2), 189-200.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Walker, S. (2015) Social dynamics of media use on parenting: A conceptual framework. In FamilyCommunication in the Age of Digital and Social Media, Carol Breuss, Ed. New York: Peter Lang.Wang, F., and Hannafin, M. J. (2005). Design-based research and technology-enhanced learning environments.Educational technology research and development, 53, 4 5-23.Wartella, E., Rideout, V., Lauriella, A & Connell, S. (2013). Parenting in the Age of Digital Technology: ANational Survey. Northwestern University, Center on Media and Human Development.http://web5.soc.northwestern.edu/cmhd/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/Parenting-Report_FINAL.pdfWenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice Learning, Meaning and Identity, Cambridge University Press.Wenger, E., White, N., and Smith, J.D. (2009). Digital habitats: Stewarding technology for communities. CPSquare, Portland, OR.AcknowledgementsPrimary thanks goes to the parents and staff and administrators at the Early Childhood Family Educationprogram who are the community through which Parentopia is informed and given shape. I also acknowledge theresearch and development team. The project is supported by a grant from the NSF (#1210863SoCS).CSCL 2017 Proceedings374© ISLS