Studying the Process of Instructional Improvement Through theLenses of Sense-Making Repertoires and Improvement PracticesElizabeth B. Dyer, WestEd, edyer@wested.orgAlthough large numbers of educational reforms and innovations have been developed in the previous fourdecades, there has been relatively little change in instruction that happens in classrooms (Rowan, 2002). As aresult, researchers have suggested that in order to bring about educational change, focus should be placed on theprocess of implementation and improvement, not just the development and testing of reforms (Bryk, Gomez,Grunow, & LeMahieu, 2015; Penuel, Fishman, Cheng, & Sabelli, 2011). These perspectives underscore theimportance of examining the processes of teacher learning, instructional improvement, capacity-building, andorganizational change across educational systems. Additionally, they highlight the potentially transformativepower this focus can bring by studying designs for these systems-level goals.My research broadly focuses on the process of instructional improvement in mathematics and science. Itake both an observational and design-based approach to better understand and support teachers to productivelyengage in improvement, as well as support this improvement across educational systems. Additionally, my workencompasses processes at different time scales (e.g. micro- and macro-level instructional improvement), as wellas processes that cross different contexts and actors (e.g. individual teacher learning, instructional coaching,administrator support). I bring two complementary perspectives to this work, (a) sense-making repertoires and(b) improvement practices, and consider both in interaction with tools and structures in educational systems.These two perspectives foreground the process of instructional improvements rather than the inputs and outputsof the process, and therefore, lead to new and different implications for designs that support teacher learning andinstructional improvement.Although I aim to understand processes of instructional improvement generally, I am particularlyinterested in improvements that promote equity and are deeply responsive to students as thinkers. Ideally, I hopemy work can better enable teachers to empower students to be agents of change in their world through STEM.Therefore, my research has focused on teaching that is responsive to the disciplinary substance of student ideas(Hammer, Goldberg, & Fargason, 2012; Robertson, Scherr, & Hammer, 2015) and I plan to explore culturallyresponsive dimensions of teaching (Ladson-Billings, 2014) and teaching that is responsive to classroom powerdynamics (Hand, 2012).Learning through teaching: The process of using everyday classroomexperiences to improve teachingMy dissertation examined the way that secondary math teachers, primarily working with students from nondominant communities, use their everyday classroom experiences to improve how they build on the substanceof student mathematical ideas in their teaching. Therefore, this study focused on the process of individualteacher instructional improvement toward responsive teaching using the lens of teacher noticing (M. G. Sherin,Jacobs, & Philipp, 2011) for improvement. To examine this process, I conducted longitudinal point-of-view(POV) observations (B. L. Sherin & Sherin, 2010; M. G. Sherin, Russ, & Colestock, 2011; M. G. Sherin, Russ,Sherin, & Colestock, 2008) to access teachers’ in-the-moment noticing for instructional improvement. Duringthe observations, teachers collected video during a lesson from their own perspective using a wearable camerain the midst of teaching and used a remote to mark moments they thought would influence their efforts toimprove their teaching. Shortly after the lesson, I interviewed teachers about the captured moments to uncovertheir in-the-moment cognition and how they planned to change their teaching based on their sense-making ofthe experiences. In addition to the longitudinal POV observations, I conducted design-based research aroundvideo-based professional development aimed at supporting teachers to develop responsive teaching practicesbased on the analyses of the longitudinal data. This research has begun to identify the sense-making repertoiresand improvement practices used by teachers during the everyday processes of instructional improvement.Sense-making repertoiresThe focus on sense-making repertoires takes a more cognitive perspective on instructional improvement toanalyze the common reasoning teachers use to improve their teaching, and in this case focused on reasoningused with everyday classroom experiences. This work found that one type of reasoning was particularlycommon and important during the improvement process: causal reasoning about students. When teachers usecausal reasoning about students, they explain why events relating to students unfold the way they do (or will/didin the future/past), which I claim reflects the complex causal models teachers create (Dyer & Kaliski, 2016). I1854also found that teachers used particular kinds of causal reasoning when they proposed changes to their teachingaligned with responsive teaching, suggesting that the type of causal reasoning can align with the type ofimprovement they propose to their teaching (Dyer, 2018). These findings question whether evaluation, anothersense-making repertoire that is commonly underlies many models for instructional improvement, is in factsupportive of instructional improvement. While evaluation would highlight he importance of determining whatworked or didn’t work, the causal reasoning repertoire suggests that it may be most importance to consider whyor how this work or don’t work. As such, supports for teacher learning should enable teachers to be moreanalytical, possibly by eliciting and developing particular kinds of causal reasoning, rather than simplyevaluating or describing teaching and learning. Specifically, in the case of practice-based teacher education(Ball & Cohen, 1999), these findings suggest that teachers need access to artifacts that provide evidence of thefactors that influence student thinking or other outcomes, not just rich records of student thinking.Improvement practicesUsing a complementary perspective, my work has identified several improvement practices teachers engage inwhen using their everyday classroom experiences to improve their teaching, which often focused on positiveclassroom experiences. For example, one such method was making infrequent successes more typical (Dyer,2017). In this method, a teacher notices a surprising, but positive event, such as a student making connectionsbetween ideas the teacher did not anticipate. The teacher then works to unpack what led to this positive, butisolated, event, and come up with a may to make it more typical. This improvement practice, as well as otherthat focus on positive classroom experiences, highlight how teacher improvement is not only a process to fixnegative outcomes, as it is commonly framed in much of the models of instructional improvement. Instead,positive experiences can be important contexts for teacher improvement, leading to strengths-based approachesto instructional improvement instead of deficit perspectives that “fix” students or teaching practice (Dyer,2017).An ecological approach to instructional improvementPrevious work completed in the Learning Through Teaching project has highlighted the usefulness of theperspectives of sense-making repertoires and improvement practices for understanding the phenomenon ofinstructional improvement. Additionally, it has begun to identify specific types of sense-making repertoires andimprovement practices, such as causal reasoning about students and making infrequent successes more typical.In future work, I plan to continue to identify additional types, leading to analytic frameworks to characterize thesense-making repertoires and improvement practices used by teachers and others. An important aspect of thisfuture work would be to expand the contexts in which each of these perspectives are considered beyond theindividual process of using everyday classroom experiences to improve teaching. Therefore I plan to examinedata of formal professional development, instructional coaching, teacher collaborative work time, teacherevaluation, and informal conversations with other teachers. Most likely, different sense-making repertoires andimprovement practices will be identified in these contexts, and the previously-identified methods may be usedin different ways. As such, this work builds the foundation for an ecological, cross-context, theory for theprocess of instructional improvement.An educational systems approach to instructional improvementIn addition to focusing on teachers when studying instructional improvement, the educational systems teachersare a part of are an important complementary perspective (Cobb & Smith, 2008; Coburn, 2016). In particular, Iaim to study support for instructional improvement the meso-level actors and structures at the school, district,and regional levels in conjunction with teachers, who can be represented as micro-level instructionalimprovement actors. In my post-doctoral and current work, I study instructional improvement at a systems-levelthrough partnership work with school districts that aim to support science and math teacher instructionalimprovement. These projects have worked in partnership with districts to develop supports and programs, suchas teacher leader roles and teacher professional development programs, using methodologies such as designbased implementation research. Through this work and future work, I am to develop theories for sustainablysupporting instructional improvement through capacity building and organizational change. In addition tostudying how these meso-level actors make sense of and design structures to support teachers’ sense-makingrepertoires and improvement practices, this work will explore the sense-making repertoires and improvementpractices used in capacity-building in educational systems.References1855Ball, D. L., & Cohen, D. K. (1999). Developing practice, developing practitioners: Toward a practice-basedtheory of professional education. In L. Darling-Hammond & G. Sykes (Eds.), Teaching as the learningprofession: Handbook of policy and practice (pp. 3–32). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Bryk, A. S., Gomez, L. M., Grunow, A., & LeMahieu, P. G. (2015). Learning to Improve: How America’sSchools Can Get Better at Getting Better. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press.Cobb, P., & Smith, T. (2008). District development as a means of improving mathematics teaching and learningat scale. International Handbook of Mathematics Teacher Education, 3(Participants in mathematicsteacher education: Individuals, teams, communities and networks), 231–254.Coburn, C. E. (2016). What’s Policy Got to Do with It? How the Structure-Agency Debate Can IlluminatePolicyImplementation.AmericanJournalofEducation,122(3),465–475.https://doi.org/10.1086/685847Dyer, E. B. (2017). Supporting Generative Change toward Responsive Teaching: How Teachers Use ClassroomExperiences as Instructional Feedback. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the AmericanEducational Research Association, San Antonio, TX.Dyer, E. B. (2018, April). Developing Responsive Teaching Practices From Causal Reasoning AboutClassroom Experiences in Secondary Mathematics. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of theAmerican Educational Research Association, New York City, NY.Dyer, E. B., & Kaliski, P. (2016). Secondary Mathematics Teachers’ Use of Causal Reasoning AboutClassroom Experiences to Change Teaching Practice. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of theAmerican Educational Research Association, Washington, D.C.Hammer, D., Goldberg, F., & Fargason, S. (2012). Responsive teaching and the beginnings of energy in a thirdgrade classroom. Review of Science, Mathematics and ICT Education, 6(1), 51–72.Hand, V. (2012). Seeing culture and power in mathematical learning: Toward a model of equitable instruction.Educational Studies in Mathematics, 80(1–2), 233–247. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10649-012-9387-9Ladson-Billings, G. (2014). Culturally Relevant Pedagogy 2.0: a.k.a. the Remix. Harvard Educational Review,84(1), 74–84. https://doi.org/10.17763/haer.84.1.p2rj131485484751Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing Research and Development at theIntersection of Learning, Implementation, and Design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331–337.https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X11421826Robertson, A. D., Scherr, R., & Hammer, D. (Eds.). (2015). Responsive Teaching in Science and Mathematics.New York, NY: Routledge.Rowan, B. (2002). The Ecology of School Improvement: Notes on the School Improvement Industry in theUnitedStates.JournalofEducationalChange,3(3–4),283–314.https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1021277712833Sherin, B. L., & Sherin, M. G. (2010). Freezing time: what mathematics and science teachers “see” whileteaching. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (Vol. 2, pp.180–181). International Society of the Learning Sciences.Sherin, M. G., Jacobs, V. R., & Philipp, R. A. (2011). Mathematics Teacher Noticing: Seeing ThroughTeachers’ Eyes. New York, NY: Routledge.Sherin, M. G., Russ, R. S., & Colestock, A. A. (2011). Accessing mathematics teachers’ in-the-momentnoticing. In M. G. Sherin, V. R. Jacobs, & R. A. Philipp (Eds.), Mathematics teacher noticing: Seeingthrough teachers’ eyes (pp. 79–94). New York, NY: Routledge.Sherin, M. G., Russ, R., Sherin, B. L., & Colestock, A. (2008). Professional vision in action: an exploratorystudy. Issues in Teacher Education, 17(2), 27–46.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1856© ISLS