Educational Affordances of Tablet-Mediated Collaboration toSupport Distributed Leadership in Small Group OutdoorActivitiesGi Woong Choi, Susan M. Land, and Heather Toomey Zimmermangxc207@psu.edu, sland@psu.edu, haz2@psu.eduPenn State UniversityAbstract: This paper investigates how distributed leadership emerges during tablet-mediatedcollaboration in an outdoor learning environment. We posit that one of the affordances of mobiletechnology is to mediate the distributed leadership that emerges among group members duringsmall group activities. A collective case study was conducted to observe how children assumedifferent types of leadership during collaborative tasks. The findings show evidence thatsupports the mediating role of tablet computers on the emergence of distributed leadershipduring a collaborative group task.IntroductionLeadership is not a singular role that is held by one person during a collaborative task; rather, leadership isdistributed and assumed by multiple group members across time and space. Different attributes of collaborativetasks require different leadership roles for their success, and, by doing so, this leads to diverse engagement(Gressick & Derry, 2010; Li et al., 2007; Mercier, Higgins, & da Costa, 2014). Our study focuses on how differentdimensions of leadership are distributed among group members during a collaborative science learningexperience. By analyzing peer interactions while using tablet computers, we explore how tablets affordcapabilities for learners to assume leadership during observational inquiry activities.Theoretical background: Distributed leadership and role takingDuring a collaborative learning experience, leadership is a “a reciprocal social process, instead of the property ofan individual (Li et al., 2007). Leadership emerges from social interactions, when a leader initiates an action andhis or her followers respond to the initiated action (Li et al., 2007). Because leadership emerges from socialinteractions, leadership does not usually stay with one person; instead, different types of leadership emerge fromdifferent group members. Li et al. presents five dimensions of emergent leadership: Turn Management, ArgumentDevelopment, Planning and Organizing, Topic Control, and Acknowledgment. Mercier et al. (2014) developedthese dimensions further by synthesizing them into two categories: Intellectual and Organizational. Theintellectual category is comprised of topic control and idea management and development; it is related to thecontent of the learners’ discussion. The organizational category is related to managing and organizing discussions.Mercier et al. suggest that the nature and content of tasks may influence the distribution of emergent leadershipamong group members.Discovering different types of emergent leadership can be interpreted as a person acquiring a role. Rowell(2002) illustrates how peers take on roles in a group activity during shared technological activities. For instance,if one assumes the role of manager, the others take on a supportive assistant role. Also, a student with the assistantrole may choose to work in a different domain than the manager in order to assume more responsibility. By takingdifferent roles, children assume different leadership for the success of a learning activity. Some studies onemergent leadership assign roles to engage learners in a collaborative learning environment. For example, Gu etal. (2015) assigned different roles, consisting of Starter, Supporter, Arguer, Questioner, Challenger, and Timer, toundergraduate students in order to engage them in the process of constructing knowledge collaboratively.Educational affordancesAnother concept related to tablet-mediated collaboration is educational affordances. From the varying definitions,we adopt Norman’s (1988) definition: “The term affordance refers to the perceived and actual properties of thething, primarily those fundamental properties that determine just how the thing could possibly be used. A chairaffords (‘is for’) support and, therefore, affords sitting” (p. 9). It is important to identify educational affordancesof the technologies because, in many cases, technologies that are used for education are not necessarily designedwith such purpose in mind. Hence, understanding the concept of affordance and analyzing which affordances areinherent within the device could help educators to effectively use the technology (John & Sutherland, 2005;Mishra & Koehler, 2006). In our study, we explored how a mobile tablet device mediates distributed leadership.ICLS 2016 Proceedings882© ISLSWe presupposed that the tablet would play a role in helping distributed leadership to emerge among learners in asummer camp.MethodologyA collective case study was conducted to see how young children (ages 9-12) collaborate and assume leadershipduring an informal learning experience. The study comprised four sessions in 2015 during iteration six of a largerDBR study (Zimmerman et al., 2015). In iteration six, each workshop session contained multiple groups. Thisstudy examines the interactions that took place among two groups of learners, resulting in total of four groups forobservation. Group interaction was video-recorded using a standard video camera. We also asked some groupmembers to wear GoPros on the head to collect additional videos. Video recording was our main data source toanalyze peer interactions within each group and to identify how distributed leadership emerged during the task.Study settingThe setting of the study was at an environmental center run by a land grant public university located in northeasternregion of the United States. The center runs summer camp for hundreds of young children each year to help themlearn about nature. The study was a one-hour session of a six-week camp program where children used tablets toexperience and learn about trees. Children were led by a Naturalist on a guided tour during the study. One iPadMini tablet was given to each group. For the first part of the tour, which lasted about 45 minutes, the Naturalistled children through the forest to learn about the life cycle of the trees. Five different stages of life cycles (seed,seedling, sapling, mature tree, and snag/dead tree) were explained during the Naturalist-led part of the session,with the assistance of a mobile app called Tree Investigators. The Naturalist prompted learners to observe thetrees and read from the app containing a conceptual diagram of the tree life cycle and pictures and descriptions ofeach stage. Tree Investigators was designed with the theory of distributed cognition/intelligence in mind wherewe intended for students to use it to augment and interact with the nature around them as part of their cognitiveactivities (Hollan, Hutchins, & Kirsh, 2000; Hutchins, 1995; Pea, 1993). The second part of the tour was studentled activity where learners were prompted to use the app to take the photos of trees they identified in each lifecycle stage. The children in groups freely explored the designated area to observe and take photos. Then they wereprompted to create a personalized photo collage of the tree life cycle using their own photos. No restrictions weregiven in terms of iPad usage and turn-taking within each group.Data collection and analysisA total of 25 upper elementary learners were video recorded after obtaining informed consent and assent. Therewas a total of four sessions, and two groups were chosen for this preliminary data analysis. The focus of the studywas observing how learners assumed leadership during the collaborative task, so only the second part of the campexperience was analyzed. The analysis focused on how and when learners took turns using the iPad and how theyassumed roles and performed tasks in observational activities such as navigating and photo-taking.FindingsOur analyses showed that the tablet device appeared to play some role in mediating leadership among groupmembers. Since children were grouped in pairs, one child would typically assume the role of holding the tabletwhile the other did not use a device. Often, the child without the device would initiate the first move. To illustratethis finding, Michael and Nathan were looking for a tree’s seed. Nathan held the tablet, and as such, had a specificrole of holding the tablet. The tablet is important because it held all the information about the tree life cycle stagesas well as a photo capture tool and checklist to verify the evidence for each identification. Hence, it was impossibleto complete the task without the tablet. Because of the tablet, Nathan’s role was clear: taking photos, organizingthe next tree stage to identify, and checking the criteria for each life cycle. However, Michael’s role and task werenot as clear since he was not holding the tablet. Michael consistently showed leadership by searching the forest tofind a tree specimen to photograph. Then, Nathan would take a photo of the specimen while Michael gave adviceon how to maneuver the tablet. To illustrate, after taking the photo, Nathan (holding the tablet), read the appcontent to find the next tree life cycle stage while Michael led them through the forest.Michael:Nathan:Michael:ICLS 2016 Proceedings((gasps)) Look! A small pine cone. ((approaches the ground to pick it up))We could make a picture of this. ((but leaves it on the ground)). It’s reallysmall just like lean down on it.((bends a bit and takes a picture))Plus check on there, check on there, and then.883© ISLSNathan:Michael:Nathan:Michael:Oh that’s perfect ((gets up) Okay.Okay.((reads)) “Has a root, stem, and at least one needle”((whispers)) stem… ((looks around))Nathan assumed the role of a photo-taker and content reviewer while Michael assumed the role of a navigator.Across the groups, often the child who was not holding the tablet would go ahead and look for the tree specimenwhile the one with the tablet focused on verification of the tree based on app content and creating the photoartifacts using the tablet. Using Mercier et al.’s (2014) term, Michael focused on organizational leadership whileNathan focused on intellectual leadership with app content.Similarly, another group displayed consistent leadership distribution. In this case, Jason and Matilda(holding the tablet) are looking for seedling:Jason:Matilda:Jason:Jason:Matilda:Jason:Jason:Matilda:Jason:Jason:Matilda:Jason:Seedling now, seedling…Here, over here, right there. Can the camera see it?((Bends down and sits to take photo as Jason monitors it))Right there, yeah got it ((Matilda seems to struggle and Jason helps)).All right, what’s next?Sapling ((points)).Let’s see. That’s a sapling ((as other group member points)). Do you want touse that sapling? Do you want to use this one?All right, I will try to find a…Mature.Mature Tree.Here’s one. Found one right here.((Takes photo)). This tree has thick tuck thicker than around both of yourhands.I will check ((goes over to the tree and tests it out using his own arms).Similar to Michael and Nathan, Jason, who was not holding the tablet, took charge of navigating and looking forthe appropriate tree specimen. Jason also initiated the task by asking Matilda to confirm which stage they arelooking to identify next. Jason also assisted Matilda while she took the photo. Also, we found that the childrencollaborated by verifying the photo target in a different manner. When they located a mature tree, Matilda providedthe criteria to verify whether the tree was indeed a mature tree. Then, Jason went over to the tree to physicallyverify what Matilda had just read. Both children were taking initiatives but in a different way to successfullycomplete a task.Overall, these two excerpts provided evidence that the device and mobile app played a role in helpingdifferent types of leadership to emerge within a group. Learners voluntarily appropriated themselves to take rolesthat were different yet complementary. This is in line with Rowell’s (2002) study where peers would strategizethemselves to assume leadership roles for the success of the group. This study adds to Rowell’s study and thestudies on emergent leadership (Gressick & Derry, 2010; Li et al., 2007; Mercier et al, 2014) by suggesting thatthe device can afford to mediate emergence of distributed leadership in an outdoor learning environment. We wereable to observe that turn taking and utlization of tablets elicited group members to assume different leadershiproles. Having a personal device to share seems to be different from sharing a large device where children caninteract together simultaneously. This shows that, instead of waiting for distributed leadership to emerge naturally,we could integrate personal devices into learning designs in order to promote and mediate distributed leadershipskills which could enrich learner experiences.Future study implicationsOur investigation suggests that tablet devices can play a role in eliciting leadership among group members. Basedon this result, we posit that different technologies and their uses could possibly afford elicitation of diverseleadership. We would like to expand this notion further by assigning different devices and/or technology-mediatedlearning methods to each member to investigate how different technological affordances influence the emergenceICLS 2016 Proceedings884© ISLSof distributed leadership. We suggest assigning roles by handing out different types of devices. For instance, asmart watch could be associated with the role of time-keeping and planning, a tablet could be associated with appcontent processing, and GoPros/cameras could be associated with artifact creation.There were some limitations to this study. First, rather than observing student groups in a longitudinalmanner, these data were collected during a single session. Having a “one-shot” study has its limitations since itcannot fully entail the group dynamics during the collaborative learning process. Second, since dimensions ofdistributed leadership were based on group discussions, there were not enough dialogue to code the data with theLi et al. (2007)’s coding scheme, suggesting a need to modify the coding scheme to fit an informal, summer-campcontext. Lastly, we implemented GoPros to see if the GoPros played a role in mediating leadership roles. However,it seems that GoPros were too ambient for learners to appropriate any leadership roles. This shows thatpedagogical consideration associated with educational affordances of a technology is essential in promotingleadership. Future research can focus on clearly delineating tasks or instructional methods associated with thedevices to investigate their role on learning and emergent leadership.With these limitations in mind, next steps in the work include analyzing and more cases for more validfindings and designing and conducting a new study which diversifies devices and assigns them to children in orderto mediate emergent leadership. Through future study, we hope to investigate whether different educationalaffordances instantiated by different personal devices could mediate children to assume different types ofleadership.ReferencesGressick, J., & Derry, S. J. (2010). Distributed leadership in online groups. International Journal of ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, 5(March), 211–236.Gu, X., Shao, Y., Guo, X., & Lim, C. P. (2015). Designing a role structure to engage students in computersupported collaborative learning. The Internet and Higher Education, 24, 13–20.Hollan, J., Hutchins, E., & Kirsh, D. (2000). Distributed cognition: Toward a new foundation for human-computerinteraction research. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 7(2), 174–196.Hutchins, E. (1995). How a cockpit remembers its speed. Cognitive Science, 19, 265–288.John, P., & Sutherland, R. (2005). Affordance, opportunity and the pedagogical implications of ICT. EducationalReview, 57(4), 405–413.Li, Y., Anderson, R. C., Nguyen-Jahiel, K., Dong, T., Archodidou, A., Kim, I.-H., … Miller, B. (2007). Emergentleadership in children’s discussion groups. Cognition and Instruction, 25(1), 75–111.Mercier, E. M., Higgins, S. E., & da Costa, L. (2014). Different leaders: Emergent organizational and intellectualleadership in children’s collaborative learning groups. International Journal of Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning, 9(4), 397–432.Mishra, P., & Koehler, M. J. (2006). Technological pedagogical content knowledge: A framework for teacherknowledge. Teachers College Record, 108(6), 1017–1054.Norman, D. (1988). The psychology of everyday things. New York: Basic Books.Pea, R. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributedcognition: Psychological and educational considerations (pp. 47–87). New York: Cambridge UniversityPress.Rowell, P. M. (2002). Peer interactions in shared technological activity: A study of participation. InternationalJournal of Technology and Design Education, 12(1), 1–22.Zimmerman, H. T., Land, S. M., Mohney, M. R., Choi, G. W., Maggiore, C., Kim, S. H., ... & Dudek, J. (2015,June). Using augmented reality to support observations about trees during summer camp. Proceedings ofthe 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children (pp. 395-398). ACM.AcknowledgmentsThis research is supported by Penn State Center for Online Innovation in Learning and Penn State EducationTechnology Services (Teaching and Learning with Technology Unit). We acknowledge the contributions of ourAugmented and Mobile Learning Research Group (http://sites.psu.edu/augmentedlearning/).ICLS 2016 Proceedings885© ISLS