Talking Past One Another: Looking for Signs of ConversationalMismatch in One 6th grade Science ClassroomMon-Lin Monica Ko, Learning Sciences Res. Institute, U. of Illinois–Chicago, mlko@uic.eduAndrew Elby, College of Education, University of Maryland, elby@umd.eduAbstract: This study analyzes two days of middle school science sensemaking conversationsto argue for the existence and explanatory power of conversational mismatch, an interactionalachievement in which students and their teacher seem to be “on the same page” about the natureof their classroom discourse, but the students’ framing and teacher’s framing of the classroomactivity differ in subtle ways—a misalignment they don’t notice until later. Conversationalmismatches, we contend, arise in part from tensions between instructional goals of fosteringstudents’ engagement in authentic scientific sensemaking and guiding them toward particularunderstandings of pre-determined concepts and models.Introduction: Shared vs. discordant framing in classroom discussionsRecent U.S. science education reforms emphasize the importance of classroom talk for developing and refiningscientific knowledge (e.g. NGSS Lead States, 2013). Productive classroom discourse relies on participants "beingon the same page" about the nature of the classroom activity (van Zee & Minstrell, 1997), which relies on thedevelopment of shared norms and routines. Researchers have used conversation and framing analysis to analyzewhere and how classroom participants get and stay on the same page, and what that page is (Berland & Hammer,2012; Hutchison & Hammer, 2010). In this study, we use the same analytic tools to examine talk that preceded amoment of discord similar to the one documented by Berland and Hammer (2012), where students resist theteacher’s bid to shift the classroom activity— a charged exchange we’ll call the explosion. While our initialanalysis of the pre-explosion frame negotiations revealed smoothness in the conversation, we also found evidenceof unrealized mismatches in expectations that only became apparent upon the explosion. We conclude by posingmethodological and theoretical questions emerging from our analysis, and by discussing implications ofconversational mismatch for teachers and teacher educators.Curriculum, classroom context, and focal lessonOur data come from a 6th grade classroom in the United States using IQWST, a curriculum which emphasizessense-making discussions (Krajcik et al., 2011). During a larger study of teachers’ enactment of the same IQWSTlessons, we observed an explosive event at the end of a lesson that was designed to help students explain the‘disappearance’ of certain components of white light when passing through filters. Prior to the explosion, studentsdiscussed patterns in their observations and tried to make sense of what happened to those missing colors.Retrospective analysisWe developed two alternative hypotheses about what led to the Explosion. One is that Ms. J and her students were“on the same page” throughout the discussion, but Ms. J’s attempts to steer the class toward consensus led to thedisagreement—just like the “explosion” in Berland & Hammer (2012). A second hypothesis is that tacit discordexisted throughout the lesson; Ms. J and the students were never fully on the same page. By this account, Ms. Jand her students interpreted one another’s utterances in ways that convinced them they were “in sync,” whereasthey were actually framing the discussion in subtly different ways. The explosion occurred when the subtleframing misalignment came fully into view; what counted as explanatory (and hence conversational) closure forMs. J different from what the students sought in an explanation.Drawing on both frame and conversational analysis (Goffman, 1986; Pomerantz &Fehr, 1997), weengaged in two rounds of retrospective analysis to identify evidence for both hypotheses. For hypothesis 1, welooked for evidence of “smooth” conversation—bids taken up, conversational repairs quickly offered and takenup, shared expectations about what kinds of responses are appropriate, and so on. For hypothesis 2, we knew fromthe explosion to look for subtle differences in the epistemological component of framing (Hammer et al., 2005).We engaged in several rounds of review of one another’s identified evidence and vetted them looking forconfirming and disconfirming evidence. We returned to the classroom video to re-examine tone, inflection, andbody language by the teachers and students at particular moments.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1477© ISLSFindingsWe found evidence to support both hypotheses, with neither set of evidence outweighing the other. Throughoutthe lessons, the students and teachers appeared to maintain a shared framing of the classroom activity as adiscussion of students’ ideas, as evidenced by smooth turn-taking (or crosstalk reflecting excitement), taken-upbids for changes in expectations about students’ responses (towards more explanation), but with student ideasalways valued and foregrounded. Given this evidence, we would have concluded that Ms. J and the students were“on the same page”—if the explosion hadn’t prodded us to revisit. However, by focusing on epistemologicalaspects of how Ms. J and the students were framing the classroom activity, we found evidence for two relatedmisalignments. One was different expectations about which pockets of knowledge the students’ explanationsshould privilege. The students recruited diverse intellectual resources, such as their understanding of color andcolor mixing. Other students drew on analogies, drawing parallels between the demonstration and a filter system,while others relied on the consensus model they constructed earlier in the unit, using words like absorb, transmitand reflect to describe what happened. Ms. J, however, privileged the consensus model. For instance, when onestudent said the missing colors became invisible and disappeared, Ms. J countered light cannot disappear:according to their previous model, light could only reflect, transmit through, or get absorbed. Ms. J repeated herbid for students to use (only) the model, in both day 1 and day 2, indicating that students weren’t stably taking upthis bid; they continued using pockets of knowledge including but not limited to the consensus model.Implications for teaching and teacher educationIn classrooms where teachers foster students’ engagement in authentic science practices while also “covering”pre-determined concepts, —teachers will likely face tensions between (i) facilitating scientific sense-making,which can lead to incorrect explanations, and (ii) guiding students toward the targeted concepts/models (Hammer,1997). If the teacher’s guidance is gentle, a conversational mismatch like the one in Ms. J’s classroom can occur;students may frame the activity as brainstorming/debating mechanistic explanations while the teacher may frameit as something more like using science practices to figure out the concepts/model, especially when time pressurebuilds. The mismatch could go unrecognized for a while, as in Ms. J’s class, because the students and teachershare a broader shared framing of the activity as a sense-making discussion.Ms. J’s classroom illustrates, conversational mismatches, once discovered, can lead to negative affect.So, when teachers need to start guiding students toward “correct” ideas, they might consider announcing this shift,explicitly distinguishing using science practices to figure out the concepts/model from a more free-formbrainstorming and/or debating mechanistic explanations. Of course, this move could shut students down. Wethink it is worth studying whether and how teachers can help students sustain their sense-making even when thestudents know they are being guided. We also urge studies of ways in which examples such as Ms. J’s class couldtherefore be used in professional development to introduce teachers to conversational mismatch, with the goal ofhelping teachers make more conscious decisions about when and how to shift classroom discussions.ReferencesBerland, L. K., & Hammer, D. (2012). Framing for scientific argumentation. Journal of Research in ScienceTeaching, 49(1), 68–94. https://doi.org/10.1002/tea.20446Goffman, E. (1986). Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of Experience. Northeastern.Hammer, D. (1997). Discovery learning and discovery teaching. Cognition and Instruction, 15(4), 485–529.Hammer, D., Elby, A., Scherr, R. E., & Redish, E. F. (2005). Resources, framing, and transfer. In J. Mestre (Ed.),Transfer of Learning: Research and Perspectives (pp. 89-120). Greenwich: Information Age Publishing.Hutchison, P., & Hammer, D. (2010). Attending to student epistemological framing in a science classroom.Science Education, 94(3), 506–524.Krajcik, J. S., Reiser, B. J., Sutherland, L. M. & Fortus, D., (2011). IQWST: Investigating and questioning ourworld through science and technology. Greenwich, CT: Sangari Active Science.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington: NAP.Pomerantz, A., & Fehr, B. J. (1997). Conversation analysis: An approach to the study of social action as sensemaking practices. Discourse as Social Interaction, 2, 64–91.van Zee, E. H., & Minstrell, J. (1997). Reflective discourse: developing shared understandings in a physicsclassroom. International Journal of Science Education, 19(2), 209.AcknowledgementsThis work is possible through funding from the National Science Foundation through ESI-0101780, and DRL1020316. The opinions expressed here are those of the authors, and not of the grant funding agency.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1478© ISLS