Power in the Digital Age: A Critical Revision to ProductiveDisciplinary Engagement (PDE)Priyanka Agarwal, University of California Irvine, priyanka@uci.eduTesha Sengupta-Irving, Vanderbilt University, tesha.sengupta-irving@vanderbilt.eduAbstract: Engle and Conant’s (2002) articulation of productive disciplinary engagement(PDE) highlights problematizing, resources, intellectual authority and accountability asimportant principles for designing learning environments. Yet, in the years since their writing,the field has advanced significantly in its articulation of power in relation to learning.Students’ disciplinary engagement is not only dependent on how they author, share orconvince others of their ideas, but also how such practices invoke issues of power. Thissuggests a need to revise the framework to engage specifically with what are now readilyunderstood as racialized, classed, and gendered dimensions of learning. In this paper, we bringthe issues of power to the forefront to explore the equity potential of the PDE framework. Thispreliminary move – which centers on the promise of positioning as a principle – is a startingpoint for the field in working toward a more integrated understanding of power anddisciplinary learning.IntroductionYears of research (National Council of Teachers of Mathematics [NCTM], 2014) have unveiled key features ofproductive mathematics learning environments that highlight the importance of instructional tasks (Smith &Stein, 1998), meaningful mathematical interactions (Cobb, Yackel, & Wood, 1992), and student authority andaccountability (Engle & Conant, 2002). While for many the design of mathematically productive learningenvironments is the same as designing equitable environments, current research provides compelling evidenceof how even well-designed learning environments may still fail to engage non-dominant students at variouslevels (Esmonde, 2009b; Langer-Osuna, 2011, 2016; Philip, Olivares-Pasillas, & Rocha, 2016) in classroomswith or without technology. Thus, this analysis problematizes the easy equivalence of productivity and equityby asking: What is mathematically productive about equitable engagement and what is equitable aboutmathematically productive engagement? In this conceptual review and through analysis of empirical examplesfrom the literature, we seek to determine characteristics of a learning environment that promote both productiveand equitable mathematical engagement for students. We begin by focusing on inequities resulting from powerladen micro-interactions that shape and are shaped by larger social structures of power. We use this to inform areinterpretation of Productive Disciplinary Engagement (PDE) as a framework (Engle & Conant, 2002) ofprinciples for designing effective learning environments. The benefits of PDE have been well documented invarious analyses of students’ disciplinary learning (e.g. Barron & Darling-Hammond, 2008; Kumpulainen,2014; National Research Council, 2009; Schoenfeld, 2013). The PDE framework has also been adapted andappropriated to think about other types of learning environments such as knowledge forums (Zhang,Scardamalia, Reeve, & Messina, 2009), technology-rich classrooms (Rasmussen, Krange, & Ludvigsen, 2003),and online learning courses (e.g., Hickey & Rehak, 2013). We submit, however, that this framework requireselaboration to sufficiently address issues of power that arise in-situ, with or without technology, to better reflectprinciples of productive disciplinary engagement and equitable engagement. This paper therefore contributes toexpanding the use of PDE to address the sociopolitical dimensions of learning (Gutierrez, 2013) necessary forthick democracy (Apple, 2006).Broadening PDE to PEDE (productive and equitable disciplinary engagement)First, we briefly describe the PDE framework and its four principles: problematizing, authority, accountabilityand resources. Then, we summarize the literature on positioning, a construct we will argue as central toarticulating principles of productive and equitable disciplinary engagement (PEDE). We then elaborate ourbroadened framework of PEDE in the context of an empirical example taken from the literature (note: in theinterests of space we present only one of multiple empirical examples in the full paper).PDE framework and its four principlesEngle and Conant (2002), in their framework on productive disciplinary engagement (PDE), defined studentengagement as evidenced by contributions to the topic made in coordination with each other rather thanICLS 2018 Proceedings832© ISLSindependently as assessed by their alignment of eye gaze, body positioning, and their emotional displaysexpressing passionate involvement. Engagement is explicitly linked with disciplinary practices: “there is somecontact between what students are doing and the issues and practices of a discipline’s discourse” (p. 402). Inmathematics, for instance, students are expected to reason and justify their thinking as they solve mathematicaltasks, build on each other’s ideas, and revise their explanations in light of new information or critiques(Common Core State Standards Initiative, 2010). As such, it is expected that a productive engagement will notonly bring about a change in the learner’s knowledge, but also in her beliefs about disciplinary norms ofparticipation (Yackel & Cobb, 1996).The PDE framework is also accompanied by four principles, i.e., the features of a learning environmentthat help foster student engagement: problematizing, authority, accountability and resources. Table 1 (except thelast column) explains each of these principles in more detail. Problematizing encourages exploration ofmathematical content by students in personally meaningful ways. Student authority allows learners to takeactive roles in the construction of their knowledge, and accountability ensures that authority to share ideascomes with a justification that is open for critique. Resources, as a principle, function at a different level, asshown, in the sense that it also supports the realization of the other principles.Table 1: Principles of productive and equitable disciplinary engagement (PEDE) frameworkResearch elaborating the PDE frameworkFurther investigations are continuing to provide explanations and extend definitions of the PDE principles inorder to (re)conceptualize them for different types of learning environments and for classrooms with diversestudent population. For instance, Venturini and Amade-Escot (2009) highlight that co-constructed micro-ideasby students and teacher during classroom conversations are powerful resources for fostering deeper engagement.Studies also highlight the role of material artefacts, cultural tools, and technology as resources in supportingdisciplinary problematizing by diverse students (Furberg & Arneseth, 2009; Krange, 2007). Two technologyrich learning environments were studied by Rasmussen, Krange, and Ludvigsen (2003). They found that theprocess of achieving joint understanding of tasks and problematizing the use of resources through negotiatingauthority relations were the main challenges in collaborative work within both the learning environments.ICLS 2018 Proceedings833© ISLSIn contrast, several investigations also highlight the issues of equity that arise in spite of the learningenvironment being well-structured and productive. For example, Philip, Olivares-Pasillas, and Rocha (2016)provided evidence that certain forms of problematizing and resources, like student-generated ideas linking theirracial or gendered experiences with mathematical concepts and challenging dominant ways of understandingcertain academic concepts are fraught with challenges. Minoritized student contributions may get ignored,contested or positioned as less preferable by peers and teachers, leading to unproductive political controversiesand student disengagement. Similarly, Langer-Osuna (2016) found that unbalanced authority structures arise ifthe intellectual contributions and critiques of non-dominant students are undervalued/subdued by socialauthority of other students (like popularity of high-status students). We therefore argue for an understanding ofthe sociocultural and sociopolitical environment and argue the importance of theorizing processes and principlesthat address both. To this end, we offer the principle of positioning and discuss its theoretical and empirical basein the next section.PositioningWe see positioning as a discursive process whereby people dynamically create narratives about others andthemselves mediated by their own subjective histories in the social world around them (Davies & Harré, 1990).How children position themselves and others, and get positioned with respect to academic competence andsocially-constructed identities has been found to be linked to children’s classroom engagement (e.g., Kim &Viesca, 2016; Leiva, 2011; Martin-Beltran, 2013; Wood, 2013). Esmonde (2009a) determined positioning asone of the key four processes that has implications for students’ opportunity to participate and learn. Studentspositioning on the basis of physical characteristics, abilities, and teacher perceptions also influence the kinds ofroles (e.g., explainer vs. listener) and work practices (e.g. individualistic vs. collaborative vs. instructive)students assume or are given during collaborative work (e.g., Esmonde, 2009b; Sawyer, Frey & Brown, 2013;Wood, 2013). Further, studies show girls, racially minoritized students, and emerging multilingual students areoften positioned out of ongoing disciplinary discussions by peers and teachers (Bang, Warren, Rosebery, &Medin, 2012; Martin, 2000; Moschkovich, 1999; Philip, Olivares-Pasillas, & Rocha, 2016). Further, studentsirrespective of race or gender may get positioned as slow, incompetent, or learning-disabled based on their priorperformances (Ben-yehuda, Lavy, Linchevski, & Sfard, 2015; Lambert, 2015), or as disruptive if their behaviorsdo not align with what is considered appropriate in the dominant culture (Langer-Osuna, 2016; Wortham, 2004).The aforementioned studies demonstrate how micro-interactional acts of positioning structure learning.We thus locate the importance of positioning for engagement and propose a consequential fifth principle to thecurrent PDE framework: (Re-)Positioning. We assert that with explicit attention to the mechanisms ofpositioning we shift PDE toward PEDE toward direct engagement with power.Re-positioning as the fifth principleThe core idea behind repositioning is that teachers pay explicit attention to the issues of power and positioningarising in the classroom interactions, and reposition students perceived as low-status in order to provide andmaintain their access to mathematical discourse and participation (See Table 1, last column). For this, we buildon (a) Cohen & Lotan’s (1997, 2004) multi-ability treatment with its specific focus on students’ behaviors,emotions, and expressions, and (b) Hand, Penuel, & Gutierrez’s (2013) multi-framing treatment to emphasizeteacher moves. We consider the principle of repositioning as a dance of teacher authority where teacherdynamically moves in and out of different teaching frames to support all students’ needs, to recognize studentmathematical discourses as intricately linked to their racial and cultural identities, and publicly emphasize thatconnecting emotionally or culturally to the topic is a sign of engagement. However, we acknowledge that withthe addition of repositioning as a possible principle, there also comes a necessary revision to the original fourprinciples—what are considered as valuable resources, what it means to problematize, become intellectualauthority, and be accountable. As such, problematizing is about encouraging disciplinary uncertainties to betaken up by learners as linked to political, cultural and social realities. Learners are authorized to share whatthey really think about the disciplinary concepts, and also about political, cultural and social issues in relationwith those concepts. Learners are responsible to justify their contributions that are open for critique vis-à-vispolitically, culturally, and socially lived experiences of people. Culturally-relevant resources are used inconjunction with their political, cultural, and social meanings that are embedded within them to advancedisciplinary learning. We will describe these extensions further in the context of an example below.Furthermore, it is also important to ensure that repositioning does not come at the expense of disciplinaryrigorousness. We have conceptualized connections between Repositioning and the other principles of PDE inTable 2. The best way to recommend our proposal is to demonstrate it using an example as we do below.ICLS 2018 Proceedings834© ISLSTable 2: Illustrating affordances and limitations of PDE for equity and how repositioning addresses thoselimitations.Example from the literatureAfter conducting an extensive review of the mathematics and science education literature, we carefully chose afew rich empirical examples to illustrate how PDE principles might get renegotiated in-the-moment as a resultof emergent power dynamics, leading to sabotaged work of engaged students and committed teachers. Wepresent here one especially rich example of several examples we chose and re-analyzed. This example (Philip,Olivares-Pasillas, & Rocha, 2016) that we present below was originally analyzed by the authors to drawattention to the racial contestations that occurred in the classroom as a result of the racial context that theactivity was embedded in. We repurpose their data to analyze student engagement, with the content and witheach other (i.e., peers and teacher), to highlight mechanisms that afforded productive disciplinary engagementbut limited student equitable participation.Philip, Olivares-Pasillas, & Rocha (2016) investigated interactions of students involved in the datavisualization activity in an urban high school computer science classroom, which was designed to be culturallyrelevant for the youth of color. The students were given graphics representing geographical rental patterns oftwo movies in the Los Angeles area: a popular, mainstream movie “The curious case of Benjamin Button” and aniche, independent, Black movie “Not easily broken”. Using this example, we first identify how it exemplifiesproductive disciplinary engagement (which was not the original article’s focus, but is important for the currentinvestigation) despite particular students being adversely positioned during classroom interactions. We thenshow how the use of PEDE would necessarily illuminate for the designers and analyst (researcher, teacher)issues of power that must be mitigated in order for this to also reflect equitable disciplinary engagement.Events evidencing productive disciplinary engagementThe given activity was open-ended, group-worthy, and culturally relevant. Students immediately becamepassionately involved in the discussion and had authority to share their ideas while using the given resources(data visualization graphs). For instance, a couple of students recognized the neighborhoods in the given graphswhere the first mainstream movie did not do well saying “Because they Black” and “ghetto” (we will refer backto this moment in the next section). William, an African-American student, noticed that in those sameneighborhoods, however, the other Black movie did better. He explained that since it is a Black movie, moreAfrican-Americans watched it. The teacher publicly recognized William’s hypothesis and labelled him as theauthor of the idea. At the same time, the teacher also held him accountable for his explanation by offering analternative explanation of how movies get marketed differently irrespective of race. William, however, feltICLS 2018 Proceedings835© ISLSstrongly about his black solidarity hypothesis and stuck with it. For our purposes, we notice that Williamproblematized the data visualization from a racial point of view, which was more meaningful to him. Later inthe discussion, the teacher and other students pursued the teacher’s marketing explanation more rigorously. Atthis time, another black female student, Jessica contributed to William’s idea by utilizing the given graphs onother states like Atlanta and Boston to critically justify his argument about black solidarity over marketing.To summarize, we noticed students’ productive disciplinary engagement through the enactment of PDEprinciples, namely, problematizing, authority, accountability, and resources. In the next set of episodes, we willhighlight those classroom interactions which we cannot possibly explain by just using the PDE framework.Events leading towards inequitable disciplinary engagementPhilip, Olivares-Pasillas, & Rocha (2016) highlighted in the article how students’ implicit positioning ofAfrican-Americans (and thus of William and Jessica) as “ghetto”, arguably a term loaded with negativeconnotations for Black population, initiated events of “microaggression” in the classroom. Students keptmocking and ridiculing William throughout the lesson using racial slurs. However, William and Jessicacontinued to support their hypothesis using evidence-based argumentation even when they continued gettingmocked by the other students and their argument disregarded by the teacher. The discussion that started on aproductive note soon turned into a commotion. It ended with William asking to move on to the next assignmentin frustration. William and Jessica remained silent and disengaged for the rest of the session.Additionally, we note that by pressing for his marketing argument over William’s black solidarityargument, the teacher unwantedly subdued an important act of problematizing, and positioned William’sargument as inconsequential. Teacher’s exclusive focus on the content and predetermined explanations,ostensibly, overpowered the student needs to understand the racial context and its implications for theirdisciplinary argumentation.How repositioning might foster productive equitable disciplinary engagement?We use the revised PEDE framework to argue that if students’ acts of racial positioning were monitored andaddressed by the teacher, the important resources in the form of ideas that were being co-constructed in themoment by the students, rather than going unnoticed, could be utilized towards building a productive andequitable learning community.Utilizing co-constructed political ideas as resources through multi-framing treatmentThe racialized context that was arising in the classroom was also in fact allowing students to co-constructimportant ideas. We highlight two instances where student-generated ideas could be explored (and racial slurscurbed) with the support of the teacher to explicitly reposition the Black students and their contributions asmeaningful. First, by shifting to a coaching frame, rather than giving students authority to negotiate or constructracial meanings by themselves, the teacher could curb students’ initial negative positioning of African Americanstudents as “ghetto”. Second, by shifting to a cultural frame, the teacher could redirect students’ attention to theracial/ cultural relevance for understanding movie popularity rankings, therefore offering a more connectedexplanation of the black solidarity and marketing hypotheses. Furthermore, by utilizing student-constructedideas as resources, the teacher could have also helped other non-black students gain racial understanding andappreciation about what it means to be black. Authors refer to this as fostering “data literacy about race”.Repositioning students using multi-ability treatmentWilliam productively drew on his cultural knowledge to make sense of the data; William’s expertise illustrated,in authors’ words, his “racial literacy about data”. The teacher could publicly recognize William’s expertise inthe class. This could reposition William as an expert, while highlighting to the students other perspectivesnecessary to competently explore and analyze data. Similarly, by publicly and explicitly recognizing howJessica employed the data creatively to present evidence in support of the black solidarity argument, she couldbe repositioned as an expert on employing disciplinary practices of evidence-based argumentation andcontributing to other’s ideas. This could present to students other models of successful data exploration, andalso help divert their demeaning racial language towards practices aligned with the discipline.ConclusionIn this paper, we suggested expanding the PDE framework to PEDE (Productive and Equitable DisciplinaryEngagement) by positing positioning as one way to press the framework in its engagement with issues of power.Re-positioning describes ways in which researchers can analyze and teachers can address students’ racial/gendered/ cultural positioning of each other, which often times create imbalances in student participation andICLS 2018 Proceedings836© ISLSuptake of opportunities. We submit that such a focus forces a more specific articulation of the possibilities andpromises of public education (and in particular, mathematics education) as a social and political good thatadvances democracy. However, we still need more work to demystify social processes embedded within theseprinciples and clarify how they negotiate hierarchies of relational power and positioning. During ourpresentation, we will also discuss implications of our work for teacher preparation and professionaldevelopment programs, and for learning environments with or without technology.ReferencesApple, M. W. (2006). Understanding and interrupting neoliberalism and neoconservatism in education.Pedagogies, 1(1), 21-26.Bang, M., Warren, B., Rosebery, A. S., & Medin, D. (2012). Desettling Expectations in Science Education.Human Development, 55(5-6), 302-318.Barron, B., & Darling-Hammond, L. (2008). Teaching for Meaningful Learning: A Review of Research onInquiry-Based and Cooperative Learning. Book Excerpt. George Lucas Educational Foundation.Ben-yehuda, M., Lavy, I., Linchevski, L., & Sfard, A. (2015). Chapter lifting the labels: A cautionary storyabout stories we tell about mathematics students. More Lessons Learned from Research, Vol 1,National Council of Teachers of Mathmatics. (JANUARY 2015), 135–146.Cobb, P., Yackel, E., & Wood, T. (1992). Interaction and learning in mathematics classroom situations.Educational studies in mathematics, 23(1), 99-122.Cohen, E., & Lotan, R. (Eds.). (1997). Working for Equity in Heterogeneous Classrooms: Sociological Theoryin Action. New York: Teacher's College Press.Cohen, E. G., & Lotan, R. A. (2004). Equity in heterogeneous classrooms. Handbook of research onmulticultural education, 2, 736-750.Common Core State Standards Initiative. (2010). Standards for mathematical practice. Retrieved fromhttp://www.corestandards.org/Math/Practice/Davies, B., & Harré, R. (1990). Positioning: The discursive production of selves. Journal for the theory ofsocial behaviour, 20(1), 43-63.Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction,20(4), 399-483.Esmonde, I. (2009a). Ideas and identities: Supporting equity in cooperative mathematics learning. Review ofEducational Research, 79(2), 1008-1043.Esmonde, I. (2009b). Mathematics learning in groups: Analyzing equity in two cooperative activity structures.The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(2), 247-284.Forman, E. A., & Ford, M. J. (2014). Authority and accountability in light of disciplinary practices in science.International Journal of Educational Research, 64, 199-210.Furberg, A., & Arnseth, H. C. (2009). The importance of socio-cultural context for understanding students’meaning making in the study of genetics. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 4(1), 211-219.Gutiérrez, R. (2013). The sociopolitical turn in mathematics education. Journal for Research in MathematicsEducation, 44(1), 37-68.Hand, V., Penuel, W. R., & Gutiérrez, K. D. (2013). (Re) framing educational possibility: Attending to powerand equity in shaping access to and within learning opportunities. Human Development, 55(5-6), 250268.Hickey, D. T., & Rehak, A. (2013). Wikifolios and participatory assessment for engagement, understanding, andachievement in online courses. Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 22(4), 407-441.Hodge, L. (2008). Student roles and mathematical competence in two contrasting elementary classes.Mathematics Education Research Journal, 20(1), 32-51.Kim, J., & Viesca, K. (2016). Three reading-intervention teachers’ identity positioning and practices to motivateand engage emergent bilinguals in an urban middle school. Teaching and Teacher Education.Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0742051X16300038Krange, I. (2007). Students’ conceptual practices in science education. Cultural studies of scienceeducation, 2(1), 171-203.Kumpulainen, K. (2014). The legacy of productive disciplinary engagement. International Journal ofEducational Research, 64, 215-220.Lambert, R. (2015). Constructing and resisting disability in mathematics classrooms: a case study exploring theimpact of different pedagogies. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 89(1), 1-18.ICLS 2018 Proceedings837© ISLSLanger-Osuna, J. M. (2011). How Brianna became bossy and Kofi came out smart: Understanding thetrajectories of identity and engagement for two group leaders in a project-based mathematicsclassroom. Canadian Journal of Science, Mathematics and Technology Education, 11(3), 207-225.Langer-Osuna, J. M. (2016). The Social Construction of Authority Among Peers and Its Implications forCollaborative Mathematics Problem Solving. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 18(2), 107-124.Leiva, C. (2011). Positioning and Latinas/os A Study of Small-Group Interactions in Mathematics. Retrievedfrom https://indigo.uic.edu/handle/10027/9081Lewis, C., & Moje, E. B. (2003). Sociocultural perspectives meet critical theories. International Journal ofLearning, 10, 1979-1995.Martin, D. B. (2000). Mathematics success and failure among African-American youth: The roles ofsociohistorical context, community forces, school influence, and individual agency. Routledge.Martin-Beltran, M. (2013). “I don’t feel as embarrassed because we’re all learning”: Discursive positioningamong adolescents becoming multilingual. International Journal of Educational Research. Retrievedfrom http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0883035513001043Moschkovich, J. N. (1999). Understanding the needs of Latino students in reform-oriented mathematicsclassrooms. Changing the faces of mathematics: Perspectives on Latinos, 4, 5-12.National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2014). Principles to actions: Ensuring mathematical success forall.National Research Council, Committee on Early Childhood Mathematics. (2009). Mathematics Learning inEarly Childhood: Paths Toward Excellence and Equity. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Philip, T. M., Olivares-Pasillas, M. C., & Rocha, J. (2016). Becoming Racially Literate About Data and DataLiterate About Race: Data Visualizations in the Classroom as a Site of Racial-Ideological MicroContestations. Cognition and Instruction, 34(4), 361-388.Rasmussen, I., Krange, I., & Ludvigsen, S. R. (2003). The process of understanding the task: how is agencydistributed between students, teachers and representations in technology-rich learningenvironments?. International Journal of Educational Research, 39(8), 839-849.Sawyer, K., Frey, R., & Brown, P. (2013). Knowledge building discourse in peer-led team learning (PLTL)groups in first-year general chemistry. In Productive multivocality in the analysis of group interactions(pp. 191-204). Springer US.Schoenfeld, A. H. (2013). Classroom observations in theory and practice. ZDM, 45(4), 607-621.Shah, N., & Leonardo, Z. (2016). LEARNING DISCOURSES OF RACE AND MATHEMATICS INCLASSROOM INTERACTION. Power and Privilege in the Learning Sciences: Critical andSociocultural Theories of Learning, 50.Smith, M. S., & Stein, M. K. (1998). Selecting and Creating Mathematical Tasks: From Research to Practice.Mathematics teaching in the middle school, 3(5), 344-50.Venturini, P., & Amade-Escot, C. (2014). Analysis of conditions leading to a productive disciplinaryengagement during a physics lesson in a disadvantaged area school. International Journal ofEducational Research,64, 170-183.Wood, M. B. (2013). Mathematical micro-identities: Moment-to-moment positioning and learning in a fourthgrade classroom. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 44(5), 775-808.Wortham, S. (2004). From good student to outcast: The emergence of a classroom identity. ethos, 32(2), 164187.Yackel, E., & Cobb, P. (1996). Sociomathematical norms, argumentation, and autonomy inmathematics. Journal for research in mathematics education, 458-477.Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., & Messina, R. (2009). Designs for collective cognitive responsibility inknowledge-building communities. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(1), 7-44.ICLS 2018 Proceedings838© ISLS