Is Student Frustration in Learning Games More Associated WithGame Mechanics or Conceptual Understanding?Shamya Karumbaiah, University of Pennsylvania, shamya@upenn.eduSeyedahmad Rahimi, Florida State University, sr13y@my.fsu.eduRyan S Baker, University of Pennsylvania, ryanshaunbaker@gmail.comValerie Shute, Florida State University, vshute@admin.fsu.eduSidney K. D’Mello, University of Colorado Boulder, sidney.dmello@colorado.eduAbstract: Digital games have evolved as an engaging medium for learning. This paper studiesthe interaction between game design and student affective experience. Data from 137 studentsplaying a learning game was analyzed to identify the factors correlating with student frustration.Results suggest that in this well-designed game, difficulty associated with conceptualunderstanding is more predictive of student frustration than difficulty with the game mechanics.IntroductionIn the past couple of decades, researchers from various fields like math, science, reading, language arts, health,and physics have looked into using digital games as vehicles for learning (Ke, 2009). The cognitive-affective stateof frustration plays a significant role both in the experience of students and their learning (Iepsen, Bercht, &Reategui, 2013). It is relatively poorly understood what elements in the design of games or specific levels in thosegames are associated with the emergence of this affective state. In this paper, we focus on examining therelationship between two keys elements of a game level - conceptual understanding and game mechanics -- andstudent frustration. Thus, the main research question of this paper is whether difficulty with game mechanics orconceptual understanding is more strongly associated with student frustration, in a puzzle-based learning game.MethodPhysics Playground (PP; Shute & Ventura, 2013) is a two-dimensional game which has been developed to helpsecondary school students understand conceptual physics. The primary physics concepts in PP include Newton'slaws of motion, energy, and torque. The player creates simple machines (i.e., ramp, springboard, pendulum, andlever) to guide a green ball to hit a red balloon (goal) by using a mouse and drawing directly on the screen. Theplayer analyzes the givens (what he/she sees on the screen) and sketches a solution by drawing new objects onthe screen (see Figure 1). Each level (total of 74) in PP has been scored on two types of difficulty: GameMechanics (GM), and Physics Understanding difficulty (PU). In simple terms, game mechanics difficulty relatesto the aspects of the level that makes it harder to solve whereas physics understanding difficulty corresponds tocomplexity of the content-related aspects of the game.We used rubrics developed by the PP research team (including learning science researchers, instructionaldesigners, game developers, and physics experts) to score the game mechanics (GM) and physics understanding(PU) difficulties of each level. The GM rubric included the following aspects of the level - position of the ball(over or below the balloon), the number of obstacles between the ball and the balloon, whether a hint was givenwithin the name of the level, whether the player needs to synchronize actions in order to solve the level, and thenumber of sub goals needed to solve the level. For the PU rubric, the physicists identified the primary andsecondary physics concepts for each level. The rubric considers the conceptual order of the primary concept ofthe level (force and motion = 0, momentum and energy = 1, torque = 2), the need to either balance the forces (i.e.,equilibrium or Newton's third law = +1) or conservation of energy (i.e., energy can transfer or conservation ofmomentum = +1), and checks if primary and secondary concepts are the subtopics of same parent topic (e.g.,Newton's first and second law) or of a different parent topic (e.g., Newton's first law of motion and energy cantransfer)=1. Each level has been scored by two raters, and conflicts between the raters were then resolved throughdialogues. The raw GM and PU scores are rescaled to 1-5.Participants of the study consisted of 137 8th and 9th grades students (57 male, 80 female) enrolled in apublic school in the southeastern U.S. They played PP in their 55-minute class period in a computer-enabledclassroom over two days. Observers used the Baker Rodrigo Ocumpaugh Monitoring Protocol (BROMP 2.0)(Ocumpaugh et al., 2015) to label students’ affective states while they played the PP game. Frustration wasobserved 11.3% of the time in this environment.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1385© ISLSResultsAmong the 74 levels in PP, tutorial levels and levels with less than 15 labeled students were filtered out to focuson levels with an adequate number of data points. In the 27 levels that remained, the mean GM and PU values are2.10 (SD = 0.62) and 2.88 (SD = 0.99). For each level, the percentage of students who were labeled as frustratedat least once was calculated resulting in an average of 15.02% (SD = 6.56%) across the final levels.Regression analysis was conducted to estimate the relationship between student frustration and the GMand PU individually (see Table 1). An ordinary least squares model was used for all regression analysis. Theresults show that PU is a significant predictor of frustration (p < 0.05, Cohen’s d = 0.96). However, GM is not asignificant predictor of frustration. Among the game levels included in this analysis, PU only takes values of 2and 4. The Cohen’s d indicates a large effect size between these two groups.To further understand the effects of PU, the levels were analyzed based on the primary physics conceptinvolved to solve the level. The top three concepts were energy can transfer (EcT), Newton’s 1st Law (N 1st L)and properties of torque (PoT). We see that EcT as a primary concept is the most predictive of student frustration(p < 0.01, d = 1.48; see Table 2).Table 1: Results of regression analysis on GM and PU (individual models)R2PredictorsBtpGMPU0.595.680.282.390.7760.025*Cohen’s d0.0030.1850.96*p < 0.05Table 2: Results of regression analysis on the primary concepts (individual models)PredictorsBtpEcTN 1st LPoT7.52-4.66-3.383.46-1.78-1.020.0020.0870.317*R2Cohen’s d0.320.110.041.48*p < 0.01DiscussionThis study examined the association between student frustration and two key elements of a learning game. Ourresults suggest that frustration is significantly correlated with the conceptual understanding of the physics content,but not to the mechanics of the game itself. This indicates that a student is less likely to get frustrated when he/shehas a conceptual understanding of the solution even when implementing it within the game itself is harder. Further,we also observed that frustration is closely related to a specific physics concept, “energy can transfer”, a conceptthat is more complex and also involves relatively more difficult machines. It is important to understand the causesand triggers of frustration in order to design interventions that can meaningfully improve student engagement andlearning. This study is a first step towards identifying how student frustration relates to the characteristics of thisspecific game. Further research is warranted to see if our findings generalize to other student demographics,learning game settings, and domains of study, and to understand causal relationships between elements of gamedesign and student emotions.ReferencesKe, F. (2009). A qualitative meta-analysis of computer games as learning tools. Handbook of research on effectiveelectronic gaming in education, 1, 1-32.Iepsen, E. F., Bercht, M., & Reategui, E. (2013, October). Detection and assistance to students who showfrustration in learning of algorithms. In Frontiers in Education Conference, 2013 IEEE (pp.1183-1189).IEEE.Ocumpaugh, J., Baker, R. S., & Rodrigo, M. M. T. (2015). Baker Rodrigo Ocumpaugh monitoring protocol(BROMP) 2.0 technical and training manual. New York, NY and Manila, Philippines: Teachers College,Columbia University and Ateneo Laboratory for the Learning Sciences.Shute, V. J., & Ventura, M. (2013). Measuring and supporting learning in games: Stealth assessment. Cambridge,MA: The MIT Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1386© ISLS