Characterizing Digital Contexts of Collaborative Learning:An Updated Classification of Computer-Mediated CommunicationAlyssa Friend Wise, New York University, alyssa.wise@nyu.eduTrena M. Paulus, University of Georgia, tpaulus@uga.eduAbstract: The learning sciences is concerned with studying how learners interact with eachother in technologically-mediated environments, but core similarities and differences amongtools are rarely addressed, limiting our ability to build a collective knowledge base. Toaddress the issue, we present a revised version of Herring’s (2007) scheme for classifyingtechnological contexts of communication, updated for current technologies and their uses.The learning sciences has a long tradition of carefully documenting learner interactions in technologicallymediated environments, with patterns in communication connected to specific affordances of the tools and theways they are taken up in the context of established or emergent practices. However, in attending to theparticulars of design, we often lose sight of fundamental technological characteristics that play a role in shapingactivity. Characterizing common aspects of tools can offer a language with which to discuss computer-mediatedcommunication (CMC) across tools and contexts. Drawing on literature from communication, linguistics,informatics, and sociology, Herring (2007) presented a scheme for such classification (see Table 1a). Noelement is deterministic, but each describes a key characteristic that can influence the structure and substance ofonline talk. While Herring’s scheme has been used extensively in other fields, there has been limited uptake inthe learning sciences. At the same time, there have been dramatic changes in the technological capabilities ofCMC and socio-cultural practices surrounding its use, creating a need to update the original elements. Therevised scheme is shown in Table 1b. Some elements have merged with others, some were added in response tonew technological capabilities, and some retained their name but changed greatly in the underlying description.Table 1: (a) Original and (b) Updated Technological Characteristics of CMC Contexts(a)Original Technological CharacteristicsSynchronicityMessage Transmission (1-way vs. 2-way)Persistence of transcriptChannels of communicationSize of message bufferAnonymous messagingMessage formatPrivate messagingQuotingFiltering(b)Updated Technological CharacteristicsTimingSynchronicitySimultaneityPersistenceMessagesCommunication ChannelsMessage SizeStorage Structure & Display FormatPeopleIdentity MarkersCommunity MarkersControlsPrivacyFiltering, Searching & SortingTiming. Synchronicity. Historically there was a clear line between systems intended for synchronous (sametime) and asynchronous (time-separated) use, but over the last decade there has been convergence of thesemodalities (Herring & Androutsopouluos, 2015). Traditionally synchronous tools (e.g. chat) now store messagesto support asynchronous use, while the pervasiveness of internet connectivity supports synchronous use oftraditionally asynchronous tools (e.g. email). In large groups, latency in message creation, receipt and reply candiffer across individuals as well. Synchronicity is now thus best considered as a continuum and one whichdepends both on the technology and how it is used. Differences in synchronicity have effects on reply latency,message length, formality and complexity. Simultaneity. Previously discussed as one- versus two-waytransmission, the broader concept of simultaneity refers to the technical possibility for overlap incommunication. Systems that support near-simultaneity require a comment to be composed in its entirety beforeit is transmitted to others. The system may or may not provide an indicator the composition is occurring (e.g.“Jo is typing”). In contrast, systems that support high-simultaneity transmit messages as they are composed on acharacter-by-character basis, allowing for interruption and overlapping talk. The degree of simultaneity possibleand indicators of message composition influence turn-taking, interruptions and how comments are interleaved.Persistence. Persistence describes how many messages remain stored in a system for how long. Traditionallyasynchronous media have effectively everlasting persistence. Traditionally synchronous mediums were in partused this way because the length of the transcript retained was limited, with new comments replacing the oldICLS 2018 Proceedings1491© ISLS(Herring, 2007). However, as described above, persistent transcripts have now become a feature of formerlysynchronous tools leading to their hybrid use. At the same time, some tools (e.g. SnapChat) have made timelimited persistence (intentional ephemerality) a feature by deliberately capping the duration for which a messageis stored. The anticipation (or absence) of persistence has implications for what learners will say to each other.Messages. Communication Channels. While CMC tools traditionally used text as the primary communicationchannel, visual and audio channels are often now supported, and in some cases designated as preferred (e.g.Instagram). Traditional analysis has focused primarily on textual communication, but the increased use ofalternate channels requires incorporation of new analysis techniques, for example methods for analyzing visualcommunication. Many CMC tools also include additional communication channels via the application of predetermined or user-generated tags (e.g. “likes” “up-votes” “#greatpoint). When available, such tags can take theplace of messages that would have been written, thus need to be considered as such in analysis. Message Size.Allowed message size typically refers to an explicit restriction on the number of characters in the textual portionof a message. While many CMC systems are effectively without cap, other tools are strongly constrained, forexample Twitter’s well-known character limit. Textual content embedded in images can also be implicitlylimited due to restrictions on image size and the need for readability. Limits on allowed message size can lead tothe use of abbreviations and particular discourse strategies. Tools can also tie display properties to messagelength, thereby affecting their use; for example Facebook currently “amplifies” (shows in large colored text)posts of 85 characters or less. Storage Structure & Display Format. Storage structure refers to relationship(s)between messages, while display format indicates the way in which messages and these relationships arepresented to learners. Storage structures can be single stream, threaded, or networked and constrains, but doesnot determine message display (e.g. chat tools add new contributions to the bottom of a list while blogs placenewest entries at the top). In addition, organization of thread display by topic or by para-content (e.g. views, upvotes and likes) can influence what messages are read and replied to. This is important to consider when makingclaims about the construction, popularity or importance of particular portions of online talk.People. Identity Markers. Some CMC systems allow learners to mask their identity when sending messageseither by not logging in (true anonymity) or while logged in (system-protected anonymity). This can supportself-disclosure and/or anti-social behavior (Herring, 2007). A variant is the use of pseudonyms through systemsthat allow (or require) learners to select a handle different from their name. Pseudonyms support continuityacross messages, providing support for identity play. At the other end of the spectrum, systems such asFacebook attempt to limit users to a single account that is tightly tied to their real world identity. Such systemscan force learners to reconcile different aspects of themselves, either through accepting the mingling, regulatingtheir disclosure, or through careful use of privacy controls. Community Markers. The rise and evolution ofsocial networking has brought about new sets of features with affordances for activity that can play a role inonline talk (Herring & Androutsopouluos, 2015). These include establishing linkages between messages or useraccounts (e.g. two-way “friends” or one-way “followers”). Traversing such connections makes it more likelythat learners will encounter messages shared by certain people, thus affecting how online talk proceeds andmaking it difficult to claim that people have innate (rather than induced) affinity for certain kinds of content.Controls. Privacy. Early CMC tools included the basic ability to send messages publicly or privately. Recenttools offer complex systems of privacy controls for “public” messages (e.g. share comments only with those inyour network or segmented subpopulations of this). This can lead different streams of talk to have distinct,limited groups of potential participants and result in participants each seeing a different, partial, version of aconversation. This splintering of experience impacts inferences that can be drawn about a conversation existingas “shared” among a group. Filtering, Searching & Sorting. Complementary to privacy controls by messageauthors, these tools give learners control over what messages from others they see. Current systems offer a widevariety of options for message inclusion, including searching by learner or keyword. Sorting can also be donebased on timing or learner-created para-data (e.g. “likes”). Application of hashtags to denote thematicallyrelated content provides an additional (privileged) vocabulary for filtering. Together these tools can createamalgamations of messages that are read by learners as in relation to each other even if not created in this way.ReferencesHerring, S. C. (2007). A faceted classification scheme for computer-mediated discourse. Language@ Internet,4(1), 1-37.Herring, S. C., & Androutsopoulos, J. (2015). Computer-mediated discourse 2.0. In The handbook of discourseanalysis, 2nd ed. (pp. 127-151). Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1492© ISLS