Affordances of Digital, Textile and Living Mediafor Designing and Learning Biology in K-12 EducationYasmin B. Kafai (organizer), University of Pennsylvania, kafai@upenn.eduMichael Horn (discussant), Northwestern University, michael-horn@northwestern.eduJoshua Danish, Indiana University, jdanish@indiana.eduMegan Humburg, Indiana University, mahumbur@indiana.eduXintian Tu, Indiana University, tuxi@iu.eduBria Davis, Indiana University, davis217@umail.iu.eduChris Georgen, Indiana University, cgeorgen@umail.iu.eduNoel Enyedy, UCLA, enyedy@gseis.ucla.eduEngin Bumbacher, Stanford University, buben@stanford.eduPaulo Blikstein, Stanford University, paulob@stanford.eduPeter Washington, Stanford University, peter100@stanford.eduIngmar Riedel-Kruse, Stanford University, ingmar@stanford.eduTamara Clegg, University of Maryland, tclegg@umd.eduVirginia Byrne, University of Maryland, vbyrne@umd.eduLeyla Norooz, University of Maryland, leylan@umd.eduSeokbin Kang, University of Maryland, sbkang@cs.umd.eduJon Froehlich, University of Washington, jonf@cs.washington.eduJustice T. Walker, University of Pennsylvania, justicew@gse.upenn.eduDebora Lui, University of Pennsylvania, deblui@upenn.eduEmma Anderson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, eanderso@mit.eduYasmin B. Kafai, University of Pennsylvania, kafai@upenn.eduAbstract: In this symposium we are examining the affordances that particular materials holdfor supporting learning biology inside and outside of school along three dimensions: (1) digitalmaterials that encompass screens and software through which students can interact, (2) textilematerials that allow students to wear bodysuits that can help them visualize physical movementson interactive displays, and (3) interactive materials that allow students to interact with livingmicroorganisms through games in science museums or through computational models thatstudents design and test against the real data in science classrooms. Panelists will discuss howaffordances of tinkerability (messing around), perceptibility (seeing results), expressivity(customizing experiences), and usability (using outcomes) entered into their considerationswhen designing and studying of environments, games, and design activities for interacting andlearning with biology.OverviewIn this symposium we want to turn our attention how affordances of different media—digital, textile, and living—can be leveraged for learning and teaching about biology using participatory simulations, gaming environments,or design activities. The concept of affordances, first introduced by Gibson (1977) emphasizes that objects in theworld are not just perceived in terms of their shapes and spatial relationships but also in terms of their possibilitiesfor interacting with them. Later work by Norman (2013) applied the concept to technologies and interactivity.Considerable research has extended affordances into design of educational construction kits and tools to makegames, robots, wearables and many other artifacts, on and off the screen (e.g., Blikstein, 2015; Resnick et al.,2008). More recently, the development of synthetic and DIY biology has made many new tools accessible andaffordable for non-professional biologists and anyone interested in “hacking and tinkering with biology” (p. 258,Kuznetsov, Taylor, Regan, Villar & Paulos, 2012). However, the affordances of playing and making with biologyare quite distinct from those with digital or textile materials and challenge many of the insights that have beengained in previous research, especially those that consider the quality of hands-on activities, processes of making,and the sharable, usable and personally meaningful artifacts key in generating interest and motivating learning(Peppler, Halverson, & Kafai, 2016 a and b):Tinkerability is characterized as playful, experimental iterative style of engagement in which learnersare continually reassessing their goals, exploring new paths and imagining new possibilities—or as having aconversation with the material. In these definitions, tinkering is often seen in opposition to planning (top downinstead of bottom up). However, many activities with living cells are distinct from the ‘typical’ contexts of digitalICLS 2018 Proceedings1275© ISLSor textile creation since these processes are time-dependent: they require a full run of the entire lab proceduresbefore one can see the expected result. In other words, whereas tinkering in engineering, crafting, and codingcontexts can occur because individual processes are discrete—iterating on a gear mechanism or developing aspecially defined procedure—in biology they occur in a holistic fashion—fixing a ‘mistake’ means doing a labprocedure all over again and waiting for the result. Additionally, tinkering with living cells involves liquids ratherthan the discrete solid parts seen in ‘typical’ electronic making, something that makes the process of tinkeringinherently more difficult.Perceptibility illustrates how designs can yield immediate feedback to users either on the the progressor results of their interactions. For instance, a coder can instantaneous see the result of a bug they fixed in aprogram whereas in biology this process is slowed down because of the requirements of the living organism.While microorganisms grow quite rapidly, it often takes twelve hours or more for any genetic transformation toyield an outcome. More importantly, due to scale and colorlessness of the microorganisms, makers often cannotsee the outcomes of their designs or their changes at first.Expressivity because processes are not yet as customizable and personalizable as seen within digital ortextile making. In many maker activities, the notion that individuals can make personal artifacts or designs thatare based on their interests, desires, or needs, is considered one of the driving motivations for student engagementand learning in maker activities. But due to the nascent state of biodesign along with the available tools andprocesses on the market, this individualization is often not easy to accomplish. Whereas consumer-gradeelectronics kits have created opportunities for lay people to create personalized computational designs, peoplewith limited biological knowledge and background are not yet as able to produce biodesigns that fulfill theirindividual goals and purposes. Instead, they must depend on existing protocols and materials developed byexperts.Usability captures the dimension that many designs that can be used by themselves or others for play,learning, or work. In biomaking, usability of created products comes with different affordances and constraints.Because living designs can perish at some point, careful thought must be paid into designing settings that eitherkeep them alive (e.g., enough nutrients, correct temperature) or develop everyday applications that fully make useof their products (e.g., transferring color into textiles). From this perspective, typical making affords numerousready-made situations for usability (e.g., kits, everyday applications), while biomaking has not yet reached thispoint of development in its short history.This symposium brings together researchers from the learning sciences, human-computer-interaction,and computer sciences, and science education to discuss how these affordances featured into their design andresearch of learning and teaching biology within K-12 education inside and outside of school. The first group ofstudies has focused on tangibility by using textile materials in new ways to introduce students of elementary andmiddle school ages to interacting and understanding complex systems. In BeeSim, Joshua Danish and colleagueswill present their efforts of designing bee costumes and flower environments that let second grade studentsemulate the behavior of honey foraging bees. In BodyViz Tammy Clegg and colleagues provide an illustration bydesigning bodywear that can be worn by students as they exercise to visualize on the body as well as on the screentheir movements and collect data. The second group of papers uses living materials on the microscopic level toengage students in interacting and designing. In the work by Paulo Blikstein and colleagues they design museumexhibits in which visitors can play games with living cells by leveraging their light sensitivity while the paper byJustice Walker and colleagues from the University of Pennsylvania, high school students adopt a design approachto biology and learn how to hack microbes in order to create their own biosensors that react to environmentalcontaminants.Each of the research designs illustrates how the affordances of particular materials—digital, textile orliving—can be leveraged to augment learners’ experiences in unexpected ways. To launch the discussion with thelearning science community, each presenter will give a 12-minute overview of how they approached the designof their materials and activities in terms of addressing particular affordances, and then present outcomes fromlearning research. Our discussant, Michael Horn from Northwestern University, will review overarching themesand then open up the panel to Q&A with the audience.Modeling bees by acting as bees in a mixed reality simulationJoshua Danish, Megan Humburg, Xintian Tu, Bria Davis, and Chris Georgen, Indiana University, and NoelEnyedy, UCLAAdvances in mixed-reality and augmented-reality technologies, which allow students to engage with computermodels and simulations using their bodies, have great potential for supporting cognition and learning (Lindgrenand Johnson-Glenberg, 2013). Research in this area has been particularly focused on the value of embodiedICLS 2018 Proceedings1276© ISLScognition, recognizing how moving one’s body can provide unique insights into complex phenomena, particularlywhen coupled with computer simulations that help students to make sense of their movements. However, muchof the work in mixed reality learning environments has focused on non-biological concepts such as physics andchemistry, and frequently focuses on individual learners or dyads. In contrast, the Science through TechnologyEnhanced Play (STEP) project has explored how larger groups of students (ranging from 4-12 at this time) affordunique opportunities for engaging with complex science phenomena in early elementary classrooms Danish et al.,2015). We report on a recent implementation of the STEP: Bees software and curriculum where students take onthe roles of honeybees to understand how bees collect nectar, and how this supports the growth of the hive, aswell as leading to pollination in the local flower population.In designing and refining the STEP environment, we have developed a sociocultural framework forembodied cognition (Danish et al., 2017) which aims to couple prior efforts at understanding the role of the bodyin learning with attention to how the interactions between participants and their peers, teachers, and technologyall play a unique role in supporting cognition and learning. In the STEP: Bees environment, students engage in anumber of participatory simulations (Colella, 2000) where they take on the role of honeybees foraging for nectar.To do this, they physically play the role of honeybees moving around within their classroom (figure 1, right). TheSTEP software uses Microsoft Kinect cameras to track their motion and feed their movement into a computersimulation which is projected at the front of the room (figure 1, left). Thus as students take on the roles of bees,they see bee avatars moving within the computer simulation, responding to their motions. As a result, studentsreceive information and feedback from both their peers and the computer simulation as they embody the roles ofhoneybees.Figure 1. The STEP: Bees Environment. The computer projection (left) depicts honeybee avatars interactingwith a simulated environment while the students move around within the classroom (right).To describe the unique affordances of the biological subject matter in this design, we present and contrastnew analyses from two prior studies. First, we report on an implementation where 16 children ages 7-8 participatedin the STEP: Bees curriculum with two teachers at a public elementary school in a small city in the midwesternUnited States. Previous analyses of the STEP: Bees Environment (Danish et al., 2017) focused on the role ofembodiment in their learning. The present study focused instead on the unique affordances of the biologicalcontext, and of the role of our design for supporting learning within a biological context. To this end, pre-postinterviews and drawings were used to measure changes in students conceptual understanding as a result of theintervention, and video analysis was used to document the process through which students learned the content.Video analysis will demonstrate the unique affordances of small group, embodied mixed reality simulations forhelping students engage with these complex biological phenomena. In particular, we will show how the bodyprovides unique opportunities for tinkerability, while also supplementing the affordances of the computersimulation for enhanced perceptability. Using one’s body also provides unique opportunities for both usabilityand expressivity. In particular, we have found that students move their bodies quite spontaneously, and oftenexpress their understanding both in ways that are interpreted in unique ways by the simulation (e.g., theirmovement in space moves their avatar) and by their peers (e.g., gesture, running, and jumping to convey ideas).Finally, we will provide a contrast with our STEP: Particles environment (Danish et al., 2015) to discuss howICLS 2018 Proceedings1277© ISLSexplorations within this biological context led to new affordances and constraints that differ from the previousphysics context. In particular, students’ ability to take on a first-person anthropomorphized perspective appears tohave led to unique forms of engagement with the content. This will allow us to discuss the unique affordances ofboth using one’s body to study complex science, and using one’s body to study biological concepts where thereis a one-to-one mapping between one’s body and an agent in the system being studied, as well as differentiatingbetween the role of biological contexts of study on student learning in this kind of mixed reality environment.Real-time play in microscopic worldsEngin Bumbacher, Paulo Blikstein, Peter Washington, and Ingmar Riedel-Kruse, Stanford UniversityThe microscopic world of biology is full of wonders to be explored, and that informs our understanding of life atall scales. Children in schools predominantly access this world through static observational microscopy.Observational microscopes open a window into that world, with limited possibilities to manipulate it. Other mediasuch as robotics construction kits, programming languages for children, and videogames have demonstrated theeducational potential of interactivity (Kim et al., 2016); and academia and industry have been developed ways tointeract with microscopic worlds for decades. Our interdisciplinary research groups have explored two ways ofbringing interactivity into biology: real-time interactivity through technology that is in the same physical space asthe user, or remote interactivity through cloud-based systems (see Figure 2). An essential principle to developingthis form of interactivity is to digitize the biological signal, e.g. with computer vision algorithms that trackmicrobiological organisms and processes, and augment and enhance it for use in a variety of ways (see “Dataaugmentation,” Blikstein, 2014).Real-time interactivity lends itself particularly well to ways of playing with the microscopic world. TheRiedel-Kruse Lab built two systems that exploit intuitive notions of interactivity through tactile experiences (i.e.Human-Biology Interaction; Lee et al., 2015): Trap it! (Lee et al., 2015) and LudusScope (Kim et al., 2016). Thesesystems use touch screens, microscopes and augmentation - either through projections or through mobile devices,to create biotic games, i.e. games that operate on the biological processes and allow children to interact with theseprocesses to play games like virtual soccer or maze-based games (Riedel-Kruse et al., 2011). The core biologicalprocess in both systems is the phototactic behavior of Euglena, i.e. the real-time reaction to light in form ofchanges to movement direction. In Trap it!, users can interact with living cells by drawing patterns on atouchscreen displaying the microscope view of the cells. These drawings are projected onto the microscopy fieldas light patterns, prompting observable movement in phototactic responses. In LudusScope, a smartphonemicroscopy platform, users can interact with individual Euglena cells by digitally selecting them via the phonetouch screen, and then influencing their swimming direction via a joystick that controls four directional LEDsarranged around the microscope. Both systems have been used in various informal contexts such as museums. Inthe user studies, the fact that the interaction involved real and not simulated organisms was particularly intriguingfor children, and researchers observed intuitive and playful interactions with the system (Kim et al., 2016; Lee etal., 2015).Figure 2. Left: Real-time interactivity in same physical space: LudusScope and Trap It!. Middle: Remoteinteractivity with microscopes. Right: Lab in the Cloud, model and real data in same representational spaces.Beyond just playing with, interactivity is also powerful for learning about biological phenomena throughauthentic inquiry, enabled by remote laboratories. Remote laboratories consist of physical laboratory equipment,e.g. microscopes or other tools, that is accessible over the internet: But these interactive cloud labs (Hossain etal., 2017) enable multiple users at the same time to execute real biology experiments, in real-time orasynchronously, and to get that data for further analysis. Our labs developed and used two remote laboratories:ICLS 2018 Proceedings1278© ISLSthe physarum lab for remote asynchronous experiments on a slime mold (Hossain et al., 2015); and an interactivecloud lab for both real-time and asynchronous experiments on Euglena (Hossain et al., 2016). These systemsremove crucial access barriers for schools, such as safety concerns, maintenance costs, and logistical requirement,that have impeded inquiry-based approaches in biology classrooms. Furthermore, they are versatile and flexible:by centralizing the core technology, and digitizing the data, they can be implemented in large online courses(Hossain et al., 2017), or in classrooms (Bumbacher et al., 2016).By embedding these core technologies in web applications, we can create systems that enable rich waysof doing inquiry not possible otherwise - instead of having to combine different systems for modeling and forexperimentation, we can integrate affordances for modeling and experimentation into one system. This is in linewith the bifocal modeling framework that brings simulated and real-world data into the same representationalspace for simultaneous, real-time comparison (Blikstein, 2014).Using the Bifocal Modeling framework, we developed a Lab in the Cloud that includes the biologicaldata from the remote lab into a simulation environment; a classroom study using an earlier version of this webapplication showed that students productively engaged in science inquiry (Bumbacher et al., 2016). We arecurrently developing and testing the next iteration of this technology (see Figure 2 right) that has increasedexperimentation, modeling and data representation capabilities. A major focus of this technology is to enablestudents to seamlessly create explicit comparisons between multiple experiments, experiments and models, andmultiple models. We hope that this work will contribute to a theory-driven design framework for technologiesdesigned to engage students in the relevant discursive and reasoning processes of science inquiry that integratepractices of modeling, experimentation and argumentation.Physiological investigations with live physiological sensing and visualizationtoolsTamara Clegg, Virginia Byrne, Leyla Norooz, Seokbin Kang, University of Maryland and Jon Froehlich,University of WashingtonWearable sensing technologies enable new forms of scientific inquiry experiences that enhance learners’ personalconnections to inquiry processes (e.g., asking questions, planning investigations, collecting data, making claims)(Chinn & Malhotra, 2002; Bower & Sturman, 2015). Fitness trackers that learners wear on their wrists, forexample, allow children to capture data about their everyday activities (e.g., steps taken) and vitals (e.g., heartrate) that can be analyzed later on mobile or desktop devices (e.g., Lee & Dumont, 2010). In this paper, we presentthe BodyVis project in which we take a textile and digital approach for helping elementary-age learners understandliving data generated from their own physiological functioning (see figures 3a and b). Unlike other wearableapproaches, we leverage the affordance of perceptibility to provide real-time model-based and analyticvisualizations of learners physiological functioning.We have developed a set of Live Physiological Sensing and Visualization (LPSV) tools that leverage thebody as a platform for inquiry (Clegg et al., 2017). LPSV tools sense and visualize learners’ physiologicalfunctioning (e.g., heart rate, breathing rate) in real time. BodyVis (Norooz et al., 2015), senses and visualizes awearers’ heart rate and breathing rate in real-time on an e-textile shirt that displays a model-based representationof learners’ upper respiratory organs (Figure 3-left). SharedPhys (Kang et al., 2016) allows up to six wearers toproject their heart rate in real time on a large-screen display (Figure 3, right).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1279© ISLSFigure 3. BodyVis (left) and SharedPhys (right) are two LPSV tools that visualize wearers’ live body-data on anelectronic textile (e-textile) shirt and a large-screen display respectively.We implemented these tools in two iterations of a four-session activity sequence in three elementary schoolclassrooms that progress from expiration of the LPSV tools and developing questions, to semi-structured inquiryactivities, and finally planning and implementing learners’ own choice-based investigations. Our analysis of thissequence of activities in a first, second, and fourth grade classroom first in 2016 and then in 2017 includes videodata of learners’ choice-based investigations, interviews with teachers, focus groups with learners, andparticipatory design with teachers between iterations. We draw themes from an Activity Theory analysis of theLPSV classroom ecosystem in 2016 and a case study of learners’ investigations in 2016 and 2017 to understandways the affordances of LPSV tools influenced children’s scientific inquiry experiences.Co-designing the BodyVis and SharedPhys tools and activities with children revealed that childrenwanted more and more opportunities to play and tinker with the BodyVis shirt. Each iteration of BodyVis hasthus provided increasing tinkerability (e.g., ability to remove and replace organs). Learner surveys, focus groupsand video observations show that the perceptibility of LPSV tools’ live visualization was deemed motivating andenjoyable by learners. However, learners need opportunities to pause visualizations and to observe the tools beingused by others to promote analysis and reflection on results. We found that with additional scaffolds, even earlyelementary learners leveraged affordances for expressivity to create novel, personally relevant questions.However, more support is needed for fostering creativity for investigation questions more systematically amongelementary learners of all grades. Finally, our study identified some usability issues that must be considered forbroader use of LPSV tools in the classroom (e.g., rules and norms around touching and sensitive topics that mayarise from live personal health data).Growing and designing biosensors in high school classroomsJustice T. Walker, University of Pennsylvania; Debora Lui, University of Pennsylvania; Emma Anderson,Massachusetts Institute of Technology; and Yasmin Kafai, University of PennsylvaniaThe Maker Movement has had an increased presence in educational settings as researchers have demonstratedhow these hands-on activities can exist in traditional disciplinary areas (Halverson & Sheridan, 2014). Whilemaking has become popular within computing and engineering (Berland, 2016; Martin, 2015), it has been lessemphasized within life sciences. This is partly because maker activities typically involve materials that can behandled and repurposed in flexible ways. Life sciences, on the other hand, often involves living organisms orcompounds that must be handled in particular ways, which are predefined and rote. Here, we argue that designthinking may be a useful frame within which to investigate how life science activities could exist within makercontexts. As defined here, design thinking can be understood as the way that people integrate useful knowledgefrom different disciplines with the goal of creating an artifact that addresses concrete needs (Buchanan, 1992).One promising context for highlighting design in biology is the rapidly growing field of synthetic biology, whichlooks at how living organisms can be manipulated to serve societal purposes and desires (Kuznetsov et al., 2012).In this study, we highlight an approach toward teaching biology which is situated within design thinking,something we call biomaking.We designed a biomaking workshop, called bioSensor, that we implemented with high school studentswithin a STEM elective classroom. We investigated the extent to which students engage in design thinking andpractices throughout the workshop, which was divided into two phases. In the lab phase, students geneticallymodified bacterial cells to make them fluoresce in the presence of a sugar called arabinose. Following, studentsassembled pre-designed devices using common lab materials like petri dishes, clamps, and dialysis tubing suchthat the microbes could be used detect arabinose concentration within a ‘mystery’ solution (see Figure 4a-d). Inthe imagination phase, we asked students to think beyond their tangible artifact toward a hypothetical applicationof synthetic biology to a real-world issue. Groups were assigned different sites across the United States that facewell-known environmental contamination issues (e.g., petroleum in the Gulf of Mexico; phosphorous in LakeErie). We then asked students to design imaginary biosensors to detect pollutants in their assigned environments,which they presented to the class using a design storyboard. This imagination phase was intended to promotestudent design thinking where lab activity constraints and materials were limited due to the nascent state of thefield.We report on the extent to which students engaged in design thinking in the bioSensor workshop. Weanalyze how each activity allowed students to: (1) tinker with ideas and materials, (2) perceive outcomes, (3)express themselves and (4) produce usable final products. Within the lab phase of the workshop, students’ abilityto perceive the outcome of their activity was relatively high—that is, they were able to see if their plates glowedICLS 2018 Proceedings1280© ISLSor not thus indicating a high or low arabinose concentration. Furthermore, the usability of their product wasarguably high within the context of the class since it fulfilled a definite function (i.e., to test for the presence ofthe sugar). However, opportunities for tinkering and personal expression were severely limited within this phasedue to the inherent constraints of wet lab activities in terms of how quickly microbes can respond to genetic ordesign changes and the general irreversibility of these kinds of processes.Figure 4 (a-d). BioSensor construction using bacteria detector (from left to right):(a) Prototype of portable biomakerlab machine; (b) Students inserting the syringes into the machine; (c)Students inputting the transformed bacteria into the dialysis bag; and (d) completed sensor contraption.The imagination phase, on the other hand, provided different affordances for students. While groups werepre-assigned to environmental sites, they each proposed diverse biodesign solutions, which were developedthrough several rounds of critique from other students and the teacher. For instance, projects ranged fromgenetically modified seaweed that would change color to indicate high petroleum concentration in the Gulf ofMexico to mechanical-biological hybrid buoys that would light up in response to high toxic algae levels in LakeErie. In this way, students were provided extended opportunities to tinker with their ideas and express themselvescreatively—affordances not seen within the lab phase of the workshop. From this perspective, the imaginationphase addresses the gap between the available resources and opportunities within synthetic biology and students’interest in actualizing personal designs. As biomaking progresses further as a viable classroom activity, there is aneed to develop ongoing supports and scaffolds that allow students to simultaneous engage with hands-on wetlabactivities in synthetic biology and to develop their design thinking sensibilities within this burgeoning field. Inthis way biomaking can reach its potential in engaging students as a true maker activity.ReferencesAbd-El-Khalick, F., BouJaoude, S., Duschl, R., Lederman, N. G., Mamlok-Naaman, R., Hofstein, A., Niaz, M.,Treagust, D., and Tuan, H.-l. (2004). Inquiry in science education: International perspectives. Sci. Ed.,88(3), 397–419Berland, M. (2016). Making, tinkering, and computational literacy. In K. A. Peppler, E. Halverson, Y.B. Kafai(Eds.), Makeology: Makers as learners (Volume 2) (pp. 196-205). New York, NY: Routledge.Blikstein, P. (2015). Computationally-enhanced toolkits for children: Historical review and a framework for futuredesign. Foundation and Trends in Human-Computer Interaction, 9(1), 1-68.Blikstein, P. (2014). Bifocal modeling: Promoting authentic scientific inquiry through exploring and comparingreal and ideal systems linked in real-time. In Playful user interfaces (pp. 317-352). Springer Singapore.Bower, M., & Sturman, D. (2015). What are the educational affordances of wearable technologies? Computers &Education, 88, 343-353.Buchanan, R. (1992). Wicked problems in design thinking. Design issues, 8(2), 5-21.Bumbacher, E., Hossain, Z., Riedel-Kruse, I., & Blikstein, P. (2016). Where the rubber meets the road: the impactof the interface design on model exploration in science inquiry. In Proceedings of the 12th internationalconference of learning sciences (Vol. 2, pp. 1277–1278). Singapore: ISLS.Chinn, C. A., & Malhotra, B. A. (2002). Epistemologically authentic inquiry in schools: A theoretical frameworkfor evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86(2), 175-218.Clegg, T., Norooz, L., Kang, S., Byrne, V., Katzen, M., Valez, R., ... & Bonsignore, E. (2017, May). LivePhysiological Sensing and Visualization Ecosystems: An Activity Theory Analysis. In Proceedings ofthe 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 2029-2041). New York, NY:ACM.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1281© ISLSColella, V. (2000). Participatory simulations: Building collaborative understanding through immersive dynamicmodeling. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 471-500.Danish, J. A., Enyedy, N., Saleh, A., Lee, C., & Andrade, A. (2015). Science Through Technology EnhancedPlay: Designing to Support Reflection Through Play and Embodiment. In O. Lindwall, Häkkinen, P.,Koschman, T. Tchounikine, P. & Ludvigsen, S. (Ed.), Exploring the Material Conditions of Learning:The Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) Conference (Vol. 1). Gothenburg, Sweden:The International Society of the Learning Sciences.Danish, J., Humburg, M., Saleh, A., Lee, C., Dahn, M., Kiefert, D., & Enyedy, N. (2017, June). A Socio-CulturalFramework for Embodied Cognition. Paper presented at the Jean Piaget Society, San Francisco, CA.Gibson, J.J. (1977). The Theory of Affordances. In R. Shaw & J. Bransford (eds.). Perceiving, Acting, andKnowing: Toward an Ecological Psychology (pp. 67–82). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Hossain, Z., Bumbacher, E., Brauneis, A., Diaz, M., Saltarelli, A., Blikstein, P., & Riedel-Kruse, I. H. (2017).Design Guidelines and Empirical Case Study for Scaling Authentic Inquiry-based Science Learning viaOpen Online Courses and Interactive Biology Cloud Labs. International Journal of Artificial Intelligencein Education, 1-30.Hossain, Z., Jin, X., Bumbacher, E., Chung, A. M., Koo, S., Shapiro, J. D., ... & Riedel-Kruse, I. H. (2015). CloudExperimentation for Biology: Systems Architecture and Utility for Online Education and Research.Biophysical Journal, 108(2), 334a.Kang, S., Norooz, L., Oguamanam, V., Plane, A. C., Clegg, T. L., & Froehlich, J. E. (2016, June). SharedPhys:Live Physiological Sensing, Whole-Body Interaction, and Large-Screen Visualizations to SupportShared Inquiry Experiences. In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on InteractionDesign and Children (pp. 275-287). New York, NY: ACM.Kim, H., Gerber, L. C., Chiu, D., Lee, S. A., Cira, N. J., Xia, S. Y., & Riedel-Kruse, I. H. (2016). LudusScope:Accessible Interactive Smartphone Microscopy for Life-Science Education. PloS one, 11(10).Kuznetsov, S., Taylor, A.S., Paulos, E., DiSalvo, C., & Hirsch, T. (2012). (DIY)biology and opportunities forHCI. In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS '12) (pp. 809-810). NewYork, NY: ACM.Lee, V. R., & DuMont, M. (2010). An exploration into how physical activity data-recording devices could be usedin computer-supported data investigations. International Journal of Computers for MathematicalLearning, 15(3), 167-189.Lee, S. A., Bumbacher, E., Chung, A. M., Cira, N., Walker, B., Park, J. Y., ... & Riedel-Kruse, I. H. (2015, April).Trap It! A Playful Human-Biology Interaction for a Museum Installation. In Proceedings of the 33rdAnnual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 2593-2602). New York, NY:ACM.Lindgren, R., & Johnson-Glenberg, M. (2013). Emboldened by Embodiment: Six Precepts for Research onEmbodied Learning and Mixed Reality. Educational Researcher, 42(8), 445-452.Norman, D. (2013). The Design of Everyday Things (expanded edition). New York, NY: Basic Books.Norooz, L., Mauriello, M. L., Jorgensen, A., McNally, B., & Froehlich, J. E. (2015, April). BodyVis: A NewApproach to Body Learning Through Wearable Sensing and Visualization. In Proceedings of the 33rdAnnual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1025-1034). New York, NY:ACM.Martin, L. (2015). The promise of the Maker Movement for education. Journal of Pre-College EngineeringEducation Research (J-PEER), 5(1), 4.Peppler, K. A., Halverson, E., & Kafai, Y. B. (Eds.) (2016a and b). Makeology (Volumes 1 and 2). New York,NY: Routledge.Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Hernández, A. M., Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., Brennan, K., Millner, A. D., Rosenbaum,E., Silver, J., Silverman, B., & Kafai, Y. B. (2009). Scratch: Programming for Everyone.Communications of the ACM, 52(11), 60-67.Resnick, M., & Silverman, B. (2005, June). Some reflections on designing construction kits for kids. InProceedings of the 2005 conference on Interaction design and children (pp. 117-122). ACM: New York,NY.Riedel-Kruse, I. H., Chung, A. M., Dura, B., Hamilton, A. L., & Lee, B. C. (2011). Design, engineering and utilityof biotic games. Lab on a Chip, 11(1), 14-22.Silver, J., Rosenbaum, E., & Shaw, D. (2012). MaKey MaKey Improvising Tangible and Nature-Based UserInterfaces. In Proceedings of the ACM Tangible Embedded and Embodied Interaction (pp. 367-370).Kingston, Ontario, Canada.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1282© ISLS