“Sorry if I’m Leaving You in the Dust”: Toward Understanding theImportance of Student Goals in Collaborative Problem SolvingMehmet Celepkolu, University of Florida, mckolu@ufl.eduKristy Elizabeth Boyer, University of Florida, keboyer@ufl.eduAbstract: This study reports on a study of the influence of students’ goal—speed versusmastery—as they solve a computer science problem collaboratively. We conducted a studywith 254 university students enrolled in introductory computer science, pairing based on thegoal they reported for that day. Results with a comparison condition show that matching bygoal may not benefit student learning unless other factors are also considered. However, forstudents who hold a mastery goal, pairing with another student who shares that goal maysignificantly improve the learning experience. These results advance our understanding ofhow we might adapt collaborative learning practices based on students' goals.IntroductionCollaborative learning has long been shown to promote effective learning through exposing students withvarious perspectives on problem solutions, and fostering critical thinking through interaction (Lin, 2015). Forcomputer science learning in particular, the collaborative paradigm of pair programming is a widely usedcollaboration strategy, and has shown significant advantages over solo (individual) programming approachesincluding an increase code quality, and student confidence. In pair programming, two learners collaborate on thesame code and take turns in typing at the computer (the driver) and examining the code, helping to plan andcatch errors (the navigator). Challenges observed within collaborative learning across many domains—such asconflicts between partners (Weinberger et al., 2010) or inequity arising within the discussion (Engle, LangerOsuna, & McKinney de Royston, 2014)—have also been documented in pair programming. In particularly,when students hold different goals for an activity, such as whether to finish quickly or whether to spend as muchtime as needed to master the material, inequitable dynamics can emerge (Lewis & Shah, 2015). Agreeing upon ashared goal is an important component to the success of collaborative learning (Barron, 2003).This paper presents a study of the impact of pairing students based on their goals during collaborativecomputer science learning that investigate the following question: What is the impact of pairing students basedon their goal (speed vs. mastery) for a collaborative computer science assignment? The results shed light onhow we may more effectively scaffold collaborative learning, particularly for students who hold a mastery goalfor that activity.MethodsWe conducted a two-condition exploratory study to investigate the effects of pairing students based on theirgoal—speed versus mastery—for a particular learning activity. The study was conducted with students whowere actively enrolled in a Programming Fundamentals computer science course at a large public university inthe southeastern United States. Out of the 278 consenting students, 254 students were present on the day that theresearch study was conducted. After students completed the lab assignment and a posttest and post-survey, theywere free to leave. The course required all students to attend labs and complete the lab assignments even if theydid not consent to participate this research study. The basis of the weekly lab was a learning task that reinforcedconcepts covered in the lecture over the preceding week. The programming task for this lab week was toimplement a fictional game called “Hexbowling” in the Java programming language. Students across all 18 labscompleted the same learning task. Each of the lab classes was randomly assigned into one of two conditions.Nine labs were assigned to the Goal-Matched condition, in which students were matched based on whether theyreported a mastery goal or a speed goal. In this condition, because student goal would be made public to otherstudents through matching, students were shown a short video emphasizing that many factors and constraintsinfluence a person’s goal on a given day and one goal is not considered "better" than the other. Then studentsindicated their goals for that day on a small index card and were paired by goal by their teaching assistant. In thecomparison condition (the Randomly-Matched condition), students completed the same index card but wererandomly paired and were not made aware of each other’s preference. After completing the task, studentscompleted a posttest consisting of seven multiple choice questions on the concepts from the lab. Students alsocompleted a post-survey reporting on their learning experience, including one item that asked students to ratewhether they would like to work with the same partner again, with choices of Yes, Maybe, and No.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1557© ISLSFindingsFirst, we performed a top-level analysis comparing the two different conditions, Goal-Matched and RandomlyMatched, based on posttest score. Students in the Goal-Matched condition had a lower mean posttest score of3.87 (n=112, sdev=1.52) than students in the Randomly-Matched condition had a posttest score of 4.41 (n=142,sdev=1.33). This difference is significant (t(252)=2.96, p=0.003, Cohen's d=0.38). With this result in hand, welooked more deeply at the students in each condition based on goal preference (Speed versus Mastery). Weconducted a two-factor ANOVA to examine this possible interaction with respect to the outcome of posttestscore. The main effect of Condition shows that students in the Randomly-Matched condition performedsignificantly better than students in the Goal-Matched condition (F(1, 250)=11.89, p=0.001, partial eta=0.045).The main effect of Goal reveals that students with the Speed goal achieved significantly higher posttest scoresthan students with the Mastery goal (F(1, 250)=4.73, p=0.03, partial eta=.019). The two-factor interaction termof Condition*Goal was not significant (F(1, 250)=2.33, p=0.19, partial eta=0.009).After examining the posttest scores, we compared students’ satisfaction level as measured by a postsurvey item asking whether they would want to work with the same partner again. Once again using Conditionand Goal as factors, we conducted a two-way ANOVA for satisfaction, which showed no main effect ofCondition (F(1,250)=0.863, p=0.35, partial eta = .003) and no main effect of Goal (F(1,250)=1.886, p=1.171,partial eta = 0.007). However, the model revealed a two-way interaction of Condition and Goal(F(1,250)=8.368, p=0.004, partial eta = 0.032). Students with the Mastery goal indicated significantly greatersatisfaction in the Goal-Matched condition than in the Randomly-Matched condition.Overwhelmingly, students report willingness to work with the same partner again. This bias towardpositivity is common among peers, and it means that a response of “No” is particularly noteworthy. Studentswith a Mastery goal gave more negative ratings in the Randomly-Matched condition (15.28% negative) than theGoal-Matched condition (4.35% negative).ConclusionCollaborative learning is increasingly essential for today's complex problem solving. However, the success ofcollaborative learning depends on many factors. The goal of the study reported here has been to examinewhether matching students by their goal—speed versus mastery—for a particular learning activity wasbeneficial to their learning and satisfaction. The results show that simply matching students based on goalregardless of other factors may not be a beneficial approach. Overall, students in the Goal-Matched conditionachieved lower on a posttest and did not see any difference in satisfaction with their partner compared tostudents in the Randomly Matched condition. However, when we look specifically at students who held the goalof mastering the material during that activity, the results tell a different story. These students did not show lowerposttest scores in the Goal-Matched condition, and they reported significantly higher satisfaction with theirpartner when they were matched based on goal than when they were matched randomly. Since we know thatsatisfaction in each learning episode can accumulate to have a broader impact, this consideration is a substantialone. Future work should consider this question even more deeply. As we advance our understanding of factorsthat foster successful collaboration, we can develop adaptive techniques that empower students to reach theirlearning goals more effectively.ReferencesBarron, B. (2003). When Smart Groups Fail. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307–359.Engle, R. A., Langer-Osuna, J. M., & McKinney de Royston, M. (2014). Toward a model of influence inpersuasive discussions: Negotiating quality, authority, privilege, and access within a student-ledargument. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 23(2), 245-268.Lewis, C. M., & Shah, N. (2015). How Equity and Inequity Can Emerge in Pair Programming. In Proceedingsof the eleventh annual International Conference on International Computing Education Research - ICER’15 (pp. 41–50). New York, New York, USA: ACM Press.Lin, L. (2015). Exploring Collaborative Learning: Theoretical and Conceptual Perspectives. In InvestigatingChinese HE EFL Classrooms (pp. 11–28). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg.Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K., & Fischer, F. (2010). Learning to argue online: Scripted groups surpassindividuals (unscripted groups do not). Computers in Human Behavior, 26(4), 506–515.AcknowledgementsThe authors wish to thank the members of the LearnDialogue group at the University of Florida for their helpfulinput. This work is supported in part by Google through a CS Capacity Research Award and by the NationalScience Foundation through grant CNS-1622438.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1558© ISLS