Dragging as a Referential Resource for Mathematical MeaningMaking in a Collaborative Dynamic-Geometry EnvironmentMurat Perit Çakır, Informatics Institute, Middle East Technical University, perit@metu.edu.trGerry Stahl, College of Computing & Informatics, Drexel University, gerry.stahl@drexel.eduAbstract: This paper focuses on the referential roles played by dragging moves on dynamicgeometry representations in a collaborative-geometry problem-solving context. Through aninteraction analysis of chat excerpts where dragging is used by a team of students to explorethe geometric properties of a given polygon, the paper investigates the role of dragging on thefacilitation of joint mathematical meaning making online. Our qualitative findings suggest thatthe indexical properties of the dynamic constructions are specified and recalibrated throughthe coordination of dragging actions with textual chat, where the two types of actions mutuallyelaborate each other.Keywords: dynamic geometry, meaning making, referential practicesIntroductionDynamic Geometry Systems (DGS) such as GeoGebra, Geometer’s Sketchpad and Cabri offer uniqueaffordances for exploring and making sense of geometry (Arzarello et al., 2002; Hölzl, 1996). The visualinterface provided by such micro-worlds allows students to construct geometric objects by using elements ofEuclidean Geometry such as points, lines and circles through a digital analog of compass and straight-edgeconstructions. More importantly, the object-oriented design of these micro-worlds allows students todynamically act on these constructions by dragging their constitutive elements, which helps them tointeractively explore the implications of the dependencies within those constructions (Stahl, 2013). Bydeveloping increasingly more purposeful dragging strategies, students may notice how a family of Euclideanconstructions relate to each other and whether specific invariants are present in that family of figures (Arzarelloet al., 2002). Therefore, such dynamic representations can be instrumental in helping students develop a deeperunderstanding of geometry by making otherwise obscure ideas/theorems in geometry more accessible. Thepossibility of testing an invariant across a continuum of cases can also help students to develop intuitions forgeneralizations that go beyond the particular construction view at hand (Leung, 2008).The nature of the dragging actions through which geometric constructions are manipulated andexplored, and their role in facilitating students’ understanding of geometry concepts have been investigated byseveral studies in the math-education literature (Arzarello et al., 2002; Baccaglini-Frank & Mariotti, 2010;Leung, 2008; Lopez-Real & Leung, 2006; Hölzl, 1996). In particular, Arzarello et al. (2002, p.67) proposed ahierarchy of dragging modalities that distinguish wandering dragging (randomly moving basic points to fish forinteresting configurations or regularities in the dynamic diagram), bounded dragging (moving a restrictedpoint), guided dragging (moves aimed to give the dynamic drawing a particular shape), dummy locus dragging(moves that reveal that a point is restricted to move on a specific path), line dragging (drawing new points alonga line in order to keep the regularity of the figure), linked dragging (linking a point to an object and moving itonto that object) and the dragging test (moves aimed to test if a particular property of the current shape ispreserved). These dragging actions are employed by students at different stages of their problem-solvingactivity, which provide insights into their reasoning with dynamic representations. In particular, wandering andguided dragging are employed during exploration/discovery phases, dummy locus dragging often hints at theconstruction of a conjecture, and the dragging test is often used to validate/justify conjectures. Therefore,dragging is treated as a key process facilitating the development of cognitive structures that bridge perceptualobservations with formal accounts of deductive reasoning in geometry (Arzarello et al., 2002).The focus of the studies reviewed thus far has been on the individual learner developing a sense ofunderstanding through his/her interaction with dynamic representations. However, acting on these dynamicresources also has a social significance, which changes the problem context not only for the actor himself butalso for collaborators witnessing those actions. At the individual unit of analysis, the meaning-making role ofthe dragging actions may be difficult to investigate from the actions themselves or think-aloud protocols. In acollaborative problem-solving situation, such actions become resources for joint meaning making, which areacted upon, referred to, reasoned with, and questioned in collaborative discourse (Stahl, 2009). Therefore, suchcollaborative activities present a perspicuous setting for researchers to explore how actions with and arounddynamic geometry objects facilitate the development of shared mathematical understanding.CSCL 2015 Proceedings228© ISLSThis paper focuses on the referential roles played by dragging moves on dynamic-geometryrepresentations in a collaborative geometry problem-solving context. Our interest is motivated by recent CSCLstudies that treat collaborative problem solving as “discovery work,” in which collaborators work out theindexical details of their joint situation by calibrating and recalibrating references to relevant constituentelements of their shared task and its evolving solution (Zemel & Koschmann, 2013; Koschmann & Zemel,2011). Indexical expressions refer to those linguistic resources whose sense depends on the context of theutterance. Through a process of calibrating and recalibrating references to an evolving space of persistentlyavailable diagrams, participants increasingly specify what those representations mean for them as part of anevolving solution account. Referring expressions initially function as a place holder for what is currently notknown, which gets specified further (i.e., thingified) as subsequent actions and references modify their sense ininteraction (Koschmann & Zemel, 2011). We argue that dragging actions have a similar referential role, whichfacilitates the discovery process with dynamic representations in geometry. Through an interaction analysis(Jordan & Henderson, 1995) of excerpts where dragging is used to explore the geometric properties of a givenpolygon, we identify the role of dragging on the facilitation of joint mathematical meaning making by studyinghow the dragging is used to increasingly specify the indexical properties of the dynamic construction.Methods and dataThe excerpts analyzed in this paper are obtained from the Virtual Math Teams (VMT) Spring Fest organized bythe Math Forum in 2013. The analyzed chat session is part of a broader curriculum-development activityincluding the use of dynamic geometry in math classes supported through online collaborative-learningactivities in the VMT system. The team consisted of Fruitloops, Cornflakes and Cheerios who are femalestudents about 14 years old, who have not yet studied geometry. This team completed seven hour-long chatsessions of dynamic-geometry tasks in the VMT environment before they met for the session from which theexcerpts were obtained. In this session, the team was given a set of 21 different quadrilaterals and was asked to(a) identify their dependencies, and (b) tell how each of them was constructed. The task description suggestsparticipants drag the vertices of each quadrilateral to see what is special about each one. The GeoGebraapplication also hints at the presence of dependencies/constraints by shading vertices that are dependent on otherpoints. Excerpts from this chat session were subjected to interaction analysis to investigate the referential rolesfulfilled by dragging actions.During the session, participants interacted through the VMT environment (Stahl, 2009), which providesa chat interface with an integrated electronic drawing area with collaborative dynamic-geometry drawingcapabilities. The dynamic drawing area is based on GeoGebra, a popular dynamic-geometry application. TheVMT environment allows a group of users to co-construct and discuss shared dynamic-geometry objects online.Access to the drawing area is managed through a turn-taking mechanism, which allows only one user at a timeto construct or manipulate dynamic objects. The VMT system also supports researchers by providing replayable logs of these sessions for analysis, allowing step-by-step walkthroughs of drawing and typing actionsthat took place during the online student sessions. The excerpts discussed in this paper involve manipulation ofdynamic objects through dragging moves—which is challenging to present in a text document. For that reason,screenshots that capture intermediary states of the dragging actions are provided to complement the chat logs.AnalysisExcerpt 1The excerpt starts when the team decides to move on to polygon #2 (i.e., EFGH). Before exploring polygon #2,the team took turns to explore polygon #1 (i.e., ABCD) by dragging each of its four vertices; they quicklyconcluded that none of the vertices had any dependencies (i.e., they are free points). In line 1, Cornflakesannounces that she will explore polygon EFGH, and then she takes control of the drawing area. Cornflakes firstdrags vertex F. The series of screenshots displayed in Figure 1 shows how polygon #2 changes while Cornflakesis dragging point F. Cornflakes drags point F up, left, down and then right, tracing almost a complete circlearound point E in a counter-clockwise direction. Note that points E and H are unaffected by this drag, but pointG is apparently moving as F is dragged.1.2.3.cornflakes (3:20:26): ill do polygon efghcornflakes (3:20:33): takes control of the drawing areacheerios (3:20:37): just say the number its easierCSCL 2015 Proceedings229© ISLS4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13.cornflakes (3:20:40-3:20:50): drags points F (Figure 1), H, D, E (Figure 2) and G (drags onH, D, and G were not visualized in the figures. D is part of another polygon the team workedon prior to EFGH, which is not displayed).cornflakes (3:20:52): releases control of the drawing areacornflakes (3:21:17): okasy polygon 2 has all points moving except point gcornflakes (3:21:28): and point g is also a different colorcheerios (3:21:40): do u think it is restrictedcheerios (3:21:44): or constrainedfruitloops (3:21:49):i feel like poly 1 and poly 2 are almost exactly the same except that poly2 had one point that is a lighter shadefruitloops (3:22:04): can i try moving it?cornflakes (3:22:17): surefruitloops (3:22:25): and @ cheerios , i dont know for sureFigure 1. Cornflakes drags vertex F counter-clockwise around point E. Each screen shot corresponds to differentstages of the polygon as F is dragged. The dashed lines are provided to aid the interpretation of the dynamicchanges enacted by the dragging action. The dashed line over E, which was not affected by the drag, is providedas an anchor to aid the visual comparison between stages. Arrows show the direction of the drag.Next, Cornflakes drags vertex H up and down. Then she begins to drag point E. The steps of thisdragging action are displayed in Figure 2 below. Point E is slightly moved to up-right and then to bottom-left,which did not seem to affect any other vertex, except very minor shifts on G’s position. Finally, Cornflakesdrags point G. Point G is moved up-left and then down-right slightly as a consequence of this dragging action.None of the other vertices seem to be affected.Figure 2. Cornflakes drags point E. Black arrows indicate the direction of the next drag.After dragging point G, Cornflakes posts two chat messages (lines 6 & 7), announcing that “polygon 2has all points moving except point g”, and notes that point G is also marked with a different color. Cornflakes’account marks G as different from other points based on the claim that all points can move except G, eventhough she has explicitly moved point G during her last drag. The way she formulates her observations from herdrags suggests that she is oriented towards whether a point can be freely moved or not. Cheerios responds toCornflakes in line 8 by asking if she thinks “it” is restricted or constrained. The indexical “it” can be read as areference to point G, since this point was the most salient object mentioned in Cornflake’s chat messagesbesides polygon #2. By explicitly mentioning the terms “restricted” and “constrained,” Cheerios invokesrelevant terminology that encodes specific distinctions among the kinds of points one can make in GeoGebra.Hence, Cheerios’ message can be read as an implicit assessment of Cornflake’s account in terms of itsdescriptive adequacy, as well as an attempt to orient Cornflake’s proposal towards a more formal account. So,Cheerios’ statements can be seen as a recalibration move. Both terms seem to index a kind of limitation in themovement of a point based on their dependencies on other points, but the specific distinction encoded in thisterminology has not been explicitly specified yet.Next, Fruitloops posts the message she has been typing while Cheerios’ messages appeared in chat,which states that polygon #1 and polygon #2 are almost the same except for the point with the lighter shade (lineCSCL 2015 Proceedings230© ISLS10). Fruitloops’ account seems to be informed by her observation of Cornflakes’ prior dragging moves, andmakes a visual reference to the color-coding of each vertex. She then requests the team’s permission to trymoving the polygon on her own in line 11. In line 12, Fruitloops responds to the question raised by Cheerios,that she is not sure about the restricted/constrained distinction.Overall, in excerpt 1, the team seems to be oriented towards how the points can be moved around basedon the witnessed dragging actions enacted by Cornflakes. The team does not mention more specificdependencies among the vertices, as the drags are rather minimal and hence have not yet hinted at the morecomplicated structure underlying polygon #2’s construction. The team members seem to be oriented towardsvisually salient features of polygon #2, such as having a point G that is lighter in shade. Based on what isrevealed by the drags performed by Cornflakes, the team seems to endorse the interpretation that polygon #2 isvery similar to polygon #1 except for the vertex with the light blue shade. Cheerios contributes to the discussionby making the concepts “constrained” and “restricted” relevant to ongoing interaction as a means to categorizevertices. Yet, it is still not clear how these terms should be applied to the problem at hand.Excerpt 2Fruitloops takes control of the GeoGebra area and begins to manipulate the shared dynamic drawing (line 15).Figure 3 shows a chronologically ordered series of screen shots from her dragging of point G. The dashedreference lines crossing over point E, which remained stationary while Fruitloops was dragging point G, areprovided to aid the comparison of different stages. Fruitloops’ drag gradually moves point G in a circularmotion, first in a clockwise and then in a counter-clockwise direction, which is followed by several full circlesin both directions. As Fruitloops is performing the drag on G, she seems to gradually notice the path that point Gis constrained to, which is evidenced in the way she moves the vertex back and forth repeatedly in clockwiseand counter-clockwise directions in this episode (Figure 3). Meanwhile, Cheerios requests permission to accessthe drawing area, which is acknowledged by Cornflakes. However, Fruitloops holds onto her turn in the drawingarea, while she is typing what will appear in line 18, which states, “so point g only moves in like a circularmotion around point f.” Fruitloops’ account is a reflection on or noticing of what has been discovered in thedragging. The message specifies the relationship she notices between points G and F without making anyreference to more technical terms such as restrictions or constraints, but using only colloquial terms ordescriptions. In the next line, Cornflakes agrees. This is followed by further drags of point G around F byFruitloops, which seem to complement her exposition in line 18 with an enactment of the verbally describedmovement pattern. These drags also simultaneously verify the proposed relationship, which recalibrates thestatus of vertex G for the group in this context.14.15.16.17.18.19.20.fruitloops (3:22:42): takes control of the drawing areafruitloops (3:23:04): drags Point G (Figure 3)cheerios (3:23:18): ok can i trycornflakes (3:23:22): surefruitloops (3:23:23): so point g only moves in like a circular motion around point fcornflakes (3:23:35): @fruitloops yeafruitloops (3:23:50): drags Point GFigure 3. Chronologically ordered screenshots taken while Fruitloops is dragging vertex G.In this episode, through her rigorous drags of vertex G, Fruitloops uncovers an important property ofpolygon #2: that vertex G always follows a specific circular path around point F. As soon as she gains control ofthe drawing area, Fruitloops starts dragging the point with the lighter shade. Fruitloops’ initial drags on G seemrather exploratory, which gradually becomes more orderly and purposeful as she notices the constraint imposedon G. While Fruitloops is communicating this noticing to her teammates, she coordinates her actions across bothchat and drawing areas in such a way that her verbal description in chat can be read in relation to her ongoingenactment on the shared drawing. In short, the sequential organization of Fruitloops’ actions across bothCSCL 2015 Proceedings231© ISLSinteraction spaces made her point witnessable by her teammates. This instance highlights another importantaspect of dragging in dynamic geometry. The progression of drags from exploratory trials to purposefuldemonstrations/tests serves both as a public display of an evolving understanding and as a resource forcommunicating abstract visuo-spatial relationships that may be difficult to articulate in text. Thus, drags alsohave a social role in this context, as demonstrable actions embodying specific conjectures about dependenciesamong geometric objects.Excerpt 3:Following Fruitloops’ demonstration, Cheerios asks about the difference between the terms “constrained” and“restricted” in line 23. Cornflakes states that “constrained is limited function,” which provides some specificityfor one of the terms. In the meantime, Fruitloops continues to drag vertices of polygon #2. She first drags pointH slightly to the bottom. No other point seems to be affected by this move. Next, she begins to drag point E(Figure 4). Point E is gradually moved away and towards point F, which simultaneously moves point G out andtowards point F. Fruitloops carefully and slowly drags E around F, which suggests that she is oriented towardsthe relationship among E, G and F triggered by the dragging action on E.21.22.23.24.25.26.27.28.29.30.31.32.33.34.35.fruitloops (3:24:09): drags Point H (Figure 4)fruitloops (3:24:15): drags Point E (Figure 4)cheerios (3:24:16): what si the difference between constrained and restrictedfruitloops (3:24:17): drags Point G (Figure 4)fruitloops (3:24:21): drags Point E (Figure 4)cheerios (3:24:24): is*cornflakes (3:24:41): constrained is limited functionfruitloops (3:24:46): also when you move e, g moves away or closer to ffruitloops (3:25:08): so i think g it definitly constrainedfruitloops (3:25:12): drags Point Hcornflakes (3:25:13): yescornflakes (3:25:19): i think that toocheerios (3:25:25): why thoughfruitloops (3:25:31): drags Point,Ffruitloops (3:25:59): and g moves whenever you move point e and f but it doesnt move whenyou move h36. cheerios (3:26:20): okay37. fruitloops (3:26:31): releases control of the drawing areaFigure 4. Fruitloops drags vertex E, first towards F, then away from F and then towards it again.Fruitloops then posts in line 28 that “also when you move e, g moves away or closer to f.” This can beread as a verbalization of the recent drag on E, which demonstrates the relationship among points E, G and F,where dragging E affects the position of G with respect to F. Similar to the previous instances, the verbalannouncement of the noticed properties immediately follow the dragging actions. In line 29, Fruitloopselaborates on the prior message by proposing that G must be constrained. This statement also responds to theongoing discussion of the distinction between constraints and restrictions, by proposing point G as an instanceof a constrained object. In other words, the posting indexes G as a particular instance of a constrained point. Inlines 31 and 32, Cornflakes concurs with Fruitloops’ observation. In line 33 Cheerios posts a messagewondering why the proposed relationship holds, which problematizes for the whole team the underlying causeof the relationship proposed by Fruitloops. In line 35, Fruitloops summarizes her observations after performingCSCL 2015 Proceedings232© ISLSanother drag on F. She states that point G moves whenever points E and F are moved, but G does not movewhen H is moved.In this episode, Fruitloops identifies additional key relationships among points E, F, G and H throughher systematic dragging of these points. She is oriented toward observing how each point is influenced by herdrags on other points. Through initially explorative and progressively deliberate drags, Fruitloops notices thatG’s position is influenced by moving E or F, but not H. However, her statements do not specify the nature ofthose relationships in terms of concepts such as lengths or angles yet. The verbal accounts are primarilycharacterizations of visual effects triggered by drags of different points. Based on the relationships identifiedbetween E, F and G, Fruitloops proposes that G must be constrained, which provides further specificity to (i.e., arecalibration of) what is referred to by the term “constraint” by proposing G as an exemplar (lines 28, 29).Excerpt 4In line 38 Fruitloops takes up the prior discussion of the distinction between constraint and restriction.Fruitloops suggests that G is constrained because it can be moved, but the function is limited (i.e., limited tomove on a circle around F). Then Fruitloops posts a question asking for the definition of “dependant” (sic) inline 40. This concept is mentioned in the task description, which asks the team to identify the dependencies ineach polygon. About a minute later, a chat message from Cheerios appears, stating the need for the other line orpoint: otherwise “it wont work.” In line 43, Cornflakes agrees and states that some points depend on each other.The definitions are rather implicit and ambiguous at this point, but the concept of dependence gradually attainsits meaning as a kind of connection between two or more objects in this exchange.38. fruitloops (3:26:42): @ cheerios. i think its constrained because it moves but the function islimited39. cheerios (3:27:36): oh i see40. fruitloops (3:27:37): what is the definition of dependant41. cheerios (3:28:52): u need the other line or point otherwise it wont work42. fruitloops (3:28:54): do you guys have any idea of how this was made?43. cornflakes (3:29:15): yeah some points are dependent on others44. cornflakes (3:29:43): maybe some invisible circles and the shapes could be dependent on thoscircles45. cheerios (3:30:02): yea maybe like the triangles46. fruitloops (3:30:20): maybe because point g only moves in a circular motion around point f47. cornflakes (3:30:35): but why?48. fruitloops (3:30:55): i think it has to do with how it was constructed49. cheerios (3:31:03): i agree50. cornflakes (3:31:29): YES51. fruitloops (3:31:44): cause eremember how before in the other topic we would sometimes usecircles to construct stuff and then hide the circles? well maybe thiis quad was made using acircle52. cornflakes (3:31:58): yeah and one of the points was on the circle53. cheerios (3:32:38): yeah that makes sense remember when we made the triangle the samething happened54. cornflakes (3:32:43): yes55. fruitloops (3:33:10): but i dont really know how it could have been made?56. fruitloops (3:33:48): releases control of the drawing area57. cheerios (3:34:14): maybe they used another shape instead of circles58. fruitloops (3:34:17): do you thinkk point e is the same distance away from f as g?59. fruitloops (3:34:25): takes control of the drawing area60. fruitloops (3:34:26-3:35:02): drags Point G (Figure 5)CSCL 2015 Proceedings233© ISLSIn line 42, Fruitloops asks the team if they have any idea how the polygon was made. In line 44,Cornflakes proposes that there may be invisible circles accounting for the dependencies they have uncovered. Inline 45, Cheerios agrees and states that this situation is “like triangles.” Cheerios seems to be referring to theteam’s past constructions during previous sessions, where they used circles to make equilateral and inscribedtriangles. In line 46, Fruitloops endorses the possibility of a hidden circle, based on the observation that G isonly moving in circles around point F. In line 51, Fruitloops elaborates further by reminding other membersabout a past exercise where they used a circle as part of a larger construction and then hid it from view bymaking it invisible in GeoGebra. In line 57, Cheerios proposes the possibility that the point may even beconstrained to an object other than a circle.In line 58, Fruitloops solicits other members’ assessment about the observations that points E and G areequally distant from point F. Next, she drags point G on the GeoGebra board, making circles around point F.Snapshots from Fruitloops’ dragging actions are given in Figure 5. Fruitloops slows down when point G getsnear point E, and drags it back and forth as the two points coincide with each other. This drag seems to explorethe possibility that EF and FG have the same length. This is the first instance where a group member mentioneddistance as a way to characterize a dependency among a set of points.Figure 5. Fruitloops’ drag on vertex G. G is seen as moving in a circle around F. Fruitloops slows down when Gis about to move near vertex E.In this episode, the team starts to reflect on the relationships uncovered between the points, and theterminology that should be used to characterize those relationships. The team begins to develop conjecturesabout possible ways polygon #2 might have been constructed. At this time, they relate the observed behavior totheir prior experiences using circles in earlier sessions. The team seems to agree on the idea/conjecture that atleast G would be constrained on such a circle. The notion of dependence makes its first appearance in the chat,gradually becoming a resource for describing how the polygon might have been constructed. In this episode, theteam makes another key observation regarding the underlying structure of polygon #2: that the edges EF and FGhave the same length. Fruitloops’ drags of point E around F led her to realize that her drags influence the lengthof EF and FG in similar ways, where E and G can even be collapsed onto the same point.Towards the end of their discussion of polygon #2, the team discusses how the dependencies they haddiscovered could be implemented in GeoGebra. The possibility of using an invisible circle for constraining Gand the use of the compass tool to define two line segments of the same length are mentioned as possible stepsin the construction. The team also discusses the order of the construction steps that might have been used toproduce polygon #2. The proposed steps of the construction can be considered as an informal proof account,explaining why the polygon has the discovered properties. However, the team disagrees about which pointwould be plotted first, and cannot account for the joint relationship between points E, F and G, which precludesthem from proceeding further in their joint inquiry.DiscussionPrevious literature characterizing dragging moves has primarily focused on how an individual learner’scognitive processes are shaped through interaction with dynamic representations, without emphasizing the socialand practical significance of such actions. In this paper, we underlined the social-interactional implications ofdragging actions in a collaborative CSCL problem-solving context. The excerpts analyzed in this paper presenta detailed view of the lived work of joint reasoning performed by a team of students while they were workingtogether to discover the geometric properties of a given dynamic polygon. The team went through a sequence ofsense-making steps, including dragging, noticing, stating in chat, bridging to past meaningful experiences ofintersubjective shared understanding, and using technical terms like dependency. Our analysis of the excerptssuggest that through an interactive process of calibrating and recalibrating their indexical references (Zemel &Koschmann, 2013) to the evolving visual configurations witnessed during different dragging performances, theteam members were able to collectively notice several key dependencies among constituent elements, describethem in colloquial/semi-formal terms and produce conjectures for the underlying causes of those dependencies.CSCL 2015 Proceedings234© ISLSThe progression of dragging performances from exploratory trials to purposeful demonstrations servesboth as a public display of an evolving understanding, and as a resource for noticing and communicatingabstract visuo-spatial relationships that may be difficult to describe and follow in textual communication. In theexcerpts analyzed above, the availability of the intermediary stages of dragging actions made the reasoning thatgoes with the unfolding dragging activity witnessable by the group. The witnessed unfolding of visual changesserved as an indexical ground which (a) gave sense to subsequent utterances that refer to the noticed regularities,and (b) provided further specificity to technical terms that distinguish relevant geometric relationships such asconstraints and dependencies by enacting them in the dynamic figure. Moreover, the emerging purposefulnessof the drags was made evident with verbal glosses following an episode of dragging, which accounted for whatwas there to be noticed. Hence, actions in both interaction spaces mutually elaborate each other, where (a) dragshighlight key relationships and eliminate the need to verbalize every complex detail, while (b) verbal accountsdirect others’ attention to relevant parts of the figure where the regularities can be located.The analyzed excerpts also suggest that not all drags are equally effective for noticing key geometricproperties. This point is supported by a comparison of the dragging performances of Cornflakes and Fruitloops,and the subsequent proposals the team members had made in the discussion following those drags. Initial dragsby Cornflakes led to the conjecture that polygon #2 is very similar to #1 (whose vertices had no dependencies),except for the vertex that was marked with a different color. Only after Fruitloops took over and performedmore strategic drags, did the team realize that there was more to the underlying geometric structure of polygon#2. In particular, the team noticed the following regularities: (a) G moves around F in a circle and when G ismoved no other vertex moves, (b) when H is moved, no other vertex moves, (c) G moves when F is moved, (d)G moves when E is moved, and (f) E and G are always equidistant from F.The analysis of the team’s work in dragging its figures shows how collaborative learning about thenature of geometric dependencies develops gradually through hands-on exploration guided by challenging tasksin a computer-supported environment. In the remaining part of their chat session, which is not covered in theabove excerpts, the team members continued to explore similar polygons by taking turns dragging. The draggingstrategies developed in the excerpts above were appropriated by other members during those explorations. Thisexemplifies the gradual transformation of one member’s public display of dragging-mediated reasoning into ashared practice of geometric reasoning for the team. Through calibration and recalibration of indexicalreferences that refer to the discovered properties of the shared dynamic drawing, team members gradually madesense of key geometry concepts as they were enacted by dragging actions on shared figures. The affordances ofthe VMT environment for making the results of intermediary stages of drags available for all participants andthe way participants coordinated such actions with their chat messages were consequential for collaborativemeaning making online. For this reason, a key design requirement to support collaborative learning in CSCLsettings should be the inclusion of mechanisms that help participants effectively coordinate representationalaffordances, especially in contexts like geometry, where diagrams and concepts need to be closely aligned witheach other. Likewise, an important part of CSCL methodology should include the analysis of discourse andactions as referential components of intersubjective meaning making.ReferencesArzarello, F., Olivero, F., Paola, D., & Robutti, O. (2002). A cognitive analysis of dragging practices in Cabrienvironments. Zentralblatt für Didaktik der Mathematik, 34(3), 66-72.Baccaglini-Frank, A., & Mariotti, M. A. (2010). Generating conjectures in dynamic geometry: The maintainingdragging model. International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 15(3), 225-253.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4(1), 39-103.Hölzl, R. (1996). How does ‘dragging’affect the learning of geometry. International Journal of Computers forMathematical Learning, 1(2), 169-187.Koschmann, T., & Zemel, A. (2009). Optical pulsars and black arrows: Discoveries as occasioned productions.The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(2), 200-246.Leung, A. (2008). Dragging in a dynamic geometry environment through the lens of variation. InternationalJournal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 13(2), 135-157.Lopez-Real, F., & Leung, A. (2006). Dragging as a conceptual tool in dynamic geometry environments.International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology, 37(6), 665-679.Stahl, G. (Ed.) (2009). Studying virtual math teams. New York, NY: Springer.Stahl, G. (2013). Translating Euclid: Designing a human-centered mathematics. San Rafael, CA: Morgan &Claypool.Zemel, A., & Koschmann, T. (2013). Recalibrating reference within a dual-space interaction environment.International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 8(1), 65-87.CSCL 2015 Proceedings235© ISLS