Beyond Just Getting Our Word Out: Creating Pipelines FromLearning Sciences Research to Educational PracticesMichael J. Jacobson, The University of Sydney, michael.jacobson@sydney.edu.auKristine Lund, French National Center for Scientific Research, kristine.lund@univ-lyon2.frChristopher Hoadley, New York University, cscl5@tophe.netRavi Vatrapu, Copenhagen Business School, vatrpu@cbs.dkJanet L. Kolodner, Concord Consortium, Janet Kolodner, jkolodner@concord.orgPeter Reimann (chair), The University of Sydney, peter.reimann@sydney.edu.auAbstract: This session convenes a symposium to discuss issues related to the gap betweencurrent learning sciences (LS) research and the majority of prevalent formal and informaleducational practices internationally. Presenters will discuss their international experiences withbuilding bridges between research and practice, such as such as commercialization, non-profits,and organizational and government supported programs. The session concludes with thepresenters and the audience considering strategies and options for members of the LScommunities to both “get the word out” as well as for future efforts to create pipelines for gettingLS research into everyday educational practices.IntroductionThere is a serious gap between the important new insights into how students learn best and how best teachers canteach informed by research in learning sciences (LS) communities and the daily formal learning experiences forthe vast majority of students at all levels and around the world. There have been important distillations of keyresearch perspectives about how people learn that have been written for policy makers and educationalprofessionals (e.g., Bransford, Brown, Cocking, & Donovan, 2000), and this research has contributed to nationalpolicy documents that reflect the latest research in the learning sciences, such as the NETP (e.g., U.S. Departmentof Education, 2010), learning and technology initiatives internationally, recommendations for STEM standards inthe United States (National Research Council, 2012) and internationally, and so on. However, the reality “on theground” in most K-12 schools and in universities is the majority of the commercially available educationalproducts and services that are available do not align with research informed from the sciences of learning (e.g.,see discussion in the final chapter of (Bransford et al., 2000)).Compare the impact of research in other professional fields to the situation in education. In the medicaland engineering fields, for example, important research based perspectives, products, approaches, and so onroutinely move from the lab into the arsenal of products and resources that professionals in those areas are ableto use. Put another way, there are pipelines for getting research from universities and labs to professionalpractitioners and thus to the general populations they serve.A goal of this session is to convene a panel to discuss issues such as the nature of this gap betweenresearch and practice in education, and, more important, to consider approaches for members of the LScommunities to both “get the word out” as well as perspectives for creating appropriate pipelines in our field.Examples of pipeline approaches that could be considered include “top down” ones such as large scale nationalinitiatives that could fund centers bring CSCL LS researchers and industry partners together to create innovativeeducational products and services in different subject areas and grade levels. Other approaches include “bottomup” ones, such as formation of non-profit and for profit companies for bringing cutting edge research into formaland informal learning environments.The session will start with opening comments for five minutes by the session Chair, Professor PeterReimann. Each of the presenters will then speak for 10 minutes about their perspectives on the themes of thispanel. We then take 15 minutes to have the audience members break into small groups to consider theseperspectives as well as five minutes for each group to share with the entire group. We then have the presentersand the audience to discuss issues and perspectives and to spend the final 15 minutes to distill possible directionsfor future efforts to create pipelines for LS research to educational practices.Starting a company in France: The personalization of multimedia content fordifferent audiencesICLS 2016 Proceedings1071© ISLSKristine LundThis presentation will first describe how the French government supports innovative technology projects thatcombine expertise from both the private and academic sectors. Second, I will present the company CogniK(cognik.net) that I co-founded in 2009, for which I am Chief Science Officer. Third, I will show how this pipeline,originally established for personalizing on-line educational games and videos for small children, permitted anumber of different research topics in the learning sciences to emerge. Finally, I will present a set of tensions Ihave experienced while navigating between academia and the private sector. These tensions include reconcilingresearch objectives with perceived market needs, aligning differently paced time-scales, and being encouraged tobranch out from initial expertise, this latter leading to new research questions.Beyond STEM and L2 in K-12: Opportunities and challenges for learningsciences research and practice at a business schoolRavi VatrapuThis presentation will focus on an institutional initiative that involved translating and extending learning sciencesresearch and practice from primarily STEM and L2 domains in primary and secondary school settings to businessdomains at the tertiary level at the Copenhagen Business School, Denmark. In particular, I outline and discusssome of the opportunities found, synergies created, and challenges faced between emergent research findings ofEU integrating project of NEXT-TELL (www.next-tell.eu) and service initiatives at the institutional and nationallevels such as CBS Teach (http://teach.cbs.dk) and ICT in Higher Education. Finally, I include observations andreflections on the systemic differences in assessment regimes (Anglo-Saxon versus Danish/Nordic), the barriersto adoption and innovation due to the “not invented here” syndrome, and some possible solutions.A professor meets the elevator pitch: Edtech startup lessons being learned inAustraliaMichael J. JacobsonLate 2013, the Research Office at the University of Sydney encouraged me to consider “spinning off” aspects ofmy research that had been funded by two grants from the Australian Research Council. Initially I was not inclinedto do so as I lacked any business experience. However, I decided the research-based and theoretically-informedapproaches for learning STEM subjects—such as the intelligent virtual worlds and computer modeling andvisualization technologies my team developed—would likely never be used in regular classrooms in Australia orinternationally unless affordable and supported products and services were commercialized by a company with amission to enable transformative education. My company, Pallas Advanced Learning Systems(http://www.pallasals.com), joined the largest incubator in Australia in 2014 and is now getting traction withschools in the Sydney area and internationally. In my presentation, I discuss my lessons learned and being learnedgoing from university research to founding an “edtech” startup company with the “lean startup methodology”being employed by many in the startup community in the US and internationally.Research practice partnerships: R&D in and with informal learningorganizationsChris HoadleyThis presentation looks at the general scheme of design-based implementation research, and contrasts it with adifferent form of research-practice partnership as exemplified by two projects: the Hive Research Lab, a projectcommissioned by HiveNYC, a network of after school and out-of-school education providers, and the MountainProject, a partnership between NGOs in Nepal and India and US-based researchers. In both cases, I describe howemergent capacities for thinking about reflection, inquiry, and research both support and sometimes conflict withtraditional research stances, and discuss some of the ways in which research can be informed by the attempt toproduce “usable knowledge” from the beginning. In both cases, research questions were partially driven bypractitioner agendas, but were neither as practitioner-driven as participatory action research or classroom-basedteacher research undertaken for data-driven decision making. I also consider the role of relationships as both amedium for and a limiting factor of scale, and highlight some of the advantages of partnerships that combinedesign and research.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1072© ISLSChallenges bringing research-based products to marketJanet L. KolodnerIn 2009, the three-year comprehensive middle-school curriculum called Project-Based Inquiry Science (PBIS)was brought to market. Creation of the curriculum was the joint effort of many academics (Joe Krajcik, BrianReiser, Danny Edelson, Mary Starr, and myself), our graduate students, post-docs, and research scientists, teacherswe worked with, and a publisher known for publishing the best in “reform curricula” — It’s About Time, Inc. Theintellectual work of creating the curriculum was funded for a decade by the US National Science Foundation, andthe research-based pedagogical approach focused on keeping learners excitedly engaged in sustained inquiry andreflection activities to foster learning from the project activities. Also, the curriculum aligned with the NextGeneration Science Standards (NGSS). The curriculum has been adopted by many schools and school districtsaround the US, but not by enough to raise sufficient funds to keep it up to date with new technologies and newcontent standards. My lessons learned? I have identified a variety of challenges we faced in bringing researchbased products to market in the US (and probably in other countries as well). The list is long: the need to marketto each of thousands of school systems separately, shifting standards that make school systems fearful of newadoptions, and the lack of allocated funding for science education, especially in elementary and middle school.There is also a reticence towards adopting a curriculum that requires extensive professional development andlearning of new teacher practices, and an enormous lack of understanding of what it takes to put together acoherent curriculum that really fosters understanding, knowledge integration, and cognitive flexibility, andinflexibility with respect to testing. Perhaps even more important is a lack of imagination about what schoolingand learning could be. As part of addressing the challenge of bringing research-based learning products to realschools and real students, I propose that our community make a concerted effort to help the public betterunderstand what learning entails and what education really could be.ReferencesBransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., Cocking, R. R., & Donovan, S. (Eds.). (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind,experience, and school (expanded edition). Washington, DC: National Academy Press.National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. Committee on a Conceptual Framework for New K-12 Science Education Standards.Board on Science Education, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington,DC: The National Academies Press.U.S. Department of Education. (2010). Transforming American education: Learning powered by technology.Washington, D.C.: Office of Educational Technology.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1073© ISLS