Equitable Science Outcomes and School Organizational ConditionsJohn Settlage, University of Connecticut, john.settlage@uconn.eduAbstract: This poster describes research at the school level that investigated systems factorsassociated with variation in equitable science outcomes. A mixed methods approach uncoveredmultiple associations between organizational features and demographically adjusted academicmeasures. Schoolwide surveys of faculty perspectives about leadership along with socialnetwork analyses revealed complexities with real-world applications. Findings highlight theneed to attend to organizational contexts while studying learning.Although academic disparities based on social class, and race levy considerable economic costs on individualsand communities (Auguste, Hancock, & Laboissiere, 2009) decades of research offer rich descriptions but fewsolutions (Bohrnstedt, et al. 2015; Fryer & Levitt, 2004). Within the learning sciences, outcome disparities areframed as equity or social justice and typically invoke individual identity development or within classroom socialcontexts (Bell, Van Horne, & Cheng, 2017; Tabak & Radinsky, 2014). Less common are studies attending toschoolwide and organizational influences on equitable outcomes (e.g., Naris & Vakil, 2017). Extending Lee’s(2017) claim that learning science has been expanding beyond the purely cognitive, it is valuable to engage indeeper consideration of institutional factors for their influences on student academic outcomes.Typically, achievement gaps are reported using large scale examination data. While some scholars contendsuch assessments remain at the fringe of learning sciences community interests (Roschelle, et al. 2011), the tests’presence, most notably in American schools, create influences that cannot be ignored. Because legislation requirestest results to report outcomes disaggregated by various demographic categories, these reports are regularreminders that discrepancies in “learning” by race and social class exist within schools. Put another way,achievement gap severity is not a matter of uneven resource distribution between towns or districts; rather, schoolswith comparable demographic profiles generate widely varied results. Inequities correspond to conditions insideschools. This predicament suggests that learning research would benefit by drawing upon sociologicalframeworks. Individual students are embedded within peer groups, classrooms are constituted by multiple interrelationships, and school level learning is shaped by complex interactions amongst adults and children. Myresearch has revealed multiple institutional factors strongly associated with student outcomes and those suggestthat equity agendas should more intentionally attend to organizational factors.MethodsData were gathered from 6 elementary schools within a single economically depressed district. To capture theorganizational and leadership conditions within the schools, we administered a validated infrastructure surveycontaining eight distinct factors. Interviews were used to collect systems-level perspectives about the schoolscience program. The school’s lead administrator was asked to describe decision-making, communityinvolvement, and equity considerations connected to the school’s science programs. The designated lead scienceteacher of the building was interviewed to understand their role as a quasi-administrator who had daily contactwith science teaching and learning. Finally, we “interviewed” the building to uncover what it would say about thepresence of science education within the school; this took the form of a school tour led during which we soughtto identify where formal and informal science instruction took place, where professional development activitiesoccurred, where/when parents were able to participate in science activities, and the locations and accessibility ofscience instructional materials and equipment.FindingsFindings revealed strong associations between multiple organizational factors and demographically adjustedscience test scores. Except for “Other Teachers’ Trustworthiness” which exhibited a ceiling effect, responses tothe School Infrastructure survey uncovered seven other factors correlating with science residuals: CollaborativeTeacher Learning, Families as Educational Partners, Principal Dependability, Principal’s Advocacy for Equity,Shared Decision-Making, Supports for Science Teaching, and Teacher Pride and Orderly Environment. If onewould allow that a science test score is a proxy for science learning, then this study’s findings offer evidence thatschool conditions, climate, or culture contribute academic performance and educational success.There were varying configurations and quantitative differences within schools for the various forms of adviceseeking. At the sites we visited, the more centralized advice-seeking arrangements placed the principal, a leadscience teacher, and sometimes a third individual at the core. It was to these leaders to whom the teaching facultywent for advice. Schools with less privatized professional relationships were also sites where performance equities1345were less severe. The below figure presents survey items from the factor Collaborative Teacher Learning anddescribes teacher actions that reduce the barriers separating teachers from one another. This is not to suggest thatopen collaboration was prevalent in the participating schools. In truth, the factors making up the SchoolInfrastructures survey were highly reliable in part because there was such a range in ratings.Items From the Collaborative Teacher Learning Subscale of the SchoolInfrastructure SurveyInstructional coaching specific to science teaching is provided to teachers at this school.Professional development has deepened my understanding of science-specific subject matter.Professional development has strengthened collaborations around science instruction.I have found value in visiting a colleague while he or she is teaching science.Teachers at this school regularly meet to plan science lessons and activities.Feedback from a colleague at this school has improved my science teaching.I admire the instructional strategies my colleagues use when teaching science.ImplicationsThis research may encourage the learning science to elevate its regard for organizational influences. Incircumstances where it is desirous to replicate and/or bring learning interventions to scale, it is advisable to giveincreased attention to factors typically relegated to the background: policy, administrators, climate, etc. Thefindings from our investigations show clear links between organizational conditions and students’ academicoutcomes. Less clear are the connections between instructional design and school infrastructure. Whether oneviews the resolution of achievement disparities as an educational imperative, there are intellectual and practicalreasons to incorporate organizational considerations into learning studies. In many respects, the findings from thisresearch project reinforces the value in looking at the nested nature of learning. The field is no longer content toinvestigate individual learning as if it is disconnected from other sources. Science learning is dialogic asindividuals and groups influence one another (Southerland, Kittleson, Settlage, & Lanier, 2005). Taking intoaccount institutional influences should become a less uncommon dimension of the learning sciencesReferencesAllen, C. D., & Eisenhart, M. (2017). Fighting for desired versions of a future self: How young women negotiatedSTEM-related identities. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 26 (3), 407–436Auguste, B., Hancock, B. & Laboissiere, M. (2009, June). The economic cost of the US education gap. McKinseyQuarterly. Available online: https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/social-sector/our-insights/theeconomic-cost-of-the-us-education-gapBell, P., Van Horne, & Cheng, B. H. (2017). Designing learning environments for equitable disciplinaryidentification. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 26 (3), 367-375.Bohrnstedt, G., Kitmitto, S., Ogut, B., Sherman, D., & Chan, D. (2015). School composition and the black-whiteachievement gap. NCES 2015-018. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics.Fryer, R. G., & Levitt, S. D. (2004). Understanding the black-white test score gap in the first two years of school.The Review of Economics and Statistics, 86 (2), 447-464.Lee, C. D. (2017). Expanding visions of how people learn: The centrality of identity repertoires. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 26 (3), 517-524.Nasir, N. S. & Vakil, S. (2017). STEM-focused academies in urban schools: Tensions and possibilities. Journalof the Learning Sciences, 26 (3), 376-406.Roschelle, J., Bakia, M., Toyama, Y., & Patton, C. (2011). Eight issues for learning scientists about education andthe economy. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20, 3-49.Southerland, S. A., Kittleson, J., Settlage, J. & Lanier, K. (2005). Individual sense making and group meaningmaking in an urban third grade classroom. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42 (9), 1032-1061.Tabak, I. & Radinsky, J. (2014) Social justice research in the learning sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences,23 (3), 269-271.AcknowledgmentsThis work supported by the US National Science Foundation (Grant #1119349). Opinions, findings, andconclusions or recommendations expressed in this material do not necessarily reflect the views of the Foundation.1346