Elementary Science Preservice Teachers’ Use of Evidence FromRehearsals When Reflecting on Revisions of Their PracticeAnna Maria Arias, Illinois State University, aariast4@ilstu.eduSarah J Fick, Wake Forest University, ficksj@wfu.eduAmanda Benedict-Chambers, Missouri State University, benedictchambers@missouristate.eduAbstract: Teachers need opportunities to develop pedagogical reasoning around reflection onone’s own teaching through the interpretation of evidence from interactions with students.Rehearsals have potential to allow for development of pedagogical reasoning. This studyexamines the evidence preservice teachers use in reflections on rehearsals in elementary sciencemethods. The findings showed preservice teachers provided evidence from rehearsals to supporttheir pedagogical reasoning; These analyses have implications for developing learningopportunities for developing teachers’ pedagogical reasoning.IntroductionLearning to teach is a complex, challenging activity, as teachers must learn how to use their pedagogical reasoning- the ability to use knowledge to make judgements in action- to coordinate interactions between students, content,and context (Shulman, 1987). This development of reasoning includes reflection on and learning from one’steaching practice in a process of analyzing a particular teaching event through the interpretation of evidence(Davis, 2006; Rosaen et al., 2008; Shulman, 1987). Preservice teachers often struggle to develop this pedagogicalreasoning as they often attend to management concerns within classrooms rather than the student actions,statements, and work that are evidence of student learning (Davis, 2006; Dewey, 1965). Given these challenges,rehearsals within teacher education offer potential context for preservice teachers to develop pedagogicalreasoning through limiting the complexity of the work of teaching (Kazemi et al., 2016). In rehearsals, preserviceteachers approximate teaching by enacting elements of teaching practice with peers acting as students (Lampertet al., 2013; Beneditc-Champbers & Arum, 2017). Involvement in rehearsals seems to support reflectivediscussions on student thinking and content within elementary mathematics education, yet more information isneeded about how these rehearsals can facilitate pedagogical reasoning, especially across different contexts(Kazemi et al., 2016). In this study, we ask: in written reflection on rehearsals within elementary science methodscourses: what forms of evidence do preservice teacher use?MethodsUsing a qualitative case study approach (Miles, Huberman, & Saldana, 2014), this study considers how threecohorts of PSTs, 52 preservice teachers total, who were enrolled in an elementary science methods course duringa four-year undergraduate teacher education program at three different institutions, used evidence in theirpedagogical reasoning within their written reflections based on too-supported rehearsals (Benedict-Chambers &Aram, 2017). During these rehearsals, the PSTs enacted part of a science lesson (e.g., the opening of a lesson)with their peers acting as elementary students. Afterwards, the PSTs wrote reflections on their enactment,describing areas in need of revision, with differing prompts across the contexts. In Context 1 and 3, each PSTtaught a small group of peers whereas in Context 2, the PSTs worked in teams to teach the whole class. In Context2 and Context 3, the PSTs videorecorded their enactments. We coded these written reflections using an emergentcoding scheme to describe the type of evidence used to reason pedagogically about the revision with 90% percentagreement. Then, we use a matrix consider patterns across PSTs and across the different cohorts.FindingsAcross the three contexts, the preservice teachers used several types of evidence from their rehearsal in theirreflection although some PSTs, especially those in context one, did not provide evidence (see Table 1). PSTs inall three universities often used broad descriptions of what happened during the rehearsal as evidence for theirrevision. An example of a very general description of teacher practice used to provide context for the neededrevision is “when I asked how their ideas [changed] over time, I did not write anything on the board and quicklytalked about their ideas.” (Context 1, PST 7, R3). In contrast, others used more specific evidence connected tointerpreting student learning to support their revisions including specific quotes from their peers acting as students,quotes of their responses to students, and patterns in student work to provide reasoning for their revisions. Forinstance, To support her reasoning for revising her enactment, a PST quoted a peer’s “student work”: “I predictthat I can see an object when I have an object in front of me with nothing blocking the object,.” She used thisICLS 2018 Proceedings1357© ISLSquote to highlight a common pattern in student work that their prediction did not mention “the need for lightand/or an eye... “(Context 2, PST 3, R1). This use of student work as evidence was more common in Context 2.Although some PSTs used only one type of evidence, 55% of the written responses used multiple types of evidenceto support their revisions. In the following example, the PST used a student quote (italics), and a teacher quote(bold) to build a more complete picture of the interaction that they would change around helping students “seepatterns and make connections within the data they collect:”After the students collected their data, I asked them “Do you notice any overall patterns ortrends within the data?” and they simply replied “Mmm, no.” The pattern that I could see andwanted them to see wasn’t clear to them because they didn’t have enough data to support it.(Context 3, PST 1, R2.2)This example highlights the teacher-student interaction, creating greater support for the PSTs’ interpretation.Table 1. Percent of PST revisions that include each type of evidence in each contextContext 1Context 2Context 3TeacherPractice39%52%53%Studentaction13%9%19%TeacherQuote2%2%29%StudentQuote0%17%35%Patterns inStudent Work0%14%3%TimeStamp0%8%26%None48%6%7%DiscussionExtending research on the potential of rehearsals in preservice teacher education (e.g., Lampert et al., 2013;Kazemi, et al, 2016), these findings suggest that the preservice teachers can use evidence from the rehearsals intheir written reflection, suggesting these rehearsals can be used to develop preservice teachers’ abilities to lookback and interpret a particular teaching event, a key aspect of pedagogical reasoning (Shulman, 1987) Thepreservice teachers provided evidence of student work, quotes from students, and teacher interactions in order toconsider how to improve student learning, a common struggle of elementary preservice teachers when observingin elementary classroom (Davis, 2006), despite the lack of authenticity of working with adults acting as children.Although some of the preservice teachers described their teaching practices rather than the interplay with studentsas in other studies where teachers examined their practice within elementary classrooms (Rosaen et al., 2008)there was variation in the types of evidence used in the reflections. Some of the variation seemed connected to thesupports and settings of the rehearsal context. For example, in Context 2, the preservice teachers taught a largerclassroom of peers in the rehearsal, likely allowing the PST more opportunity to attend to students’ work andpatterns in students’ responses as compared to the other two contexts. The prompt for reflection in Context 1 didnot explicitly ask for evidence from the enactment, likely leading to the less common use of evidence. Thesefindings have implications for creating scaffolds for using evidence of student-teacher interactions in pedagogicalreasoning during rehearsals.ReferencesBenedict-Chambers, A., & Aram, R. (2017). Tools for teacher noticing: Helping preservice teachers notice andanalyze student thinking and scientific practice use. Journal of Science Teacher Education, 28, 294-318.Davis, E. A. (2006). Characterizing productive reflection among preservice elementary teachers: Seeing whatmatters. Teaching and Teacher Education, 22(3), 281 – 301.Dewey, J. (1965). The relation of theory to practice in teacher education. In Teacher education in America: Adocumentary history (pp. 140–171). New York: Teachers College Press.Kazemi, E., Ghousseini, H., Cunard, A., & Turrou, A. C. (2016). Getting inside rehearsals: Insights from teachereducators to support work on complex practice. Journal of Teacher Education, 67(1), 18-31.Lampert, M., Frank, M. L., Kazemi, E., Ghousseini, H., Turrou, A. C., Beasley, H., … Crowe, K. (2013). UsingRehearsal to Support Preservice Teacher Learning of Ambitious Teaching. Journal of TeacherEducation, 64(3), 226–243.Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldana, J. (2014). Qualitative Data Analysis: A Methods Sources (3rd ed.).Los Angeles: Sage Publications, Inc.Rosaen, C. L., Lundeberg, M., Cooper, M., Fritzen, A., & Terpstra, M. (2008). Noticing Noticing How DoesInvestigation of Video Records Change How Teachers Reflect on Their Experiences? Journal of TeacherEducation, 59(4), 347–360. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022487108322128Shulman, L. (1987). Knowledge and teaching: Foundations of the new reform, 57(1), 1–23.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1358© ISLS