Conceptualizing Authenticity and Relevance of ScienceEducation in Interactional TermsShulamit Kapon, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, skapon@technion.ac.ilAntti Laherto, University of Helsinki, antti.laherto@helsinki.fiOlivia Levrini, University of Bologna, olivia.levrini2@unibo.itAbstract: Authenticity and relevance are two terms that are often mentioned when criticizingthe content and practice of science education in school. This paper examines the meaning ofauthenticity and relevance in science education from an interactional perspective. Particularly,it compares and contrasts authenticity with productive disciplinary engagement, and relevancewith expansive framing. We then use this comparison to discuss the tension betweenmaintaining accountability to the discipline and fostering students’ agency and authority; atension that is not sufficiently addressed in science education literature that addresses theconceptualization of authenticity and relevance. We suggest a research agenda that aims toresolve this tension by problematizing and articulating in fine detail the theoretical meaning ofproductive disciplinary engagement and expansive framing for science classrooms that aredeeply immersed in authentic scientific practices and discourse.Keywords: science education, teaching, learning, authenticity, relevance, interactionRelevance and authenticity in science educationSince the beginning of the 20th century, science educators have been concerned with questions about which topicsshould be taught in science classrooms and what activities should students engage in while learning these topics(Meltzer & Otero, 2015). Authenticity and relevance are two terms that are often mentioned in current debatesconcerning these issues (e.g., Osborne & Dillon, 2008). Relevance was traditionally considered to be personallyand societally driven, and as a central attribute of science education that can be productively applied in daily lifedecisions and future careers (Hurd, 1998). In their review of the meaning of the term relevance in scienceeducation, Stuckey, Hofstein, Mamlok-Naaman, and Eilks (2013) pointed to four main sources of relevance: (1)students’ interest, (2) students’ understanding of issues related to their lives; (3) issues of personal importance orneed; and (4) issues with real-life effects on individuals and society. They described the first and second sourcesof relevance as driven by meaningfulness, and the third and fourth as driven by consequences (personal, societaland vocational). Interestingly, relevance to the content and to the epistemological and cultural nature of STEMdisciplines has not been explicitly considered in the discussion of the relevance of science education, though inour opinion, it should.Authenticity was traditionally considered to be disciplinary driven, reflecting the desire to simulate, inthe classroom, “real” scientific practices, with the epistemological and reasoning aspects that such practices entail(e.g., Chinn & Malhotra, 2002). However, recent discussions of authenticity in science education argue implicitly,and often explicitly, for students’ and teachers’ agency in determining what authenticity means, and talk aboutauthenticity as emerging from the interaction between canonical science, teachers and students (Rahm, Miller,Hartley, & Moore, 2003) or about positioning learners in collaborative social contexts so as to explore their ownscientific questions (Calabrese-Barton, 1998; Rivera Maulucci, Brown, Grey, & Sullivan, 2014). Hence, if thediscussion of relevance started from students’ agency and went on to gradually include society as legitimate agentsin defining what is relevant science education, an opposite trend is apparent in the case of authenticity, thediscourse of which started from the canonical disciplines as the main determining agent, and gradually came toinclude students, teachers and society as legitimate agents in determining what authentic scientific practice inscience classroom means.When considered this way, the boundaries between relevance and authenticity of science educationbecome blurred, the two concepts seem to complement one another, and the meanings of both seem to emergefrom the interactions between the canonical STEM disciplines, the students, the teachers, and the society in whichall these agents function. This paper examines the constructs of authenticity and relevance from an interactionalperspective, comparing and contrasting them, respectively, with two related interactional constructs suggested bythe late Randy Engle to describe productive classroom practices: productive disciplinary engagement (Engle &Conant, 2002) and expansive framing (Engle, 2006).ICLS 2016 Proceedings843© ISLSProductive disciplinary engagement and expansive framingRandi Engle and colleagues examined social framing in classrooms, focusing on classroom discussions. Engleand Conant (2002) coined the term productive disciplinary engagement (PDE) to theoretically describe a specifictype of student engagement that “combines, moment-by-moment, interactional aspects of student engagementwith ideas of what constitutes productive discourse in a content domain” (p. 400). To explain the sense in whichdiscussions are productive, Engle defined an additional theoretical construct—expansive framing. Engle arguedthat transfer is more likely to occur when learning contexts are socially framed by the teacher as part of a broaderongoing intellectual conversation in which students are actively involved. Engle termed this framing "expansiveframing", as opposed to "bounded framing" with respect to the setting (time, place) and roles of the participants(Engle, 2006).Drawing parallelsThe engagement of students in what constitutes productive discourse in a content domain (i.e., PDE) is certainlyconsistent with engaging students in “real” scientific practices, which is the central principle of the traditional takeon authenticity in science education. The question is whether we can regard PDE as an interactional parallel ofauthenticity, and if so, what is gained by this parallelism. The answer is complex. Rahm et al. (2003) wrote that“the focus on designing and establishing authentic science learning environments and tasks has neglected to askwhat authenticity means, to whom, and according to whom” (p. 738). The same problematizing applies also, tosome extent, to productive disciplinary engagement. Namely, a fair question would be to ask what productivitymeans, to whom, and according to whom. Yet, we would argue that thinking of authenticity in the scienceclassroom as PDE allows us to better articulate the problem presented by Rahm and her colleagues, shifting thefocus of our attention from the list of topics and practices that constitute authentic science education to thestudents’ actual engagement with these topics and practices. Such refocusing explicates an unresolved tensionbetween fostering accountability to the discipline, while maintaining students’ authority over the ideas that arebeing discussed (see for example Engle & Faux, 2006).To highlight the importance of addressing this tension, let us consider the perspective of authenticity thatBuxton (2006) refers to as the “youth-center perspective on authenticity”, and which she considers to be theextreme alternative to the canonical science perspective on authenticity. According to the youth-centerperspective, learning is authentic only when its starting point is the student's desires, interests and needs. Yetstudies that adopt this perspective are usually conducted in informal education settings, such as enrichmentprograms that target young children from families with multiple socio-economic related problems (e.g., CalabreseBarton, 1998). In this context it is very easy to accept the domination of students’ needs and interest overdisciplinary demands; however, when considering science education at the advanced high school levels,accountability to the discipline is as crucial as is fostering students’ agency and authority. This tension has notbeen explicitly and deeply considered in the treatment of authenticity in science education. We argue that theinteractional lens that PDE offers can, at least potentially, lead to a more accurate and stronger conceptualisationof authenticity. In the next sections we elaborate how examining authenticity in science education through aninteractional lens, namely considering it as a case of PDE and articulating what productivity in learning sciencemeans, to whom, and according to whom, can also contribute to the development of the theoretical and operationaldefinitions of PDE.Another parallel we wish to draw is between relevance and expansive framing. We argue that expansiveframing articulates the construct of relevance in interactional terms and grounds it in classroom practice. Hereagain, the power of the interactional perspective is in focusing our attention on the engagement of students. Insteadof debating the list of topics and activities that should be part of a relevant science curriculum, it draws ourattention to the way in which these topics and activities are being used by teachers in their classrooms. Suchrefocusing suggests that the explicit links that science teachers are able to make between topics and activities inthe official curriculum and the world outside of the immediate classroom reality, are at least as influential increating a sense of relevance in their students as are the actual topics that are formally being taught. Just as thenotion of expansive framing deepens and enriches our understanding of productive disciplinary engagement, thenotion of relevance can add and enrich our understanding of authenticity.Research agendaEngle and Conant (2002) wrote that “productive disciplinary engagement can be fostered by designing learningenvironments that support (a) problematizing subject matter, (b) giving students authority to address suchproblems, (c) holding students accountable to others and to shared disciplinary norms, and (d) providing studentswith relevant resources” (p. 399). Although we agree with these design principles, we argue that to be able to trulyICLS 2016 Proceedings844© ISLSaddress the tension between students’ authority and accountability to the discipline, we must problematize andexamine in fine detail attempts to apply PDE design principles to the instruction and learning of science in contextsin which accountability to the discipline is crucial (e.g., science at the honors and advanced high school levels aswell as undergraduate levels). Such contexts emphasize the need to articulate the disciplinary specificity andmultidimensionality of the terms productive and engagement in PDE.Engle and Conant suggested that “what constitutes productive depends on the discipline, the specific taskand topic, and where students are when they begin addressing a problem” (p. 403). We suggest that in scienceclassrooms that are immersed in authentic scientific practices and discourse, such productivity should bemanifested by (1) conceptual and epistemological development, (2) development of scientific creativity and selfefficacy, and (3) identity construction as a person, citizen and future professional. We also agree with Engle andConant that “evidence for student engagement can best be seen by analyzing students’ discourse” (p. 402), butargue, as in the case of productivity, that we should better articulate what we are searching for. Specifically, welook for discourse markers that reflect (1) specific positioning of students and teachers with regard to each other,the task and the content, (2) deeply meaningful use of disciplinary concepts and habits of thought, and (3) social,personal, deeply affective, and future-oriented engagement with scientific content (Kapon, forthcoming; Levrini,Fantini, Pecori, Tasquier, & Levin, 2015). In our consideration of expansive framing, we are therefore interestednot only in examining how the teacher frames the interaction for the student, but also how the student frames it,and the degree to which these frames overlap and demonstrate deep intersubjectivity (Wertsch, 1984).Concrete examplesLevrini et al. (2015) identified forms of productive complexities that intrinsically characterize scientific practicesand discourse in modern physics. Such complexities allow content to be problematized in a productive way forstudents. Specifically, they “educationally reconstructed” (Duit, Gropengießer, & Kattmann, 2005) the secondaryschool curriculum on thermodynamics to embody the following attributes: (1) Multi-perspectiveness – the samephysics content was analyzed from two different perspectives (the macroscopic and microscopic approaches tostudying thermodynamics), each characterized by a specific approach to the content. (2) Multi-dimensionality –the two approaches were analyzed and compared according to different dimensions involved in physics, i.e. theirconceptual, experimental and formal implications, as well as their philosophical-epistemological peculiarities. (3)Longitudinality – the approaches to modeling systems and processes used in the thermodynamics unit weresystematically compared with models used in theories previously studied by the students (classical mechanics andspecial relativity).Levrini et al. (2015) analyzed data gathered from an extended intervention that implemented the designedcurriculum in a 12th grade class of 20 students. They identified five discursive markers used to determine thestudent's progress in making the learned content relevant on a personal level and to its conceptual understanding.These markers include expressions that are (1) personal “signatures”, i.e. idiosyncratic expressions involvingpersonal tastes and purposes, (2) grounded in the discipline, (3) thick, in the sense that they involve ametacognitive and epistemological dimension, (4) non-incidental, in the sense that they are used consistentlythroughout classroom activities, and (5) carriers of social relationships that position the student within theclassroom community.Kapon (forthcoming) examined the engagement and learning of a group of eight 11th and 12th gradestudents while working in their school laboratory on long-term (18 month) open-ended research projects inphysics. All eight students had the same project advisor: a physics teacher who is a member of a researchcommunity of teacher-researchers that associates several schools ("Acheret Center," 2006). Analysis revealed notonly the development of the students' understanding and mastering of content and skills, but also identifieddiscursive markers that highlight their progress towards the internalization of scientific habits of thought such as(1) spontaneous use of scientific standards of evaluation, (2) tendency to refine thought through modelmeasurement interactions, (3) persistence, (4) sensitivity to scientific aesthetics, and (5) self-efficacy with regardto scientific practices and procedures. These learning gains were connected to the particular nature of mentorshipthat the students received. The discourse between the students and the advisor positioned both students and advisorin a joint inquiry, like that of research apprenticeship, in which the expansive framing by the advisor aimed torelate the students' activities in the school laboratory to “real” science. The advisor explicitly cultivated students’interest and agency with regard to science, and nurtured their creativity, even when this cultivation meanttemporarily compromising accountability to the discipline.The discourse markers mentioned above (Kapon, forthcoming; Levrini et al., 2015) articulate the notionof authentic engagement with a scientific discipline and in so doing they further develop the concept of PDE.Specifically, while the term productive in PDE refers only to disciplinary productivity, its markers are veryICLS 2016 Proceedings845© ISLSgeneric, whereas our discourse markers are deeply grounded in the discipline. Our markers are also sensitive tothe authenticity of the engagement from the students’ perspective and thus articulate the way in which authenticityand relevance emerge from the interaction between the discipline, the students, the teachers, and the society inwhich they function.ConclusionIn this paper we argued that re-conceptualizing the theoretical meaning of authenticity and relevance ininteractional terms—particularly by drawing parallels between authenticity and productive disciplinaryengagement and between relevance and expansive framing—articulates a tension between accountability to thediscipline and fostering students’ agency and authority. We suggested a research agenda that aims to resolve thistension by problematizing and articulating, in fine detail, the theoretical meaning of productive disciplinaryengagement and expansive framing for science classrooms that are deeply immersed in authentic scientificpractices and discourse.ReferencesAcheret Center. (2006). Retrieved from http://www.acheret.org.il/Buxton, C. A. (2006). Creating contextually authentic science in a “low‐performing” urban elementary school.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 43(7), 695-721.Calabrese-Barton, A. (1998). Teaching science with homeless children: Pedagogy, representation, and identity.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35(4), 379-394.Chinn, C. A., & Malhotra, B. A. (2002). Epistemologically authentic inquiry in schools: A theoretical frameworkfor evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86(2), 175-218.Duit, R., Gropengießer, H., & Kattmann, U. (2005). Towards science education research that is relevant forimproving practice: The model of educational reconstruction. In H. E. Fischer (Ed.), Developingstandards in research on science education (pp. 1-9). London: Taylor & Francis.Engle, R. A. (2006). Framing interactions to foster generative learning: A situative explanation of transfer in acommunity of learners classroom. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(4), 451-498.Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction,20(4), 399-483.Engle, R. A., & Faux, R. B. (2006). Towards Productive Disciplinary Engagement of Prospective Teachers inEducational Psychology: Comparing Two Methods of Case-Based Instruction. Teaching EducationalPsychology, 1(2), n2.Hurd, P. D. (1998). Linking science education to the workplace. Journal of Science Education and Technology,7(4), 329-335.Kapon, S. (forthcoming). Doing research in school: Physics Inquiry in the Zone of Proximal Development.Journal of Research in Science Teaching.Levrini, O., Fantini, P., Pecori, B., Tasquier, G., & Levin, M. (2015). Defining and Operationalizing‘Appropriation’ for Science Learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 24(1), 93-136.Meltzer, D. E., & Otero, V. K. (2015). A brief history of physics education in the United States. American Journalof Physics, 83(5), 447-458.Osborne, J., & Dillon, J. (2008). Science education in Europe: Critical reflections: London: The NuffieldFoundation.Rahm, J., Miller, H. C., Hartley, L., & Moore, J. C. (2003). The value of an emergent notion of authenticity:Examples from two student/teacher–scientist partnership programs. Journal of Research in ScienceTeaching, 40(8), 737-756.Rivera Maulucci, M. S., Brown, B. A., Grey, S. T., & Sullivan, S. (2014). Urban middle school students'reflections on authentic science inquiry. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 51(9), 1119-1149.Stuckey, M., Hofstein, A., Mamlok-Naaman, R., & Eilks, I. (2013). The meaning of ‘relevance’in scienceeducation and its implications for the science curriculum. Studies in Science Education, 49(1), 1-34.Wertsch, J. V. (1984). The zone of proxiaml development: some conceptual issues. In B. Rogoff & J. V. Wertsch(Eds.), Children's learning in the" zone of proximal development (pp. 7-17): Jossey-Bass Inc Pub.ICLS 2016 Proceedings846© ISLS