Development of Disciplined Interpretation Using ComputationalModeling in the Elementary Science ClassroomAmy Voss Farris, Vanderbilt University, amy.farris@vanderibilt.eduAmanda Catherine Dickes, Vanderbilt University, amanda.c.dickes@vanderbilt.eduPratim Sengupta, University of Calgary, pratim.sengupta@ucalgary.caAbstract: Studies of scientists building models show that the development of scientific modelsinvolves a great deal of subjectivity. However, science as experienced in school settingstypically emphasizes an overly objective and rationalistic view. In this paper, we argue forfocusing on the development of disciplined interpretation as an epistemic and representationalpractice that progressively deepens students’ computational modeling in science by valuing,rather than deemphasizing, the subjective nature of the experience of modeling. We reportresults from a study in which fourth grade children engaged in computational modelingthroughout the academic year. We present three salient themes that characterize thedevelopment of students’ disciplined interpretations in terms of their development ofcomputational modeling as a way of seeing and doing science.Keywords: modeling; agent-based models; disciplined interpretation; epistemology; science educationIntroductionThe development of a modeling-based epistemology in science is central to the development of scientific literacy(Nersessian, 2008; Lehrer, 2009). Models are fundamentally analogical forms (Giere, 1988), and studies ofscientists building models show that the development of scientific models involves a great deal of subjectivity,and in many cases, is deeply intertwined with personal experiences and disciplined sensibilities about interpretingevidence (Keller, 1984; Ochs, Gonzales & Jacoby, 1996). However, science as experienced in school settingstypically emphasizes an overly objective and rationalistic view (Lemke, 2001). This is particularly relevant forstudies that involve learning science as modeling, because modeling is an act of design (Lehrer, 2009), andtherefore, deeply interweaves “knowing” and “action” (Schön, 1995). This interweaving, as Schön (1995) argued,is deeply tied to subjectivities such as learning to see things from the perspectives of others, and engaging inreflective conversations with the situation. This is a far cry from common uses of computational modeling in thescience classroom, which has traditionally followed the grossly “linear approximation” of teaching correctconcepts through guided algorithmic refinement (e.g., White & Frederiksen, 1998; Booler & van Jooligen, 2013).Such images, grounded in technical rationality (Schön, 1995), leave out the development of necessarysubjectivities, and this is the issue we address in this paper.In this paper, building on Daston & Galison’s (2007) notion of “trained judgment”, we argue for focusingon the development of disciplined interpretation as an epistemic and representational practice that progressivelydeepens students’ computational modeling expertise by valuing, rather than deemphasizing the subjective natureof the experience of modeling. We report results from a study in which fourth grade children engaged incomputational modeling by iteratively creating, presenting and evaluating their mathematical measures andcomputational models of motion and ecology throughout the academic year. In this paper, we will focus on theirmodels of motion and investigate how they develop progressively more mathematically and computationallyrefined representations of motion as a process of continuous change. We present three salient themes thatcharacterize the development of students’ disciplined interpretations in terms of their development ofcomputational modeling as a way of seeing and doing science: (1) the intertwined nature of designing models ascommunicative forms and developing deeper interpretations of numerical data; (2) progressive development ofcriteria for what counts as a “good” measure, by extending the tools of modeling beyond computational media;and (3) the shift from more normative and canonical forms of mathematization to invented forms of simulationsas equally “accurate” and communicative models.Theoretical backgroundScience studies scholars have argued that the development of disciplined interpretation is central to the productionof scientific knowledge. There is always a gap between scientific representations and reality; scientific modelsare by their very nature non-veridical designed artifacts that are deeply influenced by the technologicalinfrastructure used for inquiry and representation, as well as the purpose of representation (Galison, 1996; DastonICLS 2016 Proceedings282© ISLSand Galison, 2007). These authors have argued that the epistemic stance of scientific work shifted from a falsely“objectivist” stance to “trained judgment”. This was evident in their comparison between the 19th centuryintroduction of photographic technology where the machinic nature of photography created an impression thatscientists could “get out of the way,” and let the photograph produce what became perceived as bare, uninterpreted, objective “facts.” In contrast, beginning in the early to mid-twentieth century, with the advent of theprinting press that in turn widened the audience for scientific works such as atlases, the production of scientificimages became necessarily more interpretive on the part of the scientist, with a clear goal of enhancing thecommunicativity of the images (Daston & Galison, 2007). This represents another moment in the history ofobjectivity: trained judgment. We further posit that the advent of computing as a key mode and medium ofscientific inquiry further amplifies this epistemic stance. For example, a recent ethnographic study of scientificwork in a biomedical engineering lab illustrates how the inherent interdisciplinarity of the practice ofcomputational modeling results in new conceptual innovations, often by bridging the gap between disciplinaryperspectives, as well as between theorization, dynamic visualization and experimental work (Chandrasekharan &Nersessian, 2014).How can disciplined sensibilities about modeling develop, especially in the context of computationalmodeling, in an elementary science classroom? This is the central concern of this paper. We posit that answeringthis question involves two key issues: The first issue involves finding a suitable paradigm of computing that isintuitive and generative for young children. Scholars have argued that a particular form of computation––agentbased computation––can serve as an effective pedagogical approach that can help children bootstrap their ownpre-instructional ideas and representational competencies in order to develop scientific expertise throughmodeling (Papert, 1980; Sherin, diSessa & Hammer, 1993; Sengupta, Kinnebrew, Basu, Biswas, and Clark, 2013).In agent-based computation, users construct programs by providing simple rules to a computational object oragent, such as a LOGO turtle, which then enacts the rules through movement in computational space.Programming the agent involves thinking like it, which enables the learner to engage in embodied and intuitivereasoning (Papert, 1980; Danish, 2014). In agent-based models (ABMs), simple, agent-level actions are repeatedover time (in the case of generating continuous movement from discrete actions) and/or across multiple agents(e.g., in ecological phenomena). There is ample evidence in the literature that ABMs can support the developmentof representational competence in children (Sherin, diSessa & Hammer, 1993; Sengupta et al., 2015), and thatpedagogies that emphasize the creation of representational conventions that can be understood by others is a kindof “selective pressure” that brings forth iterative representational innovations by the students (Enyedy, 2005). Wetherefore adopted agent-based modeling and programming as the medium of computation that children engagewith in our study.Given the rather short duration of most education research studies and the limited involvement of theteacher in the design and implementation of what happens during class, little is known about what happens whencomputational modeling practices develop as a long-term practice in the science classroom over an entireacademic year. Herein lies the second issue: we posit that disciplined interpretation is one such aspect ofdevelopment that fundamentally involves long-term engagement of learners with the practice of modeling. Whilesome scholars have shown that children can indeed engage deeply with agent-based modeling to learn scienceover shorter durations ranging from a few days to a couple of weeks (e.g., Danish, 2014), we posit that a longterm focus is essential because scientific modeling is itself a long-term and complex endeavor in professionalpractice. It comprises complex interactions among theories, material means, the phenomenon of interest, therepresentational infrastructure, as well as the social contexts that shape these interactions, usually over a longperiod of time––often spanning several years (Pickering, 1995). A longer-term focus in the science classroom canprovide insights into how students develop fairly stable and sophisticated disciplinary dispositions that involvean interplay between children’s intuitions, interpretations and actions on the world in order to progressivelysymbolize and refine the representations for scientific modeling (Lehrer, 2009). What does the development ofchildren’s disciplinary dispositions look like when computation becomes a medium for scientific modelingthroughout the academic year? In this paper, our goal is to provide illustrative cases, selected carefully from ayear-long study that will illuminate key characteristics, and different forms of manifestations of a particular formof disciplinary dispositions that is often neglected in the science education literature––disciplined interpretation.MethodsThe ViMAP modeling environmentThe modeling platform we used is ViMAP (Sengupta et al., 2015). ViMAP is an agent-based visual programminglanguage that uses NetLogo (Wilensky, 1999) as its simulation engine. In ViMAP, users construct programs usinga drag-and-drop interface to control the behaviors of one or more computational agents. ViMAP programmingICLS 2016 Proceedings283© ISLSprimitives include domain-specific and domain-general commands as well as a “grapher” with multiple graphingwindows, which allows users to design mathematical measures and compare across measures of different agentand class-level variables. Figure 1 shows the programming interface and the graphing interface.Figure 1. Screenshot of the ViMAP Modeling Environment (www.vimapk12.net).Participants, setting, and data collectionThe data that we have collected is in the context of a public school fourth grade classroom (ages 9 and 10) in anurban southeastern city. The study is a design study (Cobb et al., 2003) in which we worked in partnership withthe classroom teacher to integrate agent-based programming and modeling within the existing math and sciencecurriculum. Students carried out investigations of natural phenomena in kinematics and in ecology in modelingcycles that include modeling in ViMAP. Twenty-one students and their teacher participated in the classroomwork, which was embedded in the regular curriculum. The teacher and the research team co-planned the activitiesbased on the students’ progress and the teacher’s plans across the curriculum. During class time, the teacher playedthe primary teaching role, often adjusting the plans to meet the emerging instructional opportunities as plans wereenacted. Two graduate-student members of the research team collected data. Ninety-five percent of students whoattend the school are eligible for free and reduced-price lunch. The ethnoracial and gender composition of thestudent population in this classroom was as follows: African-American: 19, Latino: 1; Somali: 1; Male: 11,Female: 10. A sequence of the learning activities is shown in Table 1. In this paper, we only report the analysisof all modeling activities from October 14 until February 3. The research approach was both microgenetic andsociogenetic, because our goal is to understand changes in student thinking and how these ideas are shared andtaken up in the larger class community. The forms of data collection include video records of all classes, detailedfield notes for each day, collection of all of students’ models and non-computational artifacts, as well as interviewswith student groups and individual students.Table 1: Sequence of activities (Analysis reported in this paper through Feb 3)Observations, preassessment, and interviewsSurvival Kits GeometryUnitAug. 11 – Sept. 8“Constant Speed” RobotsOct. 14 – Nov. 20Constant Acceleration andGravityNov. 25 – Feb. 3FrictionFeb. 5 – Mar. 31InterviewsApr. 7 – Apr. 28ICLS 2016 ProceedingsSept. 9 – Oct. 2Researchers conduct observations, preliminary interviews with allstudents in the classIntro to ViMAP programming and modeling; Turtle geometry,centered around learning goals in perimeter, area, and angles ofpolygons; model sharing and revisionStudents develop understanding of speed as a rate of the distancetraveled in a unit of time, including cycles of model sharing andrevision; students used both ViMAP and physical modelingStudents find ways to measure and model continuous changes inspeed, using acceleration down a ramp and free fall as contexts;students used ViMAP, video analysis and physical modelingStudents model processes of “slowing down” for Matchbox cars ondifferent surfaces; students used both ViMAP and physicalmodelingMid-year interviews with all students284© ISLSModeling Ant ColoniesMay 6 – May 13Post-AssessmentMay 14 - May 19Students model ant foraging, reproduction and predation in antcolonies in an embodied modeling activity, followed byprogramming in ViMAP-Ants. Students share and refine theirmodels with 8th grade mentors.End-of-year assessment and focus groupThe role of the teacher and researcher: Teacher partnershipTeaching played a significant role in this study (Sengupta et al, 2015). Although a detailed analysis of teaching isoutside the scope of this paper, it is important to note that the teacher reframed programming as a medium andactivities for designing mathematical measures (i.e., units of measurement and graphs) of motion. The teacher codesigned (along with the researchers) and implemented learning activities that supported the interpretation andconstruction of mathematical measures using ViMAP as a way to explain a real-life phenomenon involvingmotion (e.g., walking and running). In these activities, she maintained an emphasis on connecting modeling inViMAP to relevant out-of-computer modeling experiences, such as embodied and physical modeling activities.Furthermore, she created a culture for sharing and critiquing peer models, that is, their ViMAP programs,simulations and graphs. In this process, students began developing criteria for what features of their models wouldbe worth sharing: the emphasis on communicativity acted as a selective pressure for model improvement; and, theclass as a whole, normatively, developed criteria for what would count as a "good" computational model. Thesecriteria originated in teacher-led class discussions as socially defined (voted by popular choice), but over time,became progressively more grounded in students' mathematical explanations of relevant aspects of their ViMAPsimulations. This led students to use progressively more sophisticated computational abstractions, such as loopsand conditionals, in order to make their models predictive (Sengupta et al., 2015).Analytic approachWe conducted a thematic analysis (Miles & Huberman, 2004) in order to identify key forms of disciplinedinterpretations that learners developed during the phase of modeling motion. A theme captures somethingimportant about the data in relation to the research question, and represents some level of patterned response ormeaning within the data set. In our study, at the highest level, each theme represents an interpretive judgment.Each theme, in turn, consists of sub-themes, which are sets of relevant representational moves, that is, actionsundertaken by the learners that involve the creation, and/or editing of computational programs and other relatedrepresentations, and epistemic moves (e.g., arguments about the validity or significance of certain representations).Over time, these representational and epistemic moves constitute, or lead to the development of an interpretivejudgment (e.g., what counts as a “typical” measurement; what counts as a “good video”). These interpretivejudgments developed through progressive refinement of models and moving back and forth across tangible,diagrammatic, and computational models of motion. Therefore, besides the learners’ subjectivities, the judgmentsthemselves are inextricably tied to the media involved in modeling, in addition to mathematical and physical ideas,and computational abstractions.FindingsInterpreting numerical data and the emergence of ideas about errorIn the first modeling cycle, the teacher wanted to design a context for students to define constant speed motion interms of distances traveled per unit of time. The researchers initially wanted to use verbal descriptions of motion,as the best approximations of “constant speed” would require motors. The teacher, however, insisted onintroducing physical objects, both computational and non-computational, as part of the modeling activity. Hergoal was to “make things concrete,” i.e., to transform the modeling activity from a virtual and conceptual one intoa lived-in experience for her students. The students were therefore provided with Lego Mindstorms NXT robotsprogrammed to move at a constant speed. We also provided stopwatches, adhesive Post-it flags, and seamstressstyle measuring tapes, and asked students to measure the distances traveled in regular intervals of time. Studentscoordinated the placement of position-marking flags with a stopwatch in order to come up with mathematicalmeasures and explanations of robots moving at constant speed. In Figure 1, a student is measuring the distancebetween flags to find the distance traveled in each three-second interval.Students used these measurements to create computational models of the motion in ViMAP. In theirinitial models, each group’s measurements for the distances traveled in each three-second interval were nonuniform due to challenges inherent in the act of measurement. However, none of the students problematized theirdata by considering the limitations of the devices for measurement or the imperfect coordination of the placementof flags with the stopwatch. Students thought of themselves as workers following an unquestionable procedure.ICLS 2016 Proceedings285© ISLSSome of them argued some about issues of fidelity during the measurement activity. However, once datacollection was complete, no one thought critically about the potential problems in her or his data even though formost students, the data showed a wide variation in the measurements. Upon noticing this, the instructors designedan activity in which students watched a video of one group carrying out their measurement and data collection,and as a class, critiqued their work as shown in the video. The class replayed the video several times in order tonotice and reflect upon successes and breakdowns in measurement. The ensuing discussion led to the first studenttalk about error: “It’s not that the robot was moving differently, it’s that we were making mistakes!” Making senseof the data with a focus on analyzing the lived experience of designing the measure helped students interpret dataas designed measures, not independent of the challenges of measurement. This was particularly evident in theirnoticings of the various sources of error, as they replayed and re-analyzed the video. For example, some groupsnoticed that longer measurements of displacement were often coupled with shorter measurements, indicating thatthe timing of placement of the measure-flag shared by those measurements was likely off. Some groups alsodiscovered errors due to misreading the measuring tape, and in some cases, due to the sticky flags beingunintentionally moved by getting stuck to students’ shoes.Figure 2. Measuring constant speed using adhesive paper flags as “measure flags” (left) and one student’s modelof measured and “typical” step-sizes (right).We then asked students to review their measurements in order to determine what they believed was a“typical” distance measurement for their robot to travel in three seconds. The teacher welcomed this as anopportunity to connect the modeling activity with learning about measures of central tendency in their mathcurriculum. The students iterated upon their existing computational models using a second computational agentin the same simulation to represent the motion according to their “typical” values (mean, median, or mode) forspeed. Figure 2 shows one student’s model: her “measure-points” in the first-iteration were the following distancesapart, measured in inches: 30, 36, 30, 26, 39, 30. Her second-iteration data shows six uniform measurements of30 inches each. For each turtle, students programmed ViMAP to generate two graphs: one showing the value ofeach measurement (not shown), and another producing the total distance traveled by the robot. In the exampleshown in Figure 2, the graphs of the total distance traveled by the agent show a total distance of 191 inches forthe measured data, and 180 inches for the adjusted, or “typical” data. Students also recognized thatcomputationally, the typical model could be expressed as a loop, which the students and teacher appreciated as amore succinct program. A second affordance of the program for Iteration 2 is that the number of repeats can bechanged to simulate the robot traveling for a longer period of time at the same speed.In sum, making mathematical meaning of motion as processes of time-based change required thegeneration of and coordination among different representational moves, involving multiple forms of digital andpaper-based, discrete-mathematical representations of the phenomena under study. Annotating video andphotographic images in order to communicate and argue for the number of loops needed in their programsbecame a viable but emergent method for connecting among the representations, and can also be regarded asepistemic moves that grounded these representations within the disciplinary concepts. Students’ agency andinvolvement in creating connections across representations for the purpose of making meaning represents a keypractice in model-based reasoning. Epistemologically, the connections among representations were a sharedunknown, and it was up to the members of the class to come up with and refine generative ways to see, quantify,and model salient aspects of motion.What counts as a “good” video for measuring acceleration?Following students’ refinement of their descriptions of constant speed and (average) speed on inclines of varyingsteepness, we began to work on developing descriptions of acceleration. We provided clear acrylic tracks, marbles,and Lego bricks to build supports for the top and bottom of the tracks, as well as stopwatches and adhesive paperflags, in order to begin to measure acceleration. Students’ initial descriptions neglected processes of continuouschange: the marble was “slow” at the top of the ramp, and “fast” at the bottom. When asked to measure how speedICLS 2016 Proceedings286© ISLSwas changing, students tried to reapply their method with the robots: they attempted to place flags at equalintervals of time, but they soon decided this was too difficult: the motion was too fast for the method used whenmeasuring the speed of the (slower) robots. As a potential solution to this problem, the instructors introduceddigital video as a new method for collecting and analyzing motion data. We made this design decision becauseauthoring videos leverages out-of-school literacies for making and working with digital video, and, high framerate videos afford the possibility of slowing down recordings of motion that are otherwise too fast to measure.Children’s ideas of what counted as a “good” video for measuring acceleration changed dramaticallybetween the first and second iterations of their video recording and subsequent analysis. An example of studentwork is shown in Figure 3. Initially, their videos followed the marble in an action perspective, but this mademeasurement impossible because there was no frame of reference from which to measure the distances traveled.After attempting to measure the acceleration of the marble using the first round of videos, and after classroomwide discussions, the class developed a norm for what counts as a “good” video for measuring motion in a frameby-frame analysis: the camera has to stay still and the field of view must show the whole motion. Central to thiswas the realization that the viewer should be able to see the marble and identify the exact frame at which it wasreleased. Students iteratively developed, shared and critiqued several videos, and progressively refined theirmeasures, and over time, developed measures using physical and material means that used discrete mathematicalrepresentations similar to their ViMAP turtle’s “step-size”. One common form of measure involved placing a flagon their computer screens to mark the position of the marble at regular intervals of video frames. The pattern ofthe increasing distances between successive flags visually represented acceleration as a continuous process ofchange (Figure 3). The students’ epistemic moves, evident in the form of their explanations and concerns for whatmakes a video of motion useful for measuring speed represents the students’ understanding of important aspectsof motion from a disciplinary perspective. These measurements, only possible through an innovative use of video,consisting of a set of eminently representational moves, yet deeply interwoven with the epistemic moves, werethen used to make computational models that further communicate the mathematical pattern of change, asdiscussed in the following section.Figure 3. Adhesive flags mark the position of the marble at a regular interval of 10 frames.Expanding views of “accuracy” to create visually communicative modelsIn the first two modeling cycles (Oct. – Dec.), conceptual understanding of the unit of “speed” played an importantrole in their state-mandated science curriculum, and the teacher emphasized distance traveled by the ViMAP turtlein one “step” as the representation for speed. During this phase of the study, the goodness of ViMAP models as arepresentation of motion was normatively evaluated by the class based on the match between the speed vs. timegraph (“distance covered since last measure”), and the speed data that the model was designed to represent. Giventhat the graphs made the pattern of change explicit in these models, the students came to see graphs as the primarycommunicative devices, and the turtle enactment (i.e., the geometric shape generated by the turtle commands)was seen as merely the means to generate the graph. This was evident in multiple episodes of students’ sharingand presenting their models with the class. Over time, especially during Jan. – Feb., the instructors began toencourage students to further explore the ViMAP commands library, so that they would begin to deepen their useof the programming language. The goal here was to prompt students to re-envision and re-design their modelsusing newer turtle variables, so that they could make their turtle graphics less literal and more visually andmathematically communicative. As a result of this instructional push, during the third modeling cycle, all studentsbegan to take a more design-oriented approach to producing models that communicate the most important ideas,and variation in student models emerged. In terms of representational moves, all the students in the class expandedtheir use of variables by using new commands to represent mathematically the gradual change in speed using oneor more of the following variables: rotation, contrasts of color, pen-width, or relative size of agents. This was, inturn, motivated by and inextricably related to an epistemic move, that is––the students’ goals of making relevantfeatures of the phenomenon (motion) more salient to the class during presentations in their ViMAP models. WeICLS 2016 Proceedings287© ISLSillustrate this change with the work of one student, Darien. His first model of constant acceleration is shown inFigure 4 (left). The figure shows the inscription made by the agent as it executes the associated commands. Themodel increases the distance traveled by the agent by two step-size units with each step. However, the enactmentitself is limited in communicating the regularity of the increase––one would need to look at Darien’s code or atthe graphs to understand the regularity of the change.Figure 4. Darien’s first (left) and final (right) models of acceleration.In his final model (Figure 4, right), Darien added color changes to visually differentiate the individualsteps of the agent, and co-varied the pen-width with the step size using the command set <pen width> equal to<step-size>. Darien presented his model to the class, describing that the increasing pen-width of the ViMAP turtleis intended to communicate that the ball is getting faster as it falls. When he was sharing his work with the class,students asked questions about the representational significance of different aspects of his model, such as “Whydoes it look like a baseball bat?”, “Can we see the data”, and pointing out redundancies in his code (an initial set<pen-width> command, that was being overridden by the co-variation command). An excerpt of talk fromDarien’s presentation is shown below:Akia:Darien:Teacher:Darien:Why do you have set pen width equal to step size?To actually help the pen width [be] equal to the step size, so that way, thepen, the size will actually get bigger EV’RY STEP. [holds a hands slightlyapart to show a space between, gesture beats and enlarges at syllables of ev’ry step]So when it gets bigger, does that show that your speed is increasing ordecreasing?Increasing.Darien wanted to show that pen-width was increasing with every step, and illustrates this with his handmovements as he speaks, beginning with his hands slightly apart, and enlarging the space on beats with thesyllables “ev-‘ry step”. One could argue that Darien’s initial model was more canonical, because it uses thecommonly used representations of dot-traces and graphs. However, in his revised model, Darien’s goal was tomake the process of a steady increase in speed explicit without the use of graphs. This in turn led him to using aninterpretive move that involved using a computationally more sophisticated data representation––co-variation––in order to link the visual appearance of his model (pen-width) to a variable that was significant in terms ofrepresenting the underlying physics (step-size, or speed).Conclusions and implicationsWe have argued here that when children can engage in long-term, extended cycles of modeling using agent-basedcomputational platforms (e.g., ViMAP) and complementary forms of physical modeling, they can begin todevelop disciplinary dispositions and sensibilities pertaining to scientific modeling that parallel the more matureinterpretive work of scientists (e.g., see Daston & Galison, 2007). The long-term nature of the study allowedstudents to connect representational experiences across modalities, including their computational representationswith their lived experiences of designing measures in the real world with physical objects. Through suchexperiences, children came to view data as designed measures, and their views of what counts as a “good” modeldeepened significantly as they engaged in cycles of sharing and refining their models to be progressively moreICLS 2016 Proceedings288© ISLScommunicative. The emphasis on communicativity also led students to make deeper forays into programming andcomputational thinking.Our work has implications for the praxis of computational modeling in the science classroom. There isnow a growing body of literature that argues for the use of multiple and complementary forms of modeling in theclassroom (e.g, Danish, 2014; Dickes et al., in press). In our study too, the students’ representational and epistemicwork were distributed across a range of computational and non-computational materials, using which theyiteratively represented motion as a process continuous change. While modeling with ViMAP enabled the studentsto connect graphs of change over time to units of change (e.g., step-size), modeling with materials complementedthis activity by enabling them to generate the phenomenon being modeled in the “real world”, as well as to designthe measure of change (e.g., step-size) using video analysis. It is also important to note that “making thingsconcrete” using material forms was an instructional push initiated by the teacher, who co-designed these activitieswith the research team. We therefore believe that designing complementary forms of computational and noncomputational modeling is critical for enabling teacher-adoption and appropriation of computational modeling inthe K12 science curricula.ReferencesBollen, L., & van Joolingen, W. R. (2013). SimSketch: multiagent simulations based on learner-created sketchesfor early science education. IEEE transactions on learning technologies, (3), 208-216.Cobb, P., Confrey, J., Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educational research. EducationalResearcher, 32(1), 9-13.Danish, J. A. (2014). Applying an activity theory lens to designing instruction for learning about the structure,behavior, and function of a honeybee system. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 23(2), 100-148.Daston, L. & Galison, P. (2007). Objectivity. Zone Books.Dickes, A. C., Sengupta, P., Farris, A. V., & Basu, S. (in press). Development of mechanistic reasoning and multilevel explanations of ecology in 3rd grade using agent-based models. Science Education.Enyedy, N. (2005). Inventing mapping: Creating cultural forms to solve collective problems. Cognition andInstruction, 23(4), 427-466.Keller, E. F. (1984). A Feeling for the Organism, 10th Anniversary Edition: The Life and Work of BarbaraMcClintock. Macmillan.Lehrer, R. (2009). Designing to develop disciplinary dispositions: Modeling natural systems. AmericanPsychologist, 64(8), 759.Lemke, J. L. (2001). Articulating communities: Sociocultural perspectives on science education. Journal ofresearch in science teaching, 38(3), 296-316.Nersessian, N. (2008). Creating scientific concepts. MIT Press.Ochs, E., Gonzales, P., & Jacoby, S. (1996). “When I come down I'm in the domain state”: Grammar and graphicrepresentation in the interpretive activity of physicists. Studies in Interactional Sociolinguistics, 13, 328369.Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. Basic Books, Inc.Pickering, A. (1995). The mangle of practice: Time, agency, and science. University of Chicago Press.Schön, D. A. (1995). Knowing-in-action: The new scholarship requires a new epistemology. Change: TheMagazine of Higher Learning, 27(6), 27-34.Sengupta, P., Dickes, A. C., Farris, A. V., Karan, A., Martin, K., & Wright, M. (2015). Programming in K12Science Classrooms. Communications of the ACM, 58(1), 33- 35.Sengupta, P., Kinnebrew, J., Basu, S., Biswas, G., and Clark, D. (2013). Integrating Computational Thinking withK12 Science Education Using Agent-Based Modeling: A Theoretical Framework. Education &Information Technologies, Vol. 18, 351 – 380.Sherin, B., diSessa, A. A., & Hammer, D. (1993). Dynaturtle revisited: Learning physics through collaborativedesign of a computer model. Interactive Learning Environments, 3(2), 91-118.White, B. Y., & Frederiksen, J. R. (1998). Inquiry, modeling, and metacognition: Making science accessible toall students. Cognition and instruction, 16(1), 3-118.Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo. http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/. Center for Connected Learning andComputer-Based Modeling, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.AcknowledgementsThis research was supported in part by an NSF Early CAREER Award (PI: Pratim Sengupta). All opinions arethe authors’ and not endorsed by supporting institutions.ICLS 2016 Proceedings289© ISLS