Guiding Intent Participation at an Art Crating CompanySarah C. Radke, New York University, scr274@nyu.eduJasmine Y. Ma, New York University, j.ma@nyu.eduAbstract: This paper presents the theoretical concept of guiding intent participation. Groundedin a sociocultural perspective of learning and analytically guided by methods of multimodal andinteraction analysis, guiding intent participation is a distinct category of guided participation(Kirshner, 2008; Rogoff, 1995). Guiding intent participation takes as relevant both thecoordinated efforts of oldtimers and relative newcomers to make contributions to ongoing workand learning, as well as the observational activities by the oldtimers that are precursors toguidance. The analytic implications of the concept in support of rethinking assessment toconsider social context are discussed.IntroductionThis paper presents a secondary analysis of data from a larger study of an art crating company called CratEx thatdesigns and build crates for the transport and storage of art objects. We look to guided participation (Rogoff,1995) as a lens through which to analyze interactions between new employees (newcomers) and managers(oldtimers) during work activity and with a focus on how these interactions relate to newcomer learning. Werecognize the work done by Kirshner (2008) in describing categories of guided participation as relevant wheninvestigating newcomer-oldtimer interactions. In an effort to add to these works, the following question drivesthis case: What other kinds of guided participation are observable in this setting? We introduce the theoreticalconcept of guiding intent participation as a new and distinct category of guided participation.Guiding intent participation is reminiscent of intent participation (Rogoff, et. al, 2003) in that keenobservation with the expectation of participation in the future is still the participation structure of focus. However,it diverges from the original concept in that it focuses on the relative oldtimers and their observational activitiesrather than on those of the learner. Additionally, guiding intent participation is methodologically consequential asan analytical lens in reconsidering assessment during work activity because it illuminates moments of shift frominherent to discursive assessment (Jordan & Putz, 2004).Theoretical frameworkIn this paper we take a sociocultural view, allowing us to take seriously the roles that participation in socialinteractions and culturally organized activities play in learning at CratEx. Furthermore, we draw on Rogoff’s(1995) theory of guided participation, a developmental process at the interpersonal level of activity - the secondof three planes of analysis between personal and community processes. This interpersonal plane is comprised ofeveryday activities engaged in and managed collaboratively by individuals within a particular setting. Rather thanbeing an operational definition, guided participation offers a perspective on interpersonal interactions that focuseson, “mutual involvement of individuals and their social partners, communicating and coordinating theirinvolvement as they participate in socioculturally structured collective activity” (p.146).The term guided refers to direct and indirect structuring of participation possibilities through cultural,social, and interpersonal values. Moreover, by participation Rogoff is referring to both explicit involvements inan activity and observation of said activity. Central to the concept of guided participation is that more experiencedmembers of a community support the participation of relative newcomers, through “a system of interpersonalengagements and arrangements that are involved in participation activities,” (Rogoff, 1995, p.146). This may bedone, for example, by encouraging involvement in some aspects of activity and restricting it for others. This is ofprimary concern in this paper because the interactions of focus are frequently asymmetric in terms of experience.Lave and Wenger’s (1991) theory of learning as a process of legitimate peripheral participation is usefulin understanding these types of asymmetric interactions. It brings into focus the intimate connection betweenlearning and participation in a community of practice by focusing on the social situations in which activity occurs.Possible forms of participation to which newcomers have access mediate membership. In particular, the authorsargue that learning is best supported when newcomers have full access to the practices of experts. This meanshaving opportunities to complete low-risk tasks, but also to observe and participate in more complex activity withthe support of more experienced participants. In doing so, newcomers begin to “gradually assemble a general ideaof what constitutes the practice of the community,” and how their activities fit within it (p.95).Using guided participation and legitimate peripheral participation as his lens of analysis, Kirshner’s(2008) study of youth activist groups distinguished between three categories of guided participation: facilitation,ICLS 2018 Proceedings1093© ISLSapprenticeship, and joint work. Briefly stated, guidance through facilitation highlighted adults as having a neutralrole that supported youth leadership and input. Here, the youth were given a say in regards to the content ofmeetings, focus of projects, and adults stepped in only “as needed.” Guidance through apprenticeship consistedof adults being seen more as veteran activists who participated in youth-centered mutual endeavors. Lastly,guidance through joint work also had the collaborative characteristic similar to apprenticeship, but activities werenot youth-centered. Here, categories of adult or youth did not drive the tasks participants were assigned. Rather,divisions defined by experience (regardless of age) were more salient. Kirshner’s categories of guidedparticipation are relevant because they offer examples of how the efforts of oldtimers and relative newcomersmight be coordinated to make contributions to the work and learning occurring in a community.Methods and dataPresented here are findings based on a secondary analysis of data originally collected as part of a study thatinvestigated spatial reasoning practices. In the primary study, both researchers held observational roles and didnot take part in any of the building activities. Methods of multimodal and interaction analysis (Goodwin, 2010;Jordan & Henderson, 1995) were used to examine instances of guided participation by CratEx employees duringwork activity. Data include ethnographic field notes, audio and video recordings, images of materialrepresentations used by participants in their work, and informal interviews, collected over an 8-month period.The original study observed interactions and activities within all the departments of CratEx. Thisincluded the Project Managers who designed crates, the Crate Shop who built each crate’s exterior, the PackingDepartment who created the interiors and packed the art, and Transport who were responsible for shippingmanagement. The analysis presented here focused solely on interactions that occurred in the Packing Department.This department was responsible for “building out” the interior of the wooden crates. Packers cut and installedanything that went inside the crate (e.g., foam, braces, shims) and were responsible for ensuring the security ofthe crate’s contents. Previous research found that work in the Packing Department was more often collaboratively,rather than hierarchically or individually, undertaken (Radke & Ma, 2015). For example, teams of packers oftenworked on large or complicated crates and when questions came up, the help of additional packers was oftensought.Analytically, we focus on interactions where there was some amount of new employee - managerinteraction during work activity. Because work at CratEx is often collaborative, this type of interaction waspervasive. In this study we selected for analysis those episodes which highlighted aspects of guided participation,but could not be explained by Kirshner’s three categories. The episodes examined in this paper were chosen tobest illustrate our findings. They occurred across our time at CratEx and together, include all the Crate Shopmanagers as well as both new and seasoned employees.FindingsMore experienced packers often took a guiding role; however, the collaborative structure also supported relativenewcomers sharing and applying what they had learned in the Packing Department and in previous experiencesoutside of CratEx. This allowed them to show initiative or take leadership roles with the support of their moreexperienced colleagues. For example, after receiving some assistance from Nick (a more experienced packer)about how to safely pack a large piece of artwork, Brenda (a relative newcomer) offered a suggestion about howto accurately and efficiently measure for extra padding. Nick accepted her suggestion and emphasized her positionas a leader in that moment when he stated to the group, “she is showing us how to do our job!”Many of these episodes of newcomer initiative occurred after they spent time observing moreexperienced packers as they worked. It became clear that the more knowledgeable packers were not only mindfulthey were being observed, but routinely initiated the observations as potential teaching episodes. In an interview,one Packing Department manager framed these opportunities for observation as key to how processes andstandards were learned. He shared that, “the way you communicate it [the knowledge to be learned] is just byhaving someone watch you work.” Rogoff and her colleagues (2003) argue that these kinds of newcomer (orlearner) observations are not passive occurrences, but an “aspect of participation” (p.178) that they call intentparticipation. They describe intent participation as, “observ[ing] and listen[ing] with intent concentration andinitiative,” where, “collaborative participation is expected when they are ready to help in shared endeavors”(p.176). The concept emphasizes a type of observation motivated by expectations of eventual collaboration andparticipation.Our focus in this paper, guiding intent participation, combines aspects of intent participation describedabove and guiding participation. In our term, guiding refers to participation by the more experienced member inan interaction that is in support of newcomer learning. Intent indicates that there is “keen observation” (Rogoff,1995) of participants with the expectation to participate in the not so distant future. However, here we turn ourICLS 2018 Proceedings1094© ISLSattention to observations made by more experienced members rather than by relative newcomers. Finally,participation of oldtimers may come in the form of “overseeing” or “checking in on” without interjection, orsuggestions, corrections, clarifications, etc., which can occur both as an injection into interactions and duringongoing collaborative work activity.Common to work activity in the Packing Department were instances of relative oldtimers observing, orlistening in on, newcomers as they worked, often injecting themselves into the ongoing activity to clarify, correct,or otherwise offer assistance. Often times this was connected to assessment of learner’s actions or reasoningduring collaborative work in an effort to support learning, while ensuring work tasks were accomplished correctly.For example, managers would routinely walk the Packing Department to check on progress of all the ongoingprojects, listening or looking in from a distance (See Figure 1).Figure 1. Manager (Nan) Observing multiple ongoing projectsSometimes self-injections following observations occurred when they saw something of concern (e.g.,On a walk around the department floor, an oldtimer stopped at the workbench of a newcomer with the exclamation,“Whoa! What happened here?”). However, they were also part of routine assessment of ongoing work activity.For example, in the following excerpt, Nan (the manager) has been observing Fred (a Packing Departmentemployee) as he frames the interior of a crate with foam. After several non-verbal observations, Nan makes herway over to his workspace.Nan: So? (2 seconds) What does it need on the sides?Fred: Just this piece. ((Holds a short piece of foam inside the crate where he plans to glue it.))Nan: Yeah. Perfect.Oldtimers also injected themselves into ongoing activity with a guiding recommendation or to offerassistance (e.g., “Make sure you measure both sides, there might be something funky going on with that foam”).When they were already part of collaborative activity, more experienced packers would stop their own work tocheck on the work of their less experienced project partner(s). For example, in the following except, newcomer(Nancy) and an oldtimer (Chuck) worked to frame the inside of a crate with foam. As they work, Chuck stops,watches Nancy, and after five seconds of silence makes a suggestion about her work efforts.Chuck: ((Pauses in his work to watch Nancy; he looks up [Figure 2a] and down her length of foam.))Chuck: Go ahead and [Figure 2b] push that down if you can. They’re cut – you cut them a littleshort.Nancy: Oh. Sorry. ((Pushes down on [Figure 2c] the foam)).a)b)c)Figure 2. Chuck, in the midst of his own work, a) stops to observe while Nancy inserts foam into her side of thecrate, b) interjects a suggestion, and c) watches as Nancy responds.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1095© ISLSReviewing two decades of research coming out of the Palo Alto Research Center and the Institute forResearch on Learning, Jordan and Putz (2004) presented a three-part framework for rethinking assessment as aubiquitous social practice. They described the framework as a tripod of inherent, discursive, and documentaryassessment. Relevant to this analysis are the first two categories in which they describe assessments, “producedon the fly, as natural parts of mundane social activities by individuals and groups” (p.346). Some of the nonverbalobservations the managers make of their employees fall into this first category, inherent assessment. For example,the time spent moving around the Packing Department observing ongoing activity and assessing project progress.At other times however, these nonverbal observations, or inherent assessments, result in a verbal communicationwith one or more employees; these explicit communications Jordan and Putz label as discursive assessments. Theshift from inherent to discursive is a transformation of individual, nonverbal assessment, to assessment that ispublic, verbal, and now exists as an object that can be referred back to, or talked about. In these ways, thediscursive assessments are critical for the learning of ongoing activity.SignificanceGuiding intent participation is distinct from Kirshner’s three categories of guided participation. On a surface level,aspects of each of Kirshner’s categories are relevant within guiding intent participation (e.g., “veteran” packersparticipating collaboratively with newcomers; newcomers taking charge of their own learning; etc.). However, itis distinct because it is a hybrid of guided and intent participation that describes the actions and participation ofthe relative old-timers in the interactions. As such, it considers both the interactions that support and coordinateefforts of old-timers and relative newcomers to make contributions to the work and learning occurring in acommunity as well as the observation activities by the oldtimers that are precursors to guidance. Guiding intentparticipation, as a category of guided participation, provides insight into how learning occurs in everyday, routineinteractions as it highlights ways oldtimers both recognize the need for guidance and interact in order to supportthe learning of newcomers.Guiding intent participation could also serve as a methodological frame in support of the call made byJordan and Putz (2004) for research to “turn its attention to the task of gathering systematic empirical data onassessment practices as they occur naturally in various organizational contexts” (p. 355). Giving systematic,analytical attention to moments of guiding intent participation would help pinpoint and elucidate shifts inassessments from inherent to discursive.ReferencesGoodwin, C. (2010). Things and their embodied environments. In L. Malafouris & C. Renfrew (Eds.), Thecognitive life of things: Recasting the boundaries of the mind (pp. 103–120). Cambridge, UK: McDonaldInstitute for Archaeological Research.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 4, 39-103.Jordan, B., & Putz, P. (2004). Assessment as practice: Notes on measures, tests, and targets. Humanorganization, 63(3), 346-358.Kirshner, B. (2008). Guided participation in three youth activism organizations: Facilitation, apprenticeship, andjoint work. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17, 60-101.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, England:Cambridge University Press.Radke, S., & Ma, J. (2015) Helping interactions and learning in an art crating company. Poster presented at theannual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL.Rogoff, B. (1995). Observing sociocultural activity on three planes: Participatory appropriation, guidedparticipation, and apprenticeship. In J.V. Wertsch, P. Del Rio & A. Alvarez (Eds.), Sociocultural studiesof mind (pp. 139-164). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Rogoff, B., Paradise, R., Arauz, R. M., Correa-Chavez, M., & Angelillo, C. (2003). Firsthand learning throughintent participation. Annual Review of Psychology, 54, 175-203.AcknowledgementsWe are thankful to our colleagues in the New York University Interaction Analysis Laboratory who participatedin data sessions. Their analytic expertise greatly assisted this research. We are also grateful to the reviewers whoseinsightful comments pushed our thinking.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1096© ISLS