Measuring Students Epistemic Understanding of, and BeliefsAbout, Political MediaJeremy Stoddard, College of William & Mary, jdstod@wm.eduJason Chen, College of William & Mary, jachen@wm.eduAbstract: Media, information, and critical literacy have long been viewed as key todeveloping informed and active citizens. However, there has been little focus in civiceducation on developing young peoples’ epistemic understanding of media used in politics orpersonal reflections on their own role in this media culture, both of which are key to effectiveyouth engagement with politics in the media age. Quality models for measuring students’abilities to perform in these areas are virtually non-existent. Here we describe our measures ofepistemic understanding of political media and self-efficacy for political engagement.Introduction and contextPolitical and civic actions today occur as often through social media networks and commercial media as they doon the streets or in the voting booth. Further, the self-curation of information through social media andtraditional media selection, the so-called “filter bubble” (Iyengar & Hahn, 2009; Pariser, 2011), has contributedto the effectiveness of propaganda, disinformation campaigns, and the rise of “fake news.”Numerous programs are currently attempting to address the recent “fake news” crisis in news literacyand civic online reasoning (e.g., McGrew, Ortega, Breakstone, & Wineburg, 2017). None of these models factorin the social or political contexts of how and why young people engage with particular sources in the first place– nor do they focus on young people’s abilities to effectively take political action in the contemporary politicalenvironment. Here we describe our attempts to measure epistemic understanding of political media and theirskills and self-efficacy for engaging in political action through media. We do this within the context of ourVirtual Internship (VI) simulation, PurpleState Solutions. In PurpleState, students play the role of interns at apolitical communications firm to engage in developing skills and knowledge for democratic and mediaeducation. VI’s are designed using the epistemic game model (Shaffer, 2006a, 2006b) to develop expertise in anenvironment modeled on communities of professional practice. In the VI, students learn politicalcommunications concepts and then design a media campaign for a special interest group to PurpleState votersfor or against a proposed ban on hydraulic fracturing or “fracking” in Virginia (USA).MeasuresThe open-ended measures of knowledge of the issue and epistemic understandings of political media andpolitical media strategies were used in pre and post-questionnaires in all three iterations of the simulation inVirginia and Wisconsin (n= 103 total) for this design-based research project. These measures were used toexamine changes in participants’ epistemic understandings of political media and role of media in politics andtheir ability to apply the media strategy they learned to a different but related context (near transfer). Openended tasks, such as evaluating different forms of political media, illustrated participants’ understandings ofhow media is used to strategically persuade voters (e.g., use of evidence, persuasive techniques), and theirepistemic understanding of political media.The relationship between knowledge of the issue, why it is controversial, and having confidence inboth their knowledge of the issue and confidence in being able to take action that is meaningful provides strongevidence that participants will be more likely to engage in the future (Levy, 2011). Therefore, we were alsointerested in studying the impact of the simulation on the participants’ self-efficacy for political engagement(e.g., Levy, 2011; Morrell, 2005; Zhang, Torney-Purta & Barber, 2012). Over the three iterations we adaptedprevious scales of measures for self-efficacy for political engagement that better reflect the nature of politicalengagement represented in the current political context, and the rise of participatory media culture in general, aswell as to align with the simulation (Chinn & Buckland, 2011).Measures of issue knowledge and political media strategy transferOpen-ended tasks were scored and showed significant increases among participants at each iteration (n=103) intheir understanding of the issue, why it was controversial, and in their ability to apply media strategy to a newlocal policy issue. For example, we asked participants “Why is the use of the fracking process considered acontroversial public policy issue in the US?” to assess their understanding of different perspectives on the issue.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1593© ISLSIn order to understand the media strategies used in the VI and their ability to transfer these strategies to a similarproblem, we asked participants what media strategy advice they would give someone running for state office.Measures of epistemic understanding of political mediaWe were interested in particular in participants’ abilities to analyze political media utilizing politicalcommunications concepts (e.g., persuasive techniques) and in the behaviors related to epistemic understandingsof political information. Two items in particular were used. The first is a series of items asking participants toanalyze a political ad for its intended audience, message, and persuasive techniques used. The second is a socialmedia post from a political group that includes polling data for how citizens of Maryland viewed the issue offracking. This item asked students to evaluate the information it contained, as well as to identify and provide arationale for their actions if they were to see this post in their social media. They first provided a ranked order ofoptions (e.g., ignore, seek out corroborating sources, analyze the organization), and provide a rationale for whythey made these choices. This item in particular gave us a sense of their epistemic aims with political media.Measures of self-efficacy for political engagementAfter utilizing commonly used measures for self-efficacy for political engagement (e.g., Levy 2011) for the firstiteration of the VI, we realized that these items needed to be adapted to reflect contemporary politicalengagement and to better align with the simulation. In adapting the self-efficacy items for this study, wefollowed Bandura’s (2006) recommendations on constructing self-efficacy items. Students’ confidence forbeing able to engage politically was measured before and after participation in the Purplestate VI using a 10item instrument [α=.89(t0), .95(t3)]. The tasks identified for civic engagement centered on: (1) discussingpolitical issues and constructing good arguments (e.g., “how confident are you that you could construct goodarguments about political issues?”); (2) critically navigating digital media spaces that contain political messages(e.g., “how confident are you that you could use social media to effectively communicate about controversialpolitical issues?”); and (3) taking some sort of political action (e.g., “how confident are you that you could dosomething to get local officials to address a problem?”). These items do not comprise a comprehensive list ofcivic engagement activities. However, these 10 items were identified because they align with the centralactivities of PurpleState.Discussion and implications for future researchIf students are knowledgeable on controversial issues, understand why it is controversial, and feel confidentabout their understanding of the issue, there is a greater likelihood that they may be able to effectively takeaction on that issue (Levy, 2011). The measures developed here serve as a model for developing and adaptingmeasures of epistemic understanding, self-efficacy, and behaviors related to contemporary political engagementand information literacy. They provide an update to traditional measures and a methodological example of howto develop measures that tightly align with a particular curricular intervention as part of a design-based study.Finally, these measures go beyond simple strategies for evaluating information common in the current newsliteracy approaches to understand young people’s capacity for engaging in the contemporary and complexpolitical environment.ReferencesIyengar, S., & Hahn, K. S. (2009). Red media, blue media: Evidence of ideological selectivity in media use.Journal of Communication, 59(1), 19-39.Levy, B. M. (2011). Fostering Cautious Political Efficacy Through Civic Advocacy Projects: A Mixed MethodsCase Study of an Innovative High School Class. Theory & Research In Social Education, 39, 238-277.McGrew, S., Ortega, T., Breakstone, J., & Wineburg, S. (2017). The challenge that’s bigger than fake news:Civic reasoning in a social media environment. American Educator, 41(3), 4-9.Morrell, M. E. (2005). Deliberation, democratic decision-making and internal political efficacy. PoliticalBehavior, 27(1), 49-69.Pariser, L. (2011). The filter bubble: What the Internet is hiding from you. London, U.K.: Penguin Press.Shaffer, D. W. (2006a). How computer games help children learn. New York, NY: Palgrave MacMillan.Shaffer, D. W. (2006b). Epistemic frames for epistemic games. Computers & education, 46(3), 223-234.Stoddard, J. (2014). The need for media education in democratic education. Democracy & Education, 22(1).Retrieved from http://democracyeducationjournal.org/home/vol22/iss1/4Zhang, T., Torney-Purta, J., & Barber, C. (2012). Students’ conceptual knowledge and process skills in civiceducation: Identifying cognitive profiles and classroom correlates. Theory and Research in SocialEducation, 40(1), 1-34.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1594© ISLS