Improving Elementary Students’ Literacy Through KnowledgeBuildingPei-Yi Lin, National Taiwan Normal University, hanapeiyi@gmail.comLeanne Ma, University of Toronto, leanne.ma@mail.utoronto.caYu-Hui Chang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, chan1173@umn.eduHuang-Yao Hong, National Cheng-Chi University, hyhong@nccu.edu.twChiu-Pin, Lin, National Tsing Hua University, chiupin.lin@mx.nthu.edu.twAbstract: This study follows the Knowledge Building discourse of 4th graders in order toassess changes in literacy-related outcomes over the course of two semesters. Our analysesrevealed that Knowledge Forum activities, such as use of scaffolding tools, increased overtime and were positively correlated with improved essay writing, particularly for the lowperforming group. Our findings add to the growing body of research that Knowledge Buildingpedagogy and Knowledge Forum technology together support the development of students’literacy.IntroductionKnowledge Building (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014) is a pedagogical approach that aims to enculturate studentsinto authentic knowledge work. During Knowledge Building, students engage in collaborative discourse in orderto advance ideas in the community knowledge. Knowledge Forum serves as the online environment to makeideas accessible to all, with supports in place for sustaining idea improvement (Zhang, et. al., 2011). UsingKnowledge Forum, students read and write for each other to elaborate their thinking, seek clarifications, makeconnections, and improve their ideas together. Such complex, discursively-rich interactions involving highlevels of reading, writing, and revision have been shown to be positively associated with literacy outcomes likevocabulary growth (Zhang & Sun, 2011; Chen et. al., 2015).Study designThe current study aims to explore how Knowledge Building and Knowledge Forum can enhance literacyoutcomes related to essay writing. More specifically, the research questions are: (1) Which forms of engagementin Knowledge Forum enhance students’ online collaboration over time? and (2) Which online activities onKnowledge Forum correlate with their writing performance over time?. We examined the Knowledge Buildingdiscourse of a fourth-grade class (25 students) in Taiwan, where an experienced Knowledge Building teacherused a principle-based approach to improve her teaching practices and instructional design process over twosemesters. The teacher encouraged her students to work collaboratively on KF, to share, build on, and improveideas in order to advance the collective understanding of their Chinese textbook. In the second semester, theteacher aimed to deepen collaborative reading and writing in Knowledge Forum. She asked students to selforganize into dyads and triads to read KF notes online and discuss ideas together face-to-face, before buildingon other groups' ideas in KF again. Students had the option to create individual or co-authored notes.At the end of each semester, we examined students’ literacy-related activities in KF, which included basiconline activities (e.g., note writing, reading, revising), use of scaffolding tools (e.g., uses of keywords andepistemic markers in notes) and social interaction (e.g., note-linking and note-reading). In terms of students’literacy-related outcomes, they wrote an essay at the end of each semester, which was scored by the teacher. Wealso explored the relation between students’ Knowledge Building activities and writing activities to measurestudents’ progress in terms of the amount of online activities from the first to the second semester.Preliminary resultsStudents wrote a total of 645 notes in semester 1 (M = 25.8; SD = 7.67) and 692 notes in semester 2 (M =27.68,SD = 8.71). In semester 2, 92 collaborative notes were written (M = 22.6%, SD = 20.3%), with studentsgradually increasing the proportion of collaborative notes, despite given the option to create individual notes. Asummary of students’ online activities in Knowledge Forum are provided in Table 1. In order to investigate therelationship between students’ Knowledge Building activities and their writing performance, we conductedSpearman correlation analysis. Students’ essay writing is significantly correlated with their use of KFscaffolding tools (ρ = 0.44, p < .05), suggesting that their use of keywords and epistemic markers in notes werehelpful to improving their writing skills.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1527© ISLSTable 1: Summary of online activities in Knowledge Forum (N = 25)KF activitiesKF basicactivitiesUse of KFscaffoldsKF socialinteraction# notes created# notes read#build-on notes# notes revised# of keywords in notes# of epistemic markers% of note-linking% of note-reading1st semester Mean (SD)25.80 (7.67)171.28 (58.35)15.00 (6.19)7.32 (5.28)20.24 (7.46)24.92 (8.15)57.00% (8.81%)50.96% (18.61%)2nd semester Mean (SD)27.68 (8.71)104.64 (45.58)14.56 (6.16)3.76 (2.97)22.92 (7.95)26.64 (9.09)52.32% (20.25%)39.40% (17.13%)Z-1.20-4.31***-0.34-3.58***-1.73-1.31-0.97-3.52***In order to understand the trajectory of students’ improvement in writing, we compared three clusters(high-, medium-, and low-performing) based on the rank of their essay scores using the Kruskal-Wallis H test.The analysis indicated that in terms of their uses of KF scaffolding tools, there are significant differencesbetween the three clusters (X2 = 6.99, p < .05). While the writing performance for the high-performing andmedium-performing clusters remained stable, the performance of students in the low-performing clusterimproved over time, suggesting that the scaffolding tools (i.e., keywords and epistemic markers) in notes wereespecially conducive to fostering the writing abilities of students in the low-performing cluster.Discussion and future directionsIn this study, we examined the Knowledge Building activities and literacy development of fourth-graders in aChinese language class over the course of two semesters. Several patterns emerged. First, students’ onlinecollaborative Knowledge Building activities, such as notes contribution and scaffolding tools use (e.g.,keywords and epistemic markers) increased over time. Second, students’ essay writing performance wasimproved, though no significant difference was found between the two semesters. Third, students’ use of KFscaffolding tools was positively associated with their writing performance, with students in the low-performinggroup showing the greatest amount of improvement over time. Surprisingly, students’ note-reading behavioursdecreased over time, but it is likely due to the way collaborative notes were created in Knowledge Forum duringthe second semester. It should be noted that students’ note-linking behaviours remained relatively stable.Together, our findings suggest that when students engage in collaborative Knowledge Building activitiesand discussions with appropriate pedagogical and technological supports, all members benefit in a way thatminimizes the gap between high- and low-achieving groups. This is of particular importance for literacyinstruction where it is commonplace that the rich get richer, commonly referred to as the Matthew effect(Stanovich, 1986). Continued use of epistemic markers and keywords would help students sustain discourse thatleads to continual idea improvement and progressively deeper understanding. Future work should aim to exploreover extended periods of time the evolution of group knowledge processes that facilitate the development ofstudents’ multiliteracies during Knowledge Building.ReferencesChen, B., Ma, L., Matsuzawa, Y., & Scardamalia, M. (2015). The development of productive vocabulary inknowledge building: A longitudinal study. In O. Lindwall, P. Hakkinen, T. Koschman, P. Tchounikine,& S. Ludvigsen (Eds.), Proceedings of the Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL)Conference 2015, Volume 1 (pp. 443-450). Gothenburg, Sweden: The International Society of theLearning Sciences.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, andtechnology. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (2nd ed.) (pp. 397417). New York: Cambridge University Press.Stanovich, K. E. (1986). Matthew effects in reading: Some consequences of individual differences in theacquisition of literacy. Reading Research Quarterly, 21(4): 360–407.Zhang, J., Hong, H.-Y., Scardamalia, M., Teo, C. L., & Morley, E. A. (2011). Sustaining knowledge building asa principle-based innovation at an elementary school. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20(2),262-307.Zhang, J., & Sun, Y. (2011). Reading for idea advancement in a Grade 4 knowledge building community.Instructional Science, 39(4), 429-452.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1528© ISLS