Exploring Computational Modeling Environments as Tools toStructure Classroom-Level Knowledge BuildingMichelle Wilkerson, University of California, Berkeley; mwilkers@berkeley.eduBecca Shareff, University of California, Berkeley; rlshareff@berkeley.eduBrian Gravel, Tufts University, brian.gravel@tufts.eduYara Shaban, Tufts University, yara.shaban@tufts.eduVasiliki Laina, University of California, Berkeley; vlaina@berkeley.eduAbstract. Although computational modeling is noted as a powerful way to engage students inscientific knowledge construction, many studies focus on individuals or small groups. Here,we explore computational modeling as an infrastructure to support classroom level knowledgebuilding. We present data from a two-week study where two fifth grade classrooms modeledevaporation and condensation. We focus our analysis on one group that experienced successwith the activity, and another that struggled; these groups’ intended models emphasizedrandom motion and aggregation respectively, two important but complementary molecularbehaviors. Both groups’ ideas were incorporated into a collective model designed inconsultation with the entire class. We show that computational modeling (1) often requiredexplicit support, but when leveraged productively (2) served a representational role bysupporting the elaboration of student ideas about physical mechanism, and (3) served anepistemic role by allowing students to compare, synthesize, and build on other’s contributions.Keywords: scientific modeling; classroom discourse; science education; computationalmodeling; knowledge building; epistemic gamesIn this paper, we are concerned with computational modeling. We define this to be the practice of iterativelyconstructing, refining, and thinking with representations of scientific systems that are encoded as computerexecutable code. By engaging in these practices, learners are expected to discover the inner workings ofscientific and mathematical systems: First elaborating their understandings of a given system throughconstructing a computer model, then “debugging” that knowledge by testing and refining the model (Papert,1980; Penner, 2000). With proper facilitation and support, computational modeling is generally understood to bean effective way to engage learners in model-based inquiry and knowledge construction (van Joolingen, deJong, & Dimitrakopoulou, 2007; Wilensky & Reisman, 2006). Here, we argue that it can also be transformativeat the classroom level by providing a framework for students to collectively contribute, evaluate, and synthesizescientific ideas through the production and refinement of shared playable artifacts. In this way, computationalmodel construction environments can serve as analogs to the types of argument and explanation focusedknowledge-organizing tools often used to support classroom learning communities (Scardamalia & Bereiter,1994), though considerably different in structure and focus.To illustrate, we present a multiple case study from a computational modeling unit about condensationand evaporation enacted in two fifth grade science classrooms at an urban-rim public school in the NortheasternUnited States. We focus on two groups within one classroom that are representative of student experiencesduring the unit. As we will show, these two groups developed models drawing from different experiences andexplanations of condensation and evaporation, and their models foregrounded complementary scientificmechanisms. One group was quickly successful in building a working model, while the other struggled to do so.The scientific mechanisms illustrated by these two groups’ models, along with contributions from other groupsin the classroom, were consolidated into a collective model (constructed by facilitators in consultation withstudents) that offered more explanatory power than any one group’s model alone. This collective model wasthen taken up by the classroom to reason about other, related science phenomena. We argue that for thisclassroom, computational modeling (1) often required explicit support, but when leveraged productively (2)served a representational role by supporting the elaboration of student ideas about physical mechanism, and (3)served an epistemic role by allowing the class to compare, synthesize, and build on each other’s contributions.BackgroundThere is a growing body of work focused on computational model construction as a learning activity (for arecent review, see VanLehn, 2013). This work has shown that with proper support and facilitation, engaging inmodel construction can help students make sense of complex scientific phenomena, and productively engage inmodel-based inquiry. However, the focus of this research has typically been on the conceptual learning ofCSCL 2017 Proceedings447© ISLSindividual students, or on practices and discussions that emerge among pairs or small groups of students as theymodels. For example in a recent study, Xiang and Passmore explored students’ engagement in cycles of modelbased inquiry supported by ABM programming while working in pairs (Xiang & Passmore, 2015). This focuson individual or pair model construction persists across research group and modeling environment (e.g. Löhner,van Joolingen, Savelsbergh, & Hout-Wolters, 2005; VanLehn, Wetzel, Grover, & van de Sande, 2016 tomention a few). Similarly, studies that explore scaffolding to support model construction activities often focuson students working “separately and individually” (Basu, Sengupta, & Biswas, 2015, p. 307) or in pairs (Fretz etal., 2002). Our own explorations of model construction activities thus far have similarly focused on discussionof specific scientific content among small groups (Wilkerson-Jerde, Gravel, & Macrander, 2015).Work that has investigated the role of computational models and simulation at the classroom level, onthe other hand, typically does not focus on the computational model itself as a site for knowledge construction inthe same way as studies focused on content learning or modeling practice. Instead, they focus on providingclassroom communities with access to computational models, to serve as fodder for discussion or othercollective activities. One line of work has explored the development of public galleries or immersiveenvironments where students can interact with, organize, and create of computational data and artifacts (VanJoolingen, De Jong, Lazonder, Savelsbergh, & Manlove, 2005). Another line of work has investigated howteachers can orchestrate productive whole-group discussion, argumentation, and sense-making using preconstructed simulations as representational tools to inform and test theories about scientific phenomena (Berland& Reiser, 2011; Hmelo-Silver, Liu, Gray, & Jordan, 2015). Yet others investigate the relationship betweenindividual or small group work with computational tools, and collaborative engagement in discussion,juxtaposition, and sharing of resulting artifacts (Hegedus & Moreno-Armella, 2009).The work reported in this paper lies at the intersection of these two literatures. It explores whether orhow computational model construction activities themselves can serve as a site for community knowledgebuilding. Looking across several projects focused on knowledge representations to support learners’ engagementin the epistemic practices of science, Sandoval and colleagues (2000) separated projects into two classes. Oneclass of knowledge representations, which they called “epistemic representations”, focused on the constructionand organization of student arguments and explanations. The other, which they called “discipline-specificmodels”, focused on engaging learners with conceptual aspects of a discipline (for example, by interacting withor constructing their own representations of content in probability or chemistry). They argued that these twoclasses were distinct, but suggested that “[a]n interesting line of research… could be to consider how[discipline-specific models] might communicate epistemological ideas more explicitly” (p. 39). We conjecturethat discipline-specific representations and other representational infrastructures not specially designed to makeargumentation explicit can nevertheless serve as a site for students to co-construct scientific knowledge andlearn productive epistemic moves in the process, with proper scaffolding and facilitation.Theoretical frameworkTo investigate our conjecture, we leverage Collins & Ferguson’s (1993) theory of epistemic forms and epistemicgames. Epistemic forms are representational structures that can be populated by practitioners to organize, reflectupon, and expand their knowledge—such as lists, tables, or graphs. Epistemic games are the ways of thinkingthat allow them to effectively populate and make use of those forms—for example, reasoning about what mightbe reasonable axes on a graph, or recognizing and developing methods to fill in missing data in a table.Epistemic forms and games are cultural conventions that are shared by communities of practice, and particularforms are well-suited to answer particular questions. A time series graph, for instance, can make evidenttemporal and covariational relationships that might otherwise be difficult to identify.Collins and Ferguson illustrate the notion of epistemic forms and games by invoking the periodic table.The table was an effort to organize an as-of-yet unstructured collection of elements whose physical andchemical properties were difficult to understand. It revealed regularities within spatially proximate groups ofelements, and empty spaces in the table predicted the existence of other undiscovered elements. As additionaldiscoveries were made, scientists modified the table, eventually recognizing its relationship to the electron shellstructure of atoms. This example highlights four key aspects of epistemic forms: They can be populated withwhat ‘players’ know now; they make evident what players may need to know and investigate; they can bemodified and contributed to by other players; and they reveal links to other representations and domains.Bielacyzc and colleagues (Bielaczyc & Ow, 2014) further describe multiplayer epistemic games. Theseare games in which epistemic moves are distributed among a community, such the epistemic form serves as aninfrastructure to bring differential expertise together. They argue that a major part of building communities oflearners is to explicitly scaffold their shared participation in epistemic games, and that knowledge emerges at thelevel of the whole from interactions among players. Classrooms and infrastructures designed to support multi-CSCL 2017 Proceedings448© ISLSplayer epistemic games emphasize student work as a driver for curricular content, enable epistemic games to beplayed as a collective, and support epistemic moves and games through explicit pedagogical moves.Here, we posit that computational modeling environments can serve as epistemic forms to supportmulti-player epistemic games in the classroom. Specifically, we argue that they can support the comparing,testing, and synthesis of one another’s proposals regarding what physical mechanisms underlie certain scientificevents (such as evaporation or condensation, in our case). The elaboration and comparison of proposedmechanisms using computational models is commonplace in scientific practice (Chandrasekharan & Nersessian,2015; Grimm et al., 2005). And, agent-based models have been identified as a “model type” or scientific toolalongside concept maps, tables, lists, and mathematical formulae (NGSS, 2013; White, Collins, & Frederiksen,2011). Therefore, the question that motivates this paper is: What is the potential for computational modelingenvironments to support knowledge building at the classroom level?Study contextThe data we present are drawn from a design-based research study conducted with two classrooms at a public,urban-rim K-5 school in the Northeastern United States. The school serves a population of students with avariety of identified racial/ethnic, economic, and special needs backgrounds, reflected in the classrooms weworked with. However, the gender balance of our focal classroom in this paper deserves comment. Only 5 of the15 students who participated in the study identified as girls (one student did not consent to data collection);students we focus on in this paper all identified as boys. Given that the research was conducted in a publicclassroom during the school day, this imbalance is reflective of naturally occurring differences in studentpopulations and does not reflect a self-selection or participation bias in the research or activities. We focus ouranalysis on two groups from one class (Figure 1). We video recorded all whole-class and student groupinteractions, screen captured students’ interactions with computers, and collected all written work for analysis.Figure 1. Disperse Group (left), Water Cycle Group (center). A projector was positioned in the front of theclassroom (right), and was used to show animations and simulations for whole-group discussion.The two-week enactment involved two modeling activities that are loosely adapted from activitiesdeveloped for the IQWST and MoDeLS projects (Schwarz, Reiser, Acher, Kenyon, & Fortus, 2012), andconnected to important science standards (Building and Using Models; Matter and Its Interactions; NGSS,2013). In the first week, we introduced students to the launching question “Why does a cold bottle of sodabecome wet on the outside?”. On the first day, students discussed the question as a class, and then createddrawings that illustrated their ideas using templates (Figure 2). On the second, they created animations usingcraft materials and critiqued others’ productions. On the third day they created simulations, and on the fourththey viewed and discussed simulations as a group. The second week followed a similar sequence of activitiesaround the question “What happens to puddles on a sunny day?”.As part of the SiMSAM project, we have developed a web-based animation and simulation applicationthat is used as the computational modeling environment during activities. Students can create stop-action moviesusing craft materials or drawings. Once a movie is created, they can crop objects from frames of the movie tobecome programmable “sprites”. They then drag the “sprites” onto a simulation interface and use programmingby-demonstration and menu options to define behaviors like interaction, duplication, or random motion.The two groups we choose to focus on for the purposes of this paper represent cases drawn from alarger multiple case study (Stake, 2006). The quintain, or central shared phenomena, that the cases are chosen toshed light on concerns the ways in which students’ group artifacts contribute, conceptually or materially, to aneventual collective product that is endorsed by the class as a community. We choose these two groups becausethey offer a contrastive illustration of this central question. The groups both constructed simulations thatreflected different experiential knowledge resources – related to steam and weather – and that eventuallycontributed very different but equally essential elements to the shared classroom model. Second, theyexperienced varying levels of success working with the modeling environment. Together, the focal groupsreflect two extremes of a diversity of approaches across the class as a whole, in terms of knowledge leveraged,focal mechanisms expressed, and levels of success.CSCL 2017 Proceedings449© ISLSFigure 2. Templates for drawing tasks (left), and SiMSAM animation (center) and simulation (left) interfaces.MethodsOur analyses focus on (1) elaboration of student ideas, (2) the degree to which the tool supported students’articulation and revision of ideas, and (3) collaborative knowledge building through use of the tool. To identifystudent ideas, we used verbal analysis to identify what knowledge learners mobilized when making sense ofprompts and activities. To investigate the nature of student engagement in relevant epistemic games, we attendto the degree to which their discussions and actions provide evidence that they are reasoning mechanistically(Russ, Scherr, Hammer, & Mikeska, 2008) and engaging in modeling practices (Schwarz et al., 2009). Finally,to explore collective knowledge construction, we identified when artifacts (such as a simulation orrepresentational convention), theories (such as the particulate nature of water), and vocabulary (such as use ofthe term “vapor”) became taken up as shared by the classroom, and how much those artifacts, theories, orvocabulary were made possible or emerged through collective use of the modeling environment.ResultsIn this section, we report on students’ participation in constructing simulations. We will show that in both cases,the modeling environment offered students a way to externalize and elaborate their ideas. We then report thedevelopment and adoption of a collective model that featured contributions from several classroom groups.Throughout the results, we present transcript of group and classroom discussion. To make clear the role offacilitators in these discussions, when the classroom teacher or research staff (Michelle and Brian who are alsoauthors on this paper) appear in transcript records, they are marked with an asterisk.Dispersion groupDuring the first activity, students were asked to explain why the exterior of a cold bottle gets wet on a hot day.While the three students’ initial drawings had been quite different, Kenny had identified “fog” as a point ofagreement across the drawings and this became a focus for the Disperse group’s animation.1Kenny: So we agreed on like, there's coming fog onto it, right? That's what we all agreed on. We2thought, that we could, that this [holds cotton tufts] could be fog and then it could slowly3be coming down. And then like only little bits of it, but then after a while more and more.Miles:Weshould put like every picture a little bit farther [acts out steps with cotton tufts]4Kenny described fog “coming down…like only little bits” and “after a while, more and more.” Miles enacts howthis description can be expressed using the stop-action animation format with craft materials, suggesting that in“every picture”—each frame—the bits of fog could move a little bit farther. From the drawings and Kenny’scomment, we see emerging descriptions of “fog” as a discrete, scattered entity that moves gradually. We alsonote Miles’ early adoption of gradual, discrete movement as the “epistemic game” he uses to populate animationas a form. The group’s final animation showed tufts of cotton gradually moving toward and sticking to the Cokebottle, creating droplets of water on the bottle, and then scattering away from the bottle.The next day, the group began to build their simulation using cropped images of a soda bottle and“fog” (cotton tufts). Kenny initially tried to reproduce the animation by programming cotton tufts to movetoward the bottle. Miles, however, noticed that there was an option in the simulation environment to makeobjects interact with one another, rather than merely move. This option works by triggering only when twoobjects come in physical contact with one another within the simulation environment.Miles:Wait no let’s do it to interact actually, cuz the fog goes on the Coke bottle and then goes56out after.7Edgar:Well the fog is coming and then it’s gonna, yeah, go away.[1.5 minutes later]8Teacher*: What are you guys discussing?9Kenny: We’re trying to like move it [toward the bottle] and then hit the coke bottle and thenCSCL 2017 Proceedings450© ISLS10come back.11Kenny: We want this and then when it hits it [coke bottle] it just stops and then we’re gonna12keep on adding more and then were gonna put that [puddle] down there [bottom of coke13bottle] and then after that we’re gonna make the white things [“fog” objects] disperse.Here, Miles suggests the “interact” feature is a more sensible representation for their purposes, since the groupagrees that the point of contact between “fog” and the bottle is critical. Miles’ attention to the features he hasavailable in the simulation, and their potential connections to the phenomenon the group is modeling, suggestscontinued alignment between the epistemic game he is playing and the form he is populating. Meanwhile,Kenny notes a behavior of fog that he wishes to illustrate in the simulation—dispersion, or a random scatteringof particles. This scattering is programmed into the computational model as a slight random wiggle, so that“fog” objects meander toward the soda bottle, and then bounce against it to represent “sticking”.The representation of “fog”, or water particles, moving randomly and “dispersing” persists into thesecond activity concerning evaporation. The group constructed a simulation in which “steam”, represented asblue dots, moves randomly between puddles at the bottom of the screen and clouds at the top. When asked todescribe their construction, all three invoked notions of cooking, steam, and combustion:Edgar:So the steam is pretty much the evaporation. The steam is like the evaporation. The steam1415is the blue stuff.16Miles:The steam is like, fake. The steam is like, invisible17Brian*: Say I'm so small I can see what's going on inside the puddle, right? What's going on inside18the puddle, when you said it boils up, what's happening?19Kenny: Inside, inside the puddle what's happening is the heat, it’s hitting the water and then you20know when you put um, water in a pot and it starts to boil. The steam is actually the21evaporation going into the air. But then eventually you can't see the steam when it’s22boiling because eventually, um it, um, it combusts and goes away into the air so it can23stay there, because, yeah.Throughout the Disperse group’s participation, there is evidence that they are leveraging knowledge of thebehavior of fog and steam as substances that scatter, “disperse”, and “combust” to inform their model. Thesenotions are easily translated over the course of a few days into random motion of particles in the simulation.This random motion, as we will see in the next section, becomes a major contribution to the class’ shared model.Aggregation groupWhen discussing what they wanted their group animation explaining condensation on a soda bottle to look like,Luis offered an early proposal. He suggested that on a hot day a cloud forms; then, that cloud “turns cold” sothat it “could drop … ice” which would melt causing water to appear on the bottle.1Luis:So I thought, like, if it was a really hot day. So I thought this cloud would like form2because like it might like like if if, cuz you know evaporation like it has like clouds. So3then I thought if, the cloud turns cold it could drop like ice, if you put it back in the4refrigerator, and then ice would be on it like you could see the ice, and then it would all5melt for like the water to appear.After several minutes of discussion, Ryan proposes this plan to the classroom teacher, and the group settles in tocreating an animation featuring a sort of mini water cycle that carries water to the outside of the bottle:Ryan:So we're gonna try to like, you know, just pictures of the ice and water just sitting there,6and then the ice starts coming, and we're gonna try and say in like one sentence about78you know, you know, it gets so cold it builds up ice.9Teacher: It builds up ice where?10Ryan:Builds up ice outside the glass.11Teacher*: Outside the glass12Ryan:Mhm, and then and then we, these little things are gonna be water droplets that's gonnastart dropping and then after a while we're gonna make ice like on the table.13While it is unclear from the transcript alone that Ryan is echoing Luis’ idea of clouds, the resulting animationproduced by the group aligns especially well with traditional descriptions of the water cycle. It featured an openglass that was filled with water, then filled with a cloudlike substance (represented with cotton), a movement ofthe cotton to the outside of the glass, and a releasing of blue drops from the cotton onto the outside of the glass.CSCL 2017 Proceedings451© ISLSUnlike the Disperse group, who generated their animation using small, discrete movements of objects,the Water Cycle group generated their animation using “scenes” that roughly corresponded to evaporation,condensation, and precipitation. While creating an animation from “scenes” is commonplace and makesreasonable use of the stop-action moviemaking tool, it did not set the group up well for agent-based modeling asan epistemic form. This first became evidence as started to decide what objects to crop in order to assign thoseobjects rules to define their movements and interactions.14Ryan:What moves?15Ryan:I don't really think anything moves.16Sergio: Ya I don't think anything moves.17Luis:This is gonna be hard.We interpret this to mean that no isolated objects move in the group’s animation, and therefore it did not makesense to crop anything. We are careful to note that describing scientific processes in terms of phases or scenes isnot necessarily a faulty epistemic move. However, it is not well aligned with agent-based modeling as a form.Because of this, the group struggled to generate a working model to illustrate their explanation. Rememberingthis, the classroom teacher offered explicit guidance on how to construct animations that could more easily beturned into simulations during the second activity in which students modeled evaporation.18 Teacher: So remember, you guys have got to use materials to show this stuff happening. So if youjust draw a cloud on there, it's never going to move. So if you want to show a cloud1920moving, you need an object. Like the, like a puff ball or something.21 Luis:We can use the eraser [to erase the pencil drawings].22 Teacher: But, you can move the puff ball.After these explicit instructions and continued support from the classroom teacher, the Water Cycle group wasable to create a working simulation to describe evaporation:23 Teacher: Ok, so you want to make some droplets coming out of the puddle?24 Ryan:And once it like it hits it (cloud) then it disappears.25 Teacher: Once it hits what?26 Sergio: The cloud.27 Teacher: Oh ok. Do we want to make the clouds bigger so that you can—[Ryan: Yea] Ok.28 Luis:Yea, that's pretty good.29 Ryan:Then when it hits it, the clouds are gonna like get bigger.This time, the students readily describe behaviors and interactions among objects in their simulation, and relatethose behaviors and interactions to the phenomenon they wish to describe. For example, Ryan proposes tomodel clouds as “droplet accumulators” that grow larger when they are hit by a droplet of water thatdisappears—ostensibly because it has joined, or gone inside of, the cloud. Like the Disperse group, the WaterCycle group’s focus on clouds as collectors of water was sustained across both activities, despite their struggleswith simulation as a representational form. After explicit instruction on how to play the appropriate epistemicgames, they were able to operationalize this notion of cloud as a water collector by exploring interactionsbetween droplet and cloud objects. By the end of the day, the group had decided to duplicate clouds, rather thanmaking them grow, to show that droplets are added to rather than taken inside of clouds.Development of the collective modelToward the end of the evaporation activity, we projected the Water Cycle group’s simulation to bediscussed by the class. Students immediately began to interpret the simulation and make suggestions:Sheree: I think it represents when the sun evaporates the water, um the clouds they start tomake new ones because of the water vapor.Sarah:But one thing I don't understand is when, when the droplets go up, the puddles don'tdisappear. So are you saying that the puddles are still there?Miles:I think it's like the water droplets are just going straight up, and then it's [clouds] justgonna get bigger and biggerWe took note of students’ suggestions, and brought a model that incorporated many of them into the WaterCycle group’s simulation the next day (Figure 3). The new model illustrated different group’s ideas across bothmodeling activities: The notion of “droplets” or small, discrete representations of water had been adoptedCSCL 2017 Proceedings452© ISLSunanimously by the class; random motion was contributed by the Dispersion group; the notion of dropletsadding to clouds was contributed by the Aggregation group; and other contributed behaviors were also featured.Figure 3. Simulation presented to students that combines random motion of particles (from Disperse Group),accumulation of water particles in clouds (from Water Cycle Group), and shrinking puddles that emit waterparticles (volunteered during discussion by another group in the class).The class became excited when the model was presented, and their subsequent descriptions and analysesincluded combinations of mechanism that had been distributed across various student groups’ simulations:Michelle*: So I heard that a lot of people were sort of excited about this one. Does anyone want totalk about why? Maybe voices we haven't heard?Luis:Because the water droplets are like going up and the puddles are shrinking.Michelle*: And what do you think that represents that you agree with?Luis:That, like, all the water droplets are like going away because the puddles are drying up.James:Yesterday we couldn't get the puddles to go down, get smaller and the raindrops to goup. But in this one the puddles got smaller and she didn't have to place the things, itjust you know.Kenny: The sun rays go into the water, the water starts to boil, it goes into the air, itmakes clouds, and it's evaporation. And it happens over and over again.Sheree: Evaporation is when the sun takes water, and then it turns it into water vapor and then itturns it into a cloud, or adds on to a cloud.There are two things to notice here. First, the students engaging with the shared simulation and making sense ofit in the context of their own ideas (note Miles and Kenny’s descriptions of boiling to describe the randommotion assigned to a different situation, and Luis’ interpretation of the edits to his own). Second, they attend tosome of the unique affordances of computational models as a representational form, noting that interactionssuch as the puddles growing smaller without needing to do anything manually is preferable.There is evidence that students took up this shared model and its main components: particles, randommotion, and cloud-as-collector. In a follow up activity students explained why the water level of a heatedcovered beaker does not fall while the level of a heated uncovered one does. All groups in this class createdmodels with particles, random motion, and descriptions of water “going to clouds” or entering the water cycle.Conclusions and implicationsIn this paper, we argued that computational modeling environments can serve as sites for collaborativeknowledge construction, much like the collaborative concept mapping and diagramming tools that are commonin communities-of-learners classrooms. We illustrated how two groups used animation and simulationinfrastructures to externalize, elaborate, compare, test, and synthesize ideas about the mechanisms that underlieevaporation and condensation. These mechanisms were rooted in the students’ existing knowledge, andcontributed elements of a model that became taken up at the classroom level. This work suggests specificsupports for enacting computational modeling activities. The classroom teacher, when working with the WaterCycle group, explicitly and intentionally focused on epistemic moves—how the group was populating theiranimation in anticipation of converting it to a simulation—and not other aspects of their work such as content.The use of templates to structure student models, and the inherent modularity of computational models, made itespecially easy for us to share, contrast, and combine students’ ideas. This allowed students to recognize theircontributions within a new or different model. Research should extend beyond attention to individual and smallgroup learning to see how computation can become part of the epistemic fabric of science classrooms.ReferencesBasu, S., Sengupta, P., & Biswas, G. (2015). A scaffolding framework to support learning of emergentphenomena using multi-agent-based simulation environments. Rsch in Sci Education, 45(2), 293-324.CSCL 2017 Proceedings453© ISLSBerland, L. K., & Reiser, B. J. (2011). Classroom communities’ adaptations of the practice of scientificargumentation. Science Education, 95(2), 191–216. https://doi.org/10.1002/sce.20420Bielaczyc, K., & Ow, J. (2014). Multi-player epistemic games: Guiding the enactment of classroom knowledgebuilding communities. International Jnl of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 9(1), 33-62.Chandrasekharan, S., & Nersessian, N. J. (2015). Building cognition: The construction of computationalrepresentations for scientific discovery. Cognitive Science, 39(8), 1727–1763.Collins, A., & Ferguson, W. (1993). Epistemic forms and epistemic games: Structures and strategies to guideinquiry. Educational Psychologist, 28(1), 25–42.Fretz, E. B., Wu, H., Zhang, B., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J. S., & Soloway, E. (2002). An investigation of softwarescaffolds supporting modeling practices. Research in Science Education, 32(4), 567–589.Grimm, V. et al., (2005). Pattern-oriented modeling of agent-based complex systems: Lessons from ecology.Science, 310(5750), 987–991. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1116681Hegedus, S. J., & Moreno-Armella, L. (2009). Intersecting representation and communication infrastructures.ZDM, 41(4), 399–412. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11858-009-0191-7Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Liu, L., Gray, S., & Jordan, R. (2015). Using representational tools to learn about complexsystems: A tale of two classrooms. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 52(1), 6–35.Löhner, S., van Joolingen, W. R., Savelsbergh, E. R., & Hout-Wolters, B. Van. (2005). Students’ reasoningduring modeling in an inquiry learning environment. Computers in Human Behavior, 21, 441–461.Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books, Inc.Penner, D. E. (2000). Cognition, computers, and synthetic science: Building knowledge and meaning throughmodeling. Review of Research in Education, 25(1), 1–35. https://doi.org/10.3102/0091732X025001001Russ, R. S., Scherr, R. E., Hammer, D., & Mikeska, J. (2008). Recognizing mechanistic reasoning in studentscientific inquiry: A framework for discourse analysis developed from philosophy of science. ScienceEducation, 92(3), 499–525. https://doi.org/10.1002/sce.20264Sandoval, W. A., Angeles, L., Bell, P., Coleman, E., & International, S. R. I. (2000, April 25). Designingknowledge representations for learning epistemic practices of science. New Orlearns, LA.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 3(3), 265–283. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327809jls0303Schwarz, C., Reiser, B. J., Acher, A., Kenyon, L., & Fortus, D. (2012). MoDeLS: Challenges in defining alearning progression for scientific modeling. In A. C. Alonzo & A. W. Gotwals (Eds.), LearningProgressions in Science: Current Challenges and Future Directions (pp. 101–137). Rotterdam: Sense.Schwarz, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Kenyon, L., Achér, A., Fortus, D., Acher, A., Fortus, D., Shwartz, Y.,Hug, B., & Krajcik, J. S. (2009). Developing a learning progression for scientific modeling: Makingscientific modeling accessible and meaningful for learners. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,46(6), 632–654. https://doi.org/10.1002/tea.20311Stake, R. E. (2006). Multiple case study analysis. New York: The Guilford Press.NGSS Lead States (2013). Next generation science standards: For states, by states. Washington, DC: NAP.van Joolingen, W. R., de Jong, T., & Dimitrakopoulou, A. (2007). Issues in computer supported inquiry learingin science. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 23(2), 111–119.Van Joolingen, W. R., De Jong, T., Lazonder, A. W., Savelsbergh, E. R., & Manlove, S. (2005). Co-Lab:Research and development of an online learning environment for collaborative scientific discoverylearning. Computers in Human Behavior, 21(4), 671–688. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2004.10.039VanLehn, K. (2013). Model construction as a learning activity: A design space and review. Interactive LearningEnvironments, 21(4), 371–413. https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2013.803125VanLehn, K., Wetzel, J., Grover, S., & van de Sande, B. (2016). Learning how to construct models of dynamicsystems: An initial evaluation of the Dragoon intelligent tutoring system. IEEE Transactions onLearning Technologies, 1382(c), 1–1. https://doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2016.2514422White, B. Y., Collins, A., & Frederiksen, J. R. (2011). The nature of scientific meta-knowledge. In M. S. Khine& I. M. Saleh (Eds.), Models and Modeling (pp. 41–76). Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.Wilensky, U. J., & Reisman, K. (2006). Thinking like a wolf, a sheep, or a firefly: Learning biology throughconstructing and testing computational theories — an embodied modeling approach. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 24(2), 171–209. https://doi.org/10.1207/s1532690xci2402Wilkerson-Jerde, M., Gravel, B. E., & Macrander, C. A. (2015). Exploring shifts in middle school learners’modeling activity while generating drawings, animations, and computational simulations of moleculardiffusion. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 24(2–3), 396–415.Xiang, L., & Passmore, C. (2015). A framework for model-based inquiry through agent-based programming.Journal of Science Education and Technology, 24(2–3), 311–329.CSCL 2017 Proceedings454© ISLS