Identifying Expansive Learning in Democratic Activity: ACHAT/DBR Approach to Community-Based Design PartnershipsJosé W. Meléndez, University of Illinois at Chicago, jwmuic@gmail.comIntroductionMy research uses interdisciplinary approaches to investigate the nexus of theory and practice regarding issues ofsocial justice, equity, access, and learning in democratic activity. My research is a response to the ways in whichthe public is increasingly asked to engage in participatory processes. This is a paradigm shift for the planningfield (Forester, 1993; Habermas, 1996; Healy, 1996) that has resulted in increased public participation, whereparticipants from various social demographics are learning in real time the processes, as well as the civiccapacities, that is the skills, identities and dispositions (Martinez-Cosio, 2006; Price et al., 2011) necessary forcivic engagement. This new responsibility of decision-making power comes with both risks and rewards, aspower differentials in decision-making practices have real-world consequences for communities (Taylor, 2007),and especially for under-represented communities such as Latino immigrants (May, 2017; Rocco, 2004). Tobetter understand this phenomenon, my scholarship focuses on how under-represented communities engagecivically in these processes and how collective civic participation influences the systemic evolution of saidprocesses.Literature review and methodsIn studying participatory processes, I use Cultural Historical Activity Theory (CHAT), and design-basedresearch to investigate the emergence of new forms of participation and the activity structures required forunderrepresented communities to engage. Thus, I look at the internal capacities of a community over multipleyears to understand its ways of knowledge building and expansive learning. I use CHAT inspired DBR,henceforth referred to as CHAT/DBR, since it “embrac[es] open-ended partnerships driven more by long termsocial aims” (O’Neill, 2016, p. 1) and because of the critical role that context plays to further understanddevelopment and learning (Gutiérrez & Jurow, 2016; Penuel, Cole, & O’Neill, 2016). Specifically, in myresearch, participatory democratic processes provides rich contexts of the “forces that construct and challengesocial barriers to learning” (Tabak & Radinsky, 2014, p. 269) in a community setting. As such, my researchjoins the growing number of learning scientists placing equity and social justice as central to their researchendeavors (e.g. see Tabak & Radinsky, 2014 for a literature review; Gutiérrez & Jurow, 2016).Carrying out this kind of research is interdisciplinary and longitudinal and therefore entailscollaborating with communities and stakeholders to design and re-design participatory processes for robust,inclusive, and equitable decision-making practices (Melendez, et al, 2018). Specifically, my research exploresthe ways power and inequity are produced, challenged, and reproduced when underprivileged communities,such as Latino immigrants, claim a space in participatory democratic processes. For example, my dissertationwas a three-year ethnographic case study of the Participatory Budgeting process in Chicago’s 49th Ward (PB49)(Meléndez, 2016). PB began in Brazil in 1989 as an initiative of the Partido dos Trabalhadores, (PT). Thisinnovation expands democratic participation through a process that gives the public direct say in how to spendpublic funds in their community (Cabannes, 2004). In the spring of 2009, the 49th Ward alderman initiated thefirst ever PB process in the U.S. in the highly diverse area that he represents. Thus, providing a unique study ofhow a process initially designed for equity and social justice goals evolved as it migrated north.To investigate how PB49 materialized, public meetings where videotaped and segments related toLatino immigrant participation were transcribed. Following Wortham and Reyes (2015), analysis ofparticipants’ discourse (in English and Spanish) was done to present a way to “see” learning in democraticactivity. The focus here was on collective and system-level learning across multiple scales of time (Lemke,2000). Providing methods to “see” learning in democratic activity is key, as the scarcity of methods and detailedanalysis of participants’ engagement in participatory processes has prevented planning (Holden, 2008) and otherrelated researchers from developing theories about how the learning of civic processes happens in practice(Mansbridge, 2003). Given the diversity of participants in this context, I took into account multiple mediatingfactors (e.g., language, education, race/ethnicity, immigration status) that influenced participation. I approachedthe PB49 process as a complex and evolving activity system (Engeström, 1990), in this case, an example of theemerging literature on fourth generation activity theory (Engeström, 2018).As an active research participant, the ability to cross multiple identities (e.g. resident, Latinoimmigrant, etc.) enabled me to be sensitive to the competing identities and positions at play in the activity ofPB49. It was through direct observation and participation in the activity system itself that I come close enoughICLS 2018 Proceedings1860© ISLSto characterize the lived-in social worlds and lives of participants in the PB49 process (e.g. Lave, 1988). In thisway, I was able to engage in the development of a flexible collaboration between the various stakeholders andconstituents for refining the implementation of the PB49 process to better meet its ideals and goals (Gutiérrez &Jurow, 2016; Penuel, Cole & O’Neill, 2016; O’Neill, 2016). As part of my analytical approach, I identifiedtensions/contradictions (Engeström & Sannino, 2011) that emerged between participation and the structures ofthe environment to determine how and why these tensions/contradictions were resolved or not.FindingsFindings revealed insights about how the dialectic of the environment and participation can be reconstituted tosupport under-represented communities in sustaining their civic engagement over time. Additionally, Iidentified key civic capacities that appear to play a role in enacting collective and system-level changes indemocratic activity. Furthermore, my findings also add to theories of adult learning in community settings,design principles of participatory processes, and theories of civic engagement and leadership that contribute tothe literature on cultural citizenship. My findings support a developing argument that approaching the design ofparticipatory processes as learning environments can lead to greater clarity and transparency about how suchcontexts both afford and constrain civic participation, especially for under-represented communities. Myfindings and theorizing what they mean are further described and explained in my publications, which representmy emergent research agenda.Emerging research agendaMy research agenda has taken off with publications that focus on four themes. First, the analytical approachused in my dissertation is an example of the potential that qualitative methods hold to capture the nuance andcomplexity that survey-based research often misses when looking at participation in community-basedinitiatives (Meléndez, 2017; 2018). Secondly, my research initiates a dialogue between the learning sciences andurban planning that benefits both fields. In doing so I aim to introduce the concepts of learning environments,interventions, and the methods of design-based research in order to argue for more iterative design ofparticipatory process for equity using the toolbox of CHAT/DBR (Meléndez & Parker, 2018). In the learningsciences, by focusing on participatory processes, democratic activity itself is conceptualized as up for re-design(Meléndez & Radinsky, 2018). In so doing, I add my voice to the increase in calls in the learning sciences tofocus on learning in community settings. The community settings are contexts where collaborative design canhappen and is happening, with a focus on theorizing issues of power and equity in relation to the praxis orexpansive learning that we should aim for when working with underrepresented communities.Thirdly, I argue that even though most participatory processes are designed with equal participation asthe aim, designing for equality sometimes inadvertently ignores the fact that participants from differentcommunities come to participatory processes with power differentials. As such, these processes, I claim, shouldbe more explicitly designed to foster equitable participation (Meléndez & Martinez-Cosio, 2018). Lastly, whilecritically assessing participatory budgeting in the United States, I look to describe and explain how as PBmigrated from the global south to the global north, it has lost its emancipatory potential, as it is now used andmarketed as part of the deliberate democratic movement. As such, I seek to engage and push on much of theresearch that is reported on PB in the U.S. that describes its successes without differentiating participation. (Foran example of positive descriptors of participation writ large, see Ganuza et al., 2016, while an exampleaddressing differentiated participation can be found in Bherer et al., 2016).ReferencesCabannes, Y. (2004). Participatory Budgeting: A Significant Contribution to Participatory Democracy.Environment and Urbanization. 16 (1), 27-46.Bherer, L., Fernández-Martínez, J. L., García Espín, P., & Jiménez Sánchez, M. (2016). The promise fordemocratic deepening: the effects of participatory processes in the interaction between civil society andlocal governments. Journal of Civil Society, 12(3), 344-363.Engeström, Y. (1990). Developmental Work Research as Activity Theory in Practice: Analyzing the Work ofGeneral Practitioners. In Learning, Working and Imagining: Twelve Studies in Activity Theory (Ed.), Y.Engeström. Pgs. 69-106. Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit Oy.Engeström, Y. & Sannino, A. (2011). Discursive Manifestations of Contradictions in Organizational ChangeEfforts: A Methodological Framework. Journal of Organizational Change Management. 24 (3), 368387.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1861© ISLSEngeström, Y. (2018). Expansive learning: Towards an activity-theoretical reconceptualization.In Contemporary theories of learning (pp. 46-65). Routledge.Forester, J. (1993). Critical theory, public policy, and planning practice. SUNY Press.Ganuza, E., Baiocchi, G., & Summers, N. (2016). Conflicts and paradoxes in the rhetoric ofparticipation. Journal of Civil Society, 12(3), 328-343.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Jurow, A. S. (2016). Social design experiments: Toward equity by design. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 25(4), 565-598.Habermas, J. (1996). Contributions to a discourse theory of law and democracy. Cambridge: Polity Press.Healey, P. (1996). The communicative turn in planning theory and its implications for spatial strategyformation. Environment and Planning B: Planning and design, 23(2), 217-234.Holden, M. (2008). Social Learning in Planning: Seattle’s Sustainable Development Codebooks. Progress inPlanning. 69, 1-40.Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in Practice. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Lemke, J. L. (2000). Across the scales of time: Artifacts, activities, and meanings in ecosocial systems. Mind,culture, and activity, 7(4), 273-290.Mansbridge, J. (2003). Practice-Through-Practice. In Deepening Democracy, (Ed.), Fung, A. and Wright, E. O.Pgs. 175-199. New York: Verso.Martinez-Cosio, M. (2006). It is not Just Who You Know: Dominant Knowledge and Civic Participation.Journal of Civil Society. 2 (2), 123-141.May, S. (2017). Language Education, Pluralism and Citizenship. In Language, Policy and Political Issues inEducation (Eds.): McCarty T, May S. 3rd: 31-45. Springer, New YorkMeléndez, J. W. (2016). Identifying Expansive Learning in Participatory Budgeting: A Case Study of aDemocraticActivitySystem(DoctoralDissertation).Retrievedfromhttp://indigo.uic.edu/handle/10027/21600Meléndez, J. W. (2017). Learning in Chicago's 49th ward participatory budgeting process: How to studydemocratic activity across time and space by analyzing discourse. BY THE PEOPLE, 280.Meléndez, J. W. (2018). Studying Learning in Neighborhood Level Democratic Activity. Neighborhood Changeand Neighborhood Action: The Struggle to Create Neighborhoods that Serve Human Needs, 91.Meléndez, J. W., & Martinez-Cosio, M. (2018). Designing participatory environments: A case study fordesigning to support equitable civic engagement. Manuscript submitted for publication.Meléndez, J.W., & Parker (2018). Learning in Participatory Planning Processes: Taking Advantage of Conceptsand Theories Across Disciplines. Manuscript submitted for publication.Meléndez, J.W., & Radinsky, J. (2018, June). From Stunted Limitations to Awakened Imaginaries: Expansivelearning among Latino immigrant participants in participatory budgeting. In Meléndez & Radinsky(Co-Chairs), Community-Based Design Partnerships: Examples from a New Generation ofCHAT/DBR. Symposium conducted at the International Society for the Learning Sciences, London.Meléndez, J. W., Radinsky, J., Vossoughi, S., Marin, A., Bang, M., Nolan, C.,…Schmidt, A. (2018, June).Community-Based Design Partnerships: Examples from a New Generation of CHAT/DBR.Symposium conducted at the International Society for the Learning Sciences, London.May, S. (2017). Language Education, Pluralism and Citizenship. In Language, Policy and Political Issues inEducation (Eds.): McCarty T, May S. 3rd: 31-45. Springer, New YorkO’Neill, D. K. (2016). Understanding design research–practice partnerships in context and time. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 25(4), 497-507.Penuel, W. R., Cole, M., & O’Neill, K (2016). Introduction to the Special Issue. Journal of the LearningSciences, 25(4), 487-496.Price, P. L., Lukinbeal, C., Gioioso, R. N., Arreola, D. D., Fernández, D. J., Ready, T., & Torres, M. (2011).Placing Latino Civic Engagement. Urban Geography. 32(2), 179-207.Rocco, R. (2004). Transforming citizenship: Membership, strategies of containment, and the public sphere inLatino communities. Latino Studies, 2(1), 4-25.Tabak, I., & Radinsky, J. (2014). Social justice research in the learning sciences. Journal of the LearningSciences, 23(3), 269-271.Taylor, M. (2007). Community Participation in the real World: Opportunities and Pitfalls in New GovernanceSpaces. Urban Studies. 44(2), 297-317.Wortham, S., & Reyes, A. (2015). Discourse analysis beyond the speech event. Routledge.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1862© ISLS