A Geopositioning View of Teachers’ Orchestration in ActiveLearning Classrooms: Following Teachers’ Location Within theClassroomKevin Lenton, Vanier College, lentonk@vanier.collegeElizabeth Charles, Dawson College, echarles@dawsoncollege.qc.caMichael Dugdale, John Abbott College, michael.dugdale@johnabbott.qc.caChristopher Whittaker, Dawson College, cwhittaker@dawsoncollege.qc.caNathaniel Lasry, John Abbott College, nathaniel.lasry@johnabbott.qc.caChao Zhang, McGill University, czhang@dawsoncollege.qc.caAbstract: In this study we report on a method to answer a simple yet fundamental question:How do teachers manage their space resources in active learning classrooms? Specifically, wedocument how a software, designed for physics education, might provide an alternative todocumenting the physical position of the teacher as a function of time. This approach showsclear patterns can be produced, thereby revealing one dimension of the larger question ofteacher orchestration.A logical extension of active learning pedagogies (e.g., Chickering & Gamson, 1987) are active learningclassrooms (e.g., the SCALE-UP & TEAL models). Just as the learning locus has shifted from teacher as sageon the stage to teacher facilitator supporting students’ activity (King, 1993), the architecture of classrooms mustalso change. We define Active Learning Classrooms (ALCs) as technology-rich collaborative learningenvironments, which support students’ learning experiences. These innovative spaces are intended to create astudent-centered environment that encourages collaboration and communication among learners. Learningbecomes distributed across the physical space because there is no definite “front” to the classroom: the teacherdesk is often repositioned to the center of the room, if it exists at all, and rows of desks are replaced with grouptables. As adapting to supporting students’ needs drives the learning agenda, teachers no longer fully controlwhat will happen in the classroom. Teachers must now manage feedback from multiple streams (visual, aural,oral, technological) and adaptively react adaptively. Such work can be characterized as orchestration, the realtime management of activity, along with the management of classroom resources (e.g., Dillenbourg & Jermann,2010). As a research topic, orchestration has gaining much interest in the CSCL community (Dillenbourg,2013). This moment-to-moment management of the constraints of the classroom ecosystem, coupled with themanagement of the learning, places greater demands on the teacher than traditional classrooms and traditionalinstruction. Physical space and layout are important orchestrational considerations (Dillenbourg & Jermann,2010). Where the teacher is located, what the teacher can access does make a difference to the possibleinteractions and feedback to learners.To date, eye trackers have provided a method to examine teacher orchestration (Prieto, Sharma &Dillenbourg, 2015). Arguably, that method comes with costs: financial, and, possible disruptiveness to thenatural flow of the participants. This poster reports on an alternative, a post-hoc software, which also allows forthe examination of one part of the orchestration puzzle: how the teacher moves in the learning space, as afunction of time. We demonstrate the potential of the method by applying it to a case study of two classroomsettings, each representing different architectural layouts that produces different movement and access patterns.MethodsThis exploration used data from a larger ethnographic study that collected classroom video data from twodifferently designed ALCs (classroom A & classroom B). Each classroom consisted of pod-like seating forgroups of 6-7 students with group-dedicated interactive whiteboards. Classroom B, however, had a fixed centralpodium for the teacher, and each group table held three desktop monitors. The data selected were from twoteachers, each early adopters of their respective ALCs. Collection of the video data followed a set protocol: twomicro cameras (GO-PROs), one mounted on the front and another on the back walls of the classroom. Anaverage of 12 sessions were video recorded for each teacher, the selected data is representative of the teacher.Adapting Tracker software to follow the teacher’s movementTracker software, is an open source video analysis and modeling tool designed to be used in physics education.In this case study, it is repurposed to locate the physical position of the teachers in the classrooms, determined asa function of time (every 5 seconds). The basic idea is quite simple: to determine a position vector relative to theICLS 2018 Proceedings1651© ISLScamera, all one needs is the angle and the distance from the camera. Perspective dictates that the further fromthe camera, the smaller the image on the camera sensor. To determine the relative size of the teacher’s image, itis necessary to track two vertical points on the teacher in each frame. One point was the top of the teacher'shead, and the other the teacher's waist. This, together with the angle on the video relative to the camera, gives agood indication of where the teacher is located in the room to within ~1m, after the necessary camera-specificcalibration for each measure (angle and distance, and accounting for the absolute waist-head distance for aspecific teacher) is made.ResultsFigures 1(a & b) show the results of the Tracker analysis (on 15 minute data segment) with the dot representingthe physical position of the teacher every 5 seconds - connecting lines show the path. Interestingly, this visualrepresentation allows us see differences between the two teacher’s patterns of accessing the student groups - oneaspect of orchestration. Figure 1a, shows the teacher is with each group, in a somewhat even distribution(density of dots); and, the path is varied but more often sticks to the perimeter, occasionally stopping betweentables (see G4-G5 and G5-G6). By contrast, Figure 1b shows the teacher moves back and forth close to thecentral podium with one main move to G2 (based on the density of dots), compared to the other tables.Classroom AClassroom BFigure 1. Tracking analysis of the teacher’s physical location within classroom A and classroom B.DiscussionOur aim was to explore the use of the Tracker software to help examine the movement of teachers within newlearning spaces (ALCs), as part of the larger question about classroom orchestration. The results suggest that thevisualization produced by the software can show differences between teacher movement, which can then befurther analyzed and interpreted. We posit that this method holds potential for those doing this type of classroomresearch and interested in questions of classroom orchestration.ReferencesChickering, A. W., & Gamson, Z. F. (1987). Seven principles for good practice in undergraduate education.AAHE bulletin, 3, 7.Dillenbourg, P. (2013). Design for classroom orchestration. Computers & Education, 69, 485-492.Dillenbourg, P., & Jermann, P. (2010). Technology for classroom orchestration. In New science of learning (pp.525-552). Springer New York.King, A. (1993). From sage on the stage to guide on the side. College teaching, 41(1), 30-35.Prieto, L. P., Sharma, K., & Dillenbourg, P. (2015). Studying teacher orchestration load in technology-enhancedclassrooms. In Design for Teaching and Learning in a Networked World (pp. 268-281). Springer.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1652© ISLS