Mapping Student Reasoning in Support of Mathematics TeacherCandidate Digital LearningLaurie Cavey, Boise State University, lauriecavey@boisestate.eduTatia Totorica, Boise State University, tatiatotorica@boisestate.eduMichele Carney, Boise State University, michelecarney@boisestate.eduPatrick Lowenthal, Boise State University, patricklowenthal@boisestate.eduJason Libberton, Idaho State University, libbjaso@isu.eduAbstract: Using design-based research, we are developing a series of video-based onlinelearning modules to engage mathematics teacher candidates in analyzing cases of secondarystudents’ mathematical reasoning. We describe our process for developing a student reasoningframework for a task that requires the coordination of two relationally specified quantities,which provides a basis for selecting module content and analysis of candidates’ attention tostudent reasoning as they engage with the online modules.IntroductionThe Video Case Analysis of Student Thinking (VCAST) project entails the design and integration of a series ofvideo-based online learning modules into undergraduate teacher preparation coursework, with the intent ofsupporting secondary teacher candidates’ mathematical reasoning and attentiveness to students’ ideas (Carney,Cavey, & Hughes, 2017). Each online module features a distinct mathematical task with the potential to (a)highlight components of quantitative reasoning, and (b) elicit a range of observable secondary studentperformance. Appropriate curation and sequencing of secondary student evidence for inclusion in the onlinemodules requires researcher knowledge and application of secondary students’ reasoning. In this poster, wedescribe how we analyzed secondary students’ performances related to a quantitative reasoning task, both aspreparation for and as a precursor to creating and analyzing candidate work with the VCAST learning modules.MethodsThe 23 participants were mathematics students (grade 7 or 8) from a rural district located in the western UnitedStates. Our intent was to gather enough data to represent a range of responses to the task, as doing so isnecessary both to build our understanding of student thinking and to inform our development of the onlinelearning module. Each volunteered, with parental permission, to participate in an interview conducted bymembers of the research team. The interviews consisted of each student completing three mathematical taskswhile being video recorded.The bus stop task asks students to think about the relationally specified quantities of height and age fora group of seven individuals presented pictorially and then to match each person to a point plotted in a Cartesiangraph (See Figure 1). This task was intended to elicit students’ ability to work with a collection of ordered pairsas a mathematical model of a relation between two quantities, and to interpret and make connections betweenmultiple representations of the data associated with the situation being modeled (Stephens, Ellis, Blanton, &Brizuela, 2017).Who is represented by each point on the scatterplot?Figure 1. The Bus Stop Task (Swan, M. 1985).Analysis of the bus stop task data occurred in four distinct phases and involved open coding informedby the literature on quantitative reasoning and grounded theory (Strauss & Corbin, 1994). Phases 1 through 3involved applying and revising codes. In phase 4, following full application of the coding scheme, we examinedICLS 2018 Proceedings1637© ISLSfrequencies within and across categories and trends in responses. This led to the development of a studentreasoning framework for tasks involving graphing relationally specified quantities, along with generaldescriptors and labels for each primary code. Then we ordered the reasoning descriptors in a hypothesizedhierarchy based on observed trends seen in our analysis. For example, we hypothesized that the ability tocompare points with a common horizontal or vertical coordinate was more sophisticated than comparing pointspositioned along a diagonal within the coordinate plane.ResultsThe results of our analysis yielded a framework for the levels of sophistication in students’ learningperformances with the bus stop task. Examples from the data will be provided in the poster to illustrateobservable performances for each aspect of inferred student reasoning. This framework will be used as a startingplace to analyze candidates' own mathematical work, to describe aspects of student reasoning candidates attendto during online module engagement, and to provide the basis for a key element in the articulation of a learningperformance trajectory for candidates’ attentiveness.Table 1: Student Reasoning FrameworkLabelDescriptorObservable Student PerformancesRelationalOrderingOrdering a relationallyspecified quantityCompares and orders relative heights and/or ages that do not haveassigned numerical values.1-D GraphingObserving one-dimensionalgraphing conventionsExhibits knowledge that moving up (or right) corresponds to increasingvalues, while moving down (or left) corresponds to decreasing values.1-D Comparing Comparing values for a singlequantity graphicallyArticulates that points to the right (or above) represent greater heights (orgreater ages).CouplingCoupling two quantitiesgraphicallyReferences both age and height when determining which person isrepresented by a given point.2-D DiagonalComparingComparing values of coupledquantities graphicallyCoordinates relative horizontal and vertical position of two points tocompare both height and age for points diagonally positioned in the plane.2-D AlignedComparingComparing values for vertically Exhibits knowledge that points with the same vertical (or horizontal)(or horizontally) aligned points coordinate represent people who are the same age (or height).ConclusionWe posit that to improve secondary mathematics teacher candidates’ ability to recognize, describe, and analyzesecondary student work requires examination of how secondary students reason within mathematical domains.Our explicit articulation of a student reasoning framework informs the research related to these topics, theinstructional module design for our project, and the future testing and refinement of our hypotheses aboutcandidates’ learning. With respect to module design, we see the importance of contrasting the relative ease withwhich students can compare points diagonally positioned in the plane with the challenge of comparing valuesfor vertically (or horizontally) aligned points. Thus, the outcomes from the analysis not only contribute to thenext phases of our work but also potentially inform the work of others in mathematics education.ReferencesCarney, M. B., Cavey, L., & Hughes, G. (2017). Assessing teacher attentiveness to student mathematicalthinking. The Elementary School Journal, 118(2), 1-29.Sherin, M. G., & van Es E. A. (2005). Using video to support teachers' ability to notice classroom interactions.Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 13(3), 475-491.Simon, M. A. (1995). Reconstructing mathematics pedagogy from a constructivist perspective. Journal forResearch in Mathematics Education, 26(2), 114–145.Stephens, A., Ellis, A., Blanton, M., & Brizuela, B. (2017). Algebraic thinking in the elementary and middlegrades. In J. Cai (Ed.), Compendium for research in mathematics education (pp. 386-420). Reston,VA: NCTM.Swan, M. (1982). The language of functions and graphs: An examination module for secondary schools.Nottingham, UK: Shell Centre for Mathematical Education.Straus, A., & Corbin, J. (1994). Grounded theory methodology. In N. Denzin & Y. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook ofqualitative research (pp. 273-285). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1638© ISLS