Measuring Maker Mindset: Establishing Content Validity With CardSortingJonathan D. Cohen, Georgia State University, jcohen@gsu.eduLauren Margulieux, Georgia State University, lmargulieux@gsu.eduMaggie Renken, Georgia State University, mrenken@gsu.eduW. Monty Jones, Virginia Commonwealth University, joneswm2@vcu.eduShaunna Smith, Texas State University, Shaunna_smith@txstate.eduAbstract: This poster describes the development of an instrument to measure maker mindsetand establishes its content validity. We identified five component constructs of makermindsets and developed an instrument that asks participants to respond to vignettes related toeach construct. To establish content validity, a group of maker professionals (n=17) completeda card sorting task in which they grouped the 25 vignette-based items based on the makermindset attribute that they thought each item was intended to measure. Analysis of the resultsrevealed 16 items that were grouped in one of three clusters that largely aligned with the fiveoriginal constructs after collapsing some constructs. We conclude that the 16 remaining itemshave content validity.IntroductionRecently, researchers have identified and defined the problems, constructs, challenges, and opportunitiesassociated with the infusion of maker principles and technologies into education. Much of that body of researchhas identified constructs—often aggregated into the concept of a maker mindset (further defined below)—thatrepresent the cognitive characteristics important to making. We believe that maker research has advanced to thepoint at which it is now time to apply the lessons learned through this type of exploratory research to thedevelopment of a methodologically rigorous psychometric scale that measures maker mindset. We thereforedescribe the first stage of development of the Maker Mindset Instrument (MMI), a scale designed to measurecomponent factors of a maker mindset. To develop a scale for maker mindset, we identified a set of constructsto serve as sub-scales because although we expect an individual’s maker mindset to holistically represent his orher approach to making environments and activities, we also expect certain features of the mindset may be moreor less relevant to certain students, in certain environments, and when attempting certain activities.Maker mindset constructsVia a thorough literature search, we identified a set of five constructs to include in the MMI through a review ofthe literature on making, which is the upper limit of the number of constructs that should be measured with onescale. For our first construct, we grouped together resilience, grit, and “can-do” attitude into a general resilienceconstruct. The next construct is growth mindset. This construct likely contributes to resilience but is a distinctset of beliefs about aptitude and intelligence (Dweck, 2006). Our third construct is creativity. Makerspacesremove many barriers between ideas and implementation. Therefore, creativity is central to a maker mindset.Our fourth construct combines several related constructs: curiosity about how things work, playfulness in tryingnew things, iterative practices, and a do-it-yourself attitude. All of these aspects are subsumed into thewillingness to tinker construct. Researchers have characterized tinkering as including some of the problemsolving and iterative design-focused behaviors as engineering, but with a more playful, experimental orientation(Martinez & Stager, 2013; Resnick & Rosenbaum, 2013; Vossoughi, Escudé, Kong, & Hooper, 2013). The fifthconstruct is a collaboration orientation, which combines disposition to share and collaborate with aninterdisciplinary approach to challenges.Scale developmentWe wrote five situational vignettes per construct, for a total of 25 vignettes. Vignettes allow respondents toreveal their own mindset by answering a question about a fictitious character without requiring potentiallybiased self-reporting (Wallander, 2009). Following each vignette, respondents are tasked with answering howmuch they agree with a statement about the vignette character’s mindset. For each vignette, i.e., item, the scaleof agreement was the same—a 7-point Likert scale, anchored between strongly disagree and strongly agree. Anexample of a vignette follows:ICLS 2018 Proceedings1505© ISLSSadik built a fort out of sticks. He built it to play in with his friends. It took him a while tobuild it. It’s not very stable, but it hasn’t fallen down. Sadik wants the fort to stay standing fora long time. He thinks he knows a way to make it more stable. He decides to tear it down andrebuild it with a new design. How much do you agree with the following statement: It’s worthSadik’s time to rebuild the fort, even though it hasn’t fallen down yet.ParticipantsTwenty-one individuals responded to our recruitment. We excluded 4 of the 21 total responses for beingincomplete or completed incorrectly. Nine of the 17 respondents (53%) identified as male, and the remaining 8(47%) identified as female. One of the respondents (6%) identified as Hispanic or Latino. Fourteen of therespondents (82%) identified as white, 2 (12%) identified as Black or African American, and 1 (6%) identifiedas Asian. Fourteen of the respondents (82%) reported speaking English at home, and 3 (18%) reported speakingEnglish and/or another language at home.ProcedureThe card sorting task was conducted online. In an open card sorting task, participants are presented with anumber of stimuli (in this case, the 25 vignettes) and are asked to sort them into piles based on some criteriaestablished by the researchers. Participants started by watching a brief, one-minute instructional video thatintroduced the task. Participants were instructed to read through the vignettes, then sort them into 3-7 groupsbased on what construct/attitude the participant felt the vignettes were attempting to measure. Once participantscompleted sorting all of the cards, they named each group and submitted their answers.Validation results and discussionTo quantitatively analyze the groups that participants had created, we used multidimensional scaling (MDS). Tocompare participants’ categories to the constructs, we made agreement matrices for each participant. In theagreement matrix, the matrix was organized by construct, and we indicated which cards were grouped together.These matrices were then analyzed using ALSCAL to determine the number of dimensions present inthe data and the coordinates of each card in p dimensional space (i.e., to determine which cards clusteredtogether). Based on the analysis, we determined that three unique dimensions were represented. Young’s Sstress was .299 with a single dimension. With two dimensions, S-stress (.166) improved by .132. With threedimensions, S-stress (.143) improved by .023, which is a small improvement, but, based on inspection of thecoordinates for each item, was meaningful. With four dimensions, S-stress improvement was only .006 and,therefore, not meaningful enough to justify the inclusion of a fourth dimension.Based on the first dimension, cards 3-8 were separate from the others. These cards are supposed torepresent resilience and growth mindset, which are related theoretically, so we called this dimensionResilience/Growth Mindset. Based on the second dimension, cards 21-25 clustered closely and are supposed torepresent collaboration orientation, so these items represent the dimension Collaboration Orientation. The lastdimension is harder to parse, which makes sense based on the .023 S-stress improvement that it contributes. Itroughly accounts for the creativity and willingness to tinker constructs, though, which are fundamental to makermindset, so it makes sense that expert makers would group them with other constructs frequently. We called thisdimension Tinkering and retained cards 11-12, 14-16, and 18 because they clustered closely.ReferencesDweck, C. (2006). Mindset: The new psychology of success. New York, NY: Random House.Martinez, S., & Stager, G. (2013). Invent to learn: Making, tinkering, and engineering in the classroom.Torrance, CA: Constructing Modern Knowledge Press.Resnick, M., & Rosenbaum, E. (2013). Designing for tinkerability. In M. A. Honey & D. Kanter (Eds.), Design,make, play: Growing the next generation of STEM innovators (pp. 163–181). New York, NY: Routledge.Vossoughi, S., Escudé, M., Kong, F., & Hooper, P. (2013). Tinkering, learning & equity in the after-schoolsetting. In FabLearn 2013. Stanford, CA. Retrieved from http://fablearn.stanford.edu/2013/wpcontent/uploads/Tinkering-Learning-Equity-in-the-After-school-Setting.pdfWallander, L. (2009). 25 years of factorial surveys in sociology: A review, Social Sci. Research, 38, 505-520.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1506© ISLS