Exploring the Relationship Between Gesture and StudentReasoning Regarding Linear and Exponential GrowthSahar Alameh, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, alameh2@illinois.eduJason Morphew, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, jmorphe2@illinois.eduNitasha Mathayas, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, mathaya2@illinois.eduRobb Lindgren, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, robblind@illinois.eduAbstract: Leading middle school students to effectively reason with magnitude, small andlarge-scale quantities, and linear and exponential growth is a challenge facing science teachersin the U.S. working to implement the NGSS and its associated focus on crosscutting concepts.This paper examines the relationship between middle school students’ gestures and theirreasoning about quantitative growth. For this study the authors developed interview protocolson several topics that involve numbers increasing linearly and exponentially. Students’ verbaland gestural responses during the interviews were transcribed, coded, categorized and analyzed.Results showed that students display a breadth of context-dependent gestures, that their verbalreasoning is associated with the type of gesture they produce, and that gesture-speechmismatches are present in middle school students’ reasoning about scale. Implications of thisstudy include design guidelines for an interactive system that standardizes and structures scalerelated gestures.Keywords: quantitative growth, student gestures, gesture-speech mismatchIntroductionThere is strong support from multiple disciplines for the notion that gestures facilitate processes of thinking andlearning (Roth, 2001), and there is building evidence that gestures can promote learning of specific ideas in STEM(e.g., Alibali & Nathan, 2012; Goldin-Meadow, Cook, & Mitchell, 2009). Some have argued that even abstractconcepts in STEM come from our embodied interactions with the world (Lakoff & Nunez, 2000). In this paperwe examine the notion of quantitative growth and how students make sense of increasing numbers and strategiesfor “scaling up” through verbal and gestural communication. In particular, we are interested in the ways in whichgestures support or hinder student reasoning about large quantities in their efforts to solve scientific problems.Several topic areas in science require students and practitioners to engage with increases in quantity anddifferent types of scales (e.g., liner, exponential, logarithmic, etc.). Reflecting this multidisciplinary aspect, scale,proportion, and quantity are highlighted as crosscutting concepts in the Next Generation Science Standards in theU.S. (NGSS Lead States, 2013). And yet, research suggests that students across the K-12 curriculum often strugglewith reasoning about and executing operations involving very large numbers (Tretter, Jones, & Minogue, 2006).In this study we seek to gain greater insight on the challenges that students face when reasoning aboutincreasing quantities, and whether or not the gestures students make during this type of reasoning appear to playa role in their thinking and learning. Specifically, the following questions are investigated: 1) What are thedifferent ways by which students use gestures to convey their scientific reasoning of topics related to growth? 2)How does the context of the gesture (i.e., problem solving or communication) seem to affect the type of gesturesstudents utilize?Symbolic and concrete gesturesFigure 1. (left) A Symbolic gesture (right). A concrete gesture.Studies of hand gestures have indicated that these embodied acts do more than simply echo verbal expressions;rather they are “symbols that exhibit meanings in their own right” (McNeill, 1992, p.4). The form of a gesture canvary depending upon the purpose of communication (Crowder, 1996). For the sake of examining gestures relatedto quantitative reasoning, we distinguish between symbolic and more “concrete” gestures. In this study, symbolicICLS 2016 Proceedings1006© ISLSgestures are a representation of operations and/or numerical values, such as holding up fingers to represent acertain quantity (see Figure 1, left) or crossing two fingers to make an ‘X’ representing multiplication.Alternatively, concrete gestures represent objects or express ways that objects are manipulated (Figure 1, right).For example, placing one hand on top of the other to represent doubling as an operation, which adds a quantity toitself.MethodsParticipantsFifteen (10 males and 5 females) middle-school students were interviewed for this study. Students came fromdifferent backgrounds from the surrounding area of a large Midwestern University in the United States. Studentinterviews were videotaped to aid in the analysis.InstrumentThis study employed semi-structured, task-based interviews involving problems about linear and exponentialscales. This first question posed to students was a modified version of the ‘grains of rice on a chessboard’ problem,an exercise commonly used to teach exponential growth. In this version of the problem, students were asked toimagine that they had won a prize and were asked to choose whether they would prefer an option where theyreceived $1000 per day for 30 days, or a second option where they received $1 on the first day and double theamount of the previous day, each day, for thirty days. Students were asked to choose one of the options and explainwhy they selected the option. They were then asked to explain how the total amount of money increased each dayfor both options. If students did not spontaneously use gestures in their explanations, they were prompted togesture or act out how each option increased. Finally students were asked how they would convince a friend tochoose the second option if they could not communicate verbally. In addition to facilitating a transition to havingstudents think about different types of scales in various science contexts, this problem provided insight into howa participant makes sense of increasing quantities and the gestural resources they have available for thinking andcommunicating about them. After this initial question, three base problems contrasting linear and exponentialgrowth were posed to the participants from various science domains, which employ different scales (e.g., TheRichter scale, geologic time, population growth, etc.). Our analysis here focuses primarily on student reasoningabout the initial question.To analyze students’ quantitative reasoning and gesture, we segmented the videos according to where agesture related to describing a quantity that has increased or how it is increasing took place. Included in thesegmentation of the video interviews was a detailed description of how the hands, fingers, etc. were employed inthe gesture, as well as a transcription of the speech accompanying the gesture. Once coding of data was complete,students’ gestures were categorized. Two raters categorized student reasoning and gestures with an initial 70.4%agreement. The raters then met to discuss problems on which there were disagreements in the ratings and to seeif some common, agreed-upon rating could be reached. Following discussion 100% agreement was reached.AnalysisFrequencies for each gesture category were computed for all participants and are shown in Table 1. The speechassociated with each gesture act was coded for whether or not it showed correct reasoning, in the sense that itaccurately described the mathematic relationships present in the problem. Additionally, each gesture was codedfor whether it was aligned with the concurrent speech (i.e., did both the speech and the gesture appear to bedescribing the same quantity or relationship?). Table 2 shows frequencies for the different combinations ofreasoning and alignment: (1) correct verbal reasoning on mathematical growth with aligned gesture, (2) correctverbal reasoning with an unaligned gesture, (3) incorrect verbal reasoning with an aligned gesture, and (4)incorrect verbal reasoning with an unaligned gesture. Note that alignment of the gesture was coded with respectto both alignment with correct reasoning and alignment with student verbal reasoning.In order to examine further the first research question, a Fisher’s exact test between students’ gesturetype (concrete vs. symbolic) and the alignment of their gestures with their reasoning on mathematical growth wasconducted. The frequency table can be found in Table 3. To answer the second research question, a Chi-Squaretest of independence was used to investigate the association between the type of gesture used by the student andthe context of the question (whether a student spontaneously gestures or whether s/he is prompted to gesture).ICLS 2016 Proceedings1007© ISLSResultsIn the context of the quantitative growth problem, students generated a total of 161 gestures. Table 1 shows themost used gesture (N = 44) was the symbolic gesture of using fingers to indicate numbers or mathematical symbols(Figure 1 left). Conversely, there were only 5 instances of gestures indicating exponential growth by using a handto show the curve of an exponential graph. Other commonly used gestures included different ways by whichstudents represented stacking or used a referent, which they manipulated to indicate growth.Table 1: Student gesture categories and frequencyGesture Category1. Fling hands and/or fingers to show arandom increase2. Using fingers to indicate numbers,numerical or mathematical symbols3. Vertical/horizontal parallel hands toshow a linear increase4. Using hand as a curve for anexponential growthTotal1444205Gesture Category5. Adding from one hand to another toindicate an increase in the form of stacking6. Vertical/horizontal parallel hands toshow a certain amount7. Wide arms spread gestureTotal298. Placing a referent in different places torepresent time and growth9. An iterative process to indicate increase132565Table 2 below shows that the vast majority of students’ gestures (129 out of 161) revealed correct reasoning aboutmathematical growth and produced gestures aligned with their reasoning. An interesting finding was that 15 outof 161 gestures revealed cases where although students incorrectly reasoned about mathematical growth, theirgestures matched the correct reasoning. For example, Kathy (pseudonym) incorrectly articulates her reasoningabout doubling. According to her verbal statements, doubling is adding 2 to the initial amount. As she makes thisstatement, however, she produces a series of gestures where she uses her hands to set a fixed amount, and thenshe systematically extends the distance between her hands to twice the initial amount. This gesture-speechmismatch was evident in 15 places in which students’ verbal reasoning (speech) is incorrect but their gestures areindicative of (aligned with) the correct reasoning. This finding is in line with previous research showing gesturespeech mismatches as an index of transitional knowledge (Perry, Church, & Goldin-Meadow, 1992).Table 2: Students’ levels of sophisticationGesture and ReasoningAlignedGesture and ReasoningUnalignedAlignment Not ApplicableTotalCorrectReasoning129IncorrectReasoning15Reasoning NotApplicable3Total147452110133020383161Fisher’s exact test between students’ gesture type (concrete vs. symbolic) and the alignment of their gestures withtheir reasoning on mathematical growth was conducted. The test revealed significant relationship between gesturetype and alignment (χ2 (4) = 14.58, p < .05). Specifically we found that concrete gestures are more likely to bealigned with correct reasoning than symbolic gestures in this problem-solving context. In addition, a pair-wisetest of correlation shows that there is a significant positive association (p < .05) between gesture type andalignment. This suggests that the use of concrete gestures may be indicative of more correct reasoning whendescribing quantitative increase. We make the observation that even though symbolic gestures were morecommon, concrete gestures had a stronger association with correct reasoning in topics related to growth.Table 3: Relationship between students’ type of gesture and the gesture alignment with reasoningAlignmentAlignedUnalignedN/ATotalICLS 2016 ProceedingsConcrete9690105Gesture TypeSymbolic Concrete and Symbolic2724203032241008Total147113161© ISLSTo answer the second question, an examination of the relationship between gesture type and the questioncontext was examined. The questions either asked students to explain their reasoning or to try and communicatea specific quantity or quantitative operation to another person (e.g., how would you show someone ‘doubling’non-verbally). Table 4 shows the result of the Chi-Square test of independence revealed an association betweenthe type of gestures used by students and the context of the question (χ2 (4) = 35.36, p < .01). Specifically, studentswere more likely to produce concrete gestures when they were engaged in reasoning, and more likely to producesymbolic gestures when engaged in communication about specific quantities or operations.Table 4: Relationship between students’ type of gesture and the gesture alignment with reasoningContextReasoningCommunicationTotalConcrete5945104Gesture TypeSymbolic Concrete and Symbolic3232203522Total6497161Conclusions and implicationsWe make the following inferences from the findings of this study: (1) Concrete gestures were more common inreasoning (as opposed to communication) acts. In addition, when using these concrete gestures for reasoning,students’ reasoning was accurate in almost all cases (2) The variation of concrete gestures seems to providestudents with multiple potential pathways for doing their reasoning, whereas symbolic gestures only give aconstrained set of numbers and operations (3) Gesture-speech mismatch exists in the context of middle schoolstudents reasoning about increasing quantities. Further research is needed on whether these mismatches can beleveraged as transitional points in the learning trajectory for students’ understanding about scale and magnitude.Students used a breadth of gestures to reason and communicate about growth. A meaningful pattern incommunications about increasing quantities was evident in this study. This implies that in topics such asmathematical growth, we can benefit from a system that standardizes and structures this pattern. Finally, we thinkthat students may benefit from opportunities to use more concrete gestures, but in a more structured and consistentway. This study gave us many ideas for the kinds of gestures that might be incorporated into a gesture recognitioninterface. In fact, our research team is currently in the process of building a prototype interface that allows studentsto define and use concrete gestures for reasoning about problems across science topics.ReferencesAlibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. J. (2012). Embodiment in mathematics teaching and learning: Evidence fromlearners' and teachers' gestures. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21, 247-286.Crowder, E. M. (1996). Gestures at work in sense-making science talk. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 5,173-208.Goldin-Meadow, S., Cook, S. W., & Mitchell, Z. A. (2009). Gesturing gives children new ideas about math.Psychological Science, 20, 267-272.Lakoff, G., & Núñez, R. E. (2000). Where mathematics comes from: How the embodied mind brings mathematicsinto being. Basic books.McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind—What gestures reveal about thought. The University of Chicago Press,Chicago/London.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Perry, M., Church, R.B., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (1992). Is gesture-speech mismatch a general index of transitionalknowledge? Cognitive Development, 7, 109–122.Roth, W. M. (2001). Gestures: Their role in teaching and learning. Review of Educational Research, 71, 365-392.Tretter, T. R., Jones, M. G., & Minogue, J. (2006). Accuracy of scale conceptions in science: Mental maneuveringsacross many orders of spatial magnitude. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 43, 1061-1085.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1009© ISLS