Tracking Student Teachers’ Technology-Enhanced CollaborativeProblem Solving: Combining Objective Assessment Data WithSubjective Verbal ReportingJohanna Pöysä-Tarhonen, University of Jyvaskyla, johanna.poysa-tarhonen@jyu.fiEsther Care, University of Melbourne, e.care@unimelb.edu.auNafisa Awwal, University of Melbourne, n.awwal@unimelb.edu.auPäivi Häkkinen, University of Jyvaskyla, paivi.m.hakkinen@jyu.fiArto K. Ahonen, University of Jyvaskyla, arto.k.ahonen@jyu.fiAbstract: In spite of increasing interest, technology-enhanced formative assessment practicesreflecting 21st century skills are not yet much studied, particularly in teacher education context.Also, studies that combine both objective and subjective data around these practices are stillrare. This study responds to these challenges in exploration of student teachers’ collaborativeproblem solving (CPS) processes. Relevant events in CPS tasks are tracked through processdata acquired via ATC21S™ portal, and complemented with students’ interpretations of theseprocesses as cued retrospective reports. The broader aim is to provide student teachers withhands-on experiences of using novel, technology-enhanced formative assessment systems for21st century skills. It is hypothesised that familiarity with these practices will guide studentteachers to be more open toward formative, technology-enhanced assessment culture as theymove into professional practice as teachers.IntroductionDespite recent policy initiatives calling for 21st century skills, such as collaboration, collaborative problemsolving, communication and critical thinking, current assessment practices often only focus on students’ academicoutcomes (Strijbos, 2011). However, to develop 21st century skills assessment strategies should go beyond testingstudents’ factual knowledge and capture the less concrete themes that underlie the key skills defined for 21stcentury learning (Binkley et al., 2012; Kong et al., 2014).Formative assessment, as assessment for learning (Black & Wiliam, 2009; Strijbos, 2011), is seen as akey feature of the 21st century learning environments (Redecker & Johannessen, 2013). It is argued that learnersneed substantial, regular and meaningful feedback during the learning process, enabled by formative assessment,and teachers, in turn, need the feedback to better orchestrate the learning processes according to the evidenceprovided (Redecker & Johannessen, 2013). However, formative assessment in the context of 21st century skillsis a challenging and time-consuming task and may therefore be facilitated with technology and instrumentsdeveloped to promote such activities as collaboration (Strijbos, 2011; van Aalst, 2013). Technology-enhancedassessment tools and systems that can be used flexibly, will not burden students or teachers, and that will enableconstant interchange are therefore seen vital (e.g., Griffin & Care, 2015).As changing society sets novel demands for schools in terms of learning and assessment, teacher trainingprograms need to reflect these changes. Therefore, to contribute to agency change in this regard, teacher educationstudents play a central role. As teachers-to-be, it is imperative that they recognise the equal importance ofacademic achievements as well as 21st century skills as learning outcomes (Kong, et al., 2014). Assessmentpractices tend to have strong influence on the direction of student learning and influence developing pedagogicalpractices. When teachers-to-be gain familiarity with the novel, innovative, technology-enhanced assessmentpractices, it is assumed that they will be open to this new learner-centred and formative assessment culture, whichthey will then bring along when they enter schools as teacher graduates (Binkley et al., 2012; Kong et al., 2014).Collaborative learning and collaborative problem solvingEven though collaboration is regarded as one of the most crucial skills for learning and is already a part of today’slearning environments, the assessment practices for collaborative learning have remained relatively vague(Strijbos, 2011). Assessment practices do not always reflect collaborative learning in a way that takes into accountthe complexity of cognitive, social and motivational factors as they occur over the collaborative process (Kumar,Gress, Hadwin & Winne, 2010). In addition, a general set of indicators with which to assess the quality ofcollaborative activities, or upon which to compare students’ collaborative learning activities, is often lacking(Strijbos, 2011).ICLS 2016 Proceedings839© ISLSConsequently, collaborative problem solving (CPS), a specific type of collaboration, which conjoinscritical thinking, problem solving, communication and collaboration (Griffin & Care, 2015; Griffin, McGaw, &Care, 2012), has received increasing interest as one of the central 21st century skills suitable for formativeassessment. In short, CPS is defined as a joint activity between dyads or small groups to transform a currentproblem state into a desired goal state (Hesse, Care, Buder, Sassenberg & Griffin, 2015). Typically, CPS isorganized through the use of directly observable verbal and nonverbal signals. That is, to work successfully,participants need to communicate, exchange, and share in the process of identifying the parts of the problem;interpret the connections between the parts and relationships between action and effect (i.e. rules); and proposegeneralisations in search for a shared solution (Hesse et al., 2015). This “side effect” of externalization makesCPS a visible and measurable activity, which, in contrast to individual problem solving, may make CPS a moreteachable skill (Hesse et al., 2015).Measurable CPS competency may be seen as the capacity of an individual learner to engage effectivelyin the joint and shared activity of problem solving. CPS skills can be divided into a set of sub-skills that comprisefive broad social and cognitive capacities. These capacities may overlap between different stages of a CPS activity(Hesse et al., 2015) and include: social skills (participation, perspective-taking and social regulation), which areabout managing participants (including oneself), and which refer to the “collaborative” aspect of CPS; andcognitive skills (task regulation and knowledge building), which are about managing the tasks at hand, and referto the “problem-solving” aspect of CPS. These measurable skills are considered essential for successful CPSactivity.The assessment portal developed in the ATC21S™ project (Griffin & Care, 2015; Griffin et al., 2012) isone recent example of a technology-enhanced formative assessment approach that focuses on assessing moregeneric and transversal skills. The project explored new, technology-enhanced ways of assessing CPS skills andlinked them to teaching interventions designed to deepen learning and move students to higher skill levels (Griffin& Care, 2015; Csapo, Ainley, Bennett, Latour, & Law, 2012). The ATC21S™ project built on the ideas of thedevelopmental model of learning (Vygotsky, 1978); thus, its primary goal was to maximise the developmentalprogression of individuals’ skills, such as those in CPS (Griffin et al., 2012). During the ATC21S™ project, aweb-based, formative assessment portal for assessing CPS skills was developed at the Assessment ResearchCentre at the University of Melbourne.In spite of increasing interest, technology-enhanced formative assessment practices reflecting 21stcentury skills are not yet much studied, particularly in teacher education context. Also, studies that comparemethods based on objective and subjective data in this context, are still rare. This study responds to thesechallenges. Focus not only on the outcomes of CPS activity, but also the (collective) route to these outcomes fromthe learner perspective is important. Current technologies are typically inadequate to the task of analysing thecontents of communication during the chat, and so the focus has been on placement (and occurrence) of chatactions in the CPS process (Care, Griffin, Scoular, Awwal, & Zoanetti, 2015). To acquire a deeper understandingof students’ collaborative efforts in the course of CPS, a process-tracing method (van Gog, Paas, van Merrienboer& Witte, 2005) is proposed as a complementary method. Process-tracing methods produce data such as verbalreports, that can be applied for obtaining information that enables drawing inferences about the cognitiveprocesses that underlie problem solving performance (Cooke, 1994; van Gog, Paas, van Merrienboer & Witte,2005). In this study, the method is extended to cover not only the cognitive but also the social processes relatedto CPS.Accordingly, the aim of this study is: (1) to compare process data acquired through the ATC21S™ portalto individual students’ verbal reports on the process; and (2) to examine whether congruence between process andverbal data varies according to person and task characteristics.MethodsParticipantsThe sub-study is part of a four-year research project that aims to promote student teachers’ CPS and sociallyshared regulation of learning (SSRL) skills and competencies as well as attitudes towards the use of ICT inteaching and learning. The research described here is an ongoing study, conducted during Autumn 2015. Theparticipants are students (n = 20) in their second year of the four-year master-level teacher education program ata Finnish university.TasksPairs of students completed one bundle of assessment tasks of ATC21S™ portal. The bundle comprised four tasksin the science and math domains, related both to curriculum content and to generic skills. The assessment tasksICLS 2016 Proceedings840© ISLSare complex game-like tasks, constructed to have the characteristics of problems that require true collaborationand are related to everyday teaching and learning (Care et al., 2015). Some of the tasks are content-dependent,while others are content-free and, the tasks also vary from symmetric to asymmetric (Care et al., 2015).Specifically, the tasks are designed for a student pair (Students A and B), who are expected to communicate onlythrough an online chat interface. In this sub-study the bundle comprised following tasks: “Laughing Clowns” and“Olive Oil”, which are content-free tasks, and “Plant growth” and “Small pyramids” which are content-dependent.Laughing Clowns is a symmetric task whereas the other three were designed asymmetric. Symmetric refers to thecharacteristic that both students within a collaborative pair are presented with the same stimulus content andactionable artefacts within the online task space; with asymmetric referring to the characteristic that each studentwithin a pair is presented with different information and different actionable artefacts. To complete the bundlelasted approximately 60-90 minutes.Objective assessment dataStudents’ work in the ATC21S™ portal was assessed individually, with the scoring based on their actions whichincluded movement of artefacts, and the occurrence of chat to collaborate. Students also completed a briefreflective questionnaire as part of the online process. Students’ completion of the assessment tasks generated logfile data. The data generated were captured in a process data file, and patterns in these data were then automaticallycoded as indicators of the CPS elements (i.e. social and cognitive), producing reports (“Learning readinessprofiles”) on students’ social and cognitive skill levels (Adams et al., 2015; Hesse et al., 2015). In addition,CamStudio™ software (see http://camstudio.org) was used for the recording of all the screen activity during theCPS sessions on the ATC21S™ portal.Process-tracing dataTo obtain a subjective account on the CPS processes, the process-tracing method as cued retrospective reporting(CRR) (e.g., van Gog et al., 2005; Jarodzka, Scheiter, Gerjets, & van Gog, 2010) was used. In short, CRR isdefined as a verbal reporting procedure, in which study participants are invited to verbalise their thought processesduring the task performance retrospectively, based on a cue or cues of their performance (see e.g., Jarodzka et al.,2010). With verbal reporting the aim is to make explicit the CPS process in terms of students’ self-monitoring ofwhy and how they took the actions, especially as a student pair. In this study, CRR interview was cued with theactivity data (i.e. mouse operations, chat discussion) recorded during the ATC21S™ portal session. The CRRsessions were videotaped. The sessions took approximately one hour.Analysis and expected outcomesCRR resulted in qualitative accounts as retrospective reports concerning the cognitive and social processes of CPSfrom the perspective of an individual student. In-depth content and process analysis under the proposed CPSframework by Hesse and colleagues (2015) is being applied to the CRR data in studying the students’interpretations of their collaborative efforts during the problem solving activity. The aim is to compare the processdata obtained via the ATC21S™ portal to individual students’ verbal reports on the process and analyse forcongruence. Congruence findings are being interrogated with regard to CPS success of the pair and characteristicsof the task. To track and make visible the shared routes of successful CPS processes and their relevant eventsroute maps of objective assessment data acquired via the ATC21S™ portal will be notated by the subjective verbaldata. It is hypothesised that there will be relatively small skill level differences across student pairs due to thestrict selection procedure of the teacher education students in Finland. At the conference, final results will bepresented through route maps enriched with data examples.Conclusions and implicationsAs previously mentioned, the recent international trend to modify curriculum and instruction to more adequatelyreflect 21st century learning poses new challenges in terms of assessment. For example, instead of consideringcollaboration merely as a learning method, it should be seen as general human competence to be assessed in itsown right (van Aalst, 2013). Together with studying the underlying processes pertaining to (successful) CPSactivities of student teachers, the ongoing sub-study is expected to provide student teachers with hands-onexperiences of utilizing novel technology-enhanced assessment systems for 21st century skills. From a broaderperspective, it is expected that these experiences may activate teacher education students’ awareness of 21stcentury skills and most crucially, of novel assessment practices reflecting these encounters. Since teachers inFinland are considered pedagogical experts with significant decision-making authority in the application of corecurriculum and assessment (see also Darling-Hammond, 2012), this might be a critical next step. Based on thisICLS 2016 Proceedings841© ISLSrelatively small sample sub-study, later stages in the project are being designed to accumulate data with repeatedand enriched objective and subjective methods with comparable, but larger, groups of teacher education students.ReferencesAdams, R., Vista, A., Scoular, Awwal, N., Griffin, P. & Care, E. (2015). Framework for teachable collaborativeproblem solving skills. In P. Griffin, & E. Care (Eds.), Assessment and teaching of 21st century skills.Methods and approach (pp. 115–132). Dordrecht: Springer.Binkley, M., Erstad, O., Herman, J., Raizen, S., Ripley, M., Miller-ricci, M., & Rumble, M. (2012). Defining 21stcentury Skills. In P. Griffin, B. McGaw, & E. Care (Eds.), Assessment and Teaching of 21st CenturySkills (pp. 17–66). Dordrecht: Springer.Black, P., & Wiliam D. (2009). Developing the theory of formative assessment. Educational Assessment,Evaluation and Accountability, 21(1), 5–31.Care, E., Griffin, P., Scoular, C., Awwal, N., & Zoanetti, N. (2015). Collaborative problem solving tasks. In P.Griffin, & E. Care (Eds.), Assessment and teaching of 21st century skills. Methods and approach (pp.85-104). Dordrecht: Springer.Cooke, N.J. (1994). Varieties of knowledge elicitation techniques. International Journal of Human-ComputerStudies, 41, 801-849.Csapo, P., Ainley, J., Bennett, R.E., Latour, T., & Law N. (2012). Technological issues for computer-basedassessment. In P. Griffin, B. McGaw, & E. Care (Eds.), Assessment and teaching of 21st century skills(pp. 143–230). Dordrecht: Springer.Darling-Hammond, L. (2012). Policy frameworks for new assessments. In P. Griffin, B. McGaw, & E. Care(Eds.), Assessment and teaching of 21st century skills (pp. 301-339). Dordrecht: Springer.Griffin, P., & Care, E. (2015). The ATC21s method. In P. Griffin, & E. Care (Eds.), Assessment and teaching of21st century skills. Methods and approach (pp. 1–33). Dordrecht: Springer.Griffin, P., McGaw, B., & Care, E. (Eds.). (2012). Assessment and teaching of 21st century skills. Dordrecht:Springer.Hesse, H., Care, E., Buder, J., Sassenberg, K., & Griffin, P. (2015). Framework for teachable collaborativeproblem solving skills. In E. Griffin & P., Care (Eds.), Assessment and teaching of 21st century skills.Methods and approach (pp. 37–56). Dordrecht: Springer.Jarodzka, H. Scheiter, K., Gerjets, P., & van Gog, T. (2010). In the eyes of the beholder: How experts and novicesinterpret dynamic stimuli. Learning and Instruction 20, 146-154Kong, S. C., Chan, T.W., Griffin, P., Hoppe, U., Huang, R., Kinshuk, & Yu, S. (2014). E-learning in schooleducation in the coming 10 years for developing 21st century skills: Critical research issues and policyimplications. Educational Technology and Society, 17(1), 70–78.Kumar V.S., Gress C.L.Z., Hadwin A.F., & Winne P.H. (2010). Assessing process in CSCL: An ontologicalapproach. Computers in Human Behaviour, 26, 825–834.Redecker, C., & Johannessen, Ø. (2013). Changing assessment: Towards a new assessment paradigm using ICT.European Journal of Education, 48, 79–96.Strijbos, J.-W. (2011). Assessment of (computer-supported) collaborative learning. IEEE Transactions onLearning Technologies, 4, 59–73.van Aalst, J. (2013). Assessment in collaborative learning. In A. Hmelo-Silver, C, Chinn, C.A., Chan, & C.K.K.,O’Donnell (Eds.), The international handbook of collaborative learning (pp. 280–296). New York:Routledge.van Gog, T., Paas, F., van Merriënboer, J. J. G., & Witte, P. (2005). Uncovering the problem-solving process:Cued retrospective reporting versus concurrent and retrospective reporting. Journal of ExperimentalPsychology: Applied, 11, 237–244.Vygotsky L.S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. London: HarvardUniversity Press.AcknowledgmentsThis work is funded by Academy of Finland (Grant no 273970).ICLS 2016 Proceedings842© ISLS