Cross-Community Interaction for Knowledge Building in Two Grade5/6 ClassroomsJianwei Zhang, University at Albany, SUNY, jzhang1@albany.eduMaria Bogouslavsky, University of Toronto, maria.bogouslavsky@gmail.comGuangji Yuan University at Albany, SUNY, gyuan@albany.edu,Abstract: This study explores cross-community interaction in two Grade 5/6 knowledgebuilding communities. The two classrooms studied human body systems with the support ofKnowledge Forum over a 10-week period. As the students conducted focused inquiry anddiscourse within their own community, they reviewed productive threads of ideas and postedsyntheses in a cross-community space, as synthetic boundary objects. A set of idea threadsyntheses from previous classrooms studying human body systems was also posted in thecross-community space. Qualitative analyses of classroom videos, online discourse, andinterviews provide a rich description of how the students conceived, generated, and interactedaround the synthetic boundary objects for knowledge building across communities.IntroductionSchools need to engage students in sustained inquiry and knowledge building discourse by which ideas arecontinually developed, refined, and built upon, giving rise to higher-level goals (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006).In real-world knowledge creation, the trajectory of sustained inquiry and discourse in each community is furthersupported by interactions across communities that work as an interconnected field. A creative field leverages thework of all communities and their members by accumulating a shared, easily accessible knowledge base,represented using various inscription systems, facilitating dynamic idea contact and cross-fertilization(Csikszentmihalyi, 1999). Such cross-community interactions help to sustain productive knowledge buildingover time across generations, with newcomers learning from the existing ideas, practices, and role models andfurther making novel contributions. Fostering cross-community interactions for sustained knowledge building isa new challenge and opportunity for collaborative learning research.Existing designs and research of collaborative learning focus on micro-level discourse; new advancesare needed to support and understand emergent interactions at the higher social levels (Stahl, 2013). With onlinesystems automatically preserving student discussions and supporting virtual sharing (Reil, 1994), it becomesfeasible and important to use “the persistent record of interaction and collaboration as a resource” (Stahl,Koschmann, & Suthers, 2006, p. 419) for sustained knowledge building across the boundaries of differentcommunities. Several researchers have made initial explorations to engage students in interactions acrossknowledge building communities. A common strategy is to have each community directly share its onlinediscourse space with other communities. In a study conducted by Lai and Law (2006), two classrooms fromHong Kong and Toronto, respectively, engaged in collaborative knowledge building supported by KnowledgeForum, a collaborative online environment (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006). Students in each classroom hadaccess to the online discussions of their partner classroom. Through the cross-classroom sharing, studentslearned from the practices (e.g. questioning) of the partner classroom to improve their own work. Laferrière andcolleagues (2012) conducted a study that engaged three international sites. Each classroom gave otherclassrooms access to their online discourse space so they could read their notes and respond. The crosscommunity collaboration led to productive classroom changes. Meanwhile, difficulties arose for students tounderstand and build on other communities’ extended discourse without a clear sense of the contexts. Newdesigns of boundary-crossing support are needed to make knowledge progress accessible across communities.This research designs cross-community interaction using a multilevel emergence approach, focusing oninteractions mediated through boundary objects. “Boundary objects” are artifacts (e.g. reports, tools, models)used to bridge the boundaries (discontinuities) between different social worlds (Star & Griesemer, 1989).Wenger defines them as “forms of reification around which communities of practice can organize theirinterconnections.” (Wenger, 1998, p. 105) Objects from a community often have contextual meanings notaccessible to other communities. What makes boundary objects effective for bridging different communities ofpractice is their interpretative flexibility as a “means of translation” (Star & Griesemer, 1989): they have astructure that is common enough to make them recognizable across the different social worlds and allowdifferent communities to interact and work together. As Akkerman and Bakker (2011) suggest, interactions withshared boundary objects help members of different communities to identify, understand, and reflect on theirCSCL 2017 Proceedings407© ISLSdifferent practices, leading to an enriched view within each community and potentially the creation of new, inbetween practices.As noted above, raw distributed online discourse records are hard to be used as boundary objects tobridge the boundaries between different knowledge building communities. In this study, following a multi-leveldesign, students generate synthetic boundary objects for cross-community sharing on the basis of the extendedknowledge building discourse within their own community’s space. The synthetic boundary objects take theform of idea thread syntheses framed using shared structures of inquiry. Students in each community engage infocused inquiry and interactive discourse within their own community’s space, with small-groups formed andreformed to address emergent problems of inquiry. As progress is made, students working on the various areasselectively review and synthesize fruitful threads of inquiry emerged from their discourse. The selective reviewsand syntheses of inquiry threads can facilitate peer learning and build-on across inquiry topics within eachclassroom (Zhang et al., 2015); they may further be shared as boundary objects to enable cross-communityinteraction. Students from another classroom (or a subsequent student cohort) can use the syntheses of ideathreads to view into the discussions and understand the extended journey and progress of inquiry.To support students’ reflective review and structuring of distributed online discourse, our teamdeveloped Idea Thread Mapper (ITM) (Zhang et al., 2015). ITM interoperates with Knowledge Forum(Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006) and potentially other platforms that support online knowledge buildingdiscourse. Using ITM, students identify focal objects of inquiry addressed by their collective discourse andselect important discourse contributions related to each focus. The discourse entries with a shared focus aredisplayed on a timeline, as an idea thread, extending from the first to the last entry. Each idea thread has a“Journey of Thinking” synthesis. Students review their idea progress in the thread and co-author/update the“Journey of Thinking” synthesis. In line with the focus of knowledge building on continual idea improvementthrough progressive problem solving (Scardamalia & Berieter, 2006), we designed a set of scaffolds for Journeyof Thinking synthesis, including (a) overarching topic and problems, (b) we used to think…now weunderstand… and (c) deeper research needed. ITM has been used by a set of classrooms that studied variousscience topics, with a rich set of idea threads and Journey of Thinking syntheses archived.This research explores cross-community interactions mediated through idea thread syntheses, assynthetic boundary objects. Given the exploratory nature of this research topic, we used qualitative methods toprovide a rich description of a purposefully designed case of cross-community interaction in two partneringclassrooms. Students had access to archived idea thread syntheses from previous cohorts, generated idea threadsyntheses based on their ongoing work, and shared the syntheses with their partner classroom. Our researchquestions ask: (a) How did the teachers and students conceive the nature of synthetic boundary objects in theform of idea thread syntheses? (b) How did the students generate synthetic boundary objects based on theircommunity’s knowledge building discourse and inquiry work? (c) How did the students interact with thesynthetic boundary objects from other communities, with what support from the teacher?MethodClassroom contexts and designsThis study tested cross-community interaction in two Grade 5/6 knowledge building communities. The twoclassrooms were taught by two teachers: Mr. B and Mr. M. Both teachers had multiple years of teachingexperience, and Mr. B was more experienced with teaching grade 5/6 science using knowledge buildingpedagogy and technology. There were a total of 24 students in Mr. M’s room and 23 students in Mr. B’s room,with a total of 39 students consented to participate in this research. The two classrooms studied human bodysystems with the support of Knowledge Forum over a 10-week period. On an ongoing basis, students in eachclassroom contributed and built on one another’s ideas in their own classroom’ Knowledge Forum views(workspaces). Cross-community interaction was supported through a “Super View” on Knowledge Forumwhere students accessed and posted idea thread syntheses. A visual was added to the “Super View” to facilitatethe sharing process: two trees with a number of branches where Super Notes about various inquiry topics couldbe placed (see Figure 1). Each classroom had its own “tree of knowledge,” and students could take a look attheir peer classroom’s knowledge at any point of the knowledge building process for mutual learning and ideaconnection. Online posts to share idea thread syntheses in the Super View were called “Super Notes” by theteachers and students. Each Super Note was organized using the Journey of Thinking scaffolds of Idea ThreadMapper that interoperates with Knowledge Forum. Prior to this study, a set of classrooms from two schools hadused Idea Thread Mapper to organize their knowledge building discourse about human body systems andcreated idea thread syntheses. Based on these syntheses, an initial set of Super Notes (idea thread syntheses) wasposted to the Super View, each framed using the scaffolds: Our research topic and problems, We used toCSCL 2017 Proceedings408© ISLSthink…Now we understand…, We need deeper research. The teacher in each classroom first introduced theSuper View in the third week of the inquiry when their students had generated their own questions andconducted initial research about the various topics related to the human body. Students read the Super Notesfrom the previous classes and reflected on what they could learn from the questions and ideas. With deeperresearch conducted in each classroom in the next two to three weeks, students working on various themesstarted to create Super Notes to summarize their progress for sharing with their own classmates as well as withthe other Grade 5/6 classroom. Students from the two classrooms read each other’s Super Notes and discussedthe insights gained. A whole class meeting was organized in each room for students to reflect on what they hadlearned from their peer classroom and the prior classes and planned for possible deeper research.Figure 1. The “Super View” for Sharing Journey of Thinking Synthesized by Different Classrooms.Data sources and analysesThe data sources included observations and video recordings of classroom discussions, online discourse in eachclassroom’s regular views and the shared Super View, and student and teacher interviews. The video recordsand related observation notes captured major classroom episodes (seven lessons of Mr. B and six lessons of Mr.M) in which students were introduced to the Super View, discussed information learned from the Super Notesof the other classroom, and created Super Notes based on their own work for cross-classroom sharing. Weinterviewed the two teachers and 13 students at the end of the unit. The students were asked how a “Super Note”was different from other notes, how they decided what specific ideas should be included in their Super Notes,and how was reading the Super Notes of other classrooms helpful for their knowledge building. The teacherswere asked how the cross-community interaction helped their students and how they facilitated suchinteractions. The interviews were video-recorded and transcribed for analysis.Guided by each of the three research questions, we conducted detailed analysis of the classroom videosand interviews in connection with student discourse in the shared Super View and their own regular KnowledgeForum views. Specifically, to develop an overall sense of the student-generated Super Notes in connection withtheir knowledge building discourse, we conducted content analysis (Chi, 1997) to code student notes in theirregular Knowledge Forum views based on the inquiry topics reviewed by their Super Notes. Two codersindependently coded 81 notes (22% of the total notes) resulting in an inter-rater agreement of 98%. Followingprocedures of grounded theory analysis (Strauss & Corbin, 1998), the researchers read and re-read thetranscriptions of the classroom discussions and interviews, created open codes, which were then clustered intoprimary themes to capture prominent patterns addressing each of the three research questions. The authors thenco-reviewed the open codes and initial themes and discussed any disagreements. The themes were furthervalidated through checking data against the themes, relating and comparing the themes identified from studentand teacher data, and triangulating the identified themes across the data sources. The refined coding themes areelaborated in Results under the three research questions.ResultsHow did the students and teachers conceive the nature and role of syntheticboundary objects from other communities?CSCL 2017 Proceedings409© ISLSQualitative analysis of student interviews revealed interrelated themes about how the students conceived thenature and role of the Super Notes (see Table 1).Table 1: Students’ conceptions of the Super Notes captured in the interviewsThemes ofconceptionsSuper Notes as asummary of “bigidea” and knowledgebasis.Super Notes asrefined and “verified”knowledgeClassExamples from the individual interviewsBothclasses“I think it is to focus on the entire idea of the topic you are focusing on andnot just the tiny details you wanna share with the whole class.” [….] “Soit’s just I think the basic basic idea.”BothclassesSuper Notes as ajourney of thinkingMr. M'sclassSuper Notes asknowledge for othersMr. B'sclassSuper Notes as wellphrased and polishedideasMr. B'sclass“Well, we definitely did not include like the information that we did notknow much about, because that would mean that.. like if you were not sureif that was right or not, then it would not be good to include it because thatwould mean that you are technically making a Super Note, which ispartially not true…”“ It’s like one huge note that reflects on all of your ideas, and what youused to think and what you now know. So I thought it was a great idearather than making a bunch of notes on your progress of learning a topic.”“…it’s kind of to let everybody know what you are researching, but withouthaving to read like all the stuff that you’ve read and having the basicknowledge of that topic.”“When you look at normal notes, it’s kind of hard to understand: theremaybe some spelling errors, and maybe some like grammar errors… If youlook at Super Notes that are amazingly written and they are really simpleand they help people understand what is the main focus of this Super Note.”Both teachers conceived and presented the “Super View” as a higher-level space of discourse thatrequired students to formulate and summarize “big ideas” investigated so far. Unlike regular KF notes, theSuper Notes needed an additional level of reflection and refinement: both teachers asked students to show themthe final draft of their Super Notes before posting to the Super View. While sharing this common conception,the two teachers gave slightly different emphasis. Mr. B, who were more experienced with knowledge building,explicitly emphasized that the Super Notes were about sharing the “journey of thinking” rather than specificinformation. The goal was to show how their understanding and thinking had evolved during the course of theinquiry. Therefore, the Super Notes had a metacognitive layer that was weak in regular notes. The teacherscommented that the Super Note scaffolds played a crucial role in making this metacognitive layer visible byframing the process of thinking from “what you used to think” to “what you understand right now” with “an eyeon helping someone.” While both teachers emphasized using the scaffolds as a way to structure the Super Note,Mr. B underlined the importance of clarity, so the Super Notes could be understood by students from a differentclassroom, who lacked the knowledge about the classroom contexts. For Mr. M, the Super Note was aboutpulling out the important ideas from their regular KF views and bringing together “important points ordiscoveries that everybody should know about.” Unlike Mr. B, he did not explicitly emphasize that the SuperView was intended to be a communal place shared with the other classroom. During the interview, Mr. Mcommented that some of his students were somehow afraid or hesitant to take the leap into the “super level.”How did the students generate synthetic boundary objects?This question was investigated through tracing student online discourse in relation to their Super Note topics aswell as qualitative analysis of the video-recorded classroom interactions and student reflections captured in theinterviews. Figure 2 reports the Super Note topics covered by the two classrooms and the number of regularKnowledge Forum notes/posts related to each topic. Mr. B’s students created a total of ten and Mr. M’s studentscreated six Super Notes. Their Super Notes addressed both shared and unique topics of inquiry. While some ofthe Super Note topics had intensive discussions on Knowledge Forum, a few other topics had only beenaddressed by very few regular notes. These topics were very specialized (e.g. allergies, heart stroke, andscariness) but were identified as interesting and helpful for other students. Another related factor, according tothe teachers, was that some of the inquiry work was documented in students’ personal notebooks and sharedface-to-face, therefore, not reflected on Knowledge Forum.CSCL 2017 Proceedings410© ISLSFigure 2. Super Notes Created by the Two Classrooms in Relation to Regular Knowledge Forum Notes.The qualitative analyses of videos and interviews revealed essential processes that went beyond simplesummarization of information to including high-level reflection on progress and gaps, rising above distributedideas and information sources for coherent understandings, and selective integration of “juicy” ideas for crossclassroom sharing. The specific processes are elaborated below.(a) Whole class discussion to identify productive areas of inquiry and form specialized groups. In eachclassroom, the teacher asked his students to reflect on their inquiry work in various areas about the human bodyand form into small group based on specialized interest to generate Super Notes.(b) Reviewing previous Knowledge Forum posts and personal notes to identify knowledge advances, insmall groups. Prior to the Super Note intervention, students wrote in their regular Knowledge Forum views toshare specific questions and ideas, explore information from authoritative sources (e.g. books, videos), anddiscuss findings from experiments. Students also took personal notes about their research. The teachersencouraged their students to review their online posts and personal notes as a starter for the Super Notes. Forinstance, in the group focusing on DNA, four students first updated their personal notes taken in MS Word andshared their documents by passing around each other’s computer. Summarizing four separate long documentswas challenging, so Mr. B, noticing the challenge, approached the group and suggested to choose one person totype the big Super Note. The small group discussed what should be included in the Super Note.(c) Deepening research using authoritative sources, as groups and individuals. Reviewing andanalyzing existing work and ideas, students noticed questions and issues that needed to be clarified. Thispushed the students to conduct further research using information from books, videos, and websites. Some ofthe sources were beyond the students’ level of reading. The teachers worked as a co-learner and helper tointerpret the information, explain scientific terms, and model rephrasing ideas using simpler terms.(d) Combining each other’s ideas and expertise for coherent group understanding. To understand thecomplex mechanisms underlying the topics (e.g., DNA, immune system, heart holes), students workedcollaboratively to develop specialized understandings and further combined the information to elaborate the fullpicture. As a student from Mr. M’s class reflected: “I actually worked with a friend on this [topic about heartholes], and she was mostly working on where heart holes are, like I told you they are on septum, and I wasworking on how they heal. And she asked a question on the regular view on “how the heart holes heal?” so I’veresearched that and we kind of combined our ideas, and put [them] in a Super Note.” The Super Note createdby these two students is shown in Figure 3.Super note about heart holesOur topic and problems Why do hearts get holes in it? And how does it heal?We used to think that it would heal by itself overtime. We also thought that the hole(s) was on the outside of the heartNow we understand The hole is on the septum wh ich is between the two chambers of the heart. One chamber sends lots of o xygenrich b lood to the body and the other chamber sends not oxygen rich b lood to the lungs. It can be dangerous when the blood mixesbecause it’s like breathing carbon dioxide instead of oxygen.Now we understand that some people who are born with heart holes in their septum will heal overtime. Whereas some people wi llhave to get an open heart surgery to close the holes where a mach ine takes over the heart's pu mping action and moves blood awayfrom the heart.Figure 3. A Super Note about Heart Holes from Mr. M’s Class.(e) Selecting ideas for sharing through group and individual reflection. In light of the diverse ideasreviewed, students in each group decided on what should be included in their Super Note. The analysis of theCSCL 2017 Proceedings411© ISLSinterviews identified a number of criteria that the students had in mind when selecting information: consistency,importance, depth of understanding, and relevancy. For example, a student said: “Well, we definitely did notinclude like the information that we did not know much about... So we’ve looked at things that we’ve seenconsistent… that we all knew.”(f) Summarizing “big ideas” using accessible language with the Super Note scaffolds. Both teachersencouraged students to use the Super Note scaffolds to summarize ideas: start with “we used to think,” continuewith “now we understand,” and finish with “we need deeper research.” Both classrooms analyzed Super Notesfrom previous classrooms to illustrate the use of the scaffolds. Students, reminded by their teacher, tookconscious efforts to present the information in a simple and clear way to make it accessible to students fromother classrooms.(g) Sharing the Super Notes with the teacher before posting. Both teachers asked students to show theirfinal drafts of Super Notes before posting them to the Super View. Doing so encouraged students to writecareful Super Notes and ask their teacher for advisory input.How did the students interact with synthetic boundary objects?On average, each of the Super Notes from archived idea threads of prior classrooms was read by 19.83 students.Students read their peer classroom’s Super Notes more actively (34.6 users per note) than those from the priorclassrooms. Beyond individual reading, each classroom had a whole class discussion about the information fromthe Super Notes, followed by further small group discussions. Through qualitative analysis of the video recordsof the whole classroom discussions and student interviews about how they approached the Super Notes, weidentified specific patterns of interactions, which clustered around three themes, as elaborated below.(a) Identifying knowledge from other classrooms for possible connection. In whole classroomdiscussions, students identified Super Notes from other classrooms that were relevant and interesting andcontained new information, such as by saying “I am interested in K’s note about allergy.” They related theSuper Notes to their own understanding in order to comprehend the topics and enrich their learning.(b) Comparing knowledge work between communities triggering student reflection. Students discussedhow new and unique ideas from the Super Notes helped them to go beyond the limitation of their ownknowledge. The teachers facilitated the discussion by raising deeper questions for reflection. For example, Mr.B asked: “What was the idea that came from the Super Notes that you hadn’t thought before and that pushedyour thinking further?” A student responded: “Well I never really thought about what side of the brain controlswhat side of the body, while I already know, but it turns out that, your left side of the brain controls the rightside of your body”. Similarly, Mr. M asked his students: “What topic either strikes you as new information orsomething that you’d like to pick up as a thread and go deeper into?” Two students responded that they learnedfrom the Super Note about allergies, a topic investigated by Mr. B’s students but not covered by the students ofMr. M. Another student pointed out a deep concept learned from a Super Note of Mr. B’s class related to theirown work: “Me and J are doing immune system,… and we saw these notes about white blood cells, and that wasreally cool ‘cause white blood cells were part of your immune system. We don’t really know about themindividually…Yeah, it was really helpful for us…”In addition to reflecting on new knowledge and information gained from the other communities,students further adopted the epistemic form of reflective thinking: “we use to think…now we understand…”and talked about their journey of inquiry accordingly. In Mr. B’s class, student EL reflected: “I used to think,there was a person and then they had a brain, and then the brain told the body what to do and that was the endof it, and now I understand that like each part of the body has its own little system.” Student L responded:“Everything is…part of like a system, like everything is like I can say work together.”(c) Integrating knowledge across communities to develop complementary perspectives and deepunderstanding. The Super Notes from each classroom were written by students specialized in the related inquirytopics to selectively synthesize key problems and ideas using simple language. When reading the deep questionsand ideas from their partner classroom’s Super Notes, the students needed to unpack the information tounderstand the journey of inquiry presented, detect gaps of understanding, and bring together the knowledgefrom their own and from the other community to address the gaps and problems. With their teacher’sfacilitation, students engaged in extended discourse to collaboratively solve problems and develop explanations.For example, students in Mr. B’s room discussed the Super Note about heart holes written by Mr. M’s students(see Figure 3), which highlighted why heart holes can be dangerous. The students in Mr. B’s room indicatedinterests in this topic and discussed the specific reasons and mechanisms.[16] K: like the heart hole, I heard of them, but I didn’t know how that really works.CSCL 2017 Proceedings412© ISLS[17] S: if you can have a hole in your heart, without it, like, immediately, you exploded.[18] Teacher: Well, but what was the problem if you have a hole in your heart?[19] D: It’s like really dangerous if the blood mixes.[20] Teacher: Right, the blood mixes, but why is it bad if the blood mixes?[21] B: Because if they mix together, if they mix, they will be as bad as like breathing carbon dioxide.[22] Teacher: A, do you want to build on?[23] A: Because the blue side like that has no oxygen.[24] Teacher: This side, no oxygen (writes “no oxygen” on the blue part of the figure on the SmartBoard).[25] A: And other part has oxygen.[26] Teacher: This does have oxygen. So if they mix, it’s like you are breathing air with no oxygen in it,it will be like suffocating.[27] S: (reads the Super Note) It says the hole is on the septum, which is between the two chambers ofthe heart. One chamber sends lots of oxygen rich blood to the body and the other chamber sends notoxygen rich blood to the lungs...[28] Teacher: I think a lot of people might have thought the heart pumps blood to the body, but it’s morecomplicated than that. What does it actually do?[29] S: I am pretty sure that the blood comes through without oxygen can go around the body, and then itgoes through and then it collects oxygen, gives it to the body, it comes out the other way, it keeps goingaround in the cycle.[30] Teacher: Do you want to build on that, M?[31] M: Well, it goes through all four chambers, well in the right chambers, its deoxygenated the blood inthere, and its goes through of the heart, which pumps oxygen inside the blood and then it gets sent outthrough the body.[32] Teacher: So it’s working with oxygenated blood, and blood with no oxygen. C?[33] C: While, pretty much blood with no oxygen goes to the lungs, and the lungs give it oxygen, andthen it circles back to the heart, and the heart pumps out.In line 18, the teacher rephrased student K’s question of “how that really works” as “what was the problem ifyou have a hole in your heart?” He facilitated interactive input from his students, who brought knowledge aboutthe respiratory system and circulatory system to analyzing the impact of heart holes. Building on student input,in line 28, the teacher highlighted that the function of the heart is more than pumping blood to the body andinvited students for full explanations. In lines 29-33, students S, M, and C built on to one another to elaboratethe explanations. Following the above discussion, the teacher and his students improvised a participatorysimulation to demonstrate how the blood travels to collect and transmit oxygen. The teacher played the heart,and three students played the blood cell, lungs, and the rest of the body, respectively, with the whole classinvolved in discussing where the blood cell should go, and with what changes in the process of traveling.DiscussionAs the findings suggest, the fifth- and sixth-graders showed complicated conceptions of the Super Notes forcross-community interaction, which are in parallel with features of boundary objects as described in theliterature (Star & Griesemer, 1989; Wenger, 1998). They conceived that Super Notes should present “big ideas”and refined (verified) knowledge potentially relevant and interesting to other communities, and that knowledgeand ideas should be structured consistently as a journey of thinking (in line with the Super Note scaffolds) andwell-phrased and polished, so students from other classrooms could understand. Such conceptions of SuperNotes were demonstrated in students’ practices to generate their Super Notes. They reflected on productiveareas of inquiry emerged from their community’s discourse and inquiry work; reviewed diverse ideas from theironline posts, personal notes, peers’ input, and authoritative sources; selected information based on importance,depth, consistency, and relevance to others; and summarized and phrased their Super Note content using thescaffolds to make their knowledge readable and accessible for students from the other classroom. As thestudents commented, their peers’ Supper Notes “are amazingly written, and they are really simple and they helppeople understand what is the main focus of this Super Note.” The analyses of the classroom discussions andCSCL 2017 Proceedings413© ISLSstudent interviews suggest that the students engaged in active and substantial interactions with the Super Notesfrom other classrooms, with more attention paid to the Super Notes created by their partner classroom thanthose from prior classrooms. The patterns of interactions support productive mechanisms of boundary crossingsuggested by Akkerman and Bakker (2011). Students identified relevant and interesting Super Note topics fromother classrooms, compared the different perspectives and inquiries, triggering deep reflection on their owninquiry to integrate and build new knowledge across communities. The cross-community interaction was farbeyond writing and reading summaries but served to foster deeper intentionality in each community andexpanded/integrated understandings in-between. In the processes of creating their own Super Notes as well asthe processes of interacting with others’ Super Notes, students engaged in deep reflection as individuals, groups,and a whole community to review, reframe, and “rise above” (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006) their collectiveknowledge progress and carried out personal and group efforts to address gaps and limitations. The teachersframed the Super View as a higher-level discourse space that required high-level thinking and reflection;supported group processes to identify, select, and summarize “big ideas;” and facilitated knowledge buildingdiscourse to identify, compare, and connect knowledge across communities for deep understanding.Taken as a whole, the results suggest productive patterns of cross-community interaction aroundsynthetic knowledge objects. Implementing cross-community interaction is challenging for both students andteachers. To better support students and teachers, we recently designed a cross-community collaborationplatform based on ITM. A multi-year design-based research is underway to examine the processes and impactsof cross-community knowledge building in an international network of classrooms.ReferencesAkkerman, S. F., & Bakker, A. (2011). Boundary crossing and boundary objects. Review of EducationalResearch, 81 (2), 132-169.Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analysis of verbal data: A practical guide. Journal of the LearningSciences, 6, 271-315.Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1999). Implications of a systems perspective for the study of creativity. In R. J. Sternberg(Ed.), Handbook of creativity (pp. 313-335). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Laferriere, T., Law, N., & Montané, M. (2012). An international knowledge building network for sustainablecurriculum and pedagogical innovation. International Education Studies, 5, 148-160.Lai, M, & Law, N. (2006). Peer scaffolding of knowledge building through collaborative groups withdifferential learning experiences. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 35 (2), 123-144.Riel, M. (1994). Cross‐classroom collaboration in global Learning Circles. The Sociological Review, 42(S1),219-242.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In R. K.Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97-115). New York: CambridgeUniversity Press.Stahl, G. (2013). Learning across levels. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning,8(1), 1-12.Stahl, G., Koschmann, T., & Suthers, D. (2006). Computer-supported collaborative learning: An historicalperspective. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 409-426). NewYork: Cambridge University Press.Star, S. L., & Griesemer, J. R. (1989). Institutional ecology, “translations” and boundary objects: Amateurs andprofessionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907–39. Social Studies of Science, 19, 387–420.Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developinggrounded theory (2nd ed). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge, England: CambridgeUniversity Press.Zhang, J., Chen, M.-H., Tao, D., Lee, J. Sun, Y., & Judson, D. (2015). Fostering sustained knowledge buildingthrough metadiscourse aided by the Idea Thread Mapper. In O. Lindwall & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.),Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (Vol. 1,pp. 166-173). Gothenburg, Sweden: International Society of the Learning Sciences.AcknowledgmentsThis research was sponsored by National Science Foundation (IIS#1441479). We thank the teachers andstudents at Dr. Eric Jackman Institute of Child Study in Toronto for their creative work enabling this research.CSCL 2017 Proceedings414© ISLS