Promoting Cognitive Processes of Knowledge IntegrationShitanshu Mishra and Sridhar Iyershitanshu@iitb.ac.in, sri@iitb.ac.inIndian Institute of Technology BombayAbstract: Knowledge integration (KI) is an important ability by which learners relate theideas from prior knowledge and new knowledge to come up with a well connected andcoherent understanding of a topic. We present a qualitative investigation done around astudent-question-posing (QP) based learning strategy which aims at improving learners’ KI indata structures (CS2) course. The results throw light on how QP activity using questioningprompts support the improvement of the cognitive processes of KI in learners.IntroductionKnowledge Integration (KI) is defined as “the process by which learners sort out connections between new andexisting ideas to reach more normative and coherent understanding of science” (Lee, Hofstetter, & Linn, 2008).The cognitive processes of KI involve connecting knowledge pieces coming from the plethora of knowledgebase, built using prior knowledge and new knowledge. Better KI means richer connections among knowledgecomponents, coming from new knowledge and/or prior knowledge, which ultimately leads to more organizedand deeper understanding of a topic. According to the KI instructional patterns, a KI environment shouldsupport four processes (Linn & Eylon, 2011): (1) eliciting ideas from prior knowledge; (2) focus on new ideasto help distinguish or link ideas; (3) distinguish ideas; and (4) sort out ideas. These processes can be supportedat the learning environment level. A huge repertoire of work has been done to accomplish this for scienceeducation (Chiu & Linn, 2011). In our research, we examine if these processes can be supported directly at thecognitive level using the cognitive tool of question posing (QP). This research work extends previous research(Mishra & Iyer, 2015) that gave a proof of concept that QP involves the KI processes at the cognitive level, andidentified different strategies by which learners integrate prior knowledge and the new knowledge to come upwith questions that can help them to explore related knowledge, within CS2 domain. The strategies are knownas exploratory question posing (EQP) strategies. In this paper, we present a QP-based learning strategy that aimsat improving learners’ KI performance in data structures. Our learning strategy is a computer-based adaptationof the guided cooperative questioning (King & Rosenshine, 1993) which used generic question prompts. Insteadof using generic question prompts, our learning strategy uses the EQP strategies (Mishra & Iyer, 2015) as thedomain-specific question prompts. We call our learning strategy as ‘IKnowIT-pedagogy,’ where ‘IKnowIT’refers to “Inquiry-based Knowledge Integration Training.”IKnowIT-pedagogyIKnowIT-pedagogy consists of six phases of activities as follows: (1) Phase 1: Learner reads introductoryinformation about EQP and its importance. (2) Phase 2: Learner watches a video lecture on a topic and doesQP. In our implementation, the video (“introduction to the tree data structure”) was approximately 15 minuteslong, and learner gets total 45 minutes for watching the video and pose questions around its content. (3) Phase3: Learner reads detailed information about the three EQP strategies (Mishra & Iyer, 2015). These three EQPstrategies (‘Apply,’ ‘Operate,’ and ‘Associate’) are used as questioning prompts for data structures. The detailsare as follows. i) Apply (or Employ), where learner integrates the concepts from given knowledge with somegoal ‘application’ or ‘structural arrangement.’ ii) Operate, where the QP involves integrating given knowledgewith known goal state (or modifications) and seek operations/procedure to achieve the goal state. iii) Associate,where concepts from given and prior knowledge are integrated to seek insight into the given knowledge or priorknowledge. (4) Phase 4: Learner analyzes the questions generated in step 2 and categorizes them into the threeEQP strategies. (5) Phase 5: Learner criticizes the questions and their categorizations generated by anotherlearner (pre-stored). (6) Phase 6: Learner answers reflection questions to reflect on her/his experiences in theprevious five phases.Study methodology and resultsParticipants in the study were the 31 first-year engineering undergraduate learners, out of which 12 participatedin the focused group interview (FGI). During the study, the learners undergone an IKnowIT session, followedby the FGI. The broad focus of the interview was to investigate the effects of each pedagogical features ofIKnowIT on learners’ improvement of KI processes. Later, the interview was transcribed and analyzed with theICLS 2018 Proceedings1539© ISLStheoretical lenses of exploratory question posing and knowledge integration framework (Linn & Eylon, 2011).Our process was based on the approach outlined by Charmaz (2006) that involves initial coding and focusedcoding. At the end of the analysis, the focused codes were abstracted into tentative theory (story) that is thenchecked against other parts of the data to test its explanatory power. The results include two stories coming outof the interview analysis. These stories explain certain mechanisms related to how exploratory QP and KI arelinked with each other, and what are the effects of exposing learners to the three broad EQP prompts.Story 1 – Linking QP and KI: Learners perceived that EQP is highly intertwined with knowledgeintegration. On the one hand, they perceived that more KI happens after they pose more questions - “betterquestion leads to better understanding… Questions drive the KI process, as questioning lead to getting moreideas.” Learners reported that QP required them to think more into the given knowledge, their relationship withwhat they already know, to focus on inconsistencies and gaps in their understanding, to focus on alternatives towhat was given in the video lecture, and to elicit expectation mismatch concerning their prior knowledge. Thiswas an important finding, as it shows that the effects of the learning activities clearly appear to support the firstthree out of the four cognitive processes associated with KI, as described by Linn and Eylon (2011): (i) Elicitingprior knowledge, (ii) Refocusing on given knowledge and (iii) distinguishing ideas. On the other hand, learnersalso perceived that better KI leads to better exploratory questions. They reported to have recalled their priorknowledge and connected them to the ideas given in the video lecture. These connections were in severaldimensions such as comparing, contrasting, finding applications, finding methods of implementing ideas, etc.Learners perceived that integrating knowledge pieces is a precursor to the coming up with questions.Story 2 – Role of EQP Prompts: Though the IKnowIT-pedagogy activities were primarily based onEQP and exposing learners to different EQP strategies (Mishra & Iyer, 2015), they perceived that the activitieswere more about understanding the topic in a better way than just being a QP session. We used the EQPstrategies identified in the CS2 domain as questioning prompts. From the interview analysis, it was found thatthe utility of the EQP prompts was not just limited to assisting learners in posing better questions. Learners usedthe EQP prompts at several instances, viz.: (1) Before posing a question, or (2) After posing a question, or (3)Both before and after posing a question. Learners who used the strategies “before” posing question did so toeither to give direction to their knowledge exploration or to make an explicit attempt to create a question thatcan demonstrate the structure of any EQP strategy. Whereas, the learners who used the strategies “after” posingthe question did so with an intention to either validate if their question matches to the standard EQP strategies orto categorize their question and then determine the direction in which they should look for the answer. In thefirst case, learners reflected on the availability of relevant knowledge pieces and their possible integrations tosuit the requirements of any strategy. In the latter case, learners reflected about the nature of their questions, i.e.,which of the three EQP strategies a question matches with. Learners reported several other utilities of the EQPstrategies such as: (i) it helped them in validating their questions (“makes us to know which is the best way toask question.”), (ii) improved clarity of questions (“knowing categories avoids the confusions due tooverlapping multiple doubts, it gives direction”). In this way, the EQP strategies also seem to help the fourth KIprocess of sorting out ideas by providing clear objective to the sorting process.In conclusion, Story 1 shows the role of EQP activity in the IKnowIT-pedagogy. It shows thatintegrating knowledge pieces is needed for coming up with better questions. On the other hand, it also showsthat posing better questions helps in refining and strengthening prior connections and provides objectives tofurther knowledge explorations and therefore leads to further KI. Story 2 throws light on the roles of EQPstrategies in the IKnowIT-pedagogy. In the conference, we would present the IKnowIT-pedagogy andassociated evaluations in detail.ReferencesLiu, O. L., Lee, H. S., Hofstetter, C., & Linn, M. C. (2008). Assessing knowledge integration in science:Construct, measures, and evidence. Educational Assessment, 13(1), 33-55.Chiu, J. L., & Linn, M. C. (2011). Knowledge integration and WISE engineering. Journal of Pre-CollegeEngineering Education Research (J-PEER), 1(1), 2.Charmaz, K. (2014). Constructing grounded theory. Sage Publications Ltd, 1 edition, Jan. 2006.King, A., & Rosenshine, B. (1993). Effects of guided cooperative questioning on children's knowledgeconstruction. The Journal of Experimental Education, 61(2), 127-148.Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B. S. (2011). Science learning and instruction: Taking advantage of technology topromote knowledge integration. Routledge.Mishra, S., & Iyer, S. (2015, June). Question-Posing strategies used by students for exploring Data Structures.In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Conference on Innovation and Technology in Computer ScienceEducation (pp. 171-176). ACM.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1540© ISLS