The Assessment of Digital Reading Skills With Cognitive Diagnosefor the Reading Achievement Test in ChinaYan Liu, Chuxin Fu, and Xiaoqing Guflyliuyan0707@163.com, shin_1230@163.com, xqgu@ses.ecnu.edu.cnEast China Normal University, Dept. of Educational Information TechnologyAbstract: Reading skills has been viewed as a multifaceted construction with multipleconstituents. What has been invested of skills multiplicity has expanded on previous literatureby including paper reading skills constructs (comprehension, interest, and engagement).Advances in digital technologies are dramatically altering the texts and as tools available tostudents. Yet with the diagnose assessment of the digital reading skill hasn’t come issue thatcan be detected by the cognitive diagnostic assessment. The study has obtained pre and postreading performance based on the digital reading, reading perception self-reports. DINA wasused in the processing of reading assessment, and the diagnosis feedback report was designedto improve students’ reading skill. Furthermore, implications for the diagnose framework of theProgress in International eReading Literacy Study (ePIRLS) were discussed.Keywords: Digital reading, cognitive diagnosis, DINA, reading perception, ePIRLSThe study questionsDigital-text media as one of the reading approaches, has been optioned by the most readers. IEA has introducedePIRLS, which was a forwarding thinking computer-based extension to PIRLS in 2016(PIRLS, 2016). Mostreading assessment was based on the simple scores, understanding how well students’ reading comprehension,interpreting, and critiquing the information. However, it lack of diagnostic report to help students improve theirreading skills. The study was conducted that what the reading features students have, and assess reading skills bycognitive diagnostic model to provide the personal feedback report for students to improve their readingperformance.ObjectivesThis study has several objectives. First, we explore how reading skills fourth-graders in Shanghai primary schoolusing cognitive diagnose processing. Second, we explore whether fourth-graders would improve reading skillsthrough diagnose feedback. Comparison between the pre with post-reading test was conducted to confirm theimpacts on digital reading skills.Significance of the studyBased on the previous literatures, there were not many researches on the cognitive diagnosis of reading skill, butscores. This study is a significant part in assessment students digital reading skills from the cognitive diagnose oftheir reading performance. The cognitive diagnose model is likely to be adopted into a comprehensive, criticizingreading skills to better understand the picture of students digital reading. This study will help better understandthe relationship between students’ reading characteristics and their learning performance, and likely to diagnosethe learners with poor reading skill so that timely pedagogical intervention can be implemented to improve thesituation.Methodological and data sourcesThe study is part of a learning analytics project to portray students’ learning within a learning technology andassessment technology in Shanghai. A cognitive diagnostic model was employed, involving five classes of 143students in a primary school. In addition, a complex algorithm (DINA) was proposed to classify the reading scoresbased on the skills attributes and the diagnose feedback analysis has been established to identify what variablesof students’ reading scores have significant impact on their reading skills. Finally, the study would provide thefeedback to each student to improve their reading ability.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1435© ISLSMajor findingsAccording to the Q matrix and the student response matrix, the DINA model is estimated and fitted. The graspmode of the subjects was also analyzed in this study. At last, the correlation analysis was made with the students’end-of-term Chinese performance.According to ePIRLS2016, the title of this test has been identified with the corresponding attributes. Theresulting of Q matrix was shown in table 3. A1 has been stands for ‘direct extraction’; A2: ‘reasoning andunderstanding’; A3: ‘integration and interpretation’; A4: ‘criticism and evaluation’.It can be learned from the table that all four attributes ’1111’ of the subjects had a total number of 15students, accounting for about 10.5%. There are 38 students, who have mastered the two attributes, accountingfor 26.6%.The highest proportion of attribute mastery pattern was ‘1110’, with a total of 54 people, accounting forabout 37.8% of the students. The students have not mastered "criticism and evaluation", and the other threeattributes have been mastered. There are three kinds of mastery pattern ‘0001’, ‘1001’, ‘1101’, which were inaccordance with these three types of mastery patterns. It can be found that the proportion of the attribute ofcriticism and evaluation was the highest.Conclusions and implicationsThis study is still on-going to detect reading behaviors furtherly. Thus far, the preliminary analysis of the collectdata suggested that (1) the DINA model analysis has shown that the reading skill of ‘direct extracting information’and, ‘direct reasoning ability’ maintained excellent. However, the ability of ‘integration and interpretation’ and,‘criticism and evaluation’ need still improving. (2) The diagnosis of feedback report has intervened personalizedreading skills promotion. (3) Digital reading skills can be assessed by DINA, and T-test between pre and post-testwas statistical significant. The limitation of the study is the sample size which was only focused on the one grade.Furthermore, it is necessary to pay attention on the learning behaviors during students doing reading and, thefollow-up study is needed to be improved.ReferencesBiancarosa, G., & Griffiths, G. G. (2012). Technology tools to support reading in the digital age. The Future ofChildren, 22(2), 139-160.Bus, A. G., Verhallen, M. J. A. J., & de Jong, M. T. (2009). How onscreen storybooks contribute to early literacy.Multimedia and literacy development: Improving achievement for young learners, 153-167.IEA.PIRLS2016AssessmentFramework,2ndEdition.(2016).http://timssandpirls.bc.edu/pirls2016/downloads/P16_Framework_2ndEd.pdf.Korat, O. (2010). Reading electronic books as a support for vocabulary, story comprehension and word readingin kindergarten and first grade. Computers & Education, 55(1), 24-31.Leu D J, Gregory McVerry J, Ian O'Byrne W, et al. (2011). The new literacies of online reading comprehension:Expanding the literacy and learning curriculum. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 55(1): 5-14.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1436© ISLS