Exposing Piaget’s Scheme:Empirical Evidence for the Ontogenesis of Coordinationin Learning a Mathematical ConceptDor Abrahamson, University of California, Berkeley, dor@berkeley.eduShakila Shayan, Utrecht University, s.shayan@uu.nlArthur Bakker, Utrecht University, A.Bakker4@uu.nlMarieke F. van der Schaaf, Utrecht University, M.F.vanderSchaaf@uu.nlAbstract: The combination of two methodological resources—natural-user interfaces (NUI)and multimodal learning analytics (MMLA)—is creating opportunities for educationalresearchers to empirically evaluate seminal models for the hypothetical emergence of conceptsfrom situated sensorimotor activity. 76 participants (9-14 yo) solved tablet-based non-symbolicmanipulation tasks designed to foster grounded meanings for the mathematical concept ofproportional equivalence. Data gathered in task-based semi-structured clinical interviewsincluded action logging, eye-gaze tracking, and videography. Successful task performancecoincided with spontaneous appearance of stable dynamical gaze-path patterns soon followedby multimodal articulation of strategy. Significantly, gaze patterns included uncued non-salientscreen locations. We present cumulative results to argue that these ‘attentional anchors’mediated participants’ problem solving. We interpret the findings as enabling us to revisit,support, refine, and elaborate on central claims of Piaget’s theory of genetic epistemology andin particular his insistence on the role of situated motor-action coordination in the process ofreflective abstraction.Keywords: attentional anchor, coordination, eye-tracking, genetic epistemology, NUI, proportionBackground and objectives: Revitalizing LS interest in genetic epistemologyas complementary to sociocultural models of conceptual developmentThe eminent cognitive-developmental psychologist Jean Piaget, who would be celebrating his 120th birthday thisAugust 2016, has had a rocky career in the Learning Sciences. Despite a near-centennial stretch of prodigious,paradigm-changing academic oeuvre, despite the omnipresence of constructivist educational parlance in preK-12STEM rhetoric, and despite his indirect yet formative and enduring mark on the design of commercial pedagogicalproducts for discovery-based learning, Piaget’s groundbreaking construct of a schema has received some badpress. The construct suffers, perhaps, via its too-convenient association with Piaget’s oft-critiqued yet oftmisunderstood Stage Theory or the indefatigable attacks on the validity of his clinical methodologies. But whereasPiaget-bashing has generated many a dissertation and built entire research programs, his theoretical constructsand model of conceptual schemata rising from sensorimotor operatory schemes, we posit, have yet to find theirmatch as explanantia for meaningful situated learning. At the very least, we concede, the waning of empiricalPiagetian research is hampering our field’s intellectual progress and increasingly vitiating its relevance to thechanging terrain of educational media (Abrahamson, 2015; Abrahamson & Sánchez–Garcia, in press).We are calling to renew Piagetian discourse specifically on mathematical learning, and more specifically,mathematics learning with state-of-the-art interactive media (Forman, 1988; Lindgren & Johnson-Glenberg, 2013;Marshall, Antle, van den Hoven, & Rogers, 2013; Moreno-Armella, Hegedus, & Kaput, 2008; Sarama &Clements, 2009). Even more specifically, we are looking for forms of empirical research in environments whereboth student and researcher respective activities avail of multimodality, with the student engaging in explorativeactivity that the researcher monitors, documents, measures, and analyzes, even in real time (Martin & Sherin,2013; Schneider, Bumbacher, & Blikstein, 2015; Worsley & Blikstein, 2014). This brave new world ofmultimodality in design, instruction, and research demands theoretical infrastructure for thinking seriously, anew,about situated motor-action skill acquisition as it relates to conceptual development. In turn, we are thus alsolooking to draw on a century of progress in the somatic–kinesiological disciplines (Bernstein, 1996; Kelso &Engstrøm, 2006; Newell & Ranganathan, 2010; Thelen & Smith, 1994) as these bear on the action-to-conceptlearning process (Bamberger, 2013). In fact, we will argue that Piaget’s genetic epistemology is key to populatinglearning-sciences discourse with this diversity of fresh, pertinent, and resonant perspectives. In a sense, we arestepping back to jump forward.Up front, we wish to clarify that our call is to build on, rather than supplant, a research tradition of treatingICLS 2016 Proceedings466© ISLSPiagetian themes through qualitative analysis (Abrahamson, 2012; Dubinsky, 1991; Gray & Tall, 1994; Norton,2008). In fact, it is precisely these types of investigations that we wish further to pursue by introducing newconstructs and methodological techniques.To contextualize and substantiate this call, we present and discuss empirical data collected during theimplementation of experimental educational interventions, in which young study participants were engaged intechnologically enabled embodied-interaction activities designed to foster presymbolic proportional reasoning.We will argue for the unique and pivotal traction of Piaget’s thesis on our research by way of explaining thecritical role that his constructs of sensorimotor scheme and reflective abstraction served in making sense of ourdata. Namely, the Piagetian perspective enabled us to posit the significance of nuanced changes in children’ssensorimotor activity for their conceptual ontogenesis as well as the implications of these findings for both theoryand practice of mathematics education. Please note: This proceedings paper is a précis for a full-length peerreviewed journal article (Abrahamson et al., in press), where we are able to provide far more information ontheory, methods, and results.Theoretical frameworkPiaget (1896-1980) was fascinated by children’s opportunities for personal development through engaging in thesocial enactment of cultural practice, such as moral development through game play. However he viewed culture,along with its social agents, practices, norms, and material artifacts, moreso as the setting and playing field ofontogenesis than as its very fabric and constitution.In the latter 20th century, a slew of monographs inspired by the cultural–historical psychology of LevVygotsky (1896-1934) impressed upon our intellectual community a set of views not readily perceived asconcordant with Piaget’s epistemological theory. Instead of foregrounding the child’s piecemeal construction ofcognitive structures, these views underscored the critical role of sociocultural activity structures as shapingindividual disciplinary enskilment, such as mathematical competence. These alternative views include thetheorization of: (a) artifact appropriation and contextual adaptation as the sine qua non of mediated maturationinto communal techno-scientific practice, including visualizations, orientations, and discourse (Newman, Griffin,& Cole, 1989; Saxe, 2012; Wertsch, 1979); (b) learning as legitimate peripheral participation in the social coenactment of purposeful cultural practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Rogoff, 1990); and (c) discourse as the vehicleand substance of knowing (Sfard, 2010).Scholars holding constructivist views of cognition have retaliated that, notwithstanding, meaning mustbe grounded in tacit, presymbolic sensorimotor routines and innate/early cognitive capacity (Allen & Bickhard,2013; Denison & Xu, 2014; Harnad, 1990) and concepts are built painstakingly by coordinating multiple personaland situated resources for ad hoc productive engagement (Case & Okamoto, 1996; Noss & Hoyles, 1996; Smith,diSessa, & Roschelle, 1993). In the fray of this grand altercation some scholars are looking to forge dialoguebetween these die-hard entrenched camps (Abrahamson, 2012; Cole & Wertsch, 1996; diSessa, Levin, & Brown,2015). By and large, though, the field is at a stalemate, with each faction chiding the other, “Show me!”We have something new to show that might jostle the field out of its stalemate. We reasoned that if onlywe could demonstrate empirically student behaviors that are better accounted for by constructivist thansociocultural theory, then we would be in a better position to argue for a dialectical view of mathematicallearning—a view of learning as action-based ontogenesis in facilitated settings—settings that we regard asculturally–historically evolved instrumented fields of promoted action (Abrahamson & Trninic, 2015). Moreover,by way of reemphasizing the critical role of sensorimotor activity in conceptual development, we could justify anintroduction, into learning-sciences discourse, of evolving models of teaching and learning imported fromdisciplines focused on motor-action skill development and methodology (Abrahamson & Sánchez–Garcia, inpress).Our renewed interest in Piaget’s theory of learning, and in particular his model of reflective abstraction,emerged from unexpected quarters. Namely, philosophers of radical enactive cognition (Chemero, 2009; Hutto &Myin, 2013), who reject exclusively representationalist epistemologies, have been seeking corroboration viapartnerships with social scientists engaged in the empiricism of skill acquisition. For example, Hutto and SánchezGarcía (2015), respectively a philosopher of cognition and a sociologist of sport, collaborated in articulating aradical-enactivist interpretation of athletic performance. In particular they developed the construct of anattentional anchor, which then became central to our own work (Abrahamson & Sánchez–Garcia, in press), as wenow explain.An attentional anchor (AA) is a phenomenological aspect of an agent’s implicit or explicit goal-orientedinteraction with the environment. AAs may be a specific object (real or imagined), area, or other pattern orbehavior of the perceptual manifold that an agent detects, invokes, selects, and uses to enact the activity at hand.For example, a juggler struggling to coordinate the trajectories of many balls simultaneously flying through theICLS 2016 Proceedings467© ISLSair might imagine a tall rectangle rising in front of her and aim the balls to its vertices. Whether discovered ortaught, the AA interpolates itself into the agent–environment relation to serve as an enabling task constraint—itbecomes a new systemic element that hones and channels attention during perception–action couplings. The AAreduces operational complexity, rendering ergonomic and feasible otherwise overwhelming tasks. An agent actingon an AA experiences it as a “steering wheel” overlaid upon the perceptual field—the attentional anchor becomesthe mediating proxy both for operating on the environment and interpreting feedback from the environment.Specifically, the AA brings forth to the agent new latent affordances by objectifying, specifying, andforegrounding the environment’s task-oriented, invariant goal information structures (Chow et al., 2007; Kelso &Engstrøm, 2006; Newell & Ranganathan, 2010). As such, the AA thesis resonates well also with central tenets ofEnactivism (Varela, Thompson, & Rosch, 1991).We are intrigued and motivated by an apparent resemblance of the constructs motor-action coordinationand attentional anchor from ecological-dynamics theory to those of coordination and category in Piaget’s modelof reflective abstraction. Reflective abstraction is the highest of three abstraction levels that Piaget distinguished.It concerns a learner’s coordination of actions. Piaget viewed this type of abstraction as ‘constructive’ in the sensethat new syntheses emerge that bring forth interaction regularities toward encapsulating and generalizing newcapacity. In short, reflective abstraction is “the construction of mental objects and of mental actions on theseobjects” (Dubinsky, 1991, p. 101). It should come as no surprise that Piaget’s work resonates with dynamicalsystems theory, given his deep commitment to anti-representationalist, situated structuralism (Piaget, 1970;Turner, 1973). In the remainder of the paper we will discuss an empirical study, in which we have tracked whatappear to be children’s sensorimotor behaviors that mark a new coordination focused on an attentional anchor; acoordination leading to the reflective abstraction of a higher-order functional structure and its consciousarticulation as a new phenomenal category. As we explain, this situated cognitive process is pivotal to a designedactivity on proportional relations.MethodsIn total, 76 volunteering students from the Netherlands participated in two studies. Study 1 included 30 studentsof 5th/6th grade (mean age = 11[3] years; 13 male, 17 female) from five elementary schools. They all worked onthe Parallel Bars activity (see Figure 1a). Study 2 included 46 students of 7th/8th grade (29 male, 17 female; meanage = 13[5]) from two prevocational schools. Of these, one group (26 students) only worked on “parallel tasks”—Parallel Pluses (Figure 1a) followed by Parallel Bars (Figure 1b); the other group (20 students) only worked on“orthogonal tasks”—Orthogonal Pluses (see Figure 1c) followed by Orthogonal Bars (see Figure 1d).a. Parallel Pluses: userslides pluses each alongits vertical axis toreposition them; fullscreen color feedbackb. Parallel Bars: userdrags bar tips each alongits vertical axis to extendor shorten bars; colorfeedback on bars.c. Orthogonal Pluses: userslides pluses along theirvertical (left) and horizontal(right) axes; full-screencolor feedback.d. Orthogonal Bars: userdrags bar tips along theirvertical (left) andhorizontal (right) axes toextend or shorten bars;color feedback on bars.Figure 1. Sample screenshots from enacting four activity modules in the touch-screen tablet application. Tomake the screen green, participants had to manipulate either the positions of cursors (1a, 1c) or the extension ofbars (1b, 1d) either along parallel (1a, 1b) or Cartesian axes (1c, 1d).The tasks were variations on the Mathematical Imagery Trainer for Proportion (Reinholz, Trninic,Howison, & Abrahamson, 2010), an interactive technological device designed for students first to develop newoperatory schemes underlying mathematical concepts and then mathematize these schemes using standard framesof references (e.g., a grid, numerals). The task is implemented in a multi-touch tablet, with each hand (or eachindex finger) controlling one element on the screen, either a plus-shaped cursor (the “plus” task conditions) or theedge of a stretch/shrink rectangle (the “bars” task conditions). The task objective is to move these elements on thescreen so as to achieve a specified goal state: keeping green either the whole screen (“plus”) or elements thereof(“bars”). The software mediating between user-action input and screen-color output instantiates mathematicalICLS 2016 Proceedings468© ISLSdatum point (e.g., 10 and 20 cm, respectively, above the screen base) then calculates their quotient (e.g., 10/20).A match with a preset ratio (e.g., 1:2) makes for green, otherwise red (Figure 1). Thus in the case of a 1:2 ratio,users might move their index fingers along the screen constantly keeping the right-hand double as high as the left(“parallel” conditions, Figures 1a, 1b) or double as far from the origin (“orthogonal” conditions, Figs. 1c, 1d), orthey might attend to other properties of the performance, such as the distance between their hands or their speeds(Abrahamson et al., 2014).Figure 2. On left: Tobii Mobile Device Stand for X2. The stand is attached to the edge of a desk. The iPad ispositioned in the center. The eye-tracker is placed on the stand base, with the camera on the top. Center: sampleintegrated eye-tracking and video data from the Parallel Bars condition. On right: Orthogonal Pluses datasample (left hand moves the plus up/down; right hand moves the plus righ/left).The intervention and analysis followed principles of task-based semi-structured clinical interviews (e.g.,Ginsburg, 1997). Our data set comprises videography (of student actions and multimodal student–tutor discourse),streaming logs of touchscreen activity, and eye-gaze tracking (see Figure 2). This complex data constellation wasdesigned so as to serve us in developing a more detailed and comprehensive theoretical model for the spontaneousemergence of new sensorimotor coordinations grounding mathematical conceptions. We used visualizationsoftware that superimposes the eye-tracking paths onto the videography, so that we could see which particularlocations on the screen were in the users’ foveal vision as they were manipulating the virtual objects in dialoguewith the researcher. Computational analyses of users’ visual pathways on the screen fed into micro-analyses oftheir concurrent actions and multimodal utterance (Siegler, 2006). The analyses enabled us to discern generalpatterns in students’ search for, and articulation of, effective bimanual manipulation strategies. We wereparticularly interested in implicating the emergence of attentional anchors that first support the bimanual motoraction then come forth into dyadic discourse as new mathematical objects and solution procedures. Furthermore,we evaluated whether Piaget’s four phases of reflective abstraction—interiorization, coordination, encapsulation,and generalization—could be genuinely implicated and differentiated in the data as depictive markers parsingstudents’ activity flow. For reliability, two researchers independently analyzed part of the data corpus, then sharedtheir findings, and finally watched the videos repeatedly until reaching agreement over all their observations.ResultsCumulative findings: A Piagetian analysis of learning proportion as reflectiveabstractionBoth within and across age and condition groups, students differed along several dimensions relevant to the study,including: (a) duration of time elapsed until discovery of a first effective interaction routine; (b) time to completethe whole task; and (c) pace of finger movement (fast or slow) at the initial exploration phase. Participants alsodiffered in the incorrect rules they initially posited, their eye-gaze patterns accompanying successful handcoordination strategies, and their lines of reasoning toward effective solutions. These individual differencesnotwithstanding, the progress of all participants through the activity bore the pattern presented in Table 1. Thediscoveries students made en route to figuring out “green” interaction rules replicate our earlier findings (Reinholzet al., 2010). However adding eye-tracking visualization into the data manifold now enables us better to modelthe emergence of these discoveries from students’ interactions and characterize the discoveries in terms ofreflective abstraction phases.Table 1: Participants’ cross-condition behavioral sequence follows Piaget’s reflective abstraction phases1. Interiorization:Exploring taskenvironmentICLS 2016 ProceedingsStudents: (a) explored the task environment without any clearly discernable plan or strategy; (b)found greens haphazardly; (c) could not replicate green positions; (d) attempted strategies that didnot bear out, e.g., moving fingers in equal pace; (e) realized there should be a spatial relation between469© ISLS2. Coordination:stable sensorypatterns emergeconcurrent witheffectivemotor-actionperformance3. Encapsulation:Articulatingsensorimotorpatterns resultsin objectifyingtacit elements,enhancedperformance4. Generalization:From iterated,qualitativeprocess rule toexplicitfunctional rule:articulating alatentmathematicalrelation as aconstantpropertythe hands; (f) attempted to coordinate actions. Concurrently, eye gaze shifted between the movingfingertips.In the course of attempting to develop an effective bimanual dynamical motor-action scheme forkeeping green, gaze patterns emerged (see Figure 3) that: (a) followed tentative localized discoveryof effective positions and constraints on action; (b) manifested as iterated rapid shifts among specificinterface elements; (c) included at least one un-manipulated point; (d) settled on consistent, stable,and reoccurring forms; (e) coincided with significant improvement in overall performance; (d)coincided with more continuous as opposed to abrupt motor action; (f) enabled toreconstruct/replicate/repair previous green locations; and (g) preceded logical–mathematicalreflective reasoning, discovery, or articulation of rules.Probed to articulate their strategy, students objectified an attentional anchor and then elaborated onit, forming new conjectures. Initially, though, their conjectures tended to belie their actions, such asspeaking of a fixed distance between the moving fingers in the Parallel conditions, whereas in factthey had been changing the distance covariate with height. As they enacted their thoughts, however,they gradually came to appreciate the error, such as noticing that the distance in fact increases withheight. After several replications they expressed their inference, such as saying, “No I was wrong.”At times, the experimenter guided this process by either challenging students or orienting them oncritical features in the visual display. In turn, process of articulating and evaluating effectivestrategies resulted in better performance.Once students had validated an effective strategy, their actions were no longer explorative. Theirgaze pattern intensified, e.g., more consistent and more rapid eye-gaze shifts along the triangularattentional anchor in Parallel Bars. Concurrently, their utterance included qualitative properties ofobjects and prospective actions. Introducing the grid precipitated a shift toward quantitativereasoning, e.g., “When they are lower they are one line apart, when they are in the middle they aremore lines apart, and when the right hand is at the very top they are most apart.” Supplementing thenumerals resulted in students unpacking the bimanual composite into ordered pairs, e.g., left at 1,right at 2; left at 2, right at 4; etc. Eventually they recognized a constant intra-pair quantitative(multiplicative) relation, e.g., “Oh wait it’s a half… I know it’s a half, the left is always half of theright.” They thus shifted from a scalar, inter-position process rule for iterated enactment (the higheryou go, the bigger the distance) to an explicit intra-position functional rule with predictive power(wherever right is, left is half). That is, they articulated the notion of a constant ratio that underliesproportional equivalence.Parallel Bars: Triangle A most prevalentParallel Pluses: Pattern B most prevalentThe top of Left Bar is “projected” to an un-manipulatedpoint on Right Bar. Students dynamically calibrated theheight of Left Bar relative to half the height of Right Bar (&vice versa).The focal gaze point between the pluses is an unmanipulated location. It emerged and was constructed inrelation to the two plus signs, constantly moving them andmoved by them.Orthogonal PlusesOrthogonal BarsFigure 3. Schematic overview of the variety of emergent dynamical gaze patterns reveals attentional anchors.In Figure 3, circles represent focal gaze points, lines are gaze paths. Triangulated with the tablet action-loggingand clinical data, we interpret these gaze patterns as evidence for ecologically coupled sensorimotor attentionalanchors mediating effective enactment of problem solutions for the embodied-interaction task. In ourICLS 2016 Proceedings470© ISLScollaborative-analysis sessions, as we watched the superimposed gaze/video data, we have been compelled by thedynamical evolution of these forms, and in particular when we played these movies in fast motion: It is as if bitsand pieces of a would-be instrument—a handle or steering wheel—assemble in the task environment as solutionmeans; as actionable media “between” student and objective. These media, the attentional anchors, emerge viaco-evolving dialectical process: attentional anchors are invented for and by the sensorimotor scheme that wieldsit as a means of accomplishing the situated task objective. As the interview advances, the attentional anchorsascend: from latent aspects of the task environment; to tacit, dynamical, ecologically coupling patterns; tobonafide articles of discourse and reasoning.Summary: Beyond representations—appreciating Piaget as a non-cognitivistThe structure that the child constructs through goal-oriented engagement in the task environment is not arepresentation in the sense of some accessible mental content in her head. Rather, the structure is a cognitiveconstruct, a tacit relation that emerges between the subject and the objective world through adaptive efforts towardequilibrating effective engagement. The structure functions as a dynamical systemic dialectic, by which areformed both the subject’s schematized action routines of engagement with the world and, reciprocally, thoseworldly categories being engaged—aspects of the world toward which this schematized sensorimotor activity isoriented and transforming; categories by which the child is effecting aspects of the environment. In theparticularities of the child’s engagement with the MIT-P technological system, the emergent operatory schemesare correlational. For example, in the case of the Parallel Pluses the reciprocally emergent category upon whichthese schemes are operating is often the interval between the hands. The emergent correlational manipulation ofthe interval coordinates two operations upon it—transforming its elevation, transforming its size—so that thehigher the interval is (or the farther it is along the screen), the bigger it should be so as to effect and maintain thedesired worldly state (making and keeping the screen green). This covariational coordination is created through aprocess Piaget called reflective abstraction, that is, the construction of a higher-order operational structure—theorganization of a new phenomenal invariance that breaks away from, yet contains and coordinates, existingroutinized operations that hitherto had been sufficient for productive engagement with simpler categories yethence prove insufficient. To iterate, this coordination is centered on the new category, the interval between thehands.Looking at results from implementing the MIT-P system in an eye-tracking study, we have attempted tomake sense of our data from this Piagetian perspective. In particular, we have been curious about shifts in students’visual attention toward the objects they are manipulating—shifts that co-occur with, or briefly anticipate, anapparent organization of new action patterns as well as the multimodal discursive articulation of these patternsinto proto-mathematical propositions. Emblematic of these pattern shifts is that students will incorporate into theirnew routine a visual attention toward a location on the screen that is not a constituent part of the objects beingmanipulated. For example, they may stare at a point, a blank locus between two objects that they aremanipulating—a point that apparently is strategic for constructing and applying the new coordination, such as the“higher-bigger” dynamical correlation discussed above. Whenever these new coordinations constitute schemesthat we evaluate as proto-conceptual, such as schemes leading to proportional reasoning, it is very tempting tostate that the children are re-inventing mathematical concepts within our designed fields of promoted action. Thatis, we seem to be witnessing the process of reflective abstraction, and this process is mediated by the children’sparticipation in the discovery and enactment of a cultural practice of our design, a sensorimotor practice they arenever shown but are steered toward.We are thus offering an explication of mathematical learning as a Piagetian constructivist processembedded in a Vygotskian cultural–historical framework. In so doing, we are also endeavoring to redress a lacunain Piaget’s theoretical thesis, namely his little concern for sociocultural enframings of children’s logicomathematical ontogenesis. As Turner (1973) writes:Piaget’s model of psychogenesis is formulated in an artificial sociological vacuum; he has neverconfronted the question of the socio-cultural components of the mind at the level of the basicstructure of the psychogenetic process itself. (p. 364) [Piaget] has, in other words, not yet cometo grips with the problem of the specific social and cultural mechanisms through which culturesand societies participate in and control the genetic development of the individual psyches oftheir members. (p. 369)Conclusions and implicationsWhen Piaget began publishing on cognitive developmental psychology a whole century ago, clinical interviewswere cutting-edge scientific method. By detecting systematic patterns in children’s action and utterance duringICLS 2016 Proceedings471© ISLSinterviews, as they attempted to respond to his questions and solve his puzzles, and building on a colossal batteryof cross-sectional studies, Piaget put forth a cognitive theory of genetic epistemology. Central to this theory wasa painstaking explanation for individuals’ subjective construction of psychological objects—new phenomenalcategories that come forth to enhance, mediate, and regulate effective worldly transactions. These new categoriesand attendant sensorimotor schemes coalesce as the child’s cognitive adaptations—emergent interaction routinesenabled yet constrained by innate cognitive architecture. That is, the mind constructs a new category and,whenever doing so, extends and tightens its grip on the world.Though much water has since flowed under Geneva’s Mont-Blanc bridge, the Learning Sciences havenot advanced much in evaluating Piaget’s central claims respecting the child’s construction of new psychologicalobjects as solutions to problems of sensorimotor interaction. To be sure replication, qualification, and elaborationhave been offered aplenty, and yet abstraction itself—the construct and process—have not been validated viaindependent measures.These are early days in our quest to witness the psychological construction of new objects as it occurs.And yet our findings to date embolden and impel us to submit that we are literally seeing reflective abstraction.Empirical data from our task-based interviews, and in particular children’s eye-gaze patterns triangulated againsttheir tablet action-logs and audio–video recordings, are aligning remarkably well with Piaget’s constructivistmodel of cognitive development. What more, by seeing what the child is looking at and manipulating we nowunderstand far better our own successes and failures as educational designers in guiding the children tomathematize these tacit constructions.More broadly, we have demonstrated alignment between a core construct from Piaget’s theory of geneticepistemology—reflective abstraction—and tenets of Enactivism, dynamical-systems theory, ecologicalpsychology, and socio-kinesiology. We thus join Allen and Bickhard (2013) in challenging and encouraging ourcolleagues to revisit Piaget’s seminal contributions; to see for themselves the emergence of conceptual categories;to understand what this might all mean in practice; and make that practice a reality.The ICLS 2016 conference theme “directs our gaze to the commitment of the Learning Sciences toprovide a more insightful understanding of how people learn.” By directing our gaze to students’ gaze, we hopeto do just so.ReferencesAbrahamson, D. (2012). Discovery reconceived: Product before process. For the Learning of Mathematics, 32(1), 815.Abrahamson, D. (2015). The monster in the machine, or why educational technology needs embodied design. InV. R. Lee (Ed.), Learning technologies and the body (pp. 21-38). New York: Routledge.Abrahamson, D., Lee, R. G., Negrete, A. G., & Gutiérrez, J. F. (2014). Coordinating visualizations of polysemousaction: Values added for grounding proportion. ZDM Math. Education, 46(1), 79-93.Abrahamson, D., & Sánchez-García, R. (in press). Learning is moving in new ways: The ecological dynamics ofmathematics education. Journal of the Learning Sciences. doi:10.1080/10508406.2016.1143370.Abrahamson, D., Shayan, S., Bakker, A., & Van der Schaaf, M. F. (in press). Eye-tracking Piaget: Capturing theemergence of attentional anchors in the coordination of proportional motor action. Human Development.Abrahamson, D., & Trninic, D. (2015). Bringing forth mathematical concepts: Signifying sensorimotor enactmentin fields of promoted action. ZDM Mathematics Education, 47(2), 295–306.Allen, J. W. P., & Bickhard, M. H. (2013). Stepping off the pendulum: Why only an action-based approach cantranscend the nativist–empiricist debate. Cognitive Development, 28(2), 96-133.Bamberger, J. (2013). Discovering the musical mind: A view of creativity as learning. NYC: Oxford U. Press.Bernstein, N. A. (1996). Dexterity and its development (M. L. Latash & M. T. Turvey, Eds.). Mahwah, NJ: LEA.Case, R., & Okamoto, Y. (Eds.). (1996). The role of central conceptual structures in the development of children’sthought (Vol. 61[1-2], Serial No. 246). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Chemero, A. (2009). Radical embodied cognitive science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Chow, J. Y., Davids, K., Button, C., Shuttleworth, R., Renshaw, I., & Araújo, D. (2007). The role of nonlinearpedagogy in physical education. Review of Educational Research, 77(3), 251-278.Cole, M., & Wertsch, J. V. (1996). Beyond the individual-social antinomy in discussions of Piaget and Vygotsky.Human Development, 39(5), 250-256.Denison, S., & Xu, F. (2014). The origins of probabilistic inference in human infants. Cognition, 130(3), 335347.Dubinsky, E. (1991). Reflective abstraction in advanced mathematical thinking. In D. Tall (Ed.), Advancedmathematical thinking (pp. 95-126). Dodrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.diSessa, A. A., Levin, M., & Brown, N. J. S. (Eds.). (2015). Knowledge and interaction. New York: Routledge.ICLS 2016 Proceedings472© ISLSForman, G. (1988). Making intuitive knowledge explicit through future technology. In G. Forman & P. B. Pufall(Eds.), Constructivism in the computer age (pp. 83-101). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Ginsburg, H. P. (1997). Entering the child’s mind. New York: Cambridge University Press.Gray, E., & Tall, D. (1994). Duality, ambiguity, and flexibility: A “proceptual” view of simple arithmetic. Journalfor Research in Mathematics Education, 25(2), 116-140.Harnad, S. (1990). The symbol grounding problem. Physica D, 42, 335-346.Hutto, D. D., & Myin, E. (2013). Radicalizing enactivism: Basic minds without content. Cambridge: MIT Press.Hutto, D. D., & Sánchez-García, R. (2015). Choking RECtified: Embodied expertise beyond Dreyfus.Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 14(2), 309-331.Kelso, J. A. S., & Engstrøm, D. A. (2006). The complementary nature. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. NYC: CUP.Lindgren, R., & Johnson-Glenberg, M. (2013). Emboldened by embodiment. Ed. Researcher, 42(8), 445-452.Marshall, P., Antle, A. N., van den Hoven, E., & Rogers, Y. (Eds.). (2013). The theory and practice of embodiedinteraction in HCI and interaction design [Special issue]. ACM Transactions on Human–ComputerInteraction, 20(1).Martin, T., & Sherin, B. (2013). Learning analytics and computational techniques for detecting and evaluatingpatterns in learning: An introduction to the special issue. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 22(4), 511520.Moreno-Armella, L., Hegedus, S., & Kaput, J. (2008). From static to dynamic mathematics: Historical andrepresentational perspectives. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 68(2), 99-111.Newell, K. M., & Ranganathan, R. (2010). Instructions as constraints in motor skill acquisition. In I. Renshaw,K. Davids, & G. J. P. Savelsbergh (Eds.), Motor learning in practice (pp. 17-32). Florence, KY:Routledge.Newman, D., Griffin, P., & Cole, M. (1989). The construction zone. New York: Cambridge University Press.Norton, A. (2008). Josh’s operational conjectures. J. for Research in Mathematics Education, 39(4), 401-430.Noss, R., & Hoyles, C. (1996). Windows on mathematical meanings. Dordrecht: Kluwer.Piaget, J. (1968). Genetic epistemology (E. Duckworth, Trans.). New York: Columbia University Press.Piaget, J. (1970). Structuralism (C. Maschler, Trans.). New York: Basic Books.Reinholz, D., Trninic, D., Howison, M., & Abrahamson, D. (2010). It's not easy being green: Embodied artifactsand the guided emergence of mathematical meaning. In P. Brosnan, D. Erchick, & L. Flevares (Eds.),Proc. of PME-NA 32 (Vol. VI, Ch. 18: “Technology,” pp. 1488-1496). Columbus, OH: PME-NA.Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive development in social context. NYC: Oxford U. Press.Sarama, J., & Clements, D. H. (2009). “Concrete” computer manipulatives in mathematics education. ChildDevelopment Perspectives, 3(3), 145–150.Saxe, G. B. (2012). Cultural development of mathematical ideas. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Schneider, B., Bumbacher, E., & Blikstein, P. (2015). Discovery versus direct instruction. In T. Koschmann, P.Häkkinen, & P. Tchounikine (Eds.), Proc. of CSCL (Vol. 1, pp. 364-371). Gothenburg, Sweden: ISLS.Sfard, A. (2010). Thinking as communicating. NYC: Cambridge University Press.Siegler, R. S. (2006). Microgenetic analyses of learning. In D. Kuhn & R. S. Siegler (Eds.), Handbook of childpsychology (6th ed., Vol. 2, Cognition, perception, and language, pp. 464-510). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.Smith, J. P., diSessa, A. A., & Roschelle, J. (1993). Misconceptions reconceived: A constructivist analysis ofknowledge in transition. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(2), 115-163.Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1994). A dynamic systems approach to the development of cognition and action.Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Turner, T. (1973). Piaget’s Structuralism (review article). American Anthropologist, 75(2), 351-373.Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied mind. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press.Wertsch, J. V. (1979). From social interaction to higher psychological processes. Human Dev., 22(1), 1-22.Worsley, M., & Blikstein, P. (2014). Using multimodal learning analytics to study learning mechanisms. In J.Stamper, Z. Pardos, M. Mavrikis, & B. M. McLaren (Eds.), EDM (pp. 431-432). London: Inst. of Ed.AcknowledgementsThis work was funded by an Education and Learning grant, Utrecht University, January 2014.ICLS 2016 Proceedings473© ISLS