Characterizing Chemistry Practices:How Teachers Design and Perform Chemistry ExperimentsSuna Ryu, Korea National University of Education, sunaryu@knue.ac.krAbstract: This study aims to characterize the complicated nature of science practices in anopen-ended inquiry chemistry lab in which students participate in group work. In this study,the complicated nature of science practices is framed and traced by drawing on the notion of“science as a mangle of practice.” From this notion, the dialectical relationship betweenhuman and non-human agency constitutes science through the dynamic process of resistanceand accommodation. Tackling these dialectical agencies may allow us to effectively capture asnapshot of students’ lab activities and science practices. Methodologically, the studydemonstrates how the combined use of social network analysis and discourse analysis mayprovide insight into the complicated nature of this mangled science practice. The study alsoexplores the advantages of using a 360 VR camera, providing an immersive view whilereducing blind spots.Student assessment on inquiry-oriented labs tends to focus on the understanding of science concepts whileessentially ignoring the practical aspects, such as asking questions, designing experiments, and conductinginvestigations. Unfortunately, there is little understanding of how to integrate content knowledge with sciencepractices. Today, the science content knowledge learned and procedural skills acquired are assessed separately;however, these two aspects need to be understood and analyzed in a dialectical manner in order to effectivelyaddress students’ engagement in science practice. Importantly, while the understanding of content knowledgefrom lab activities often focuses on individual learning as the unit of analysis, collaborative work requires a lookat group interaction in order to understand students’ science practices.Pickering (1995) conceptualized doing science as a dance of material and human agency in adialectical relationship. Scientists enact their agency by making hypotheses and designing experiments tounderstand material phenomena. However, most material phenomena take time to understand fully, andscientists face many difficulties. To overcome such resistance from the material world, scientists reconsider andrevise both their material parts (procedures and equipment) as well as their existing scientific knowledge. Thisintegration represents what science practices actually look like. Pickering’s idea of science practice aligns withsocial-cultural learning perspectives in that conceptual and social practices (human and material agencies) areintegrated in a given community to evolve the disciplinary field (Manz, 2015). Both Pickering’s ‘mangle’ viewand social-cultural learning perspectives demolish the dichotomy between conceptual knowledge and practices.Methodologically, it is challenging to tackle the dialectical relationship between human and non-human agency,along with the process of resistance and accommodation. To address this difficulty with our study, we followedthree phases for conducting open-ended inquiry chemistry labs. First, we created an initial design in whichstudents conducted the experiment. Second, when things did not go as planned, we observed students’responses. Third, we sought to determine if students revised the experiment. We observed the resistance andaccommodation between material (experimental procedure) and human agency (students as scientists, whodesign and conduct experiments). To align with the agency-relation view, a linkage analysis used to connectmaterial and human agency while describing changes in agency relationship. Consequently, we utilized amethod that combines discourse analysis (DA) and social network analysis (SNA) (author(s), 2015).The study addressed the following two questions: How do pre-service chemistry teachers initiate theirexperiment design, change and update their experiments when they do not go as planned, and revise them? Howdo group interactions differ between groups when conducting experiments?Methods and analysesThis 15-week qualitative study sought to gain an in-depth understanding of how 20 pre-service teachers planand conduct their open-ended inquiry experiments. After conducting guided, basic experiments, they were givena week to design a freestyle open-ended experiment. The teachers also were asked to include phone-recordedvideo clips and pictures in their reports in order to increase the records’ accuracy and to supplement note-taking.An integrated 360 VR camera was used to observe verbal and non-verbal interactions among pre-serviceteachers. The camera enabled the researchers to trace multi-layered interactions during experiments. That is, thecamera captured both the verbal talk among students and the experimental procedure (e.g., how students dealtwith the equipment as well as how they observed and measured phenomena). The 360 VR camera records anICLS 2018 Proceedings1711© ISLSimmerse-view, making it easier to observe multiple-layered actions and verbal interactions without confusion(See figure 1, for comparison between a single lens camera and 360 VR camera). The panoramic overview ofthis camera also allows one to navigate science with multiple points of views, instead of having a single point ofview captured by a traditional video camera. With the 360 VR, a student’s movement is literally indexedspatially for subsequent verbal and non-verbal interactions (Pea, 2006). For the DA, two of five groups wereselected for detailed analysis. We transcribed all verbal interactions, gestures, and facial expressions beforedeveloping free codes based on our readings of these transcripts several times. We finalized these codes afterextensive discussion between the researchers: an expert in science education, three experienced scienceteachers, and a graduate student. To trace changes in human and non-human agency, we created detailedcategorizations of how students responded to failed experiments, resulting in eight codes. For the SNA, weutilized UCINET and NetDraw as well as a matrix displaying basic interactions among participants.Findings and discussionsScientists actively respond to the resistance of material agency because they have a clear epistemic goal, toconstruct new scientific knowledge. Having students conduct a freestyle, open-ended experiment enables preservice teachers to establish a similar epistemic goal—allowing them to create and conduct an experiment basedon their own curiosity. They also are expected to negotiate and interact with uncertain and resistant phenomenafrom their experiments, calling on their ability to engage and integrate their conceptual knowledge with theirpractice. However, a few issues emerged in terms of the pre-service teachers’ engagement in free-style, openended inquiry. These pre-service teachers selected the topics of their experiments, driven by external factorsrather than their own curiosity about natural phenomena. Rarely did we see the emergent, ongoing negotiationbetween human agency and material agency resulting from unexpected and mysterious situations. One of thereasons for this failure was that pre-service teachers might not make a strong connection between theirconceptual idea (content knowledge) and experimental design (what and how to measure and observe). Whenthey met unexpected, unsuccessful situations, most pre-service teachers decided to repeat the exact sameexperiment without considering the possibility of revision. This decision diverges from how scientists handletheir challenges: scientists revisit and revise both their conceptual knowledge and their material procedures.Because their epistemic goal was not to construct new knowledge, pre-service teachers rarely constructedknowledge or negotiated between human and material agency. To make inquiry-oriented experimentsmeaningful for students, it seems essential to have them establish an epistemic goal as scientists do. In essence,the purpose of conducting inquiry-oriented, freestyle experiments lies in experiencing a scientist-like curiosityabout natural phenomena, directly connected to the establishment of an epistemic goal. Despite somedisappointing findings, we noted some progress over the course of the semester. At the beginning of thesemester, one group leader tended to decide on issues and proceed with tasks and experiments accordingly. Theleader made decisions in isolation when things did not go successfully. However, a couple of groups differed inimportant ways. When the experiments failed, these groups took time to reflect and incorporated othermembers’ ideas and opinions more actively. More members engaged in the experiments, leading to more ideasand trials. A student who pitched in with the experiments relatively late pointed out that she felt strongerresponsibility, attachment, and ownership. In this study, the researchers designed more authentic, freestyleinquiry-oriented experiments and analyzed pre-service teachers’ science practices. The description of preservice teachers’ practices indicates that borrowing a form of practice (e.g., freestyle, open-ended experiments)might not work as desired. It seems necessary to establish epistemic goals in order to enact the dance of agency;meanwhile, genuine curiosity toward the natural world must be triggered and activated as part of lab activities.ReferencesRyu, S.& Lombardi,D. (2015) Coding Classroom Interactions for Collective and Individual Engagment.Educational Psychologist, 50 (1), 70-83.Manz, E. (2015). Resistance and the development of scientific practice: Designing the mangle into scienceinstruction. Cognition and Instruction, 33(2), 89-124.NGSS Lead States. (2013).Next generation science standards: For states,by states. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies PressPea, R.D., 1321-1393. (2006). Video-as-data and digital video manipulation techniques for transforminglearning sciences research, education, and other cultural practices. In J. Weiss (Ed.), The internationalhandbook of virtual learning environments (pp. 1321-1393): Springer.Pickering, A. (1995). The mangle of practice: Time, agency, and science. University of Chicago Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1712© ISLS