Developing Argument Skills Through the SOCRATES LearningEnvironmentKalypso Iordanou, University of Central Lancashire Cyprus, KIordanou@uclan.ac.ukWendy Goh, Teachers College, Columbia University, wwg2102@caa.columbia.eduAbstract: The SOCRATES web-based learning environment, which aims to support thedevelopment of argument skills, is described here. Also, a study (in progress) is described where5th graders (11 year olds) engaged (a) in electronic argumentive dialogs with classmates whoheld an opposing view on the topic, and (b) in some evidence-focused reflective activities, basedon transcriptions of their dialogs, in the context of the SOCRATES learning environment.Participants’ epistemic cognition, epistemic emotions and argument skills are examined.IntroductionEngagement in argument from evidence features as one of the fundamental objectives of science educationthroughout the K-12 range, from kindergarten through grade 12 (The Next Generation Science Standards, 2013).There is a general consensus that there is a need to move away from practices that support the mere transmissionof facts to students for consumption, to practices that promote scientific thinking.Various approaches have been developed to help students learn how to participate in scientificargumentation with mixed results (Zohar & Nemet, 2002). Some efforts to support argumentation focused onteaching students the structure of a “good” argument, based on Toulmin’s argumentation model, (Mc-Neill et al.,2006; Sampson & Clark, 2009; Zohar & Nemet, 2002). Yet, the modest gains of instruction to supportargumentation (Osborne, Erduran & Simon, 2004; Zohar & Nemet, 2002) point to the challenge of supporting thedevelopment of scientific argumentation and to the need for further research to gain a better understanding onhow to support students to develop the ability to engage in skilled argumentation. Some other efforts to supportargumentation focused on offering professional development to teachers (Osborne, Simon, Christodoulou,Howell-Richardson, & Richardson, 2013) and studying teachers’ practices in order to gain an understanding ofwhat kind of practices support scientific argumentation (McNeill, Pimentela, & Strauss, 2013; Ryu & Sandoval,2012). Yet, the work of Osborne et al. (2013) showed that relying solely on teachers, without any particularcurriculum, is not always a successful means to promote students’ argumentation.Besides direct teaching and offering traineeship to teachers to support students’ argument skills,computer supported collaborative activities have been employed to support students’ argument skills (Bell &Linn, 2000). Iordanou and Constantinou (2015) developed the SOCRATES web-based learning environmentwhich supports the development of students’ argument skills through engagement in electronic argumentation andscaffolding. Students have the opportunity to engage in electronic argumentation, through a chat tool that isembedded in the learning environment, and then reflect on the product of their argumentation using electronicscaffold sheets. The SOCRATES learning environment supports both students’ ability to constructcounterarguments and their ability to employ evidence to support their claims and critique. Students are notdirectly asked to use evidence in their arguments; they are asked instead to reflect on whether they had usedevidence in their arguments when engaged in a dialog with peers and to revise their arguments, in respect toemploying evidence to back up their claims. Reflection is facilitated by having participants arguing on thecomputer, through instant messaging software, which has the benefit of providing an immediately available,permanent record of the discourse for participants to reflect on, in contrast to the conditions of real-time verbaldiscourse.In the work of Iordanou and Constantinou (2014) the SOCRATES learning environment was employedto support pre-service teachers’ argument skills. 66 Junior (third-year) students who attended an undergraduateprogram in Education engaged in an argument-based intervention in the context of the SOCRATES learningenvironment over 13 sessions. Same-side peers collaborated in that study in arguing on the computer againstsuccessive pairs of peers on the opposing side of an issue on the topic of Climate Change and engaged in explicitreflective activities on the use of evidence. In this study meta-level awareness regarding the use of evidence indiscourse was supported by having same-side peers collaborating in arguing on the computer against successivepairs of peers on the opposing side of an issue on the topic of Climate Change and by engaging in explicit reflectiveactivities on the use of evidence. Results showed that by the end of the intervention participants exhibitedsignificant advances both in their skill of producing evidence-based arguments and counterarguments andregarding the accuracy of the evidence used. Advances were also observed at the meta-level, reflecting at leastimplicit understanding that using evidence is an important goal of argumentation. Another group of pre-serviceICLS 2016 Proceedings847© ISLSteachers, who studied about the role of evidence in science in the context of regular curriculum and served as acontrol condition, did not exhibit comparable advances in the use of evidence in argumentation.In order to gain a deeper understanding of the process of development Iordanou and Constantinou (2015)examined high school students while engaging in argumentive and reflective activities in the context ofSOCRATES learning environment, using the microgenetic method. The aim of this study was to examine howstudents used evidence in argumentation when they engaged in argumentive and reflective activities in the contextof a web-based learning environment. Sixteen 11th graders, working with a partner, engaged (a) in electronicargumentive dialogs with classmates who held an opposing view on the topic, and (b) in some evidence-focusedreflective activities, based on transcriptions of their dialogs. Another 16 11th graders, who studied the data basein the learning environment but did not engage in argumentive discourse activity, served in a comparisoncondition. Students who engaged in an evidence-focused dialogic intervention increased the use of evidence intheir dialogs, used more evidence that functioned to weaken opponents’ claims and used more accurate evidence.Experimental condition students exhibited also gains in meta-level communication about the use of evidence indialog over the course of intervention dialogs. Analysis of participants’ dialogs over the course of the interventionwas particularly insightful in revealing considerable gains in evidence use in argumentation after participantsengaged in reflective activities about their dialogs. This finding suggests that reflective activities on evidence usemight be an important feature of the intervention that supported the development of students’ ability of usingoverall more evidence in argumentation and particularly evidence which functioned to critique other’s position.The present studyIn the present study we extend previous work by examining participants’ epistemic beliefs and epistemic emotionswhile they engage in an argument-based intervention in the context of the SOCRATES learning environment.Martinovski and Mao (2009) point to the cognition-emotion interface by maintaining that emotions serve as anargumentation engine. The category of emotions which most closely exemplify the cognition-emotion interface,are epistemic emotions. Epistemic emotions refer to emotions that are triggered by the knowledge-generatingaspects of cognitive tasks (Pekrun & Stephens, 2011). Thus far, the studies that have tapped into epistemicemotions, have examined their relation to epistemic beliefs (Muis et al., 2015), problem-solving (Muis,Psaradellis, Lajoie, Di Leo, Chevrier, 2015) and reasoning (Blanchette, 2014). Also epistemic emotions have beensubject to exploration regarding their antecedents and outcomes (D’Mello, Zehman, Pekrun & Graesser, 2012)during simulated collaborative learning situations. Yet, epistemic emotions is still an under-explored category ofemotions (Muis et al., 2015) and further research is required to illuminate our understanding of the interplaybetween epistemic emotions, reasoning and learning. The current research aims to address this gap in the literature,by examining the interplay between epistemic understanding, epistemic emotions and argumentation.MethodsSample40 fifth graders (11 year olds) participate in the present study. Participants are students from two classrooms froma public elementary school in Cyprus.The SOCRATES web-based learning environmentThe SOCRATES web-based learning environment that was developed by Iordanou and Constantinou (2015) isemployed in the present study. The learning environment was designed by a group of researchers and teachers two elementary school teachers and two high school Biology teachers. Researchers had the leading role in thedevelopment of the educational curriculum, while teachers contributed substantially to the development of theknowledge base − finding relevant data and adapting them to be appropriate for high school students.The SOCRATES learning environment is hosted on the platform of Stochasmos (Kyza & Constantinou, 2007).Stochasmos offered two main environments. The first is the Inquiry Environment, where a knowledge base forthe topic of climate change was developed. The knowledge base includes different types of information − shorttexts, graphs, tables and images (e.g., a graph of Earth’s temperature over years).The second is the WorkSpaceenvironment, which hosts the reflective templates “Finding Evidence”, “Own argument” and “Other argument”where students were asked to construct evidence-based arguments and reflect on the arguments they producedwhile they were engaging in dialogic argumentation. Stochasmos offered students the opportunity to transferinformation from the Inquiry Environment to the WorkSpace environment, and vice versa, using the “Data capturetool”. The platform also incorporated a chat tool, which was used for conducting students’ dialogic argumentation.For more details regarding the SOCRATES learning environment see Iordanou and Contstantinou (2015).ICLS 2016 Proceedings848© ISLSProcedureInitial and final assessmentsStudents’ argumentation skills were assessed at both initial and final assessments. Two socio-scientific topics,solar energy vs. natural gas (intervention topic) and genetically modified food (transfer topic), were used forassessing students’ individual argument skills. Students’ positions and supporting arguments regarding the twotopics were assessed individually in writing, after a short passage introducing the scenario had been presented.Each scenario presented two opposing positions regarding the topic, solar energy vs. natural gas, and for or againstconsumption of genetically modified food. Students have been asked to indicate their position by choosing amongthree options: the two alternative positions of each topic and the option “Undecided”. Then an individual essayassignment followed for each topic.Participants’ epistemic cognition was examined through individual interviews, based on the interviewsemployed by Pluta, Chinn and Duncan (2011). Participants’ epistemic emotions while they were engaging indifferent activities in the intervention were examined through a questionnaire based on Epistemic Emotions Scale,developed by Muis, Psaradellis, Lajoie, Di Leo, and Chevrier (2015).InterventionThe intervention took place over 13 sessions. Students had available a learning environment which had beendeveloped for the purposes of the present study. The mission of students was to get prepared for a final showdownthat would be conducted by the end of the intervention to inform students and their parents about alternativesources of producing electricity.Finding EvidenceIn the first sessions students were asked to review the information included in the learning environment andconstruct evidence-based arguments, with the help of the “Finding Evidence” reflection sheet. The purpose ofpreparing those arguments, they were told, was to get prepared for the series of discussions that would follow.The “Finding Evidence” reflection sheet asked students to state a claim and to provide evidence from the LE tosupport their claim. A separate reflection sheet was used for each argument they made. All the reflection sheetsconstructed were saved by the system in each student’s account to be available for students to access them whenthey would engage in electronic discussions.ArgumentationThen students engaged in a series of electronic dialogs with an opposing side pair. In each of these sessionsparticipants discussed with a different opposing pair. Participants were asked to engage in these dialogs with thegoal to persuade their interlocutors, who hold an opposing position, that their own position was right. After thecompletion of each dialog participants reflected on an electronic transcript of their dialog, with the help of twoelectronic reflection sheets the “Own Argument” and the “Other Argument”. The reflection sheets are based onthe reflection sheets that were used in Iordanou (2010) and Iordanou and Constantinou (2014; 2015) studies.ShowdownThe culminating point of the curriculum activities was a class level electronic debate between students holdingopposing positions.ResultsThe study is in progress. The results of the study will be presented at the conference.ReferencesBell, P., & Linn, M. (2000). Scientific arguments as learning artifacts: designing for learning from the web withKIE. International Journal of Science Education, 2(8), 797-817.Blanchette, I., & Leese, J. (2015). The effect of negative emotion on deductive reasoning. Experimentalpsychology.D’Mello, S., Lehman, B., Pekrun, R., & Graesser, A. (2014). Confusion can be beneficial for learning. Learningand Instruction, 29, 153-170.Iordanou, K. (2010). Developing argument skills across scientific and social domains. Journal of Cognition andDevelopment. 11(3), 293-327.Iordanou, K. & Constantinou. C. P. (2014). Developing Pre-Service Teachers’ Evidence-Based Argumentationskills on Socio-Scientific Issues. Learning & Instruction. 34, 42-57.ICLS 2016 Proceedings849© ISLSIordanou, K. & Constantinou. C. P. (2015). Supporting use of evidence in argumentation through practice inargumentation and reflection in the context of SOCRATES learning environment. Science Education. 99,282–311.Kyza, E. A., & Constantinou, C. O. (2007). STOCHASMOS: A web-based platform for reflective, inquiry-basedteaching and learning. [Computer software]. Cyprus: Learning in Science Group.learning from the web with KIE. International Journal of Science Education, 2(8),797-817.Martinovski, B., & Mao, W. (2009). Emotion as an argumentation engine: Modeling the role of emotion innegotiation. Group decision and negotiation, 18(3), 235-259.McNeill, K. L., Pimentel, D. S., & Strauss, E. G. (2013) The impact of high school science teachers’ beliefs,curricular enactments and experience on student learning during an inquiry-based urban ecology curriculum.International Journal of Science Education, 35(15), 2608-2644. doi: 10.1080/09500693.2011.618193Muis, K. R., Psaradellis, C., Chevrier, M., Di Leo, I., & Lajoie, S. P. (2015). Learning by preparing to teach:Fostering self-regulatory processes and achievement during complex mathematics problem solving. Journalof Educational Psychology, 107, 1-19.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Osborne, J., Simon, S., Christodoulou, A., Howell-Richardson, C., & Richardson, K. (2013). Learnig to argue: Astudy of four schools and their attempt to develop the use of argumentation as a common instructionalpractice and its impact on students. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 50(3), 315-347.Pekrun, R., & Stephens, E. J. (2012). Academic emotions. In K. Harris, S. Graham, T. Urdan, S. Graham, J. Royer,& M. Zeidner (Eds.), Individual differences and cultural and contextual factors. APA educationalpsychology handbook (Vol. 2, pp. 3-31). Washington, DC: American Psychological Assocation.Pluta, W. J., Chinn, C. A., & Duncan, R. G. (2011). Learners' epistemic criteria for good scientific models. Journalof Research in Science Teaching, 48(5), 486-511.Ryu, S., & Sandoval, W. A. (2012). Improvements to elementary children's epistemic understanding fromsustained argumentation. Science Education, 96(3), 488-526.Sampson, V., & Clark, D. (2009). The impact of collaboration on the outcomes of scientific argumentation.Science Education, 93(3), 448-484.school science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(10), 994-1020.Zohar, A., & Nemet, F. (2002). Fostering students’ knowledge and argumentation skills through dilemmas inhuman genetics. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39(1), 35–62.ICLS 2016 Proceedings850© ISLS