Newcomer Integration Strategies in Blogger Online KnowledgeBuilding Communities: A Dialog AnalysisNicolae Nistor, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Germany, and Walden University, USA,nic.nistor@uni-muenchen.deYvonne Serafin, Armed Forces University, Munich, Germany, yvonne.serafin@unibw.deAbstract: Online knowledge building communities (OKBCs) are sustainable over longerperiods of time only if they constantly integrate newcomers. Previous research, based on selfreported data, suggest that OKBC members intentionally use strategies such as advertising,positive or negative welcoming, knowledge assessment, mentoring, or consistent newcomertraining. Based on dialog analysis of approx. 143,000 comments produced by 2085participants during one year in twelve blogger OKBCs, this study confirms the use ofnewcomer integration strategies. Moreover, it refines and structures the analysis instrument,describing three categories of strategies (recruiting activities, practice-oriented interaction,and socializing) with further sub-categories, thus contributing to a deeper understanding ofsocio-cognitive processes in OKBCs, and potentially to extending Social KnowledgeAnalytics applications in CSCL.IntroductionOnline knowledge building communities (OKBCs) are already established for more than two decades asenvironments for collaborative, formal or informal learning environments (e.g., Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006).They are sustainable over longer periods of time only if they constantly integrate newcomers. Eberle, Stegmann,and Fischer (2014) examined faculty student councils in face-to-face settings, and identified a number ofspecific strategies, further asserting that the intentional use of newcomer integration strategies generally occursin communities of practice. So far, such strategies were insufficiently studied in OKBCs.In this study, newcomer integration strategies were identified in blogger OKBCs by means of dialoganalysis. Moreover, the analysis categories proposed and applied by Eberle et al. (2014) were refined andstructured. For educational practice, the study suggests a way of connecting informal learning in OKBCs withformal learning, e.g. in higher education (Greenhow & Lewin, 2016). OKBCs with appropriate discussion topicsand, additionally, with a more frequent use of newcomer integration strategies can be selected for studentinquiries. At the same time, the underlying dialog analysis can be performed automatically (Nistor, Dascălu, &Trăușan-Matu, 2016). For educational research, the study extends the insight in the socio-cognitive processes inOKBCs, provides an instrument of analysis, and potentially supports Social Learning Analytics applications.Theoretical frameworkRelying on a definition provided by Wenger (1998), OKBCs are groups of mutually engaged peoplecommunicating online over longer periods of time, and sharing interests, knowledge and activities. Mostresearchers assume that OKBCs display core-periphery socio-cognitive structures similarly to those describedby Lave and Wenger (1991) in communities of practice. These include experts at the center, novices at theperiphery, and in between regular, active members who carry out the largest part of the community practice. Aknowledge building community lives from the diversity of its members, meaning that there are oldtimers andnewcomers, experts and novices, all of which can participate at the center, at the periphery, or in theintermediate socio-cognitive layers, and learn from and with each other. According to Lave and Wenger (1991;also Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006), learning in such communities is tightly connected with the negotiation of aperipheral vs. central member identity. The ideal learning trajectory begins for newcomers with the noviceidentity and peripheral participation, and evolves in time towards the expert identity and central participation(Lave & Wenger, 1991). According to Wenger (1998), learning resides in the interplay of participation andreification. Participation supports the construction of experiential knowledge, which is being reified, i.e.,transformed to material or immaterial (conceptual) artifacts that, in turn, support participation at a higher level.Users of communication technologies, from email and newsgroups to social media (including blogplatforms; Deng & Yuen, 2011) and virtual reality, build similar communities with similar socio-cognitivestructures. However, some researchers (e.g., Zhang, Ackerman, & Adamic, 2007) argue that online communitiesare mainly help-seeking communities (Karabenick & Puustinen, 2013). Here the members who most intensivelyseek help play the central role, while experts participate only peripherally. Either way, significant learningseems to take place at the OKBC periphery, which nevertheless corresponds to Lave and Wenger’s (1991) viewCSCL 2017 Proceedings561© ISLSof learning as legitimate peripheral participation. Reification, i.e., artifact production plays the same central rolein the process of learning, whereas OKBCs mostly produce immaterial or conceptual artifacts such ascollections of frequently asked questions and answers, or blog articles (Deng & Yuen, 2011).There are always members leaving the community for some reasons, so that the remaining membersconstantly need to integrate newcomers in order to keep the community alive and sustainable over longerperiods of time. Therefore, they intentionally apply newcomer integration strategies, observed and described byEberle et al. (2014) as follows.First, these were participation support structures derived from workplace learning research. Positivewelcoming strategies accompany a newcomers’ first contact with the community and aim to foster newcomers’gratitude towards the community and their interest to acquire specific community knowledge. On the otherhand, negative welcoming strategies are initiations confronting newcomers with their own shortcomings, whichaim to show them the need to attain a higher level of knowledge and skills to become full community members.Further, modeling is performed by senior community members who show newcomers how to behave accordingto community norms. Sponsoring is done by existing members who bring new members, and take theresponsibility for their behavior and participation in the community. Mentoring designates a long-termnewcomer-oldtimer relationship, in which the oldtimer shares knowledge and experiences, and supports thenewcomer deliberately. Oldtimers encapsulate newcomers by encouraging them to spend time with and for thecommunity. Consistent training aims to support a constant learning process, in line with community norms andvalues. Monitoring and knowledge assessment evaluate newcomers’ knowledge about, and their behavior in thecommunity practice.Second, Eberle et al. (2014) added two categories they regarded as classical participation supportstructures in communities of practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991). Offering opportunities for peripheralparticipation (accepting and inviting to different levels of participation, including passive participation, offeringsmall tasks, working together) opens the entrance of a community and supports the newcomers to participateaccording to their wishes and aptitudes. Also, legitimation strategies include advertising, approaching potentialnewcomers directly, and welcoming interested newcomers.Third, the authors observed additional participation support structures. Recruitment strategies (joboffers, written information, contact) comprise advertising and offering general information about the communityin order to attract newcomers. Accessibility of community knowledge enables knowledge sharing andparticipation (listening, asking, job introduction, general introduction, written information), and maycomplement recruitment strategies.A critical examination of these categories reveals a clear research gap. Eberle et al. (2014) provide anadditive, unstructured category system that includes redundancies between the three categories. Their study isbased on subjective data from face-to-face settings. To our knowledge, their studies have not been replicated,yet. In online settings, Nistor (2016) has conducted a questionnaire survey in massively multiplayer online roleplaying OKBCs confirming the use of newcomer integration strategies. Furthermore, Nistor et al. (2016) haveperformed automated dialog analysis in OKBCs, predicting the success of newcomer integration, i.e., whethernewcomer inquiries lead to integration in the community discourse. Gaining more in-depth understanding of thenewcomer integration process in OKBCs may extend the existing automated dialog analysis methods and tools,thus extending the Social Learning Analytics applications in CSCL.Purpose and methodologyAddressing the research gap discussed above, this study aimed to identify newcomer integration strategies inblogger OKBCs and their occurrence frequencies. At the same time, difficulties with applying the availableanalysis categories were recorded, helping to specify them for the OKBC environment, to refine and structurethem for the use in further research.Accordingly, a dialog analysis with both quantitative and qualitative components was conducted. Thequantitative part addressed the occurrence frequencies of the newcomer integration strategies, while thequalitative part comprised the specification and refinement of the analysis categories for the OKBCenvironment, including their structured representation in categories and subcategories. The corpus of analysiswas produced in 12 blogs, four in each of the three topic categories: cooking, politics and economy, and science.Here, a total of N = 2085 active participants had made approx. 143,000 comments within one year.The newcomer integration strategies described by Eberle et al. (2014) were used as analysis categories.Each of six groups of graduate students of Educational Sciences analyzed the dialog from two blogger OKBCs.The groups were composed of 4-5 students who searched and identified expressions of newcomer integrationstrategies in the OKBC dialog. Whenever the group members coded the material differently, they discussed thedialog and proposed rephrasing the original categories so that they could agree on the coding. Finally, theCSCL 2017 Proceedings562© ISLSrefined categories were synthesized and grouped according to the logic of the integration process, buildingcategories and subcategories at four levels (Table 1).FindingsThe frequencies of the newcomer integration strategies (Table 1) and the refined category definitions are brieflypresented in the following.Preliminary to newcomer integration, OKBC members carried out recruitment activities (33occurrences in total), posting messages about their communities in other OKBCs, inviting individuals toparticipate in their OKBCs, offering their contact addresses, or offering jobs. This category was relativelyinfrequent, as compared with the practice-oriented interaction (229 occurrences), which was further divided inthree subcategories:• Within beginning interaction (67), newcomers were individually, either explicitly and positivelywelcomed (28), or negatively welcomed, often by ironical comments questioning newcomer’sknowledge (24). Additionally, generic expressions of openness towards newcomers (6), ofopportunities for peripheral participation (5), and statements accepting different levels of participation(4) were found.Within short-term interaction (85), oldtimers often referred newcomers to information reifyingcommunity knowledge as written text, such as frequently asked questions (FAQs)(51), or simplyanswered newcomers’ questions (27). In some cases, oldtimers helped newcomers to understandspecific aspects of the OKBC practice.• Within long-term interaction (77), oldtimers kept employing integration strategies, however in a morecomplex way. Detailed activity descriptions (e.g., how to season Asian pickles, or how house andground prices change when interest rates vary) were coded as modeling an activity within the limits oftext-based communication. Thus, roles and activities were frequently modeled, and oldtimers togetherwith newcomers reflected and elaborated on these (33). Similarly, newcomers were consistently trained(11), their participation in the OKBC practice was monitored, and their corresponding knowledge wasassessed (8). Beside expert-novice interaction, situations were also found where oldtimers andnewcomers collaboratively explained or elaborated on concept meaning, which was regarded as peerinteraction (25).Finally, a few cases of oldtimer-newcomer interaction were found that did not address the OKBCpractice. These were forms of socializing, such as oldtimers introducing themselves (7), sponsoring newcomers(3), or inviting them to face-to-face activities (1).•Table 1: Structured categories of newcomer integration strategies, and their occurrence frequenciesRecruitmentactivities (33)Contents/practiceorientedinteraction (229)Socializing (11)Advertising (16)Invitations to participation (15)Initiating contact (1)Job offers (1)Interaction begin (67)Positive welcoming (28)Negative welcoming (24)Expressing generic openness towards newcomers (6)Offering opportunities for peripheral participation (5)Accepting different levels of participation (4)Short-term interaction (85) Referring to written information (e.g., FAQ) (51)Answering newcomer questions (27)Offering comprehension support (7)Long-term interaction (77) Expert-noviceOffering role models, modeling activities,interaction (52) reflecting, elaborating (33)Consistent training (explaining basicknowledge, explaining expectations) (11)Monitoring, knowledge assessment (8)Peer interaction, working together (25)Self-introduction (7)Sponsoring (3)CSCL 2017 Proceedings563© ISLSEncapsulation, offline social activities (1)ConclusionsThis study examined blogger OKBCs (Deng & Yuen, 2011; Greenhow & Lewin, 2016; Nistor et al., 2016;Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006), identifying newcomer integration strategies (Eberle et al., 2014) used within thecommunity dialog. The most frequent integration strategies occurred in the context of community practice. Thefrequency of use was roughly the same at the beginning, in short-term, and in long-term interaction newcomeroldtimer interaction. However, the specifically used strategies were different in these three categories. At thebeginning of the interaction, oldtimers welcomed newcomers in a way meant to stimulate them to reflect abouttheir own capabilities, and to participate in the OKCB at corresponding level. In short-term interaction,oldtimers shared knowledge with newcomers. Long-term interaction added oldtimer contributions to, andresponsibility for, newcomers’ knowledge construction and identity development from a peripheral towardscentral participation. This was essentially done as consistent training within expert-novice interaction on the onehand, and as collaboration within peer interaction on the other. Beside practice-oriented interaction, recruitingactivities and socializing were also present, although less frequent.These findings are consistent with previous research in face-to-face communities of practice (Eberle etal., 2014), and in massively multiplayer online role-playing OKBCs (Nistor, 2016). However, unlike previousresearch that is based on self-reported data from interviews and questionnaire surveys, this study is grounded ondialog analysis data. Therefore, it displays higher internal and ecological validity. Moreover, the studyrevalidated, refined and structured the dialog analysis instrument, thus potentially contributing to an automateddialog analysis focused on newcomer integration strategies (Nistor et al., 2016).The presented findings are soon to be complemented by the assessment of inter-rater reliability; largersamples of online OKBC discussions may additionally increase the result validity. Broader dialog analysesshould examine learning trajectories in OKBCs, and possibly connect informal learning in OKBCs with formallearning, e.g., in higher education (Greenhow & Lewin, 2016).ReferencesDeng, L., & Yuen, A. H. (2011). Towards a framework for educational affordances of blogs. Computers &Education, 56(2), 441–451.Eberle, J., Stegmann, K., & Fischer, F. (2014). Legitimate peripheral participation in communities of practice:Participation support structures for newcomers in faculty student councils. Journal of the LearningSciences, 23(2), 216-244.Greenhow, C., & Lewin, C. (2016). Social media and education: Reconceptualizing the boundaries of formaland informal learning. Learning, Media and Technology, 41(1), 6-30.Karabenick, S. A., & Puustinen, M. (eds.) (2013). Advances in help-seeking research and applications: The roleof emerging technologies. Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.Nistor, N. (2016). Newcomer integration in knowledge communities: development of the Strat-I-Comquestionnaire for MMORPG-based communities. Smart Learning Environments, 3(1), 1-16.Nistor, N., Dascălu, M., & Trăușan-Matu, Ș. (2016). Newcomer integration in online knowledge communities:Exploring the role of dialogic textual complexity. In C. K. Looi, J. L. Polman, U. Cress, & P. Reimann(Eds.), Transforming Learning, Empowering Learners: The International Conference of the LearningSciences (ICLS) 2016, Volume 1 (pp. 914-917). Singapore: International Society of the LearningSciences.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In K. Sawyer(ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97-118). New York: Cambridge UniversityPress.Zhang, J., Ackerman, M. S., & Adamic, L. (2007). Expertise networks in online communities: structure andalgorithms. In P. Patel-Schneider, & P. Shenoy (eds.), 16th International World Wide Web Conference(pp. 221–230). ACM, Banff, Alberta, Canada.AcknowledgmentsThe authors are thankful to the participants of the first author’s seminar “Online Knowledge BuildingCommunities”, who significantly contributed to the dialog analysis described in this paper, and to Joan BrunerTimmons who proofread the paper.CSCL 2017 Proceedings564© ISLS