Use of Interactive Computer Models to Promote Integration ofScience Concepts Through the Engineering Design ProcessElizabeth A. McBride, UC Berkeley, bethmcbride@berkeley.eduJonathan M. Vitale, UC Berkeley, jonvitale@berkeley.eduLauren Applebaum, UC Berkeley, lauren.applebaum@berkeley.eduMarcia C. Linn, UC Berkeley, mclinn@berkeley.eduAbstract: During a Solar Ovens project in which middle school students design, build, and testsolar ovens, students should also engage with science content to strengthen their designs. Weintegrate these two areas by using an interactive computer model to show how design decisionsimpact energy transformation inside a solar oven. This study investigates how students use acomputer model to connect design decisions and science concepts at different points during adesign project. Students engaged in either planning or reflecting by using the model beforebuilding or after, respectively. Students in the planning condition used the model in anexploratory manner, while students in the reflecting condition used the model to confirm theresults of their physical solar ovens. Results suggest that using the model is helpful during bothphases, but using the model during the planning phase helped students to better integrate theirideas about energy.Keywords: science, engineering, computer models, technology, knowledge integrationIntroductionThis research investigates how an interactive computer model could help students understand the interplaybetween science principles and engineering design decisions while carrying out a hands-on design project in aclassroom setting. Often when students build a physical model they neglect the scientific basis for their decisions(Crismond, 2001). We address this challenge by engaging students in using a computer model that connects thescience principles to their design decisions, consistent with the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS)emphasis on science and engineering practices (NGSS Lead States, 2013). Interactive computer models can helpstudents connect science principles and design decisions by making mechanisms such as energy transformationvisible (Snir, Smith, & Grosslight, 1993; Wilensky & Reisman, 2006). Our research explores the effectiveness ofthe computer models, including whether they introduce confusions rather than supporting links between designdecisions and energy concepts.We used the knowledge integration framework to create a unit about solar ovens, with the goal ofconnecting design decisions and scientific principles (Linn & Eylon, 2011). The knowledge integration frameworkhas proven useful for design of instruction featuring dynamic visualizations (Ryoo & Linn, 2012) and virtualdesign activities (Chiu & Linn, 2011; McElhaney & Linn, 2011). The framework supports linking of ideas by firsteliciting all the ideas students think are important, then engaging them in exploring their ideas. When studentsbuild a physical artifact they can often only test a few of their ideas due to time and material constraints. Modelingallows students to explore many more ideas.Besides testing the overall advantage of modeling for knowledge integration, we also investigate whetherit is more effective to use modeling to connect design decisions and principles prior to building a physical modelor following the model construction and testing. Modeling before building the physical oven could help studentsdistinguish among alternatives such as whether to line the inside of the solar oven with black paper or with foil.Modeling after building a physical model could enable students to test conjectures that arose during theconstruction of the oven. The computer model we designed illustrates the flow and transformation of energy in asolar oven and allows students to make design choices and compare multiple designsMethodsParticipants and proceduresTwo teachers from one middle school serving a diverse population (42% reduced lunch, 13% ELL) participatedin this study. A total of 252 sixth grade students participated in this study, completing a pretest, the curriculumunit, and a posttest. The pretest was conducted one day before beginning the unit, and the posttest one day afterICLS 2016 Proceedings799© ISLSfinishing the unit. Both the pretest and posttest were administered to students individually. Pairs of students wereassigned to collaborative workgroups by their teacher to work on curriculum. Workgroups were randomlyassigned to a condition (planning or reflecting) by the software and received the same activities in different orders.Curricular materialsThis study was implemented in a curriculum module entitled Solar Ovens and Solar Radiation (referred to asSolar Ovens in this paper). The goal of the unit was to familiarize students with the way energy transforms fromsolar radiation to heat through a hands-on project and interactive models, covering the modeling aspect of theScience and Engineering Practices of the NGSS, as well as the standards associated with energy, specificallystandards related to the transfer of thermal energy (NGSS Lead States, 2013). Students engaged with thecurriculum in WISE (Web-based Inquiry Science Environment), utilizing a variety of instructional and assessmenttools (Linn & Eylon, 2011).Table 1: Solar Ovens Curriculum. Students used the model EITHER for planning or for reflecting.ActivityIntroduction to Solar OvensSolar Radiation and theatmosphereSolar Radiation andGreenhouse Gases (GHGs)Model for planningconditionDesign, Build, Test 1Design, Build, Test 2Model for reflectingconditionReflectDescription & Items of InterestElicit initial student ideas about energy transformationEnergy comes as radiation from the sun; energy can be absorbed or reflected. Studentsuse a simulation to investigate energy.Describes how energy interacts with greenhouse gases. Students use a model toinvestigate how addition of GHGs impacts energy.Students use an interactive model to investigate how radiation works in a solar oven[Trials item]Design oven under budgetary constraints using a draw tool, build, test under a heat lampusing a temperature probe to collect dataStudents reflect on what was learned from the first iteration; use new budget constraints torepeat process [Learn item]Students use an interactive model to investigate how radiation works in a solar oven[Trials item]Students describe how their solar ovens work using energy from the sun; makeconnections between solar ovens and the atmosphere [Atmosphere item]Table 1 displays the general layout and features of the Solar Ovens curriculum unit. In this study wehighlight those steps after the conditions diverge, specifically the embedded Trials, Learn, and Atmosphere items.In the Trials item students were asked to run at least three trials on the solar oven model, then write about whatsettings they used, how hot the oven got, and how long it took for the oven to get that hot. In the Learn item,which occurred between the two Design, Build, Test (DBT) iterations, students were asked what they learnedfrom their first trial and how they will improve their design during the second iteration based on what they learned.In the Atmosphere item, students were asked to compare and contrast how radiation works in the atmosphere andin a solar oven.The solar oven model was designed using NetLogo (Wilensky, 1999) (Figure 1). Each time studentsviewed a model, they made a prediction, interacted with the model to test their prediction, and wrote about whethertheir prediction was correct or incorrect and why.Figure 1: Screenshot of solar oven model (left) and solar radiation and the atmosphere model (right)Test materialsThe pre- and posttest assessments measured student ability to link concepts about energy. Typically the itemsoffered a choice among options and asked for a written explanation of the choice, consistent with the knowledgeICLS 2016 Proceedings800© ISLSintegration emphasis on linking ideas. For example the, Car on a Cold Day (Car) asked students to explain whatwould happen to a car left in the sun during a cold day. In another item, Laura’s Car, students were asked whatcolor interior and exterior Laura should have on her car in order to keep it the coolest on a sunny day (Laura1),and to explain whether or not Laura should use a sun shield to keep her car cool (Laura2). Students were alsoshown two pictures, of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere and of a greenhouse, and asked to compare them inGreenhouse Gases 1 (GHG1), then asked to compare the atmosphere and a greenhouse with a solar oven inGreenhouse Gases 2 (GHG2). One item, Model, asked students to use a basic solar oven model to answer help afictional student determine whether a tall, skinny box or a short, wide box would heat up faster. The pretest ismade up of the Car, Laura1, Laura2, GHG1, and GHG2 items, while the posttest is made up of these same itemswith the addition of the Model item.Analysis approachTo measure knowledge integration, the items were scored using knowledge integration rubrics to assess linksbetween multiple normative science ideas (Linn & Eylon, 2011; Liu et al, 2008). The knowledge integration rubricfor Cars shows how links are scored (Table 2).Table 2: KI scoring rubric for “Car on a Cold Day” pre/post open response itemScore012LevelNo AnswerOff TaskIrrelevant/Incorrect3PartialNormative isolated ideaswithout a valid linkBasicElaborate a scientificallyvalid link45ComplexElaborate two or morescientifically valid linksExamplesI don’t know.The inside air and the outside air are the exact same temperature becausethe sun is not enough to heat the inside if the car.The solar radiation would go through the metal and would stay in the carwhen the outside air wouldn't be able to get inside.it would be warmer than the outside air because if the car hasn't beendriven for a week and its been in the sun the whole time the car willabsorbe the heat and scence there is know way the heat can get out of thecar the heat will just keep building up.The sun produces solar radiation which heats up the car and the infraredradiation gets trapped in the car which leads to the temperature rising.The Learn and Atmosphere items were scored using knowledge integration rubrics, while Trials wasevaluated using an adjusted knowledge integration rubric. Trials was evaluated for use of numerical evidence,mention of energy transformation mechanisms, and completion of Trials, with students earning one point for eachpiece included in their response for a possible total of three points.ResultsStudents in the planning condition outperformed students in the reflecting condition on posttest [planning:M=15.54, SD=0.32; reflecting: M=14.83, SD=0.26]. A t-test of pooled pre- and posttest data across conditions(Car, Laura1, Laura2, GHG1, GHG2 items) revealed a significant effect of testing session [t(473) = -5.81, p <0.001], demonstrating that across both conditions students made gains from pre- to posttest. A regression modelshowed that posttest scores were significantly influenced by condition when controlling for pretest scores [F(247)= 27.11, p=0.05], suggesting a benefit from interacting with the model earlier during the unit.These results suggest that interacting with the solar oven simulation before DBT might be mostbeneficial, if time constraints allow for only one modeling phase. Additional support for this claim comes fromthe Model posttest item. Students in the planning condition performed slightly better than students in the reflectingcondition [t(240) = 1.88, p < 0.06]. This is surprising since students in the reflecting condition would have theadded benefit of interacting with a similar computer model recently (during the end of the unit), whileapproximately one week had elapsed for students in the planning condition since they interacted with theembedded model.Students in the planning condition also performed better on scored items embedded in the unit [Learn:t(248) = 2.43, p < 0.02; Atmosphere: t(248) = 1.83, p < 0.06; Trials: t(248) = 4.10, p < 0.001]. Higher scores onthe Learn and Atmosphere items, which were scored using a knowledge integration rubric, indicate that studentswere able to add more normative ideas and connect their ideas together. Higher scores on the Trials item indicatesstudents used the model to run trials of their existing or future ovens, wrote about the results using numericalICLS 2016 Proceedings801© ISLSvalues, and connected the energy concepts with their design choices. A regression model also showed that posttestscore across conditions was by influenced by score on the trials item, when controlling for pretest score [F(247)= 30.57, p < 0.02], indicating that students who scored higher on the trials item were more likely to score highlyon the posttest.Conclusions and implicationsThis study shows how students use computer models in conjunction with hands-on activities. This combinationallows students to connect science concepts to their design decisions.During the Solar Ovens unit, the modeling activity strengthened the links between the science conceptsand design decisions, offering students a space to plan and test their designs in the planning condition, or toconfirm their results and make further connections after they engaged in design process (reflecting condition).Students who used the interactive model for planning during the unit were more likely to make gains onthe integration of energy concepts between pre- and posttest. Many students in the reflecting condition used themodel for very simple confirmatory analysis of models they had already built, which was not as helpful as usingthe model during the planning phased to connect science and design ideas.In future studies we plan to explore patterns of student interactions with the model by collecting log data.The log data will consist of the clicks students make within the model and the time at which they make them.Using this data, we will also be able to evaluate the amount of time students spent on the model, how that differsby student pair, and how systematic or unsystematic students explorations with the model are. Some early researchhas been done on analysis of student log data from interactive computer models, showing that this is a feasibleaddition to our research on student use of computer models (Conati et al, 2015).ReferencesChiu, J. L., & Linn, M. C. (2011). Knowledge integration and WISE engineering.Journal of Pre-CollegeEngineering Education Research (J-PEER), 1(1), 2.Conati, C., Fratamico, L., Kardan, S., & Roll, I. (2015, June). Comparing Representations for Learner Models inInteractive Simulations. In Artificial Intelligence in Education (pp. 74-83). Springer InternationalPublishing.Crismond, D. (2001). Learning and using science ideas when doing investigate‐and‐redesign tasks: A study ofnaive, novice, and expert designers doing constrained and scaffolded design work. Journal of Researchin Science Teaching, 38(7), 791-820.Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B. S. (2011). Science learning and instruction: Taking advantage of technology to promoteknowledge integration. Routledge.Liu, O. L., Lee, H. S., Hofstetter, C., & Linn, M. C. (2008). Assessing knowledge integration in science: Construct,measures, and evidence. Educational Assessment, 13(1), 33-55.McElhaney, K. W., & Linn, M. C. (2011). Investigations of a complex, realistic task: Intentional, unsystematic,and exhaustive experimenters. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 48(7), 745-770.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States.Snir, J., Smith, C., & Grosslight, L. (1993). Conceptually enhanced simulations: A computer tool for scienceteaching. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 2(2), 373–388.Wilensky, U. (1999). {NetLogo}.Wilensky, U., & Reisman, K. (2006). Thinking like a wolf, a sheep, or a firefly: Learning biology throughconstructing and testing computational theories—an embodied modeling approach. Cognition andinstruction, 24(2), 171-209.ICLS 2016 Proceedings802© ISLS