A Self-Organizing Network of Schools That Transform Teacherand Student Learning Through Socio-Technical Co-EvolutionNancy Law, University of Hong Kong, nlaw@hku.hkLeming Liang, University of Hong Kong, lmliang@hku.hkKenneth Cheng, Buddhist To Chi Fat She Yeung Yat Lam Memorial School, ywcheng@seltas.edu.hkAbstract: Scaling up educational innovations through networks has attracted muchinterest in diverse research and education policy communities. Literature on scaling areoften associated with top-down or partnership models of change, and the goals, resourcesand technology tools used are generally defined and developed by stakeholders outside ofschools. This paper reports on the sustained efforts of a self-organizing network of specialneeds schools in Hong Kong that has worked together for more than a decade to realizethe vision of providing the same educational opportunities to children with various degreesof learning disability. The analysis focuses on how their engagement in the developmentof a collaborative platform for teacher learning started a journey of socio-technical coevolution that resulted in exponential scaling of the innovation both qualitatively andquantitatively. The evolution trajectory of this network shows characteristics andsusceptibilities similar to those in the socio-technical innovation literature.IntroductionScaling up educational innovations (Coburn, 2003; Clarke & Dede, 2009) has been a central theme foreducation research for several decades, starting from the educational leadership and reform literature (e.g.Fullan & Hargreaves, 2009), and attracting increasing interests from the learning sciences community(Vuorikari, Kampylis, Scimeca & Punie, 2015; Fishman, Penuel, Allen, Cheng, & Sabelli, 2013). Scalingup of innovations are particularly important as countries around the world are launching various curriculumand pedagogical reform efforts since the turn of the millennium, to bring about changes in curriculumstandards, and/or to bring a stronger focus on some higher level generic capacities such as collaboration,communication, creativity and critical thinking, often referred to as 21 st century outcomes (Partnership for21st Century Skills, 2009). Scalability has also been identified as a key issue in e-Learning implementation(Law, Yuen, & Fox, 2011) as use of digital technology per se would not bring about enhanced learningoutcomes, and much depends on the pedagogy adopted (Watson, 2001; Fisher, 2006). In order for e-Learningto bring about transformative learning outcomes requires deep pedagogical transformation (Somekh &Davis, 1997). Hence the challenge to scaling up ICT-enabled learning innovations is primarily one oflearning at multiple levels, as sustained changes in classroom practice requires aligned changes to take placewithin the education ecosystem from classroom to school to district and system levels (Davis, 2008; Law,Niederhauser, Christensen, & Shear, 2016).Innovation networks have been found to be a productive model of supporting teacher learning forinnovation (Hamel, Turcotte, & Laferrière, 2013; Vuorikari et al., 2015) as it provides room for teachers toengage in peer learning and engage in productive knowledge building in the innovation process. However,as educational change is located within a complex ecosystem with many established rules, regulations,practices and expectations as well as organizational, physical and technological infrastructures, thearchitecture for learning (Wenger, 1998) plays an important role in such situated learning contexts.Architecture for learning can be broadly defined as the “organizational structure, mechanisms and artefactsthat are available to facilitate interactions and to consolidate change at different levels of the educationsystem” (Law, Yuen, & Lee, 2015, p. 3). Comparative studies of innovation development under differentarchitectures for learning have revealed that coupling mechanisms (Spillane, Parise, & Sherer, 2011) andthe kind of organizational structures and interaction mechanisms (Stein & Coburn, 2008) impact stronglyon the effectiveness and sustainability of reform efforts.Design-based implementation research (DBIR) (Fishman et al., 2013) is an approach to scalingeducational innovations that builds on the design-based research approach developed in the learningsciences community (Brown, 1992; Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004) to connect research and practice inan organic nexus to address the challenge of applying research-based learning principles to guide learninginnovations in authentic classroom contexts. At the core of the DBIR approach is the concept ofinfrastructuring (Penuel, 2015), which recognizes the crucial role of the architecture for learning andinteractions in the success of scaling efforts and argues for the need to engage in organizational sensemakingCSCL 2017 Proceedings431© ISLSthrough partnership between researchers and educators in order to be able to make dynamic changes toinfrastructures and designs at different levels of the organization to achieve the innovation goals.In this paper, we report on a study of a self-organizing network of schools that serve children withdifferent levels of learning disabilities. The researchers first met this network in the context of a governmentcommissioned evaluation of a three-year e-Learning Pilot Scheme in which this network was a grant-holderfor one of the 21 funded projects.Research context and methodsIn 2011, the Education Bureau (EDB) of Hong Kong launched a three-year e-learning Pilot Scheme (20112014) in order to develop, try out and evaluate when and how e-Learning works best to bring about effectiveinteractive learning, self-directed learning, and to cater for learner diversity in different curriculum andschool contexts in Hong Kong (EDB, 2011). Two studies were carried out in relation to this e-Learning pilotscheme. Study 1 was a longitudinal evaluation of the e-learning pilot scheme (2011-14, referred to here asYears 1-3) commissioned by the EDB. Study 2 was a follow-up study (2014-16, referred to as Years 4-5) toinvestigate the sustainability and scalability of the pilot projects after the end of the funding period. Therewere wide diversities in the 21 funded projects, and the projects selected for Study 2 were already the mostsuccessful studies that showed potentials for sustainability.A common feature of the 21 pilot projects was the inclusion of an e-Learning resources/toolsdevelopment component as the technology base for the e-Learning implementation in these projects. TheEDB required all the projects to include partnership involvement with the business sector, which generallyserved the role of technology development to serve the aspirations of the schools’ pilot projects. Altogether21 pilot projects (61 schools in total) were selected for funding; 9 were individual school projects and 12joint-school projects. Study 1 found that the e-Learning technology developed in some of the projects wasmarginally used during the 3-year pilot period, and were rarely used again after the end of the 3-year pilotperiod. Preliminary analysis of Study 2 data found that while the e-Learning technology tool may still beused by one or two schools in some of the projects, all of the project networks stopped functioning after theproject funding ended, except for one of the projects. This project (to be referred to as Project S) was an“outlier” in that after the funding ended, the schools still continued to fund further technology developmentfrom their regular school budget, and both the scale of adoption and level of pedagogical transformationtaking place in the schools actually progressed exponentially. The present study is a case study of ProjectS, with the purpose of investigating (1) the trajectory of development of the project both in terms oftechnology development and e-Learning practice implementation over the five years, (2) how this schoolnetwork evolved in terms of the architecture of learning that supported the innovation, and (3) if there is aconnection between the innovation evolution and the network infrastructure that supported it.In Studies 1 and 2, the research team interviewed the principal, the project core team members andteachers participating in the e-learning pilot at the beginning and at the end of each school year from Years1 to 5. From Year 2 onwards, the participants were asked about: (1) the general status and any change offeatures and goals of e-learning in the school; (2) the organizational structures, organizational routines andinteraction mechanisms within and outside the school related to the school’s e-Learning initiatives; (3)teachers’ learning opportunities and outcomes relating to e-learning, and whether these were related to theirresponses to (2). To evaluate teachers’ learning outcomes in terms of changes in e-learning pedagogicaldesign, teaching and assessment practices, we collected in each year the teaching plan and students’ workfor one curriculum unit selected by the teacher that used e-Learning. In Years 4 and 5, we conducted inaddition classroom observations of one e-learning lesson within the teacher nominated curriculum unit afterdiscussion and negotiation with the project team and teachers. The focus of the observations was on thepedagogical approaches adopted by the teacher when using ICT, and the extent to which students were givenopportunities to use ICT in their learning that were oriented towards building 21st century competencies.During the interviews in Years 4 and 5 with the principals and teachers in Project S, the researchteam was told that the project success can be largely attributed to the efforts of two important teams: theNetwork of principals from a number of special needs schools in Hong Kong (referred to as Network S) thatwas actually established in 2006, and the Project Accelerator Team (AC Team) that was first established insummer 2013, as well as the unfailing support from a retired University academic from UK who served asa consultant for Network S since its inception and for Project S. At the request of the research team, theproject leaders were very generous in making available the entire set of minutes and related documents ofthese two teams, which became a primary source of data for the research team to understand what kind ofarchitecture for learning was established for the Network, how it evolved over time, and how the architectureimpacted on the innovation development and teachers’ learning. Additional interviews were conducted withCSCL 2017 Proceedings432© ISLSthe key members of Network S and the AC Team, as well as the UK consultant, to understand their role inthese two organizational structures and their views on how the project evolved over time.For the purpose of this study, we operationalize the concept of architecture for learning in ouranalysis as comprising four important elements: (1) Organizational structures that direct and guideinteractions; (2) Mechanisms for sharing, interactions and decision-making; (3) Artefacts that serve asreifications of outcomes of interactions to propagate decisions and advances in understanding; and (4)Technology infrastructure that supports communications, interactions and knowledge management ofindividuals and communities (Law et al., 2015). Educational institutions and innovation networks arecomplex systems, and a characteristic of such systems is that history matters. This is no different for ProjectS. We will first present our descriptive analysis of the S Network, which predated Project S by 7 years, andwas the initiator and change agent for the Project, in order to provide the necessary contextual backgroundfor understanding how the project and its architecture for learning evolved.Network S: A self-organizing school network committed to providing equitablelearning opportunities for children with learning disabilitiesThe “incubation” for Network S started in 2003, when the Hong Kong Government launched itscomprehensive curriculum reform, which emphasized the goal of nurturing students’ lifelong learningabilities. Some of the special needs school heads were disappointed that no guidelines or support were givenon how special needs schools should incorporate the reformed curriculum into the teaching and learning ofstudents with different levels of disability. These principals share the vision that irrespective of the natureand profoundness of a child’s learning disability, s/he should be entitled to a pathway of learning that wouldgive them access to the same curriculum outcome goals as all other children in Hong Kong. This sharedcurriculum philosophy was referred to by the principals as SAME, to stand for Systematic Approach toMainstream Education.In 2006, the Hong Kong Government changed the secondary school structure from seven years tosix and launched a new school curriculum in conjunction with that change as an integral part of the overallcurriculum reform. Network S was formally established in 2006 when nine of the special needs schoolprincipals joined together to bid for government funding under a University-School Support Program(USSP) to develop a curriculum framework so that students with Special Education Needs (SEN) can stillbe able to access the mainstream curriculum. To achieve the goal of building a direct “bridge” for intellectualdisabilities to access the general curriculum, learning activities and resources need to be adapted andcustomized according to the developmental status and special needs of each child. The goal of this USSPproject was to develop the following deliverables:• A learning progression framework (comprising fine attainment levels) for the general curriculum;• An assessment system called SCALE (Same Curriculum Assessment for Learning Effectiveness);• A common curriculum framework and Scheme of Work (SoW) for teachers across SEN schools toshare ideas and resources, collaborate with and learn from each other.To carry out this USSP project, Network S established two inter-connected teams: one for principalsand the other for teachers. The Principal Team took leadership in steering the direction of the project, makingimportant decisions and providing professional advice to the teachers, seeking advice from an overseasconsultant from the UK and consultants from a local university. This team conducted meetings on a monthlybasis. The Teacher Team was also referred to as the Writing Team, which comprised specialist subjectteachers from the nine project schools and took responsibility for writing the SoWs, lesson plans andaccompanying learning resources. In fact, there were a number of Writing Teams, one for each subject area.Generally, each team would spend about two weeks on its writing tasks. Each Writing Team was coordinatedby an Organizing Manager (OM, usually a specialist teacher from one of the schools) and a StrategicManager (SM, usually one of the principals whose expertise was in that particular subject).The deliverables from these projects provided a solid and common artefact base for teachers to usein planning their teaching activities to match the learning needs, attainment levels and learning patterns oftheir students. In 2010, Network S was successful in being funded for a subsequent USSP project thatfocused on developing resources for lesson planning: co-constructing teaching resources around theteaching units set out in the strands and key stages of each of the key learning areas.During the process of collaboration, core members of Network S found that they were unable tomaximize the uptake and utilities of the resources created without these being integrated into an advance dinformation technology system. The Network leaders also believed that e-Learning could enrich and enliventhe learning of SEN students. Hence, Network S decided to submit an e-Learning pilot project proposal toCSCL 2017 Proceedings433© ISLSfurther enhance and build on what the Network has already developed to achieve its vision and goals.Project S: History of its 5-year developmentProject S was a joint bid from 10 SEN schools in Network S. Their project goal as indicated in the proposalwas to develop an online platform, for sharing and collaboration in adapting and customizing the learningactivities and resources to cater for the special needs of each child, building on the resources that havealready been developed. During Year 1, the project focus was on collating resources according to theattainment levels framework established. In Year 2, the project team found this to be inadequate and refocused the project on designing learning activities for effective use of the collated resources. In Year 3, theproject team considered it necessary to facilitate a paradigm shift in teachers: focusing on changing teachers’pedagogical practices in order to achieve the goal of catering for learner diversity through e-learning. Sothe school-based and joint-school activities were changing from a resource and activity focus to learningdesign, peer observation of lessons and documentation of evidence of students’ learning outcomes. Learningdesign with a four-level structure (Curriculum, Scheme of Work, school, and class levels) was explicitlyidentified as a framework for teachers to follow. The primary focus for Project S in Year 3 was to scaffoldteachers’ lesson design and classroom practice. The technology Platform was modified so that teachers wereno long able to access the curriculum and assessment resources available from the Project unless they gothrough the SoW, school level plan and class lesson plan (i.e. the four level design structure). This changewas specifically introduced to force teachers to think carefully about learning design considerations throughchanging their lesson design practice. In Year 4, the focus moved to student-centered learning and thecollection and use of analytics on students’ performance data. The Project also started to transform many ofthe functions on the web-based platform to support mobile-based applications, making it more convenientfor teachers to collect evidence of students’ formative performance. More collaborative functions were alsoadded, such as providing parental access to students’ learning records, allowing students to upload their ownassignments, etc. In Year 5, as the demands for e-Learning resources and collaborative activities increased,Project S established a formal collaboration arrangement with Google and another digital education portalin Hong Kong so that the resources and services from these partners can be integrated into the Projectplatform. Besides, the platform was gradually revised to cater for diverse e-learning development progressand context among the project schools.Table 1 summarizes the key project changes over the five years. There are several noteworthyfeatures in the project development trajectory. First of all, the deliverables (artefacts such as SoW, lessonplans and learning resources) developed in the years prior to the project start served as an important part ofthe architecture for learning as reifications (Stein & Coburn, 2008) to scaffold teachers’ learning, designand classroom practices. Secondly, these artefacts were developed by the Network and so have authenticityand ownership for the schools and teachers in the Network. Thirdly, there was a learning process for theProject team, moving from a resource model of change to a strong focus on expertise development (designexpertise) and on changing pedagogical paradigm and practice from Year 1 to Year 3. In Year 4, the focuswas on building support for feedback on students’ learning through the portfolio type assessment supportplatform linked to the attainment levels framework (SCALE). In Year 5, the change was further consolidatedthrough adding platform functions that support collaboration with parents as partners in facilitatingchildren’s learning. Fourthly, by making the students learning outcomes evident and linking them to theSCALE framework, the achievability of the Network vision was made tangible and convincing. This led toan exponential increase in the uptake of the platform use as well as in the increasingly student-centredpedagogical practices adopted by the Network teachers. Fifthly, the evolution of the technology platformreflects a deepening understanding of the “nature of the beast” in terms of e-Learning adoption as apedagogical innovation requiring a clear focus on changing teachers’ practices. Further, the project leadershave cleverly changed the interaction design of the platform so as to enforce changes in teachers’ workpractices in lesson design: demanding that teachers pay explicit attention to pedagogical designconsiderations before the selection of activities and resources. In fact, the platform also required teachersto consider students’ specific learning needs in the design process by requiring teachers to specify thespecific students targeted when assigning learning activities, and the learning levels of the students alsohave to be made explicit to match the level of the learning activities. Hence this project is not simply oneof developing an e-Learning support platform, but one involving socio-technical co-evolution.Project S: Architecture for learningTo lead the e-Learning Pilot Project, the joint-school Principal Team in Network S served as the drivingchange agent, and a teachers’ network was also set up for implementing the project on a day-to-day basis.CSCL 2017 Proceedings434© ISLSThe latter had specialized sub-networks under it for IT coordination and for the different subjects in Years1 and 2. These two teams were interconnected through a formal coordination mechanism of regular meetingsto exchange ideas, concerns and explore solutions. During these meetings, the teachers would report onproblems the Teacher Teams identified to the Principal Team. The Principal Team then held meetings todiscuss the issues raised, which could concern administration, resources, technology, or pedagogy, and comeup with solutions to feedback to the Teacher Team. In addition, both teams would conduct lessonobservations across schools. In Year 2, the project leaders found that the communication between thetechnical group and the subject groups was not effective as these two groupings of teachers did not havesufficient expertise on both technology and subject teaching to understand each other’s concerns. Further,Table 1: Project S developmental trajectory, Years 1 to 5.Year Innovationdevelopment focus1 Transforming theSoW, attainment level,and related learningresources to e-copiesfor more convenientsharing amongnetwork members.2 Starting theintroduction of elearning resources intoclassroom teaching345Platform featuresdevelopedTeachers creating,uploading and sharingteaching resources- The major progressof this period was totry-out & reviselesson plans throughclassroom teaching.- Teachers’ use of thisplatform increased &more resources werecreated and shared.- An e-forum wasestablished forteachers to sharetheir good practices.Facilitating paradigmA clear structuring ofshift in teachers:a four-level learningencourage thedesign pathwaymodification ofthrough the onlinepedagogical practicesplatform (Curriculum,to cater for learnerScheme of Work,diversitySchool, and Classlevels) for theteachers.Student-centredCapture students’learning and analyticslearning process in theon students’form of qualitativeperformance dataevidence of students’(how the dataperformance;collected on thedevelopment ofplatform could bettermobile apps toserve student-centeredsupport the weblearning)applications.Sustainability of the- Develop mediaproject; e-learningcapture apps (iOS,design to cater forstudent version)diverse learner- Student login datadevelopmental contextadded for analysisin the project schools; - Single sign-onbetween projectlearning analytics andplatform and Google/big dataHKEdCity for easyaccess to externalCSCL 2017 ProceedingsInnovative practicesStudents’ learningimplementedoutcomes observedNo pedagogicalStudents workpractices at thisappeared to be paperstage. Teachers were based drill andtrained to preparepractice. No 21stlesson plans & othercentury competencylearning resources on was observed.the platformIntroduced- Some high-abilitycollaborationstudents started toactivities amonguse tablets.students, such as- Differentiatedonline discussions,outcomes goals: highpeer assessment.ability studentsprepared a shortpresentation & weakones did a paperbased assignment.- Some students wereable to engage incollaboration online.ScaleTeachers wererequired to use anonline teaching planto organize theteaching materials,and students’ learningmaterials and learningartefacts.Collaboration; inquirywithin groups;information literacysuch as searching,organizing and ethicaluse of information(for high abilitystudents).Use of thee-Learningplatformin teachingpracticesin allNetworkschools.Teachers continued toexplore implementation of collaborativelearning amongstudents, use ofmobile devices inoutdoor activities &differentiated designsfor learner diversity.Teachers continuedto exploreimplementation ofcollaborativelearning amongstudents, use ofmobile devices inoutdoor activities &differentiateddesigns for learnerCollaborative inquiryin groups; informationliteracy such assearching, organizingand ethical use ofinformation (for highability students).The scaleincreasedin eachnetworkschool- Collaborative inquiryin groups;information literacysuch as searching,organizing andethical use ofinformation (for highability students).- Using IT tools asproductivity tools inThe scaleincreasedin eachnetworkschool435Teachersinvolvedin SoWwritingteam(Chineseand PSHE)Try-outteachersfromwritingteam(Chineseand PSHE)© ISLSresources.diversity.everyday life (Forlow ability students.)more and more problems were emerging from the teachers in the participating schools in the process ofimplementation, but the technical team did not have adequate knowledge and expertise to address the diverseproblems arising in the different school contexts. To address these challenges, a new organizational structurecalled “Accelerator Team” (AC) was created in Year 3, comprising of senior teachers who have knowledgeboth in technology and pedagogy from each of the participating schools. The role of the AC Team was, onthe one hand, to refine and improve the function of the technology platform based on teachers’ feedback,critiques and suggestions the team members solicited in their own schools; and on the other hand, to providein-situ support to the school teachers in the form of peer coaching and school-based training workshops.From Year 3 onwards, the AC Team had been playing a crucial role in connecting the teachers and the projectleaders, providing instant support to and receiving feedback from the classroom teachers on the ground, andproposing revisions to the platform and implementation strategies to the project leader network on the top.In reviewing the Network documents, it was clear that the Principal Team played a leadership rolein driving the project in two important aspects: (1) steering the strategic direction of the project in alignmentwith the Network’s educational vision, (2) assignment of roles and allocation of human and other resourcesthroughout Years 1 to 5. While the principals’ leadership was important, the compositions and modes ofwork of the specific working teams (hereafter referred to as innovation teams) were also critical. Theinnovation teams played the quintessential role of leading from the middle: these teams comprise theteachers who designed, constructed, and piloted the e-Learning platform, and who interacted with classroomteachers to develop pedagogical implementations using the technology platform and tools on a day-to-daybasis. They made and implemented school-based plans to realize the project vision and goals, and mediatedbetween the project leadership, school leadership and classroom teachers in the participating schools.In Years 1 and 2, the innovation teams were structured similarly to those set up in the USSP projectsconducted by Network S in the years before Project S came into existence. Essentially, the project wascarried out by a small number of task groups, each led by a principal with teacher members drawn from thevarious Network schools. This was adequate when each component in the project was relatively welldefined, without strong interdependence, and no technology development was involved. In Year 2, theoverseas consultant pointed out that there was a need for a central team with strong technological andpedagogical expertise to work together, and that the key challenge was a pedagogical one. There was apressing need for the core working team to put a strong focus on teacher professional development. Withprofessional and networking assistance from the overseas consultant, the Network S principals and somecore innovation team members went on a study visit to the UK to learn about how student-centered learningcan be implemented for children with special needs, and how SoW and attainment levels can be used toscaffold teachers’ lesson design and assessment work. These events triggered a significant structural changein the innovation team structure, and the network schools agreed to contribute an experienced teacher withe-Learning and/or curriculum innovation expertise to set up an Accelerator Team (AC Team) in Year 3.The AC team members were handpicked for their pedagogical experience and relativelysophisticated understanding of the role of technology in supporting student learning. Once constituted, theAC Team began by formulating a total reconceptualization of the platform functions to focus on supportingteachers’ lesson design practices. Further, none of the AC team members had full-time commitments toProject S. Hence they all had teaching duties and roles within their own schools, and were able to sensequickly how the platform features were received by their colleagues in the context of their day-to-daypractices. The establishment of the AC Team was instrumental to the successful refocusing of the projectdirections. In Year 4, the AC Team structure changed again. The reason for the change was two-fold. Firstly,without government funding for the project, some of the schools found it difficult to contribute their prizedstaff to work on the project. Secondly, the Network decided that the focus from Year 4 should be ondeveloping student-centered practices, and that further technology development would be scaled down.Hence, every school was encouraged to assign one teacher to the AC team, whose role was to help andintroduce the platform functions to teachers, and to scaffold innovation-focused professional developmentactivities within their own schools. This AC Team 2 met regularly to review implementation progress ineach of the schools, and to report problems and suggestions from grassroot teachers within the Networkschools. The new AC Team structure was very successful in stimulating adoption by teachers in the Network.Many of the improvements such as the desirability of mobile applications as tools for collecting evidenceof students’ learning was gathered as teachers’ voice in the innovation process.Summary and discussionCSCL 2017 Proceedings436© ISLSA Technology-Enhanced Pedagogical Innovation (TEPI) is a journey and a process. An innovation journeyis by definition one in which both the destination and the pathway are not clear. It is also a collaborativeproblem-solving process involving agents at multiple levels: classroom teachers, teacher leaders, schoolleaders and external partners such as consultants and technology developers to address inter-relatedproblems that emerge on the way. Network S is a self-organizing network that came together voluntarily toachieve an educational vision through embarking jointly on Project S as a TEPI. To achieve success, theNetwork has to be able to undertake successful self-organized learning in navigating through the manychallenges encountered during the journey. In this final section, we will summarize our key learning fromthis case study of Project S.First, the TEPI is a process of sociotechnical co-evolution. Over the five years, as illustrated inTable 1, the functions and roles of the e-Learning platform changed alongside the changes in teachers’experimentation with the technology and also with the changes in the architecture for learning set up toimplement the project. In Year 1, the focus of the innovation was to develop a platform for resource sharing(e.g., teaching plan, teaching materials, useful e-learning tools, etc.), and the teachers spent a lot of timelearning to transform paper-based resources into electronic format, with little impact on classroom practices.In Year 2, the innovation focus shifted to the pedagogical use of ICT in classrooms, and some teachersexperimented with using the e-Learning platform in this project (referred to as Platform S) for planningtheir lessons, including efforts to cater for learner diversity. The availability of discussion forum and peerassessment resources on the platform stimulated the adoption of these activities by some teachers. Therewere also scattered efforts to design and implement differentiated learning activities based on students’based on the fine-grained SCALE specifications of learning outcomes. In Year 3, the newly constituted ACteam designed a well-structured teaching plan e-form that capitalized on the teachers’ interests in using theteaching and learning resources to enforce a four-stage model of lesson design. Some teachers who initiallydoubted the value of e-Learning for their students changed their views after interacting with other teachersand experimenting with new practices in their own classrooms. In Year 4, the focus shifted to using studentdata to improve their learning, and new mobile applications and interfaces were developed in Platform S tosupport user-friendly ways of documenting students’ performance. These new tools serve as resources forstudents to reflect on their own learning, and to inform parents about their children’s development. In Year5, sustainability and compatibility of Project S was discussed in the Network schools and affirmed as apriority by most of the member schools. Good practice cases were shared among the network teachers toattract more teacher adoption.A second observation is the need for a strong, cohesive and respected core at the network leadershiplevel that constantly monitors the innovation direction and re-focuses its efforts once it deviated from theprimary vision and goal. As Network S moved from the development of curriculum resources such as SoWand SCALE to the implementation of e-Learning, there was an initial shift towards a techno-centric focuson the development of digital resources for teaching and learning. The international consultant’s visit in thesecond year of the project was instrumental in re-focusing the project team on pedagogical concerns, andthe affirmation that professional development of teachers should be the primary strategic implementationgoal. The seven years of prior collaboration among the Network leadership and the consultant provided atrusting relationship that underpinned the re-focusing effort and the establishment of the AC Team as aconsequence of the consultant’s intervention.A third observation is that the capacity of a network to undertake TEPI has to be built up over time.The two prior USSP projects conducted by Network S fostered crucial innovation capacity for Project S asa pedagogically focused innovation. First, the SoW and SCALE developed served as the curriculum andpedagogical bases for developing the TEPI. Secondly, the Principal Team and Writing Teams that conductedthose two projects served as a foundational social infrastructure to lead the implementation of Project S.Thirdly, the working relationships among the Principal Team and Writing Teams, and the successfulimplementation of these two prior projects helped to lay a good social milieu for Project S.A fourth observation is the need for a “middle-layer” organizational structure and interactionmechanisms to materialize the innovation vision of the Network leadership through concrete implementationplans that engage classroom teachers “on the ground”. In fact, variations in project implementation efficacyacross schools in the Network often reflect differences in the strength and suitability of the middlemanagement at the school level.Fifth, the composition of the Network middle management teams (e.g. the Writing Teams, AC Team1 and AC Team 2) need to have the necessary expertise and be tasked with the appropriate mission for thespecific phase of the innovation, and hence will need to be changed/adjusted as necessary. Such change isalso part of the sociotechnical co-evolution.CSCL 2017 Proceedings437© ISLSNetwork S is an autonomous self-organizing network connecting a group of schools serving SENstudents. Project S, led by the Network, went through stages of development reflecting a co-evolution ofthe curriculum artefacts, organizational infrastructure and interaction mechanisms in bringing aboutinnovations in pedagogical practices and the technology platform.ReferencesBrown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.Clarke, J., & Dede, C. (2009). Design for Scalability: A Case Study of the River City Curriculum. Journalof Science Education and Technology, 18, 353-365. doi:10.1007/s10956-009-9156-4Coburn, C. E. (2003). Rethinking scale: Moving beyond numbers to deep and lasting change. EducationalResearcher, 32(6), 3-12.Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design Research: Theoretical and Methodological Issues.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15-42.Davis, N. (2008). How May Teacher Learning be Promoted for Educational Renewal with IT? In J. Voogt& G. Knezek (Eds.), International Handbook of Information Technology in Primary and SecondaryEducationTechnology in Primary and Secondary Education (pp. 507-519): SpringerEDB (2011). Selection results of Pilot Scheme on e-Learning in Schools announced.http://www.info.gov.hk/gia/general/201101/03/P201012310128.htmFisher, T. (2006). Educational transformation: Is it, like beauty? in the eye of the beholder, or will we knowit when we see it? Education and Information Technologies, 11(3), 293-303.Fishman, B. J., Penuel, W. R., Allen, A. R., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. H. (2013). Design-basedimplementation research: An emerging model for transforming the relationship of research andpractice. National Society for the Study of Education, 112(2), 136-156.Fullan, M., & Hargreaves, A. (Eds.). (2009). Change Wars. Bloomington, IN: Solution Tree Press.Hamel, C., Turcotte, S., & Laferrière, T. (2013). Evolution of the conditions for successful innovation inremote networked schools. , 6(3), 1. International Education Studies, 6(3), 1-14.Law, N., Niederhauser, D. S., Christensen, R., & Shear, L. (2016). A Multilevel System of Quality Technolo g yEnhanced Learning & Teaching Indicators . Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 19, 72-83.Law, N., Yuen, A., & Fox, B. (2011). Educational Innovations Beyond Technology: nurturing leadershipand establishing learning organizations New York: Springer.Law, N., Yuen, J., & Lee, Y. (2015). Precarious School Level Scalability Amid Network Level Resilience:Insights from a multilevel multiscale model of scalability. Paper presented at the AmericanEducation Research Association Conference 2015, Chicago.Partnership for 21st Century Skills. (2009). P21 Framework Definitions. Retrieved fromhttp://www.p21.org/storage/documents/P21_Framework_Definitions.pdfPenuel, W. R. (2015). Infrastructuring As a Practice for Promoting Transformation and Equity in DesignBased Implementation Research. Paper presented at the Keynote presented at the InternationalSociety for Design and Development in Education (ISDDE) 2015 Conference, Boulder, CO.Somekh, B., & Davis, N. (1997). Using information technology effectively in teaching and learning : studiesin pre-service and in-service teacher education. London ; New York: Routledge.Spillane, J. P., Parise, L. M., & Sherer, J. Z. (2011). Organizational Routines as Coupling Mechanisms Polic y,School Administration, and the Technical Core. AERJ, 48, 586-619.Stein, M. K., & Coburn, C. E. (2008). Architectures for learning: A comparative analysis of two urban schooldistricts. American Journal of Education, 114(4), 583-626.Vuorikari, R., Kampylis, P., Scimeca, S., & Punie, Y. (2015). Scaling Up Teacher Networks Across andWithin European Schools: The Case of eTwinning. In Scaling Educational Innovations. In C. K.Looi & L. W. Teh (Eds.), Scaling Educational Innovations (pp. 227-254). Singapore: Springer.Watson, D. M. (2001). Pedagogy before Technology: Rethinking the Relationship between ICT andTeaching. Education and Information Technologies, 6(4), 251-266.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning as a social system. Systems thinker, 9(5), 1-5.AcknowledgmentWe thank the principals, teachers, students and the international consultant Mr. Keith Humphreys in ProjectS, and the contributions of Dr Yeung Lee (CITE, HKU) during the various stages of this study. This work isfunded by General Research Fund grant #17404314 and Humanities and Social Sciences PrestigiousFellowship Scheme (HSSPFS) grant #HKU 37600414 to the first author, both from HK RGC.CSCL 2017 Proceedings438© ISLS