Engineering Discourse Development in an Informal YouthDriven Maker ClubSagit Betser, University of California Davis, sbetser@ucdavis.eduLee Martin, University of California Davis, leemartin@ucdavis.eduAbstract: This paper investigates opportunities to learn engineering design discourse withinmaker activities. Drawing from a study of youth participation in an informal, out-of-school,youth-driven maker club this study investigates processes of discourse use and learning. Thisstudy contributes to the ongoing conversation in the learning sciences about how youth gainaccess to valued disciplinary discourses. The authors employ Sfard’s (2008) commognitiveframework to conduct a detailed examination of mentor-mentee interactions in order touncover mechanisms of disciplinary learning. Findings suggest that youth can pick up aspectsof discourse relatively quickly, but that negotiating discourses in real time can be challengingfor both youth and mentors.IntroductionThere is a broad consensus that more work is needed to uncover the processes by which young people becomeinterested and skilled in STEM fields. In this study, we report results from a study of youth participation in aninformal, youth-driven maker club as a setting for engineering design learning. We view learning as adevelopment of a specialized discourse (Sfard, 2008). While in formal learning setting like schools, one role ofthe curriculum and teachers is to introduce students to disciplinary discourse in explicit ways, in informalsettings like the one examined in this study, these processes are usually implicit. The goal of this study is tocontribute to the body of research that explores how disciplinary discourse develops in interest-driven youth-ledlearning environments.A growing body of literature examines maker spaces and maker activities as contexts for STEMlearning. One line of work examines the particular practices of making, and the opportunities that youth andother participants have to engage in those practices. Gravel, et al. (2015) found that experienced makersidentify, organize, and integrate information across sources. Blikstein (2013) reports that youth who worked onprojects using digital fabrication techniques received an opportunity to explore STEM concepts like electricity,magnetism and motion. Martin and Dixon (2016) describe opportunities to engage in frequent dialogicinteraction around unexpected events within a community that values conceptual understanding – practicesbelieved to foster the development of adaptive expertise. Halverson, et al. (2014) show the importance of thecommunity within maker spaces, demonstrating the fluidity of mentoring in such spaces and its impact on justin-time learning.Others have looked for evidence of change over time. Fields and King (2014) found that college-agewomen in a craft technologies course changed their view of themselves and their ability to be designers oftechnology. Blikstein (2013) showed that youth in his studies showed increased interest in STEM fields. Bevan,et al. (2015) found that question development and moments of struggle were key learning indicators duringtinkering. Dixon and Martin (2017) found that youth with more maker experience showed greater and moredynamic interactions within the community. Calabrese Barton, Tan, and Greenberg (2016) show how makerspaces can be important sites of identity development.While the number of studies that investigate the potential of making and tinkering to STEM learning isgrowing, there is a need for additional work examining the mechanisms of learning in making and the waydisciplinary discourse develops in these settings. The goal of this study is to contribute to this body of literatureon STEM learning and making by focusing on practices of engineering design. From a disciplinary perspective,one important routine within engineering design is the design process (Dym et al., 2005). There are manydifferent versions of the design process, but all share a commitment to iterative design: as the project movesforward, participants gain new insights that feed back to earlier stages, which may direct a new path for theproject. For any specific stage in the process there are norms of what counts as acceptable contribution in thatstage. To examine how young makers learn in an open-ended out-of-school learning environment, we closelytrack changes in engineering design discourse that take place during mentor-mentee interactions within worksessions of youth-driven maker projects.Theoretical frameworkICLS 2018 Proceedings847© ISLSThis work is guided by sociocultural theory of learning, looking closely at the relationship between culture andlearning as a social activity, where knowledge is built within a community of practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991).Our research uses Sfard’s (2008) commognition framework, which views thinking as individualization ofinterpersonal communication and learning as change in learner’s discourse towards becoming a participant in acommunity with a certain type of discourse. Discourse, according to Sfard, is a form of communication thatdefines a community and was developed along the history of a profession to answer certain communicationalneeds within that community. Each discourse is characterized by four features: (1) words and the way they areused as defined by the discursive community; (2) visual mediators that are operated upon as part of the processof communication; (3) routines, which are repetitive patterns characteristic of the way participants in a discourseact in specific situations; and (4) endorsed narratives, which are texts (written or stated) that the discoursecommunity endorses as true.MethodsThe purpose of this study is to contribute to our understanding of how engineering design discourse develops ina particular kind of informal maker project work, where projects are driven by youth interests and are supportedby disciplinary expert mentors. The research questions addressed in this study are: 1) What opportunities fordisciplinary learning develop in open-ended interest driven maker projects? 2) What mentor-mentee interactionsenable or constrain disciplinary learning?Research contextThe data for this analysis comes from a study of youth participation in Maker Club, an organization that broughttogether small groups of young makers and helped them find adult mentors suited to their interests. MakerClub’s goal was to support 8-to-18-year-old youth in creating and ultimately presenting projects of their ownchoosing at a local Maker Faire. The full study details the work of four separate clubs, but for this paper, wefocus on one club consisting of five boys, ages 12 to 14, and three adult mentors. Three of the boys, Parker,Kobe, and George, had already worked together for two years designing two other projects for the Maker Faire.One of the boys, Barnes, joined the team for the second year. A fifth boy, Barkley, was new to the team and tothe making experience. The three mentors each had different expertise. Betty, the mother of Parker and Barnes,was an artist and a home-school mom. She organized the group and most often took the role of coordinator.Stephen, the leading mentor, was a retired electrical engineer with vast experience in product design. He hadalso mentored the group in previous years. The third mentor, David, was recruited by Stephen midway throughthe project to help with the main mechanism, as he was a mechanical engineer with years of experience indesign.After several meetings of brainstorming project ideas, the team decided to build a human-sized“creepy” cymbal banging monkey, inspired by a figure in the movie Toy Story 3. Figure 1 illustrates the cymbalbanging mechanism the group designed (left), and the final project as displayed at the Maker Faire (right).Figure 1. Cymbal Monkey mechanism and final product at Maker Faire.Data collection and analysesICLS 2018 Proceedings848© ISLSThere were two main sources of data for this study. First, we took field notes and made video recordings ofgroup work sessions. We observed seven collaborative work sessions of about two hours each, spanning aroundfour months of work. Second, we conducted interviews with youth and adult participants. Data analysis startedby transcribing all interviews and watching all seven work sessions and creating content logs. For this paper, wefocused our analysis on observational data from the work sessions. For each session, we flagged moments ofinteraction between mentors and mentees. To allow a close look at changes in disciplinary discourse, wetranscribed and then coded the first and last work sessions. Our initial coding pass was focused ondifferentiating broad types of mentor-mentee interactions: work discussion, demonstration, planning andmanagement, building interactions, and social related interactions. For a second pass, we coded for the featuresof engineering disciplinary discourse and then looked for the following: changes in discourse, differencesbetween participants, and instances where we should expect a potential for change even if it did not happen.This initial coding work was a preamble to our discourse analysis, which is the primary analytic method for thispaper. The coding was a means to identify significant moments for further analysis.FindingsThe examples in this paper are taken from the first working session after the team decided on their project (theCymbal Monkey). This session took place at Betty’s home and was divided into three sections: brainstormdiscussion, prototyping session, and wrap-up design discussion. Both the first and third sections were facilitatedby Betty, who asked questions and kept the conversation focused, with the participation of four young makersand the leading expert mentor, Stephen.In this section, we will highlight three aspects of discourse development in the setting. The firstexample contrasts the discourse of the newcomer with the oldtimers to illustrate the learning of the designprocess routine, a central routine in the work of a design project team. The second example tracks changes in anewcomer discourse and describes the mentor moves and mentor-mentee interactions that allow this change.The third example tracks a team discussion where we saw an opportunity for a shift in youth discourse that wasmissed in the moment.Learning to be a part of a product design teamIn the brainstorming discussion below, for example, the goal was to figure out how to design the monkey’s mainbody. As a first analytic pass, we coded the contribution of each boy into one of three options (see Table 1).Aligned: An utterance that relates to the design and aligns with the goals of this specificdesign process stage.Not Aligned: An utterance that relates to the design but does not align with the goals of thisspecific design process stage.Playful talk: An off topic, playful utterance, following Sullivan & Wilson (2015)We can see that Parker and Kobe had a similar number of utterances both for aligned, not aligned andplayful talk, while George and Barkley had notably different numbers of utterances. Because George arrivedlate to the session and entered the conversation much later we will not use his data in this analysis.Table 1: Number of aligned, not aligned and playful talk utterances per participantAlignedutterancesNot alignedutterancesPlayful talkutterancesTotalParker3951256Kobe4251360George130215Barkley91812391032839170TotalThe table shows that the number of playful talk utterances was similar between Parker, Kobe andBarkley. This similarity in playful talk may indicate that all three boys were comfortable socially in the space.However, comparing the number of aligned and not-aligned utterances shows that Barkley differed from ParkerICLS 2018 Proceedings849© ISLSand Kobe. Barkley was the newcomer to the team, while Parker and Kobe were completing third maker project.This difference in experience could explain differences in his patterns of participation.Guided by the two mentors, the two oldtimers (Parker and Kobe) brainstormed ideas for the design ofthe monkey body. They mentioned their past experiences, suggested materials, and identified possible solutionsamong known off-the-shelf products. Barkley, the newcomer, made fewer contributions to the brainstormingsession, and when he did contribute, he mostly made suggestions for new features rather than solutions for thedesign problem under discussion, His new feature suggestions were not taken up by others in the group, likelybecause they were not appropriate to this juncture in the design process. The oldtimers replied with statementslike “I don’t think that’s going to happen” or “I thought we figured that out last week.”We hypothesize that this difference between Barkley and the more experienced boys represents theirprior learning of a particular design discourse, learning that took place over an extended period of time throughrepeated participation in design work.Despite his relative lack of experience with design discourse, Barkley was able to make shifts in hiscontributions even on the short time scale of one design session. Table 2 presents some representative,contrasting examples of Barkley’s contributions at the beginning and end of this one maker session.Table 2: Barkley’s statements at the beginning and end of one sessionBeginning of session“He’s definitely coming up with theoutfit. We could give him a scarf, tophat.”“I think you guys should not do themoving arms thing and like if he isgonna be dressed up in a thing, like ahigh fashion thing he should like do thislike … I mean you would press a buttonand like he would say like ‘HighFashion’. And you could raise – youcould just make like something thatwould make his chin lift up”End of session“So the cymbal, so there are thesepieces of sponge on the bottom. Andwhen, I, I was thinking that we couldput them on the cymbals and when itwill send, it will send volts throughthe arms. And you know how themotors reverse back into startingposition”“Because a sponge, sponge. Well Ithought with this sponge here, wecould wire it up to something, and uhelectric, electric, electricity. This iswhat this is. When these touch theytell you. It. The electricity goesthrough and that tells the gears, oh,turn it back. And when it goes back itstarts the routine over and over”Reading Barkley’s contributions closely, and watching how he presented them, we saw a difference inhis choice of words and the visual mediators, both important characteristics of a discourse in the commognitionframework (Sfard, 2008). . While at the beginning of the session Barkley was focused on the way featureslooked or the way the user interacts with their functionality, at the end of the session he took up the group’sfocus on the way things actually operate, including the hidden mechanisms that control their operation, whileincorporating engineering words like volts, motor, reverse, wires, electricity, gears, and routines like takingapart and using it in a new way.Mentor-mentee interactionsTo understand what may have led to this change in Barkley’s discourse, we analyzed the expert mentor movesand interactions with the boys during the session. The mentor, as an expert in the engineering discourse,introduced the boys to engineering narratives, modeled design routines, and emphasized engineering vocabularywithin conversations with youth about their ideas. To illustrate this process, we present a moment where thementor coupled talk about the engineering concept of feedback with an engineering routine of disassembling aproduct to see how it works. We show how Barkley made attempts to gain access to the engineering discoursethrough explorative imitation of the mentor’s discourse and physical manipulation of materials.At the beginning of the session, the mentor, Stephen, brought a printer to the table and took apart themodules to illustrate the idea of feedback in the printer’s design. Stephen did not explicitly define feedback, buthe described the way the idea of feedback is realized in the printer design.ICLS 2018 Proceedings850© ISLS“So that’s kind of a feedback thing, where you have a motor that moves something and thensomething else that tells it where it is. And then you can get it to go to the right spot. That’s acommon thing you run into – the combination of a motor and a sensor connected togetherwith a computer.”When Stephen used the printer to introduce feedback, he also demonstrated an engineering designroutine: taking apart designed objects to learn how they work in order to inform the current design. Here againwe see an important characteristic of a discourse, a routine, modeled by the expert. Barkley used this routinelater in the session, when he decided (without prompt) to take apart a video game controller that was brought bythe mentors to the work session. He took apart the controller and, prompted by the mentor, examined ways touse its parts in the mechanism of the cymbals.SpeakerBarkley:SpeechCan I take this apart?Stephen:Barkley:Betty:Stephen:I thought we were building a monkey.I need to take it apart ‘cause someone jammedthis piece in. I need to get something. Anybodyhave – do you know where a screwdriver is?Here’s one. It’s a Phillips though.Did you figure out how the buttons worked?Barkley:Yeah, so they’re actually magnets.Stephen:Actually they’re just conductive material. It’snot a magnet, it’s just any kind of metal that –or something that conducts electricity. And sothere’s a little set of fingers that goes like thisand a little set of fingers that go like that and ifthey both make electrical contact between thefingers that closes the circuit.We could use this.You could use that.Huh. That’s always good.What do you want to do when the switchcloses?Oh, when the switch, when the switch closes,we could make his fingers go like this, likeI thought he was gonna have cymbals in hishandsOh, we could do it on the cymbalsSo that little black thing in there, that’sconductive foam. It’s conductive like this. It’sreally soft rubbery stuff.You could put those on the cymbals, and whenthe cymbals touch, it would make them goback to their position.So when they touch, that would tell the motorto reverse direction.Barkley:Stephen:Barkley:Stephen:Barkley:Stephen:Barkley:Stephen:Barkley:Stephen:ICLS 2018 ProceedingsGesturePointing the gamecontroller851Holding the controllerGive it to BarkleyAfter some time ofwork, when Barkleytook out some parts,Stephen approacheshimUsing his own fingersto demonstrate how theelectric circuit lookslikeUsing his fingers todemoPointing to the part inBarkley’s handsDemonstrate with thepart in his hands© ISLSBarkley:Betty:Barkley:Kobe:Barkley:Kobe:Barkley:Kobe:Barkley:Yeah, reverseWe’re, boys, we’re pretty much done, soyou’re gonna draw up some sketches and –I’ll sketch.What’s that?So the cymbal, so there are these pieces ofsponge on the bottom. And when, I, I wasthinking that we could put them on the cymbalsand when it will send, it will send volts throughthe arms. And you know how the motorsreverse back into starting position?It depends how far it is.Everyone sitting arounda tableOpens his notebook anddraw his ideaApproachingPointing to his sketchwhile explainingYeah. This is easier. Because then when theytouch it just throws it backYeah, but it’s more wiring on the cymbals.Plus they’ll be obvious. Like people will see it.Or you can cut a hole in the cymbalsIn this interaction we see Barkley took initiative and took apart a game controller. This action divergesfrom the main activity, but the mentors do not stop him or tell him to join the main activity. We see severalexamples of Barkley’s explorative imitation of Stephens’ discourse – the use of fingers, the use of engineeringvocabulary, and the parallel reasoning about feedback in Barkley’s cymbal mechanism that resembles Stephen’sexplanation of the printer mechanism. The move between physical objects, embodied modeling, and talk allowsBarkley to imitate in an explorative way and to move from a peripheral participation at the beginning of thesession to fuller participation later on when he sketches ideas for a presentation and gains the attention of one ofthe more experienced boys.A missed opportunity for discourse developmentAn environment like this also presents challenges to mentors when opportunities arise in the moment and arenot always easily picked up. One example of such instance happened during a discussion on the next step in thedesign of the monkey. The main participants in this discussion were the three oldtimers, Parker, George, andKobe, and the two mentors, Betty and Stephen. Betty managed the discussion about the “skeleton”, asking theteam to brainstorm ideas on “what is the project’s skeleton made of”. Table 3 offers a transcript of thisconversation with our interpretations for the statements.Table 3: The ‘skeleton’ discussionSpeakerSpeechBetty:Ok, so if we say the next step is the skeleton, thenwhat is the skeleton made of?Parker:The skeleton should be made of foam and we shouldwrap it in fabric and awesomeness.For Parker, theskeleton functionsalso to set the shapeof the monkeyKobe:We could make the thing out of foam, right? Andthen we could uhWe could take like – you could make a mold of itand make it like a hollow thing.For Kobe, theskeleton alsofunctions as settingthe shape.Stephen:I, I was sort of visualizing kind of a frame boardmade out of metal or wood or something.For the mentor, theskeleton functions asa structural supportICLS 2018 ProceedingsInterpretation852© ISLSBetty:[to George who just arrived] So we’re going to catchyou up to date to where we’re at right now. We’vetalked about some ideas for materials. Or first weasked what was the next step. And then peopleanswered skeleton and we talked about ideas formaterials for the skeleton, we said foam or layeredcardboard or wood or aluminum.Betty at this stage isfamiliar with allparticipants’ ideas.Her interpretation ofthe discussion is froma material perspectiveand not a functionalone.George:Wood seems kind of hard to cut it into the shape of askeleton.Couldn’t we – I kind of like claymation where youhave a little thing and then you put wires.George interprets theword “skeleton” in itseveryday use (e.g.skeleton of a humanbody).Parker:Couldn’t we technically use one of those ceramicskeletons they have in like horror, or like moldedskeletons out of plastic or something? Like theyhave in classes and stuff.Like a skeleton of a human and the skeleton of amonkey are kind of kind of close.Parker, too, interpretsthe word skeleton inits everyday humanbody context.Kobe:What if you got a little store mannequin and made itsit down and just made it look like a monkey.Because it’s already hollow. It’s already strong.Shape and support.Stephen:I’m just thinking, it would just be…it would just belike a rectangular solid thing. You know like foursides, four posts.Stephen restates hisframe idea. This timehe addressesimplicitly the shapeargument byemphasizing that theframe can berectangular (not abody shape).Kobe:What happened to the mannequin? That was agenius idea.Kobe advocates hisidea.Stephen:Make a square – a rectangular base, a rectangulartop. And then start adding stuff around the outside ofit.Stephen restates theidea of the frame as astructural support.Kobe:Mannequin mannequinKobe expresses hisfrustration.Kobe:Stephen, I challenge you to a battle of wits.Stephen:Uh oh.This conversation is an example of a commognitive conflict (Sfard, 2008). A commognitive conflicthappens when participants in a conversation actually participate in two different discourses. In this case, we cansee that Betty and the boy’s discourse is based on an everyday discourse of designed objects. In their discourse,skeleton embodies both the shape and function of an object. In a design engineering discourse, a skeleton is astructural support to which modules are attached (Slocum, 2008). Therefore, there is no required connectionbetween the form (shape) and the functionality of the object. The frame can serve the function of structuralsupport without attending to the shape requirements, an engineering narrative of the separation of form andfunction. Stephen’s discourse is a professional engineering design discourse. When engineers work on productdesign, they take into account different requirements: for example, mechanical (e.g. mechanisms), structural(e.g. stress, flow), and industrial design (look and feel). They separate functionality requirements from shaperequirements to maximize degrees of freedom in the design. The mentor, who is the expert in the professionalICLS 2018 Proceedings853© ISLSdiscourse, is the only person who can expose the conflict to the group and introduce the other participants to therules of his discourse. However, Stephen did not make any moves to do so here. He missed the opportunity todevelop the young makers’ disciplinary discourse. We do not mean this as a critique, but rather note it as anexample of the challenges of negotiating this complex discourse space on the fly.Conclusions and implicationsLearning can be viewed as a development of a specialized discourse. In formal settings, introduction todisciplinary discourse can be an explicit goal of instruction, but in informal, youth-driven, and/or project basedlearning environments, those processes can be implicit. As a field, we need good models and examples of howyoung people develop disciplinary discourse in such settings.Youth participation in making and the maker movement is a germane setting to investigate these issues.Many have identified making and tinkering as spaces where youth can gain access and experience with STEMdisciplines in an informal, youth-driven space. While some have noted the topical and practice-basedconnections between making and STEM fields (and engineering in particular), there has been less work toexamine precisely how making can help youth develop these disciplinary discourses. This study employedSfard’s (2008) commognition theoretical framework to investigate a group of young makers and their mentors.We identified moments where youth exhibited shifts toward disciplinary discourse, and the mentor moves thatpreceded these shifts. We also identify moments of communicational conflict where mentors and youth seemedto “talk past” each other and did not shift their discourses.This study contributes to the ongoing conversation in the learning sciences about how youth gainaccess to valued disciplinary discourses. It does so within the context of the maker movement, a genre oflearning environment that has recently gained traction in the field. In doing so, we also bolster claims thatmaking can be a productive site for learning STEM, while also highlighting the fact that such learning is notautomatic, but depends on careful articulation between mentors and youth.ReferencesBarton, A. C., Tan, E., & Greenberg, D. (2016). The makerspace movement: Sites of possibilities for equitableopportunities to engage underrepresented youth in STEM. Teachers College Record, 119(6).Bevan, B., Gutwill, J. P., Petrich, M., & Wilkinson, K. (2015). Learning Through STEM‐Rich Tinkering:Findings From a Jointly Negotiated Research Project Taken Up in Practice. Science Education, 99(1),98-120.Blikstein, P. (2013). Digital fabrication and ‘making’in education: The democratization of invention. FabLabs:Of machines, makers and inventors, 4.Dixon, C., & Martin, L. (2017). Make to Relate: Analyzing Narratives of Community Practice. Cognition andInstruction, 35(2), 103-124.Dym, C. L., Agogino, A. M., Eris, O., Frey, D. D., & Leifer, L. J. (2005). Engineering design thinking,teaching, and learning. Journal of Engineering Education, 94(1), 103-120.Fields, D. A., & King, W. L. (2014). So, I think I'm a programmer now. In Developing connected learning foradults in a university craft technologies course. In Polman, JL, Kyza, E. A., O'Neill, DK, Tabak, I.,Penuel, WR, Jurow, AS & D'Amico, L.(Eds.).(2014). Learning and Becoming in Practice: TheInternational Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) (Vol. 1, pp. 927-936).Gravel, B. E., Tucker-Raymond, E., Kohberger, K., & Browne, K. (2015). Literacy practices of experiencedmakers: Tools for navigating and understanding landscapes of possibility. In Proceedings.Halverson, E. R., & Sheridan, K. (2014). The maker movement in education. Harvard EducationalReview, 84(4), 495-504.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge Univ. Press.Martin, L., & Dixon, C. (2016). Making as a pathway to engineering. Makeology: makers as learners, 2, 183.Sfard, A. (2008). Thinking as communicating: Human development, the growth of discourses, andmathematizing. Cambridge University Press. Sheridan, K., Halverson, E. R., Litts, B., Brahms, L.,Jacobs-Priebe, L., & Owens, T. (2014). Learning in the making: A comparative case study of threemakerspaces. Harvard Educational Review, 84(4), 505-531Slocum, A. (2008). Fundamental of Design Topic 4 Linkages. Jan, 1, 62.Sullivan, F. R., & Wilson, N. C. (2015). Playful talk: Negotiating opportunities to learn in collaborativegroups. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 24(1), 5-52ICLS 2018 Proceedings854© ISLS