Productive Knowledge Building Discourse Through StudentGenerated QuestionsAhmad Khanlari, Monica Resendes, Gaoxia Zhu, and Marlene Scardamaliaa.khanlari@mail.utoronto.ca, monicaresendes@gmail.com, gaoxia.zhu@mail.utoronto.ca,marlene.scardamala@utoronto.caUniversity of TorontoAbstract: Working on students’ authentic problems is emphasized in Knowledge Buildingtheory and pedagogy, as it is perceived that a failure to deal with such problems may result in afailure of knowledge building. This study is focused on questions students asked in a knowledgebuilding environment, in order to examine how issues students cared enough about to pose asquestions help knowledge building succeed. Comparing question threads (threads started withquestions) and non-question threads (threads that did not start with questions), we noticed thatproblems posted by students engaged the community in a sustainable and progressive discourse,which is central to collaborative knowledge building. Moreover, the quality analysis of the datarevealed that the threads starting with questions were more likely to end up with productivethreads compared to the non-question threads.IntroductionKnowledge Building is an idea-centered pedagogy where students create knowledge through engaging in complexsocio-cognitive interactions as epistemic agents (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006a). Knowledge Building is basedon 12 foundational principles, such as community knowledge, collective responsibility, idea diversity, andimprovable ideas (Scardamalia, 2002; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006a). As a principles-based pedagogy,knowledge building classrooms are “profoundly different from even the best of traditional and modernclassrooms” (Scardamalia, 2002, p. 77). Engaging students in real ideas, authentic problems (Scardamalia, 2002),which is one of the critical principles of Knowledge Building, means focusing on ideas that students themselvescome up with, and the questions that they actually care about—not what others decide are engaging. Students inknowledge building classrooms are given high levels of agency, so that they actively mine the world around themfor interesting issues and challenges. In pursuing real ideas/authentic problems that arise from their efforts tounderstand the world, students engage in sustained creative work with ideas through knowledge building discourse(Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006a) -- another Knowledge Building principle. Knowledge building discourse iscentral to collaborative knowledge creation, because learners construct their knowledge, express their opinions,values and feelings through discourse (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1993; Tsoukas, 2009). Engaging in sustainableknowledge building discourse will help students dig down the issues, which is part of idea improvement(Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006b). Therefore, the more students are engaged in knowledge building discourse, thehigher the chance of knowledge building success. It is perceived that questions are propulsions that push thedialogue forward (Resendes, 2014); factual questions (who, what, where, and when) are required for explanationseeking dialogue as they increase the coherence of theories, and explanatory questions (why/how somethingworks) push the dialogue forward in new and promising directions (Resendes, 2014). This exploratory studyinvestigates the extent to which students introduce their authentic questions in their knowledge building discourse,how the peers pursue these peers-generated questions to reach a deeper understanding of the world, and how thesecontributions impact collective idea improvement.Method and data analysisThe dataset used for this study is comprised of the online discourse of one class of Grade 4 students exploring“rocks and minerals.” Student dialogue consists of 262 notes generated by 20 students over the course of 4 monthsand archived on Knowledge Forum®-- a knowledge building environment built specifically to supportcollaborative production and refinement of the community’s knowledge (Scardamalia, 2004). This study employsthe “ways of contributing” framework, which was developed to code students’ types of contributions to knowledgebuilding discourse (Chuy et al., 2011). This framework was chosen because it offers a systematic inventory ofways of contributing that can shed light on how knowledge building discourse moves toward knowledgeobjectives. This framework categorizes students’ contributions into six main categories (e.g., questioning,theorizing, obtaining information) and 24 subcategories (e.g., proposing an explanation, improving anexplanation, synthesizing information from resources).CSCL 2017 Proceedings585© ISLSFor this analysis, student contributions were also assessed according to their role in discussion threads.In this study, a thread is defined as a set of connected notes, or even a single isolated note. This definition iscompatible with Hewitt and Teplovs’s (1999) and Hewitt’s (2005) description of a discussion thread, whichconsidered one single disconnected note as a thread. In Knowledge Forum, students are able to post individualnotes into the discussion space, and are also able to create ‘build-on’ notes, which are contributions that linkdirectly onto an existing note. Build-on notes are indicated by an arrow that connects the two notes on the screen.In the dataset for this work, there were a total of 91 online discussion threads. The discussion threads were firstcategorized into two categories: I) threads starting with students’ questions, and II) threads starting with nonquestion notes. Among these 91 threads, 68 threads were question threads (threads started with questions), while23 threads were non-question threads (did not start with a question). Applying the ways of contributing scheme,two raters coded all the notes and achieved an agreement rate of 99.57%. The result of the coding of the notes wasthen used to categorize threads starting with questions. Based on the results of the coding, 33 threads wereidentified as factual-question threads (threads started with factual question--e.g. what is a rock?), and 37 threadswere identified as explanatory-question threads (threads started with explanatory question-- e.g. how are rocksmade?). Two threads were identified as starting with both factual and explanatory questions (e.g. where did Lavacome from? and how it was formed?) In order to answer the research questions, ANOVA analysis and qualitativeanalysis were conducted. The ANOVA analysis was conducted in order to examine if and how the length of thesethree types of threads differ. The length of threads is an indicator of sustainable discourses and can indicate thepotential of a discourse to be productive, as the depth of inquiry in a short thread is usually limited (Law, Yuen,Wong, & Leng, 2011, p. 64). However, it is very important to realize if the discourse is really moving toward aknowledge objective, despite thread length (Bereiter, Scardamalia, Cassells, & Hewitt, 1997). Therefore,qualitative analysis was conducted in order to qualitatively examine which types of the threads demonstrated ideaimprovement. Chen, Resendes, Chai, and Hong (2017) employed the ways of contributing schema, anddistinguished productive and non-productive threads using the improving an explanation subcategory of thetheorizing category. If a contribution was found to be improving an explanation, it was helping to move thediscussion towards a knowledge goal and increasing the explanatory coherence of collective ideas (Thagard, 1989,2007). If any note in a thread fell under the improving an explanation subcategory, that thread was considered a“productive” thread, otherwise, it was considered non-productive. We employed Chen and colleagues’ method toidentify which threads are productive.ResultsSustainability of threadsResults show that almost 78% of the non-question threads did not have any responses, while only 30% of thefactual-question threads and 24% of the exploratory-question threads had no responses. These isolated discussionthreads form threads with size 1. Moreover, almost 9% of the non-question threads had one response (threads withsize 2), while almost 36% of the factual-question threads and 19% of the exploratory-question threads had oneresponse (Figure 1).90%80%70%Factual-question threadsPercentage60%50%Explanatory-question threads40%Non-question threads30%20%10%0%12345678912Size of ThreadFigure 1. Comparing the size of the threads.CSCL 2017 Proceedings586© ISLSAs Figure 1 demonstrates, the maximum size of a non-question thread is 5, while the maximum size ofa question thread (either factual or exploratory) is 12. Therefore, the results show that compared to non-questionthreads, threads starting with factual questions and exploratory questions tended to be more sustainable--a qualitywhich can potentially push discourse toward other types of contributions, resulting in productive discourses.As Table 1 shows, the ANOVA analysis revealed that the size of the factual-question threads andexplanatory-question threads do not differ significantly. However, the size of both factual-question threads andexplanatory-question threads differ significantly with the size of non-question threads; non-question threads havesignificantly fewer responses compared with the other two types of threads that started with questions.Table 1: ANOVA analysis of the size of the three types of threads(I) Types of notes that (J) Types of notes thatlead threadslead threadsNon-questionFactualExplanatoryFactualExplanatoryMeanDifference(I-J)1.565 *1.808 *.243Std.Error.610.597.53895% Confidence IntervalLowerUpperSig.BoundBound.032.113.02.009.393.23.894-1.041.53Productivity of threadsThe results of the productivity analysis show that among all the 91 existing threads, 11 threads were identified asproductive threads, while the other 80 threads were coded as non-productive threads. Among these 11 productivethreads, five threads (45.5%) were coded as explanatory-question threads and four threads (36.4%) were identifiedas factual-question threads. Only two threads (18.1%) were coded as non-question threads. Below you can see anexample of a productive knowledge building thread. (Typos in students’ notes have been revised).[Note A] How are rocks made?[Note B] My theory is that rocks are made by magma drying and being compacted.[Note C] My theory is that sand is in the sea starts to form in a number of years and finally it [arock] forms.[Note D] Some rocks are made by sand hardened sand.[Note E] My theory is that wherever the rock is found is probably where it is made.[Note F] The rock that I brought in is made out of pure hardened sand[Note G] There were a whole lot of volcano and the ash came and lava so the lava cooled andyou have your rock.[Note H] Rocks are made by minerals coming together over many millions of years.In the above thread, the thread starts with an Explanatory Question [Note A]. Based on the coding, NoteB and Note C are considered as improving an existing theory of the community, Note E is coded as proposing atheory, and Note G and Note H are coded as supporting a theory. As there are two notes in this thread that arecoded as “improving a theory” notes, this thread is considered as a productive thread.The thread shown below is an example of a non-productive thread (size 2) that does not show evidenceof knowledge advancement:[Note A] Some scientists think that the thing that exploded was remains of an old universe what if thatuniverse had life the old life from the old life particles C.[Note B] i think that’s true BUT, what does c mean?Discussion and conclusionThe results of the analysis show that threads not starting with students’ questions were not sustainable enough tomove the discourse toward a knowledge objective. On the other hand, questions (either factual or explanatory),made students’ discourses more sustainable, which is a favorable phenomenon for Knowledge Building. Theresults of the productivity analysis show that, in this case, the chance of having productive dialogue in threadsstarting with questions is higher than the chance of having productive threads in non-question threads. AsCSCL 2017 Proceedings587© ISLSpresented above, there were nine question-driven threads that were coded as productive, while there were onlytwo non-question threads that were coded as productive threads. Therefore, only 18% of the 11 existing productivethreads started with non-question notes, while 82% of the all productive threads of the community were threadsthat started with students’ questions.As described before, the length of the “factual question” and “explanatory question” threads did not differsignificantly. Moreover, we identified five productive threads starting with explanatory questions, while four otherproductive threads started with factual questions. These findings do not show any significant difference betweenfactual questions and explanatory questions, in terms of their effects on improving the community knowledge. Infact, the results suggest that giving students sustained opportunities to pose original questions may help themengage in sustainable discourses that may result in productive discussions.These findings indicate that computer supported knowledge building environments provide theopportunity for students to express their puzzlements in order to mine the world around them. On the other hand,these questions encouraged peers to engage in sustainable discourse to dig down the issues and finallygenerate/improve theories. As a result, dealing with students-generated questions which they really care abouthelps knowledge building succeed by engaging the community in sustainable and productive discourses.Replicating the study with a richer dataset from different grade levels will be the focus of our next investigation,in order to examine if the same phenomenon occurs.ReferencesBereiter, C. & Scardamalia, M. (2012). Theory building and the pursuit of understanding in history, social studiesand literature. In Kirby, J.R., & M. J. Lawson, (Eds.). Enhancing the quality of learning: Dispositions,instruction, and learning processes (pp. 160-177). Cambridge University Press, UK.Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1993). Surpassing ourselves: an inquiry into the nature and implications ofexpertise. Chicago: Open Court.Bereiter, C., Scardamalia, M., Cassells, C., & Hewitt, J. (1997). Postmodernism, knowledge building, andelementary science. The Elementary School Journal, 97(4), 329.Chen, B., Resendes. M., Chai, C. S., Hong, H.-Y. (2017). Two tales of time: Uncovering the significance ofsequential patterns among contribution types in knowledge-building discourse. Interactive LearningEnvironments.Chuy, M., Resendes, M., Tarchi, C., Chen, B., Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2011). Ways of contributing toan explanation-seeking dialogue in science and history. QWERTY - Interdisciplinary Journal ofTechnology, Culture and Education, 6(2), 242–260.Hewitt, J. (2005). Toward an understanding of how threads die in asynchronous computer conferences. Journalof the Learning Sciences, 14(4), 567–589Hewitt, J., & Teplovs, C. (1999). An analysis of growth patterns in computer conferencing threads. In C. Hoadley& J. Roschelle (Eds.), Proceedings of the Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 1999Conference (pp. 232–241). Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.Law, N., Yuen, J., Wong, W., & Leng, J. (2011). Understanding learners’ knowledge building trajectory throughvisualizations of multiple automated analyses. In S. Puntambekar, G. Erkens & C. Hmelo-Silver (Eds.),Analyzing Interactions in CSCL: Methodologies, Approaches and Issues. pp. 47-82. New York: Springer.Resendes, M. (2014). Enhancing Knowledge Building discourse in early primary education: Effects of formativefeedback. Doctoral dissertation, University of Toronto.Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.),Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago, IL: Open Court.Scardamalia, M. (2004). CSILE/Knowledge Forum®. In Education and technology: An encyclopedia (pp. 183–192). Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In R. K. Sawyer(Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97-115). Cambridge University Press.Thagard, P. (2007). Coherence, truth and the development of scientific knowledge. Philosophy of Science, 74,28–47.Thagard, P. (1989). Explanatory coherence. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 12, 435-467.Tsoukas, H. (2009). A dialogical approach to the creation of new knowledge in organizations. OrganizationScience, 20(6), 941–957.CSCL 2017 Proceedings588© ISLS