Science Teachers’ Communities of Practice and PolicyImplementationKathryn M. Bateman, The Pennsylvania State University, kmb1182@gmail.comScott McDonald, The Pennsylvania State University, smcdonald@psu.eduAbstract: Science education is impacted by messages from multiple sources includingnational, state, and local policies as well as teachers’ communities of practice. National levelpolicies like the Next Generation Science Standards and local instructional polices such as theuse of Project-Based Learning require sensemaking by teachers, an inherently social process.As teachers engage with learning events and new tools they will use their network ofcommunities of practice to make sense of these policies, creating assemblages as they playwith the policy. In this data from an ethnographic study of school policy, four science teachersengage with tensions created as they make sense of school-based policies and optionalnational standards. Teachers with larger communities of practice engaged in more productiveplay with policies. We call for expanding teachers’ networks of communities of practice andbringing policy makers and administrators into the design of learning events and tools forbetter implementation.Keywords: science education, communities of practice, educational policy, taxonomy of learningMajor issues addressedEducational policies enter schools from multiple layers of the educational system. From national policies likethe Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA, 2015), to state level standards, and local instructional policies indistricts and even schools, teachers have to determine how best to implement these networks of policies in theirclassrooms in ways that most benefits their students. However, the messages sent at these different levels of thesystem are not always aligned, nor are the policies necessarily aligned with the teachers’ personal stance onteaching and learning. In this paper, we ask how science teachers’ communities of practice influence theirinterpretation and implementation of local instructional policy and their use of the NGSS Science andEngineering Practices. To address this question, we lay out a brief summary of work in implimentation research,the theoretical and conceptual framing used to look at this problem, as well as the methods of data collection.We conclude with claims regarding the effect of communities of practice on teachers’ implementation of policy.National and local policies in practiceAt the national level, science education does not have mandated standards or curricula. However, in 2013, theNext Generation Science Standards (NGSS) were published, having been built through a collective ofstakeholders from states using previous publication in science education research and policy. These standardsare not currently adopted in all states, but some states have used them to draft their own state standards using thethree-dimensional learning model of the NGSS. This three-dimensional model provides PerformanceExpectations rooted in Disciplinary Core Ideas, Cross Cutting Concepts and the Science and EngineeringPractices (hereafter referred to as the Practices), which states use to create their own standards and curriculumaligned with the local contexts. Though national accountability models require state standards in science, thereis no obligation to conform to the NGSS or a derivative of it. Therefore, states are free to create their owninterpretation of the NGSS or choose another model altogether.The school district represented in this study is situated in a state that has not currently adopted NGSSaligned standards, and the local district has not chosen to create an NGSS aligned curriculum. Implications forpractice include that teachers must make sense of messages they receive from different layers of the educationsystem – national, state, district, and local. Local implementation of state and national policy is often incombination with the implementation of other locale-specific policies that require or promote the use of highlyspecific pedagogical practices which can be in conflict. Teachers, then, must decide which policies should takeprecedent in their instructional practice.Policy sensemaking and communities of practiceIn addition to the policies in the educational system, a teacher’s communities of practice (Wenger, 1999) alsoinfluences instructional practices relating to these policies. Sensemaking is a collective practice; teachers do notcome to decisions on their own. Teachers’ communities of practice, both within and beyond their individualICLS 2018 Proceedings985© ISLSschool, shape policy implementation. Looking at reading teachers, Coburn (2001) found communities ofpractice serve as gatekeepers, determining what policies to validate or veto, and eventually come to support thedevelopment of shared thinking. For science teachers, sense needs to be made around pedagogical practices. Thevalues and beliefs of the communities of practice teachers engage in will therefore impact the way that theybring both teaching practices and science practices into their classroom.Teachers involvement in multiple communities of practice can then result in multiple interpretations ofa policy in different classrooms within the same school. To help inform this complexity, we take up Koyamaand Varenne’s (2012) idea of “policy as productive play” where policy implementation is assemblages ofdiscourses, peoples, regulations, rewards and punishments. In this framework, policy implementation is a nonlinear, non-consensus process in which there is room for “play” – negotiation, interpretation, and selectiveappropriation of the tenets of the policy (Koyama & Varenne, 2012, p. 157).As teachers engage in sensemaking around a policy, local communities provide resources to supportsensemaking and implementation of the policy. Cobb and Jackson (2012) developed a taxonomy of learningsupports to describe the potential that different types of resources have in supporting implementation of policyin schools and classrooms. There are four parts of the taxonomy: new positions, learning events, neworganizational routines, and new tools. In this paper, we focus on the learning events and new tools provided tothe science teachers in one school district to support their implementation of the local policy of Problem-BasedLearning (PBL) and the Practices found in the NGSS. Learning events happen within formal professionaldevelopment and communications, as well as teacher’s informal talk. Formal, or intentional learning eventsmight look like single day workshops, meetings of Professional Learning Communities, or presentations bycolleagues in a department meeting. Incidental learning events might take place in hallway conversations, lunchroom discussions, or as part of small group side conversations in other meetings. New tools to engage with thepolicies might be the texts teachers use with students, technology aids, and written policy messages. Theopportunities teachers have to engage with these learning events and tools will influence their play with policy.Theoretical and conceptual framingEach community of practice a teacher engages with will influence their implementation of a policy in theirclassroom practice and may introduce different learning events or new tools. What does and does not get takenup is influenced by multiple boundary interactions teachers have in each community (Wenger, 1999). Theinterpretation of policy that teachers create will be unique to each of them, based on the assemblage of messagesfrom each of their communities of practice about the policy and its peripheral factors. As part of a largerethnographic study of middle school culture, this study takes a sociocultural approach to teacher learning,drawing on situated cognition (Lave & Wenger, 1991) and communities of practices (Wenger, 1999) as meansof sensemaking (Coburn, 2001). A conceptual framework has been designed to incorporate Cobb and Jackson’s(2012) taxonomy of learning supports with policy as productive play (Koyama & Varenne, 2012) to criticallyexamine the ways that four science teachers incorporate two different policies (PBL and the Practices) into theirclassrooms.Methodological approachUsing ethnographic methods, data was collected through semi-structured interviews, participant observation,and artifact collection (Spradley, 1979, 1980). Though interviews with multiple disciplines in the schoolcommunity influenced the study, we focus our findings on four science teachers within two middle schools ofBrighton School District. Participating teachers’ classroom instruction was observed over the span of 2-5 dayson multiple occasions throughout the school year (see Table 1.) In addition to teacher interviews, Wilson’s (3)and Aldrin’s (2) principal, Aldrin’s vice principal (1), and two teacher leaders (1) were interviewed.Table 1: Teacher data collectedTeacherTaliaKaseyRoryMaggieSchoolAldrinWilsonWilsonWilsonSubject and Grade7th grade science8th grade science8th grade science7th grade scienceNumber of Interviews17101011Number of Observed Class Periods2617812Analysis was conducted using a constant comparative method and open coding (Emerson, Fretz, &Shaw, 2011; Lincoln & Guba, 1985) iteratively to create more cohesive codes. Within axial coding, emergentthemes (Maxwell, 2012) were used to find patterns in classroom practice and teacher thinking in terms of howICLS 2018 Proceedings986© ISLSthey were playing with policy in their teaching decisions. The resulting analysis led to a focus on PBL and thePractices, which was examined through further analytic iterations.FindingsAnalysis of this data is still preliminary, but several working claims are backed with evidence from theinterviews, observations and artifacts. Brighton School District provided teachers with broad scope professionaldevelopment opportunities in homogenous settings that minimized teachers productive play with policy as thesefail to account for variations on the taxonomies of learning put forth by Cobb and Jackson (2012.) Thehomogenized approach to broad professional development, lack of administrative knowledge of science, andmisaligned communities of practice each contribute to the level of productive policy play in which each teacherengages. Within their productive play with the local policy of PBL and the national level NGSS Practices, thefour participating science teachers engaged in play along a continuum for each policy. Maggie, a veteranteacher chose to ignore the policies of PBL and the Practices, incorporating neither. Talia embraced both PBLand the Practices, but struggled to implement both to a level she believed successful. Rory and Kasey each puttogether a patchwork of instructional practices in their classroom that attempted use of PBL alongside othertools and practices of the district. Rory, midway through the study, began to implement the NGSS, but did notquite get to incorporation of the Practices during the study’s scope.Professional development offered within the district likely contributed to the lack of time for thedistrict’s science community of practice to collaboratively play with the policies of PBL and the Practices.Learning events within Brighton School District around PBL represented a broad, homogenized approach. Allscience teachers were offered formal learning opportunities around PBL by colleagues who hold leadershiproles or who had been identified as successfully implementing PBL into their own classrooms; however, thesewere one-off workshop sessions, often only part of a larger day of activities. Informal learning opportunitieshappened between teachers within and across disciplines. Rory and Kasey reached out to two colleagues whohad been informally identified as successful implementers of PBL, but were not science teachers. There were noobserved formal or informal learning opportunities around the NGSS or other science content.There was some variation between schools in terms of formal learning events, but, no formal learningevents focused on science offered within the district professional development schedule. Administrators atWilson and Aldrin were responsible for setting the schedule of professional development offerings. Neitherprincipal had a science background, had taught science, or had heard of the NGSS. Both schools offered similarpercentages of learning events for Writing (18% and 19%) and Technology (31 and 30%.) With their additionalprofessional development time, Wilson provided learning events for Project Based Learning and note takingskills, whereas Aldrin used a large portion (31%) of its learning events for mathematics. Wilson’s principalbelieved in developing “21st Century Skills” so students were able to collaborate, whereas Aldrin’s principalwas concerned with increasing scores on the state tests coming in the Spring. Without learning events, tools forscience learning, administration established roles or organizational routines to discuss science formally,Brighton’s science teachers were denied space to engage in social policy play.Though pedagogical foci of the schools constricted the in-district productive policy play by sciencecommunities of practice, involvement with multiple communities of practice appears to increase teachers’ levelof productive policy play. Talia is highly involved with external communities of practice like national, state andlocal level science organizations, as well as a long-term project with a local university. She engaged the mostfully with PBL, allowing students to drive the instruction throughout most of the year, but voiced concernedwith the lack of “doing science” (Jiminez-Aleixandre, Rodriguez and Duschl, 2000). However, Maggie, aveteran science teacher in the school district, identified no external communities of practice, did not attemptimplementation of PBL and claimed to use the NGSS as a check-in for her to see if she’s “on track.” She callsthe NGSS “circles instead of squares,” a phrase she uses to mean the same thing with a new name. Maggie doesnot see the NGSS as influencing her teaching. Rory and Kasey each fall on the continuum between Maggie andTalia. They are attempting to use new policies like PBL, and in Rory’s case the NGSS, within their classroom.ConclusionsTeachers’ communities of practice, and the members within those communities, influenced how teachers playwith policies in this context. Within the district community of practice, teacher learning support was providedfrom administration as formal learning opportunities and tools, and teachers crafted informal learningopportunities through their communities of practice. However, two other elements of Jackson and Cobb’s(2012) taxonomy of leaning supports, new organizational positions and routines were not provided for teachersto engage with the Practices or PBL as a science-specific tool. Administrators need to be cognizant of theelements of the taxonomy of learning that are offered to teachers around policies. Because there was no data toICLS 2018 Proceedings987© ISLScollect on new organizational positions or routines within this data set, we surmise that these pieces may havefurther influenced the ways in which teachers play with policy.Communities of practice can enhance teachers’ play with non-district policies. Because the NGSS wasrelatively unknown to the district and school level administrators, there was no professional developmentoffered to the science teachers in the district. Subsequently, teachers and administrators who did not haveexternal science education communities of practice were less aware of the NGSS and did not explicitly engagewith the Practices in their classroom. External communities of practice, like those with which Talia engaged,can provide learning opportunities and tools not available in the district. Experiences with more heterogeneousgroups of science teachers expose teachers to a broader perspective on science teaching and learning.SignificanceFindings from this study add to our understanding of how teachers make sense of conflicting policies as part oftheir negotiation across school and external communities of practice. It also adds to the limited amount ofresearch on science education and policy that involves observations and thick descriptions of practice. Thoughthere are studies using survey data (Anderson, 2012; Aydeniz & Southerland, 2012), there are few studies ofteachers’ enactment over longer periods of time. Barton (2001) does examine the political nature of educationthrough critical ethnography but focuses specifically on the students’ culture. Similarly, Kelly and Chen (1999)use ethnographic methods to examine student discourse, but do not situate the teacher in larger community ofpractice of the school system. Providing thick description of the practices of science teachers engaged inproductive policy play adds to the research base and provides grounding for further intervention studies.This research informs policy making at all layers of the educational system (national, state, anddistrict), as well as how learning events and tools should be provided to teachers in order to implement policieswith success. We provide administrators, professional development facilitators and teacher leaders withinformation on how policies get interpreted and implemented. This can help to guide teacher learning towardopportunities for teachers to more easily implement policies that are meant to increase student learning.Relevant scholarly referencesAnderson, K. J. (2012). Science education and test-based accountability: Reviewing their relationship andexploringimplicationsforfuturepolicy.ScienceEducation,96(1),104–129.http://doi.org/10.1002/sce.20464Aydeniz, M., & Southerland, S. A. (2012). A national survey of middle and high school science teacher’sresponses to standardized testing: Is science being devalued in schools? Journal of Science TeacherEducation, 23(3), 233–257. http://doi.org/10.1007/s10972-012-9266-3Barton, A. C. (2001). Science Education in Urban Settings: Seeking New Ways of Praxis through CriticalEthnography, 38(8), 899–917.Cobb, P., & Jackson, K. (2012). Analyzing educational policies: A learning design perspective. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 21(4), 487–521.Coburn, C. E. (2001). Collective sensemaking about reading : How teachers mediate reading policy in theirprofessional communities, 23(2), 145–170. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/3594127ESSA (2015). Every Student Succeeds Act of 2015, Pub. L. No. 114-95 § 114 Stat. 1177 (2015-2016).Emerson, R. M., Fretz, R. I., & Shaw, L. L. (2011). Writing ethnographic fieldnotes. University of ChicagoPress.Jimenez-Aleixandre, M. P., Rodriguez, A. B., & Duschl, R. A. (2000). " Doing the lesson" or" doing science":Argument in high school genetics. Science Education, 84(6), 757-792.Kelly, G. J., & Chen, C. (1999). The sound of music: Constructing science as sociocultural practices throughoral and written discourse. Journal of research in science teaching, 36(8), 883-915.Koyama, J. P., & Varenne, H. (2012). Assembling and dissembling: Policy as productive play. EducationalResearcher, 41(5), 157–162. http://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X12442799Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Learning in doing (Vol.95). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. http://doi.org/10.2307/2804509Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry (Vol. 75). Sage.Maxwell, J. A. (2012). Qualitative research design: An interactive approach: An interactive approach. Sage.Spradley, J. P. (1979). The ethnographic interview.Spradley, J. P. (1980). Participant observation.Wenger, E. (1999). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge University Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings988© ISLS