The Role of Time, Engagement, and Self-Perceived Leadershipon Peer-Nominated Emergent Leadership in Small Group OnlineCollaborative LearningKui Xie, The Ohio State University, xie.359@osu.eduZhiru Sun, The Ohio State University, sun.272@osu.eduLin Lu, The Ohio State University, lu.962@osu.eduAbstract: The study investigated the nature of leadership emergence in small group onlinecollaborative activities. The study tested the effects of time, engagement, and self-perceivedleadership on peer-nominated leadership. Results indicated that emergent leadership perceivedby peers in a group not only required individuals’ active engagement and self-perception oftheir leadership role, but also required the leadership to be developed over time. High levels ofperceived task leadership and active engagement would lead to more likelihood for individualsto be perceived by peers as emergent leaders in a group. Qualitative analysis revealed thatquality of posts, active facilitation, quantity and diversity of posts, significant contribution,initiation of interaction, and motivating promotion were primary characteristics of emergentleaders.Keywords: emergent leadership, small group online learning, collaborative learningIntroductionLeadership roles often emerge in group-learning activities, where students commonly take different social rolesin the process of completing collaboration tasks (French & Stright, 1991). The emergence of leadership is asocial process during which individuals with no formal authority become leaders (Neubert & Taggar, 2004).Emergent leadership plays a crucial role of the success of small group collaborative learning activities. Membersof the group can lead different aspects of the collaborative learning process. For example, one member canfacilitate communications among team members; another person may mediate to resolve conflicts. Gressick andDerry (2010) found that leadership did emerge and was distributed among group members in onlinecollaborative learning activities. Li and colleagues (2007) found emergent leaders led in various means such asturn management, argument development, planning and organization, topic control, and acknowledgement.Particularly in online learning settings, however, questions, such as “How does leadership emerge in smallgroup collaborative learning? Why do some individuals become emergent leadership while others do not? Whatare the determining factors for individuals to become emergent leaders? What is the dynamic process ofleadership formation in small group learning?” remain unanswered. There has been limited research on whatthe nature of leadership emergence is in authentic classroom group learning activities (Edwards, 1994; Gressick& Derry, 2010; Yamaguchi, 2001).Traditional leadership research has often conceptualized emergent leadership as outward characteristicsand behaviors that can influence the entire group (e.g. Yukl, 1989; Carte, Chidambaram, & Becker, 2006).Leaders may regulate team members’ performance and provide rewards, caring, motivation, and intellectualstimulation to others (Avolio, 1999; Bass, 1998; Gibson & Vermeulen, 2003). Leaders can promote groupcohesiveness by managing the task or fostering a positive group environment (Huang, et al., 2010). They alsomonitor task progressions, direct group interactions, and resolve conflicts among group members (Wakefield,Leidner, & Garrison, 2008).Emergent leadership also may be viewed as an inner perception of person’s social status within thegroup, which often can (a) be represented through individuals’ perception of leadership of themselves, and (b)be seen as a common perception of social roles by peers in the group. Self-perceived leadership is an innerperception of self in respect to the social status within the group (Avolio & Gardner, 2005; Hall, 2004). Twotypes self-perceived leadership include task leadership that deals with task accomplishments such as initiatingstructures and monitoring the process of the task, and relational leadership that facilitates team interactions suchas maintaining closed relationships, and empowering and motivating group members (Burke et al., 2006;Yamaguchi & Maehr, 2004). Peer-nominated leadership reflects how members perceive others’ leadership rolewithin the group. It often features characteristics such as competence, popularity, reputation, and authority(Avolio & Gardner, 2005; Bass, 1998). For example, with or without official leadership appointment, individualmembers could perceive themselves as leaders and others as followers in particular contexts or tasks. On theother hand, they could perceive others as leaders and themselves as followers.CSCL 2015 Proceedings198© ISLSTherefore, three facets of leadership in group-learning setting include outward characteristics andbehaviors – engagement, self-perceived leadership, and peer-perceived leadership. These facets maydynamically influence each other during a group learning process. Leadership research literature suggests thatself-perceived leadership may lead to the demonstration of active behaviors (engagement) with significantinfluences on learning performance (Kahai, Sosik, & Avolio, 1997; Carte, Chidambaram, & Becker, 2006;Gressick & Derry, 2010). Limited extant research further suggests that active learning engagement would helpstudents to gain popularity and possibly would lead to establish a leadership status perceived by other membersin a collaborative group (Xie, Yu, & Bradshaw, 2014). In addition, research suggests that the development ofsocial status in collaborative learning groups is a gradual and continuing process that requires to be evolved overtime. For example, Tuckman (1965, 1977) proposed that group development often goes through five stages offorming, storming, norming, performing, and adjourning. Xie, Miller, and Allison (2013) found that socialrelations in an online group learning community often go through multiple weaves of progressive development.These research findings lead us to believe that the development of emergent leadership could be a dynamicprocess where time, engagement, self-perceived leadership and peer-perceived leadership interact with eachother and evolve among the members within a learning group.In this paper, we report an investigation on how students’ engagement and self-perceived leadershipinfluenced their peers’ perception of emergent leadership over time in a small group online collaborativelearning setting. The following research questions guided the design of this study, conducted in an onlinecollaborative learning setting:1. Do time, engagement, and self-perceived leadership have an effect on peer-nominated leadership?2. How do engagement and self-perceived leadership influence peer-nominated leadership over time?3. What are the qualitative characteristics do students report to describe the peer-nominated leaders?MethodsParticipants and contextThe study involved undergraduates who were taking an elective online study-strategies course at a large publicuniversity in the Midwest United States during spring 2013. In total, 170 students from six sections of the courseparticipated. Participants were 63% White, 8% African American, 8% Asian, and the remainder 21% was ofother racial backgrounds. The distribution of gender was roughly equal, with males (42%) and females (49%).9% of students did not report their gender. In terms of college experience, 13.6% were first-year students,26.5% were sophomores, 20.6% were juniors, and 31.8% were seniors. 7.5% of students did not report theirgrade level. Students participated in five collaborative online discussions addressing the topics of note taking,reading, studying, presentation skills, and resilience. Students worked in groups of 5-7 in the discussions, whichprovided a forum for brainstorming ideas and coordinating process. Each discussion portfolio provided specificinstructions and grading criteria, which covered expectations of both quality and quantity of the onlinediscussion posts. At end of each week, students in a group were asked to nominate a group leader and providedthe rational for their nominations. To provide insight into students’ perceived leadership, students alsocompleted a confidential online survey at the end of the semester. Students provided consent for the use of theircoursework and survey responses for this research study.MeasuresMeasures of this study include self-perceived leadership, peer-nominated leadership, and online engagement.• Self-Perceived Leadership. Students’ perceived leadership was measured on a seven-point Likertscale, which was adapted from Yamaguchi and Maehr’s (2004) leadership scale. It consists of taskoriented (4 items) and relationship-oriented (5 items) leadership scales, measuring management ofactivities and interpersonal processes, respectively. Sample items, means, medians, standard deviations,and Cronbach’s alpha reliabilities of the scale are presented in Table 1.• Peer-Nominated Leadership. During the five-week research period (week 6-10), students were askedto nominate the emergent leaders for each week; therefore, the number of peer nominations wasemployed as a measure of students’ emergent leadership. Peer nomination data were collected in eachweek with total 5 times during the course of the study.• Online Engagement. Total numbers of students’ authored discussion posts in the five weeks were usedas the measure for students’ engagement in the online course. The engagement data were aggregatedinto five data points to represent students’ online learning engagement for each of the five weeks.CSCL 2015 Proceedings199© ISLSTable 1: Mean, standard deviations, and reliability statistics of perceived leadership scaleVariableTask LeadershipRelational LeadershipSample ItemI gave the directions about how to do the online discussions.I tried to get everyone to work together.Mean4.013.98SD1.491.41.87.88Findings and discussionsQuantitative findingsTo answer the first and second research questions, repeated measures ANOVA was conducted to examine theinteraction between students’ perceived leadership and engagement and to link the interactions with the fivetime points in a person-centered analysis, the perceived leadership scale and engagement were dichotomizedusing a median-splits method (Midgley & Urdan, 2001; Pintrich, 2000). This procedure allowed for the use ofrepeated measures ANOVAs with multiple independent variables. Taking the task-oriented leadership variableas an example, student scoring below 4.0 were classified as low task leadership (LTL) and those scoring 4.0 andabove were categorized as high task leadership (HTL). This resulted in 48% (n=81) classified in LTL group and52% (n=89) in HTL group. The same method was applied to the perceived relationship-oriented leadership scaleand engagement data. Table 2 represents the grouping results through the median splits method.Table 2. Grouping through median splits methodAverage Peer NominationFactorOnline EngagementMedian16Task Leadership4.0Relational Leadership4.0GroupLowHighLowHighLowHighN818981897991%48%52%48%52%47%53%Week 6.351.07.54.89.67.77Week 7.331.07.44.97.67.76Week 8.351.17.481.04.61.92Week 9 Week 10.21.411.20.9626.431.16.93.42.571.00.80Then, repeated measures ANOVAs were performed using perceived task-oriented leadership,relationship-oriented leadership, and engagement variables as the between-subject factors, the five time pointsas the repeated measures factor, and peer-nominated leadership on the five week points as the within-subjectfactors. The analysis generated two general tests of significance that are relevant to the research questions.Do time, engagement, and self-perceived leadership have an effect on peer-nominated leadership?The within-subject analysis showed that there was an overall significant interaction effect of time,perceived leadership, and online engagement on students’ emergent leadership nomination [F(4,648)=2.35,p=.05,=.01]. However, no significant main effects were found in the individual within-subject factors –time, perceived leadership, and online engagement. These results suggest that time, engagement, and selfperceived leadership alone did not significantly influence peer-nominated leadership. However, together, theyhad significant impact on the emergent leadership perceived by other members in a learning group.How do engagement and self-perceived leadership influence peer-nominated leadership over time?The between-subject analysis showed that after controlling the time effect, both perceived task-orientedleadership [F(1,162) =53.29, p<.001,=.06] and engagement [F(1,162)=18.84, p=.002,=.15] hadsignificantly positive effect on students’ emergent leadership nomination. Specifically, as shown in Figure 1.A,students who were in high-engagement group were more likely to be nominated as the group leader throughoutthe five weeks than those students in low-engagement group. As shown in Figure 1.B, students in high-taskleadership group were more likely to be nominated as the group leader throughout the five weeks than those inlow-task-leadership group. However, as shown in Figure 1.C, there were no significant differences in the peernomination between the high-relational-leadership and low-relational-leadership groups. In addition, nosignificant interaction effects were found in the between-subject factors – perceived leadership and engagement.CSCL 2015 Proceedings200© ISLSA.–––– High Engagement Group–––– Low Engagement GroupB.–––– High Task-Leadership Group–––– Low Task-Leadership GroupC. –––– High Relational-Leadership Group–––– Low Relational-Leadership GroupFigure 1. Differences of peer-nominated leadership between groupsIn summary, the quantitative results indicated that emergent leadership perceived or nominated bypeers in a group not only requires individuals’ active engagement and self-perception of their leadership role,but also requires the leadership to be developed over time. High levels of perceived task leadership and activeengagement would lead to more likelihood for individuals to be perceived by peers as emergent leaders in agroup.Qualitative findingsWhat qualitative characteristics do students report to describe the peer-nominated leaders?In this asynchronous online course, main class activities were facilitated through the weekly online discussions.Therefore, the posting records in the discussion board would reflect the most frequent and visible learningactivities where students interacted with each other. The reasons of the leader nomination, therefore, focusaround various posting behaviors. By the end of each week, in the nomination surveys, students were asked tonominate one or more leaders in the group and provide justifications for their nominations. Six primary reasonsemerged in the qualitative analysis through open coding combined with interpretive coding (Merriam, 1998).The results are delineated in Table 3.First, 199 instances were identified from the data indicating that the quality of posts was the primaryreason determining students’ nomination. Students indicated appreciation to those posts that had highly relevant,original, thoughtful, and well-structured contributions to group knowledge building. While students spokehighly of the nominees’ high-quality posts, they also demonstrated their disappointment on those posts withrepeated opinions or being poorly structured.Second, students generally perceived leadership by receiving the leaders’ active facilitation. 167instances were coded relevant to this theme. Timely coordination and replies with constructive suggestionsbenefited students when they had questions or confusions in group learning. Students tended to recognizeindividuals as leaders who are willing to voluntarily keep the group functioning and capable to understand,analyze, and solve other students’ problems.Third, 106 instances revealed another critical reason for their nomination, that is, the quantity anddiversity of posts made by the leaders during online group discussions. Emergent leaders not only gave a largenumber of posts in the discussion board, but also responded to a wide range of group members. Studentsrecognized that emergent leaders did read posts authored by various group members, and gave at least a reply toalmost everyone in the group. In addition, emergent leaders actively and consistently participated in groupthroughout the entire one-week learning period.Fourth, 97 instances indicated that initiation of interaction in a group discussion is an explicitleadership behavior through posting in the online discussion board. Initiation means that the post is published tothe group prior to any other posts under a certain discussion topic. Students also indicated that they regularlyreviewed others’ posts before writing their own posts. The initial post that started the discussion of the weekoften led the direction of the discussion for this week. Students who made the initial posts, therefore, naturallyhad been perceived as the leader and the moderator of the week.Fifth, 87 instances denoted that students perceived those who practically made a significantcontribution to the group tasks as their leaders. The leaders completed the major group tasks (i.e., making theCSCL 2015 Proceedings201© ISLSpresentation slides, turning in the final paper) or made important decisions (i.e., deciding the topic of groupproject).Finally, 22 instances revealed that students were motivated to participate in class activities by thoseemergent leaders. The leaders promoted others’ motivation. For example, students reported that they had to readand post more because of the emergent leaders’ active engagement, and frequent and timely responding. Someresponses from the emergent leaders gave advice to students in an encouraging tone, and made the author feelemotional and motivated on their own learning.Table 3. Reasons for nomination with sample quotesNomination Reason1. Quality of PostN199Sample Quote[His opinion is] significantly different from the rest of the group.She provides well-formatted arguments and presents good ideas.[The student made] concise quote that made a number of compelling points.2. Active Facilitation163[The student] replied to many of the posts using constructive tips.She did a lot in terms of keeping everyone on track and making sure we got thingsdone.3. Quantity andDiversity of Posts106She is always constantly posting throughout the week[The student] provided feedback on everyone's comments.[The student] tried to give her input to every person's post.[The student] contributed the most and offered the most input among all the groupmembers.4. Initiation ofInteraction97He started off this week’s conversation.She was the only person in our group who had posted an initial discussion!5. SignificantContribution87[The student] created the presentation and completed a lot of the skeleton chart.He was the one to suggest module 2 as our topic and put the PowerPoint together.6. Motivating Promotion22She gave me some tips along with being encouraging.This differs from some people who just comment on a post for credit. I believe hiscomments are substantive.In addition, the absence of the six factors often led to non-nomination behavior which happened whenstudent chose to not nominate anyone in the group as the emergent leader. Some students who chose not tonominate anyone provided explicit reasons, such as, a late start-up post, lack of responses, little knowledgeableinput, or a failure of receiving help from the group. The non-nomination denoted that students perceived a lackof leadership in their group.Conclusions and implicationsThe present study made an initial attempt to reveal the nature of leadership emergence in small group onlinecollaborative learning. Beyond a common sense, the study provided the quantitative evidence to argue that thefactors – time, engagement, and self-perceived leadership – have a significantly interactive effect on the peerperceived leadership. This means the emergent leadership perceived by peers in a group requires individuals’active engagement and self-perception of their leadership role, and also requires time to develop. Specifically,consistent active-engagement and self-perceived role of task leadership are the two essential indicators for theemergence of leadership. The students who perceive themselves as the leader in the learning group and activelyengage in group discussions are more likely to be nominated as the leader by peers, vice versa. This couldprovide guidance for designing and managing online group activity where emergent leadership is needed (suchas doing a synthesized group project).Furthermore, both quantitative and qualitative findings suggest the importance of meeting students'need of being supported by leadership. For example, the six main reasons of nomination outline the qualities ofan ideal leader that students expected their leaders to have in their group. The matching degree between what thestudents expected for leadership and what the learning environment provided could be a diagnostic perspectivefor teaching practitioners to examine different collaborative online learning context.Last but not least, the findings would help online students to better understand that the conflictsbetween self-perceived and peer-perceived leadership roles may exist in online collaborative learning activities.Further instructional design could be guided by the present study for helping students coordinate self-perceivedand peer-perceived leadership role.CSCL 2015 Proceedings202© ISLSReferencesAvolio, B. J. (1999). Full leadership development: Building the vital forces in organizations: Sage.Avolio, B. J., & Gardner, W. L. (2005). Authentic leadership development: Getting to the root of positive formsof leadership. The leadership quarterly, 16(3), 315-338.Bass , B. M. (1998). Transformational leadership: Individual, military and educational impact. Mahwah, NJ:Erlbaum.Carte, T., Chidambaram, L., & Becker, A. (2006). Emergent leadership in self-managed virtual teams. GroupDecision and Negotiation, 15(4), 323-343. doi: 10.1007/s10726-006-9045-7Edwards, C. A. (1994). Leadership in groups of school-age girls. Developmental Psychology, 30(6), 920.French, D. C., &Stright, A. L. (1991). Emergent leadership in children's small groups. Small Group Research,22(2), 187-199.Gibson, C., &Vermeulen, F. (2003). A healthy divide: Subgroups as a stimulus for team learning behavior.Administrative Science Quarterly, 48(2), 202-239.Gressick, J., & Derry, S. (2010). Distributed leadership in online groups. International Journal of ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, 5(2), 211-236. doi: 10.1007/s11412-010-9086-4Hall, D. T. (2004). Self-awareness, identity, and leader development. Leader development for transformingorganizations: Growing leaders for tomorrow, 153-176.Huang, R., Kahai, S., &Jestice, R. (2010). The contingent effects of leadership on team collaboration in virtualteams. Computers in Human Behavior, 26(5), 1098-1110. doi: DOI: 10.1016/j.chb.2010.03.014Kahai, S. S., Sosik, J. J., &Avolio, B. J. (1997). Effects of leadership style and problem structure on work groupprocess and outcomes in an electronic meeting system environment. Personnel Psychology, 50(1), 121146. doi: 10.1111/j.1744-6570.1997.tb00903Merriam, S. B. (1998). Qualitative Research and Case Study Applications in Education. Revised and Expandedfrom" Case Study Research in Education.".Jossey-Bass Publishers, 350 Sansome St, San Francisco, CA94104.Midgley, C., &Urdan, T. (2001). Academic self-handicapping and achievement goals: A further examination.Contemporary educational psychology, 26(1), 61-75.Neubert, M. J., &Taggar, S. (2004). Pathways to informal leadership: The moderating role of gender on therelationship of individual differences and team member network centrality to informal leadershipemergence. The Leadership Quarterly, 15(2), 175-194.Pintrich, P. R. (2000). The role of goal orientation in self-regulated learning.Wakefield, R. L., Leidner, D. E., & Garrison, G. (2008). Research Note-A Model of Conflict, Leadership, andPerformance in Virtual Teams. Information Systems Research, 19(4), 434-455.Xie, K., Miller, N.C., & Allison, J.R. (2013). Toward a social conflict evolution model: Examining the adversepower of conflictual social interaction in online learning. Computers and Education, 63, 404-415.Xie, K., Yu, C., & Bradshaw, A.C. (2014). Impacts of role assignment and participation in asynchronousdiscussions in college-level online classes. The Internet and Higher Education, 20, 10-19.Yamaguchi, R. (2001). Children’s Learning Groups A Study of Emergent Leadership, Dominance, and GroupEffectiveness. Small Group Research, 32(6), 671-697.Yamaguchi, R. &Maehr, M.L. (2004). Children's emergent leadership: The relationships with groupcharacteristics and outcomes. Small Group Research, 35(4), 388-406.Yukl, G. (1989). Managerial Leadership: A Review of Theory and Research. Journal of Management, 15(2),251.CSCL 2015 Proceedings203© ISLS