Common Ground and Individual Accountabilityin Literature Selection of Groups:Three Different Group Learning TechniquesMichael Schubert, University of Tübingen, michael.schubert@uni-tuebingen.deJürgen Buder, Knowledge Media Research Center, j.buder@iwm-kmrc.deRoman Rädle, University of Konstanz, roman.raedle@uni-konstanz.deFriedrich W. Hesse, Knowledge Media Research Center, f.hesse@iwm-kmrc.deAbstract: Libraries heavily changed over the last decades, supporting more and more thecollaborative learner in providing adapted spaces and technologies. The transformation seemsnot surprising, as group learning is generally considered to be better than individual learning,although the mechanism behind is still unclear. In a single factor experiment with 180students, 3-person groups jointly selected research literature for a Geology course at aMultitouch Tabletop. Based on the notions of common ground and individual accountabilityone third of the groups performed the task collaboratively. Another third had a precedingcooperative stage involving a division of labor, whereas the remaining third of groups had apreceding “parallel” stage. Results indicate a significant difference in learning achievementsfavoring the parallel condition. The results are discussed in the context of learningenvironments in libraries.Keywords: library, problem-solving, group learning, multitouch tabletop, experimentIntroductionIn the last decades, libraries experienced a tremendous transformation by providing more and more secludedrooms for groups to work and learn together using digital technologies (Gabbard, Kaiser, & Kaunelis, 2007).This transformation comes to no great surprise as the benefits of group learning has been shown for more thanforty years, summarizing that learning in groups is better than learning alone (e.g. Springer, Stanne, & Donovan,1999). There are many techniques to learn effectively in groups (e.g. collaboration, cooperation). Nonetheless,the way how group learning should be structured and fitted to real world scenarios is still unclear.For the purpose of this paper, we build on socio-cognitive research, arguing for the combination of twofactors: common ground as a social factor, and individual accountability as a cognitive factor. Based on thisrationale, we report first results of an empirical study altering the two factors in three specific group learningtechniques (collaboration, division of labor and parallel cooperation). The task involves computer-supportedface-to-face problem-solving, which is situated in the context of literature screening and selecting in a librarybased setting.Three techniques of group learningCollaboration (C) can be regarded as the gold standard of group learning. Working permanently together, one ofthe many benefits of C is that over time learners gain a common ground about the task at hand. Common groundrefers to shared knowledge, mutual beliefs and mutual assumptions to coordinate activities (Baker, Hansen,Joiner & Traum, 1999). By the means of grounding (Baker et al., 1999), groups not only overcome gaps in theirshared understanding, they also build a group knowledge, which is especially important while performingproblem solving tasks.However, research on motivation losses also identified effects, such as social loafing, which hampergroup achievement in collaboration (Kerr & Tindale, 2004). To bypass this problem, scholars studyingcooperative learning techniques found that individual accountability plays an important role in motivating eachgroup member to contribute to a group learning process (Johnson, Johnson, & Smith, 2007). Hence, instead ofpermanently working together, multi-stage approaches are introduced, including an individual stage and acollaborative stage. One way to initiate an individual stage, and therefore individual accountability, is to rely ontechniques using some division of labor (DoL). In stages of DoL, mostly no or just part of the task material isbeing shared in the group. Accordingly, it can be assumed that group learners who first use a DoL are motivatedto gain individual expertise as the group has to rely on it in a subsequent collaborative stage. However, thedownside of DoL is that learners will not possess common ground, and therefore a shared understanding of thewhole material, when entering the collaborative phase.CSCL 2015 Proceedings499© ISLSIn order to induce both common ground and individual accountability at the same time, a two-stagetechnique of group learning is used to which we refer as the parallel cooperation (PC). In the first stage, learnersindividually work on an identical task (i.e share the same material/no DoL), while in the second stage individualresults can be discussed. Thus, a “divergence of labor” in the first phase results in heightened individualaccountability producing idiosyncratic viewpoints with both varying and redundant contributions. At the sametime, it creates a common ground as every learner needs to elaborate on the same material. We like to use thetechnique in a computer-mediated setting, which allows us to not only capture individual learning contributionssystematically, but make them even comparable for the second stage, so that awareness about each groupmember's understanding is increased.In order to address the possibility of comparing group member’s learning activities, we decided to use aMultitouch Tabletop (MTT) technology. According to Jermann and Dillenbourg (2008), the MTT can eitherreflect individual and group activities, or transform these activities in a way that makes them more comparableand accessible for the group. While the former is important for collaborative and DoL groups, the lattercharacteristic might account especially for PC groups.The present studyThe present study compares the three techniques of group learning in a problem-solving task that involves thejoint activity of screening and selecting research literature in a computer-supported library setting. Three-persongroups were asked to select four out of twelve journal articles, which they would further employ in a seminarreport on “Water Scarcity in Sub-Saharan Africa”. To make the selection of four, participants read the abstractsof each article and rated them on a scale ranging from 0 (very irrelevant) to 6 (very relevant). Even thoughabstracts provide just a blink of information compared to full-text articles, we decided to use abstracts becausein real-world literature selection tasks rarely all relevant articles are fully read before deepen into the material.After rating every article, the four highest rated articles were automatically selected if the group decided tofinish the task. Groups in the C condition did the entire selection task in a one-stage approach as a group. In theDoL condition, a first stage had individuals rate four out of the twelve articles individually. In the second stage,individual ratings were transferred into a shared external representation, and learners had the opportunity tochange these ratings collaboratively. In the PC condition, the first stage required learners to individually rate alltwelve articles. For the second stage, individual ratings were also transferred into a shared externalrepresentation, and learners had the opportunity to change ratings collaboratively. In order to address thepractical question of whether group learning outperforms individual learning, we employed a fourth condition asour base line with learners who did the entire task in a one-stage approach alone and without a group context.Based on the considerations about common ground and individual accountability, it was expected thatthe C condition and the PC condition will be associated with common ground and shared understanding aboutthe task at hand, reflected in a higher degree of post-interaction shared mental models (Hypothesis 1). Further,the DoL technique and the PC technique should benefit from heightened individual accountability, resulting in ahigher motivation to contribute to the collaborative discussion in the second stage, reflected by a higher equalityof participation (Hypothesis 2). Finally, we expected that the PC technique which benefits from both commonground and individual accountability would yield the highest problem-solving performance compared to theother group techniques, reflected in the similarity of the final selection compared to an expert solution(Hypothesis 3).MethodsParticipants and designTo conduct our experiment, we recruited a total of 180 students (119 women; 61 men; mean age = 24.39 years)from the University of Tübingen. Students were either paid 8 Euros, or received course credit. To reduce theeffect of prior knowledge, we excluded students from Geography. The experiment had a single factor designwith three different interventions (group learning techniques): collaboration, DoL and PC. Moreover, we alsoinvestigated an individual condition as our baseline. Participants were randomly assigned to the conditions.MaterialsArticlesIn a preliminary study, the twelve articles had been selected from a set of 21 articles, by having 30 participantsindividually rate article abstracts on readability and understandability. The items were presented as 5-pointscales ranging from 1 (e.g. not readable at all) to 5 (e.g. very readable). Based on the results, we selected 12CSCL 2015 Proceedings500© ISLSarticles with the highest ratings of readability (M = 3.89; SD = 0.37) and understandability (M = 3.81; SD =0.31). After having the set of twelve articles, we additionally asked a subject matter expert (SME) to rate eacharticle on a 7-point scale to conduct the final relevance ratings according to the task and the seminar theme.These relevance ratings have later been used to evaluate performance measures.Multi-touch tabletop (MTT)As an MTT device for both the group conditions and for the individual condition, we used a Samsung SUR40.To make article reading and rating possible, we further developed a tool which allowed the handling of articleswith multi-touch interactions.In the collaboration condition and in the individual condition, the participants used the same interfacefor the whole time. In the DoL and PC condition, in order to allow individual working before discussing results,first, three distinct private spaces were presented, providing the functionality of reading and rating articles.Depending on condition, either four (DoL) or twelve (PC) articles were presented, and articles were color-codedto allow better distinction afterwards. Once all group members submitted their individual rating, private spacesdisappeared, and the screen changed to the full-screen interface version. In the DoL condition, it showed theindividual ratings as a cumulated representation, keeping the color-coding, so that participants knew whicharticle was rated by whom. In the PC condition, it showed a transformation of the individual ratings toarithmetic means. Additionally, individual, color-coded ratings were preserved for each article, making it morecomparable to distinguish which article was rated by whom to which degree.ProcedureOn arrival at the laboratory, participants were assigned randomly to one of the group conditions. Participantsfirst read task descriptions and filled out a pre-intervention questionnaire asking for demographic data and priorknowledge. After finishing the questionnaire, participants were invited to test all functionality (moving, openingand rating articles) in a demo version of the basic interface with three non-related articles for around fiveminutes. Afterwards, the group started the task as described above having no time limit to finish the task. Thewhole task procedure was videotaped. Once participants agreed upon their selection of four, they filled out apost-intervention questionnaire. Finally, participants were debriefed and rewarded for their participation.MeasuresShared mental modelsIn the post-intervention questionnaire we measured shared mental models about selection criteria (Mathieu,Heffner, Goodwin, Salas, & Cannon-Bowers, 2000). Nine rating criteria have been presented to the participants(e.g., currentness of date or relatedness to the region) asking to indicate for each criterion whether it played animportant role for the group during discussion or not (categorical: y/n). Frequencies and percentage of completeagreements (three times yes or no) upon one criterion were measured and transformed to odds ratio (-1 / 1,where 1 means perfect agreement upon all nine criteria).Equalization of participationTo calculate equalization of participation, we used the standard deviation of talking time (in seconds) acrossgroup members in the collaborative stage. The lower the standard deviation, the more equal the participation(whereas 0 would mean perfect equalization). Using the coding software ANVIL (Kipp, 2001), two codersdouble-coded 33% of the videos with an interrater-reliability of .765 (corrected Cohen’s kappa), which indicatesa substantial agreement.PerformanceBefore we started calculating the performance, data has been cleaned by dropping all ratings which a group setto a value between 0 and 1 (of a scale from 0 to 6) in the discussion phase, classifying them as dismissed (nonrelevant) articles. Then, we took the final rating of all not-dismissed articles from the log files and calculateddifferences to the corresponding subject matter expert ratings. Finally, the mean difference upon all articles(ranging between 0 and 6) of one group was computed—the smaller the mean difference, the better the groupperformance.FindingsHypothesis 1 predicted that groups in which common ground is established (collaboration, PC) will have agreater degree of sharedness among post-intervention mental models about selection criteria. Using an oddsratio for calculating agreement, a one-way ANOVA of shared criteria mental models between the three groupCSCL 2015 Proceedings501© ISLSconditions showed no significant effect, F < 1. There was no difference between the collaboration condition (M= .27, SD = .82), the DoL condition (M = .51, SD = 1.07), and the PC condition (M = .15, SD = .75). This meansthat hypothesis 1 has to be rejected.For testing our hypothesis that individual accountability has a moderating effect on equality ofparticipation (Hypothesis 2), we measured the total time of talk of each participant (in seconds) and looked onthe standard deviation of each group. As a Levene’s test of equality of error variance was significant (p < .05),we ran a Kruskal-Wallis-Test. Results indicate a difference among the three group learning techniques (H(2) =14.387, p = .001, w = .52), with a mean rank of 38.72 for collaborative groups, 24 for DoL groups and 19.78 forPC groups. Further post-hoc analysis using the Mann-Whitney-U test, revealed significant differences betweenthe collaborative condition (Mdn = 129,8) and the DoL condition (Mdn = 67,6), U(34) = 74, Z = -2.78, p = .005,and significant differences between the collaborative condition and the PC condition (Mdn = 39,1), U(34) = 74,Z = -3.607, p = .000. No differences were found between the DoL condition and the PC condition (U(34) = 137,Z = -0.79, p = .429). On the basis of these data, Hypothesis 2 can be confirmed.Hypothesis 3 tested whether there were differences in group performance among all four conditions.Therefore, we performed a one-way ANOVA of selection performance (mean rating differences to SME ratings)between the four conditions to see which condition reached the lowest mean differences (best performance) atthe end. Results indicated a significant difference of F(3, 68) = 5.576, p = .002, η² = .197. Further analyses usingTukey-HSD revealed that this effect was due to a better performance in the PC condition. This condition (M =1.06, SD = .29) differed significantly from the collaborative condition (M = 1.49, SD = .43, p = .009), from theDoL condition (M = 1.51, SD = .44, p = .006), and also from the individual condition (M = 1.50, SD = .43, p =.007). Thus, Hypothesis 3 could be confirmed.The design of the experiment also allowed to further analyze whether groups in the two-stageconditions (DoL, PC) had different performance levels over time, as both the performance of collated ratingsafter the first, individual phase and of collated ratings after the second stage could be compared. A 2 (condition:DoL and PC) x 2 (time of measurement: before and after discussion phase) ANOVA with time as within-subjectfactor revealed a disordinal interaction effect F(3, 68) = 19.756, p < .01, η² = .368. Further paired t-testscomparing measurement times (pre/post discussion phase) revealed that performance increased for the PCcondition, Mpre = 1.42, SDpre = .29, Mpost = 1.06, SDpost = .29, t(17) = 4.943, p < .001. In contrast, performance inthe DoL condition slightly decreased over time, Mpre = 1.29, SDpre = .22, Mpost = 1.51, SDpost = .44, t(17) = 2.028, p = .059. In other words, these results lent further support to the idea that the PC technique was effective.DiscussionThis study compared different techniques of group learning, based on the rational that they differ with regard tocommon ground and individual accountability. While our results underscore findings on cooperative learningemphasizing individual accountability as an important role in group problem solving, common ground seemedto have no effect in our setting. As the collaborative condition and the PC condition did not differ in regard toshared understanding of literature selection criteria, we need to question whether the advantages in groupachievement of the PC condition were due to common ground. Calling for other possible factors, one candidatemight be the increased comparability of group members’ individual contributions. The external representationsused in the PC condition did not only show collated rating averages after the first stage, but also madedifferences between individual ratings visible. In providing valuable cues for groups to compare and supportnegotiation, different instructions for evoking comparability seems a promising approach for future research.This accounts not only for learning scenarios involving libraries, but for learning environments in general.ReferencesBaker, M., Hansen, T. G. B., Joiner, R., & Traum, D. (1999). The role of grounding in collaborative learningtasks. In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.), Collaborative Learning  : Cognitive and Computational Approaches (1sted., pp. 31–63). Amsterdam ; New York: Elsevier Science.Gabbard, R. B., Kaiser, A., & Kaunelis, D. (2007). Redesigning a library space for collaborative learning.Computers in Libraries, 27(5), 6–11.Jermann, P., & Dillenbourg, P. (2008). Group mirrors to support interaction regulation in collaborative problemsolving. Computers & Education, 51(1), 279–296. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2007.05.012Johnson, D. W., Johnson, R. T., & Smith, K. (2007). The State of Cooperative Learning in Postsecondary andProfessional Settings. Educational Psychology Review, 19(1), 15–29. doi:10.1007/s10648-006-9038-8Kerr, N. L., & Tindale, R. S. (2004). Group performance and decision making. Annual Review of Psychology,55, 623–55. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.55.090902.142009CSCL 2015 Proceedings502© ISLSMathieu, J. E., Heffner, T. S., Goodwin, G. F., Salas, E., & Cannon-Bowers, J. A. (2000). The influence ofshared mental models on team process and performance. The Journal of Applied Psychology, 85(2),273–83. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10783543Springer, L., Stanne, M. E., & Donovan, S. S. (1999). Effects of Small-Group Learning on Undergraduates inScience, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology: A Meta-Analysis. Review of EducationalResearch, 69(1), 21–51. doi:10.3102/00346543069001021CSCL 2015 Proceedings503© ISLS