Using Differences to Make a Difference:A Study on Heterogeneity of Learning GroupsSven Manske, University Duisburg-Essen, manske@collide.infoTobias Hecking, University Duisburg-Essen, hecking@collide.infoIrene-Angelica Chounta, University Duisburg-Essen, chounta@collide.infoSören Werneburg, Otto-Hahn-Gymnasium Dinslaken, soeren.werneburg@gmail.comH. Ulrich Hoppe, University Duisburg-Essen, hoppe@collide.infoAbstract: There is an increasing interest in student-centered teaching methods with smallgroup learning as an important ingredient. In this paper, we present a study in which theperformance of heterogeneous and homogeneous learning groups has been c ompared in atechnology-enhanced classroom setting in the area of STEM learning. The group formationwas based on learning analytics results that were considered in a semi-automatic formationprocess. The analytic methods used incorporated different artefact-related characteristics, butalso motivational features as input. We observed that the heterogeneous groups outperformedthe homogeneous ones in different ways. The results of the study are analysed usingquantitative and qualitative approaches on both the individual and the group level.Keywords: group learning, heterogeneity, inquiry-based learning, online experimentationIntroductionThere is an ongoing debate about the future of Europe being threatened by a downward trend in scienceeducation due to a lack of attraction for young people to become researchers or to work in fields of science andtechnology (Rocard, et al., 2007; Gago, Ziman, Caro, Constantinou, & Davies, 2004). Many initiatives point outthat there is a need for more scientists and thus for fostering students’ interest in science (Global Science Forum,2006). Large scale assessments, such as PISA, show that student-centered and supportive teaching methods areneeded. These aim to convey key competencies to learners by activating them, which opens new opportunitiesin contrast to teacher-centered approaches (Hannafin, Hill, Land, & Lee, 2014). This has been mainlyunderpinned by a change from teacher-centric and deductive to inquiry-based methods. Initiatives like the GoLab project enforce the idea of inquiry-based science education with online experimentation. Students dive intothe role of researchers to investigate the big ideas of science. They receive guidance in the different steps ofinquiry, e.g., through explicit phase names, scaffolds and other guidance mechanisms. Typical scenarios in GoLab consist of different tools and learning resources, aligned to an experiment with the Go -Lab portal serving asa general infrastructure and access point to a variety of online labs. As such , Go-Lab does neither directlysupport student collaboration nor classroom orchestration on the part of teachers. While collaborative onlinetools, especially in the context of virtual and remote experimentation, are not generally available, blendedlearning scenarios offer the opportunity to induce off-line collaboration in the classroom. Thus, teachers arerequired to set up group learning scenarios and take care of the classroom and group orchestration (Dimitriadis,Prieto, & Asensio-Pérez, 2013; Roschelle, Dimitriadis, & Hoppe, 2013; Dillenbourg, 2013).To support this kind of classroom orchestration, we employ methods from learning analytics to createstudent groups with specific performance characteristics. To that end, we propose a multidimensional, clusteringschema that takes into consideration students’ motivation towards science and students’ activity style withrespect to artefact-based measures in a computer-supported learning environment. With the use of theaforementioned schema, we created heterogeneous and homogeneous groups that carried out a learning activitythrough the Go-Lab portal. Our main objective was to compare the performance of those groups and explorewhether group heterogeneity had an effect on the overall learning outcome. Usually it is expected that weaklearners who are members of heterogeneous groups or medium ability learners forming homogeneous teamsachieve the maximum knowledge gain (Lou, Abrami, & d’Apollonia, 2001). We argue that heterogeneousgroups coordinate and create common ground faster and easier than the homogeneous groups since the differentcharacteristics of the individuals might complement each other. This is also depicted on the quality of theactivity’s outcome and the knowledge gain of students.We evaluated this hypothesis on heterogeneity in a real classroom setting where the students had tocarry out an inquiry-based learning-task. In order to evaluate the knowledge gain, the students took pre - andpost-knowledge tests and the outcome of the activity (concept maps, short descriptive texts and group reports)was assessed by the teacher. We used the log files of the Go -Lab portal to analyze the activity of students. InCSCL 2015 Proceedings182© ISLSaddition, two experts were asked to observe the activity and keep notes in the form of activity transcripts inorder to assess the collaborative practices of groups.In the next sections we present a short overview of the state of the art, the experimental setting of thestudy and our conceptual framework. We present the analysis and evaluation of the results, a discussion on thefinding of the study and we conclude with the outcome and future work.Background and related workGroup formation is a key aspect of CSCL because it can affect the way people work together towards a commongoal and eventually the learning outcome itself. Collaborative activitie s are expected to promote learningthrough common knowledge building and the social interaction among users (Stahl, Koschmann, & Suthers,2006). However, collaboration alone does not ensure knowledge gain or successful prac tice (Jermann, Soller, &Muehlenbrock, 2001). Usually the task of group formation is carried out by the teacher who uses his experienceon pre-defined criteria that may refer to students’ social skills, gender, motivation or knowledge background(Ounnas, Davis, & Millard, 2009). This complicated process requires time and does not always lead to success.Based on the availability of student performance data in computerized learning environments, (semi-)automatic or algorithmic approaches to group formation have been suggested. E.g., Balmaceda, Schiaffino, &Pace (2014), define group formation as a weighted constraint satisfaction problem (WCSP) depending on thecharacteristics of students such as personality traits, team roles, and social relationships. Also network analysistechniques have been employed for analyzing the interaction of users through a learning platform and clusteringstudents based on their similarity (Sadeghi & Kardan, 2014). As one of the most sophisticated technicalsolutions so far, the GroupAL algorithm (Konert, Burlak, & Steinmetz, 2014) allows for optimizing groupcomposition according to a variety of features, with the option of choosing between homogeneity andheterogeneity for each of these features.The role of group homogeneity in collaborative classroom activities has been a subject of variousstudies. There are indications that heterogeneity of knowledge is beneficial for group performance (Webb,Nemer, & Zuniga, 2002; Kizilcec, 2013). However a certain baseline of background knowledge appears to berequired for the collaboration to be beneficial (Gijlers & De Jong, 2005). In our own prior work we had alsoseen positive effects of diversity on the performance of learning groups (Chounta, Giemza, & Hoppe, 2014).Experimental settingThis section covers the experimental setting of the study. First, we describe the Go-Lab platform which will beexplained in line to the implemented scenario. Apart from the technical system, we explain the didactical goalsand the production of learning objects by the students during this scenario. These artefact s are used for theassignment of groups and the assessment of performance characteristics.The learning activity was split up into two phases: the first phase consists of individual student workfor the initial assessment of performance characteristics. The tasks that the students had to carry out involvedwriting a short text to describe a simulation, and creating a concept map from different learning resources. Amotivational questionnaire captured their interest and motivation in science. These characteristics served as aninput for the group formation, which was used in the second phase of the study. In the second phase, thestudents performed an inquiry-based learning task in groups. The task objective was the online experimentationwith a virtual lab of an osmotic power plant.The outcome of the second phase was a concept map and a written report per group. The concept mapshould describe the parameter model of the power plant, and for the report the students had to formulate a shortsummary about their findings. This should include a critical reflection about the usefulness of osmotic powerunder different aspects, e.g. sustainability, effectiveness and dependence of the location. Four explicitassignments guided the students through the scenario and provided a scaffold for the report. However, no formalstructure was given in order to promote an open-ended range of possible solutions.Go-Lab learning environmentThe Go-Lab portal is a web based learning environment for the authoring of inquiry-based learning scenariosand their implementation in classes (Govaerts, et al., 2013). The Go-Lab system follows an innovative approachto inquiry learning by providing a general infrastructure and acts as an access point to online labs. It aggregateslearning resources and scaffolds, and provides guidance to learners (de Jong, Sotiriou, & Gillet, 2014). Figure 1shows an example Inquiry Learning Space (ILS) of the environment, which has been used fo r this study, fromthe student perspective. Such learning activities consist of different inquiry phases, which are displayed as“tabs” in the navigation bar of the web environment and thus define a guided path through the inquiry process .CSCL 2015 Proceedings183© ISLSLearning goalsThe main goal of our learning scenario is to understand the mechanism of osmotic power and how the locationof an osmotic power plant influences the power generation. The learning scenario demands multidisciplinarityfrom the students in a way that knowledge from different subject domains such as biology, chemistry andphysics is used. Also competencies from different fields such as text writing, metacognitive skills, conceptmapping and inquiry skills are released during this experiment.Critical thinking skills are demanded in the second phase of the study, where the students perform thegroup work task. At the beginning of the group phases, they get confronted with the “aggregated concept map”of all students (Manske, et al., 2014), which can be seen as a union of all concept maps represented as graphs.Such a structure contains useful and useless concepts and possibly wrong connections. This enforces a criticalgroup discussion about the correctness of specific parts. In the following, students take this knowledge to createa new concept map capturing the parameter model of an osmotic power plant, while they are also confrontedwith some ecological factors of osmotic power and sustainability. Explicit assignments guide them through thisscenario although they have to structure a final report by themselves.Such a complex and multidisciplinary scenario, which incorporates different skills and competencies,possibly lead to a big diversity of the results. The students provide a non -standardized report as a final result,which does not allow for a simple and automated assessment. However, the benefits are in the qualitativeevaluation of the reports and the group observations, which shows that it is possible to track differentcompetencies and to have a detailed view on the students’ performances.(a)(b)Figure 1. The web based learning environment with the interactive osmotic power plant simulation (a), and astudent using the concept mapper in this environment during the study (b).Conceptual frameworkThis section covers the conceptual framework for the group formation. First, it describes the process chain forthe conceptual model of the group formation, which has been applied in our experimental setting. A key aspectis the composition of a feature set to describe different performance related characteristics of learning objectsand motivation. Therefore, we provide an overview about all used measurements and their backgrounds.Group formation processing chainWe define a heterogeneous learning group as a learning group, where each member has different performancecharacteristics. The learners produce artifacts during an inquiry-based learning scenario as described in theexperimental setting. The artefacts, particularly learning objects and the assessment of motivational scores formthe dataset for the group assignment. These characteristics span a feature space, while the vector containing thescores for a single student is called feature vector, which is an element of the feature space. To use simpleEuclidean distance measurements in such a vector space, the feature vectors are normalized.CSCL 2015 Proceedings184© ISLSIn total, we capture the performance characteristics through six artefact-related and three motivationalscores, leading to a nine-dimensional feature space. In terms of classroom size, the dimension is too high toproduce meaningful clusters. To tackle this curse of dimensionality, we perform a feature selection to minimizethe dimension to a plausible number derived from the number of students and groups.Performance characteristics and indicatorsTo decide whether a group is heterogeneous or homogeneous, we capture different performance characteristicswhich serve as a basis for the group formation. These incorporate not only artefact-based assessment on conceptmaps and small texts but also motivational assessments based on the SMTSL questionnaire (Tuan, Chin, &Shieh, 2005). The following section lines out different measurements of these performance characteristics.Concept MapsConcept mapping (Novak, 1984) is a technique for the externalization of knowledge structures in form ofsemantic networks. A learner creates a concept map by connecting concepts that are considered important for agiven domain by labeled relations. Since concept maps reflect the structure of domain knowledge of individuallearners, these artefacts are particularly suitable as a factor additionally to knowledge tests for characterizingstudents (Stoddart, Abrams, Gasper, & Canaday, 2000). In order to use the concept maps of students asparameters for group formation, quantification is needed. One approach is to compare a concept map to areference map created by a tutor or expert (Conlon, 2004; McClure, Sonak, & Suen, 1999). This requires amatching of concepts between both maps comparing labels. This can be done automatically using computerlinguistic methods (Conlon, 2004; Hoppe, Engler, & Weinbrenner, 2012). However, this is not trivial and canlead to wrong matching. Since the aim of this study is to measure the impact of group formation on studentperformance as accurately as possible, we decided to do the matching manually in order to avoid biasesintroduced by automatisms. Each concept map cm with a set of concepts 𝑁𝑆 and a set of relations 𝐸𝑆 iscompared to an expert map with the concepts 𝑁𝐸 and relations 𝐸𝐸 . Five different measures were calculated:Node precision: Node precision measures the fraction of concepts in a student concept map that can be|𝑁 | ⋂|𝑁 |matched to concepts in the expert map, 𝑝 𝑐= 𝑆| | 𝐸 .Node recall: This measure indicates to what extent the concepts in the expert map are covered by the|𝑁 | ⋂|𝑁 |student map, 𝑟 𝑐= 𝑆| | 𝐸 .Edge precision: The fraction of concept connections in the student concept map that can be also foundin the expert concept map, 𝑒𝑝 𝑐𝑁𝑆𝑁𝐸=|𝐸𝑆 | ⋂ |𝐸𝐸 ||𝐸𝑆 |.Edge recall: Edge recall is defined as the fraction of edges in the expert concept map that can be found|𝐸 | ⋂|𝐸 |in the student concept map, 𝑒𝑟 𝑐= 𝑆| | 𝐸 .𝐸𝐸HEW-measure: Hoppe, Engler & Weinbrenner (2012) introduced a quality indicator for concept mapsbased on the comparison of a concept map to a given ontology. The measure was obtained based onempirical observations of structural properties that correlate with expert quality judgments.ℎ𝑒𝑤 𝑐=|𝑁𝑆 |1+ 3|𝑁𝑆 ⋂ 𝑁𝐸 |+|𝐸𝑆 |1+ |𝐸𝑆 ⋂ 𝐸𝐸 |+|𝑁𝑆 ||𝐸𝑆 ⋂ 𝐸𝐸 |1+ |𝐸𝑆 ||𝑁𝑆 ⋂ 𝑁𝐸 |.We are aware that using these measures alone for a reliable assessment of the students' actual domainknowledge is limited. However, the concept map measures contribute to the creation of heterogeneous andhomogeneous student groups by providing additional discriminating factors. In this sense the measures do notnecessarily answer the question which students produce better concept maps but they give insights in whichstudents produce different concept maps, and thus have different characteristics.Text writingWhile text analytics and approaches of text mining still have huge deficits especially for short texts written bystudents in STEM fields (Leeman-Munk, Wiebe, & Lester, 2014), we used a non-automatic measurement for thetext quality characteristics. A teacher creates a model solution and scores the texts in respect to the model. Thisled to plausible scores without the possible downsides of text mining on short texts in sciences.MotivationAs motivation is one of the key ingredients for successful group work, we incorporated three measures formotivation towards science. The SMTSL questionnaire has been used in a shortened version to assess scores inCSCL 2015 Proceedings185© ISLSthree different categories of motivation: (a) Self efficacy, (b) Science Learning Value, and (c) LearningEnvironment Stimulation.EvaluationIn this study we aim to explore how group formation affects the practice of students and their performance incollaborative learning activities . To that end, we formed homogeneous and heterogeneous student groups usinga multidimensional clustering schema based on artefact-related characteristics and motivational scores, asdescribed above. In order to evaluate the practice of students we used bo th a qualitative (expert observations)and a quantitative approach (learning analytics). In order to assess the students’ performance, we carried outpre-knowledge and post-knowledge tests. In the following paragraphs, we present the results of the analysis anddiscuss the findings of the study.Quantitative analysisThe interaction of students with the learning platform was recorded in log files. We used the log files to extractmetrics of students’ activity and further explore any possible relation with q ualitative characteristics and theoverall knowledge gain. The scores of the knowledge tests ranged from 0 to 35 points and we used them toassess the learning outcome. Additionally we defined the activity metrics portrayed in Table 1 in order toevaluate the interaction of students with the learning platform.Table 1: Activity metrics extracted from user log filesMetrics of students activity on the concept mapnamedescriptionlearning platform related activity #actionsnumber of actionsduration (min)overall durationavgtimegap (sec) time gap between consecutive actions on averageconcept map related activity #conceptsnumber of created concepts#relationsnumber f drawn relations#addnumber of added objects#updatenumber of updates#deletenumber of deleted objectsIn Table 2, we present the results of the knowledge tests per group. According to the results, theheterogeneous groups appeared to have a higher knowledge gain than the homogeneous groups. Theheterogeneous groups improve their score in the post knowledge test on an average of 33% while thehomogeneous groups improved their score about 20%. In the current study, group homogeneity does not ensurethat the members of a group share similar knowledge background. For example, the members of group G2 thatis considered heterogeneous, scored similarly in the pre-knowledge test (pre-STDEV = 0.5). On the other hand,the pre-test scores of the members of group G6 that is considered homogeneous, portray a big devia tion (preSTDEV = 6.50).Table 2: Results of the pre and post knowledge tests for heterogeneous and homogeneous groupsHeterogeneous groupsPre-test scorePre-STDEVPost-test scorePost-STDEVAvg gainG116.001.4123.333.407.33G215.334.7823.004.907.67G315.500.5023.500.508.00avg(G1_3)15.612.2323.282.937.67Homogeneous groupsG412.672.0516.173.323.50G518.671.7024.001.475.33G612.506.5015.005.002.50avg(G4_6)14.613.4218.393.263.78The results of the knowledge tests were studied in comparison with the metrics of user activity.However, we were not able to draw any plausible conclusion for possible relations. The groups’ activity, asportrayed in the log files of the learning platform, was similar for all groups (Table 3). A common hypothesismade in similar studies is that collaboration quality and knowledge gain are usually depict ed in activity metrics,i.e. intense activity will lead to a solution of better quality (Kahrimanis, Chounta, & Avouris, 2010). Thishypothesis however was not confirmed in this study.CSCL 2015 Proceedings186© ISLSTable 3: Group activity metrics for heterogeneous and homogeneous groups#actionsduration (min)avgtimegap (sec)#concepts#relations#add#update#deleteHeterogeneous groupsG1G2G330575623.8248.4221.6749.2852.9423.6413.0028.0024.0010.0025.0028.0013.0024.0024.0012.0024.0028.000.006.001.00Homogeneous groupsG4G5G638566016.7725.6729.7527.1928.0030.2519.0023.0029.0012.0023.0027.0017.0024.0026.0014.0023.0027.002.002.004.00Qualitative analysisDuring the group phase of the study, the users had to create a concept map based on what they learned and towrite a report. A teacher rated both the concept maps and the reports of the groups. This way, we wanted toensure the findings from the pre and post knowledge tests. The concept maps were rated in a [0, 8] range and thereports were rated within the range [0, 12]. The ratings of the teachers for the concept maps and the work reportsare presented in Table 4. The results of the ratings with respect to group homogeneity confirm the findings ofthe knowledge tests. The heterogeneous groups are higher graded than the homogeneous ones for both theconcept maps (21.4%) and the final work reports (29.6%).Table 4: Teacher ratings of the concept maps and work reports per groupConcept M ap ScoresReport ScoresHeterogeneous groupsG1G2G3avg(G1_3)4734.67101169.00G412Homogeneous groupsG5G6avg(G4_6)221.67644.00The practice of students was recorded in transcripts by two experts who attended the study. In addition,a third expert took general notes of the activity (e.g. notes about the timeline and events that might affect theactivity). From the analysis of the transcripts, we identified three main group types: (a) Type A: One studentoperates the computer, the rest comment or guide him verbally , (b) Type B: Group members change rolesfrequently regarding typing and directing and (c) Type C: One student is actively involved in the task, the otherswatch silently or do not do pay attention.Two out of three heterogeneous groups (G1 and G3) were identified as of type B. The experts statedthat even though they started out shyly, they managed to create a common ground and share responsibilities andtasks. They were enthusiastic about the activity until the end and seemed to enjoy it. For the group G3 inparticular, the experts noted that they did not communicated openly (talking or arguing, etc.) and sometimesthey were hesitant to act. Towards the end of the activity they did not interact between them but they carried onworking separately even though they shared the use of the computer. This group score the highest score in thepost-knowledge test and the maximum knowledge gain. The third heterogeneous group (G2) was identified astype C. According to the experts’ observations, one particular student took over the activity but continuouslytried to involve the other members by giving detailed explanations on every step of the process.For the homogeneous groups, two were identified as type A (G4 and G5). According to the transcripts,the students of both groups were hesitant in the beginning. For group G4, it took them considerable effort tostart communicating and one student took action in order to move forward with the activity. In group G5 onestudent appeared to be more aggressive and active and dominated the activity from the start. Gradually allstudents began to participate within their groups. For group G4, however, it was too late to catch up while groupG5 lost motivation towards the end. We think that the time the individuals needed in order to coordinate withthe rest of the rest of the group members was critical and in the end this is depicted in the learning outcome. Thethird homogeneous group (G6) was identified by experts as type C. According to the experts’ observations, onegroup member carried out the whole task while the other one was silently watching. Despite the fact that theactive student tried to involve the other member in the activity, there was no collaboration or argumentation.Group G6 had the lowest score on average in the post-knowledge tests and also the minimum knowledge gain.It is worth mentioning that the groups which were identified as type C had the maximum groupdeviation in the pre-knowledge tests (Pre-STDEV, Table 2). This practically means that in both groups thereCSCL 2015 Proceedings187© ISLSwas a “strong” student who eventually dominated the activity. However, in the case of the heterogeneous groupthe knowledge gain on group average was higher than in the case of the homogeneous group.DiscussionIn this paper, we discuss the effect of group formation strategies on students’ collaboration and the learningoutcome. Analysis showed that the heterogeneous groups increased their performance and appeared to have ahigher knowledge gain than the homogeneous groups. On an individual level, the students who were memb ersof heterogeneous groups had a knowledge gain of 33% on average while the students who formed homogeneousgroups improved their individual performance for about 20% with respect to the pre -tests. This finding was alsoconfirmed by the teacher ratings of the concept maps and the group reports. Heterogeneous groups were gradedhigher than homogeneous groups for the quality of the concept maps they provided through the learningplatform and for the quality of the written reports.In order to assess the group activity with respect to collaboration quality, we used activity transcriptswhere experts recorded their observations. The experts stated that the students of heterogeneous groups adjustedtheir practice easier than the students of homogeneous groups. They undertook roles and responsibilities fasterand without conflicts. Even in the case when they didn’t seem to communicate on a satisfactory level, theymanaged to carry out the task efficiently. On the other hand, homogeneous groups needed more time in order tocreate a common ground and to collaborate effectively. In some cases this was proven critical since some of thestudents lost interest and others were unable to carry out the task in time.Additionally, we used the log files of the learning platform to define metrics of user activity. To thatend, we followed popular approaches where activity metrics were introduced as indicators of good collaborationquality or efficient group practice (Kahrimanis, Chounta, & Avouris, 2010). However, we were not able toprove any relation between activity metrics and the learning outcome. The group practice was similar for mostcases with respect to activity metrics and group homogeneity. We should however keep in mind that due to thestudy setup one could argue that the activity metrics do not reflect group work or collaborative practice andtherefore we should not expect a correlation with the overall group picture.ConclusionTo tackle the issue of how to engage students in sciences and capture their intere st, we propose the usage of richinquiry-based learning scenarios, as demonstrated in the Go -Lab project. Incorporate online learning withclassroom presence leads to blended learning scenarios. This gives the opportunity to take the collaborativeparts of the learning into the classroom, with all its benefits and challenges for the teacher. We propose a way tosupport the group orchestration through the application of learning analytics, particularly the analysis of learningobjects and assessed motivation. Finally, we conducted an experiment and applied methods of sequence and logfile analysis to validate our hypotheses through multi-level analysis.The analysis of our results indicated that heterogeneous groups outperform the homogeneous ones andachieve higher knowledge gain. Thus, there is no benefit of choosing homogeneous groups in terms ofperformance. Even though when having a group with only good performin g students, they still do not performsignificantly better than the heterogeneous groups, but they don’t compensate the weaker performance in theother homogeneous groups with weaker characteristics. For the class average, heterogeneous groups are betterin sum, while it also covers basic principles of fairness, which is reflected by a lower diversity between thegroups’ performances. Fairness is both a principle that can influence the motivation of students in a further waybut also underpins pedagogical decisions and thus is one of the important steps towards successful internaldifferentiation of learner groups . The results of this study cannot be generalized due to the small number ofparticipants; however they can serve as indications for group formatio n. In future work, we aim to conductlarge-scale studies in order to confirm the outcome in a statistically significant way.ReferencesBalmaceda, J. M., Schiaffino, S. N., & Pace, J. A. (2014). Using constraint satisfaction to aid group formation inCSCL. Inteligencia Artificial, Revista Iberoamericana de Inteligencia Artificial, 17 (53), 35-45.Chounta, I.-A., Giemza, A., & Hoppe, H. U. (2014). Multilevel Analysis of Collaborative Activities Based on aMobile Learning Scenario for Real Classrooms. In Collab. Techn. and Soc. Computing,127-142.Conlon, T. (2004). 'Please Argue, I Could Be Wrong': a Reasonable Fallible Analyser for Student ConceptMaps. World Conf. on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia and Telecomm., 2004, 1299-1306.de Jong, T., Sotiriou, S., & Gillet, D. (2014). Innovations in STEM education: the Go -Lab federation of onlinelabs. Smart Learning Environments, 1(1), 1-16.CSCL 2015 Proceedings188© ISLSDillenbourg, P. (2013). Design for Classroom Orchestration. Comput.& Educ., 69, 485-492.Dimitriadis, Y., Prieto, L. P., & Asensio-Pérez, J. I. (2013). The role of design and enactment patterns inorchestration: Helping to integrate technology in blended classroom ecosystems. Comput.& Educ, 69,496-499.Gago, J., Ziman, J., Caro, P., Constantinou, C., & Davies, G. (2004). Europe needs more scientists. Brussels:European Community Conference Increasing Human Resources for Science and Technology.Gijlers, H., & De Jong, T. (2005). The relation between prior knowledge and students' collaborative discoverylearning processes. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42(3), 264-282.Global Science Forum. (May 2006). Evolution of Student Interest in Science and Technology Studies.Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.Govaerts, S., Cao, Y., Vozniuk, A., Holzer, A., Zutin, D. G., Ruiz, E. S., . . . others. (2013). Towards an onlinelab portal for inquiry-based stem learning at school. In Advances in Web-Based Learning, 244-253.Hannafin, M., Hill, J., Land, S., & Lee, E. (2014). Student-Centered, Open Learning Environments: Research,Theory, and Practice. In Handbook of Research on Educ. Communications and Technology, 641-651.Hoppe, H., Engler, J., & Weinbrenner, S. (2012). The impact of structural characteristics of concept maps onautomatic quality measurement. Proceedings of the 10th ICLS. Sydney, Australia.Jermann, P., Soller, A., Muehlenbrock, M. (2001). From mirroring to guiding: A review of the state of arttechnology for supporting collaborative learning. Proceedings of the EuroCSCL-2001.Kahrimanis, G., Chounta, I. A., & Avouris, N. (2010). Study of correlations between logfile -based metrics ofinteraction and the quality of synchronous collaboration. Int. Reports on Socio-Informatics, 7(1).Kizilcec, R. F. (2013). Collaborative Learning in Geographically Distributed and In -person Groups. AIED 2013Workshops Proceedings Volume, 67.Konert, J., Burlak, D., & Steinmetz, R. (2014). The Group Formation Problem: An Algorithmic Approach toLearning Group Formation. In Open Learning and Teaching in Educ. Comm., 8719, 221-234.Leeman-Munk, S. P., Wiebe, E. N., & Lester, J. C. (2014). Assessing Elementary Students' Science Competencywith Text Analytics. Proceed. of the 4th Int. Conf. on Learning Analytics And Knowledge .Lou, Y., Abrami, P. C., & d’Apollonia, S. (2001). Small group and individual learning with technology: A meta analysis. Review of educational research, 71(3), 449-521.Manske, S., Hecking, T., Bollen, L., Göhnert, T., Ramos, A., & Hoppe, H. U. (2014). A Flexible Framework forthe Authoring of Reusable and Portable Learning Analytics Gadgets. ICALT, 2014, 254-258.McClure, J. R., Sonak, B., & Suen, H. K. (1999). Concept map assessment of classroom learning: Reliability,validity, and logistical practicality. Journal of research in science teaching, 36(4), 475-492.Novak, J. D. (1984). Learning how to learn. Cambridge University Press.Ounnas, A., Davis, H. C., & Millard, D. E. (2009). A Framework for Semantic Group Formation in Education.Educational Technology \& Society, 12(4), 43-55.Rocard, M., Csermely, P., Jorde, D., Lenzen, D., Walberg-Henriksson, H., & Hemmo, V. (2007). Scienceeducation now: A renewed pedagogy for the future of Europe. European Commission.Roschelle, J., Dimitriadis, Y., & Hoppe, U. (2013). Classroom Orchestration: Synthesis. Comput.& Educ., 69,523-526.Sadeghi, H., & Kardan, A. A. (2014). Toward effective group formation in computer-supported collaborativelearning. Interactive Learning Environments, ahead-of-print, 1-14.Stahl, G., Koschmann, T., & Suthers, D. (2006). Computer-supported collaborative learning: An historicalperspective. Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences, 2006, 409-426.Stoddart, T., Abrams, R., Gasper, E., & Canaday, D. (2000). Concept maps as assessment in science inquirylearning-a report of methodology. International Journal of Science Education, 22(12), 1221-1246.Tuan, H.-L., Chin, C.-C., & Shieh, S.-H. (2005). The development of a questionnaire to measure students'motivation towards science learning. International Journal of Science Education, 27(6), 639-654.Webb, N. M., Nemer, K. M., & Zuniga, S. (2002). Short circuits or superconductors? Effects of groupcomposition on high-achieving students’ science assessment performance. American EducationalResearch Journal, 39(4), 943-989.AcknowledgmentsThe Go-Lab project is partially funded by the European Union (Grant Agreement no. 317601) under theInformation and Communication Technologies (ICT) theme of the 7th Framework Programme for R&D (FP7).This document does not represent the opinion of the European Union, and the European Union is notresponsible for any use that might be made of its content.CSCL 2015 Proceedings189© ISLS