Rising Above? Implications of Complexity for Theories of LearningMichael J. Jacobson, The University of Sydney, michael.jacobson@sydney.edu.auPeter Reimann, The University of Sydney, peter.reimann@sydney.edu.auManu Kapur, ETH Zurich, manukapur@ethz.chSten Ludvigsen, University of Oslo, stenl@iped.uio.noStella Vosniadou, Flinders University, stella.vosniadou@flinders.edu.auSasha Barab, Arizona State University, sasha.barab@asu.eduMitchell J. Nathan, University of Wisconsin, mnathan@wisc.eduClark Chinn (discussant), Rutgers University, clark.chinn@rutgers.eduAbstract: A recent article—Conceptualizing Debates in Learning and Educational Research:Toward a Complex Systems Conceptual Framework of Learning—analyzed the long-runningcognitive versus situative learning debate and proposes that a Complex Systems ConceptualFramework of Learning (CSCFL) could provide a principled way to achieve a theoreticalrapprochement. In this session, we bring together major educational and learning theoreticiansfor cognitive, situative, embodied, and socio-cultural perspectives to consider, debate, and toperhaps (or not) “rise above” currently engaged major issues, debates, and disagreements thatfundamentally influence educational research in a wide range of areas.Session summaryThe main objective of this session is bring together major educational and learning theoreticians who generallyconduct research from cognitive, situative, embodied, and socio-cultural theoretical perspectives to discuss andconsider a Complex Systems Conceptual Framework of Learning (CSCFL) proposed by Jacobson, Kapur, andReimann (2016). Their article argues that “current complexity perspectives might function best to inform aconceptual framework from which to view current and perhaps future theories of learning in terms of sharedprocesses and conceptual dimensions,” such as complex collective behavior in a system (e.g., system levels,nonlinearity, emergence) and behaviors of individual agents in a system (e.g., parallelism, conditional actions,adaptation and evolution). The CSCFL is then used to analyze the cognitive-situative debate, noting “a numberof theoretical components of both situative and cognitive theories of learning do align with several key CSCFLconceptual perspectives” but also that “the CSCFL … helped identify major omissions in both theories such assensitivity to initial conditions and nonlinearity and emergence. (p. 217)” Their article notes the applicability ofthe CSCFL for new “debates” about the potential primacy (or not) of neuro-science over cognitive and situativeperspectives and concludes with the hope that “principled theoretical considerations of learning as an emergentphenomenon in complex neural, cognitive, situative, social, and cultural systems will yield critically importantinsights of central relevance to our field that might not otherwise be possible with current perspectives andapproaches (p. 217).”The organizers of this session hope that bringing together these distinguished researchers for “principledtheoretical considerations of learning” will help answer the question posed in the title of this session: Is a complexsystems conceptual framework fundamental to theories of learning? If yes, then why; if no, then why not.Scholarly or scientific significanceThis session is significant because it will open a dialogue and exchange of ideas and perspectives by adistinguished group of researchers whose work has been influenced by different theoretical perspectives who willconsider potential merits and limitations of the CSCFL proposed by Jacobson et al. (2016). Further, through theirinteractions, the participants and the audience can perhaps identify or articulate ways to advance thinking in thefield of educational research broadly construed about issues of fundamental theoretical importance.Structure of the sessionThis 90-minute session opened with comments by the Chair (5 minutes), followed by the five presentations (10minutes each). The participants were asked to consider three main points in their presentations: (a) provide a briefoverview of their main theoretical orientation, (b) discuss how their theorizing has informed their main researchactivities, (c) consider if the CSCFL (or some complexity-based variation of it) might or might not provide insightsnot otherwise possible with current theoretical perspectives in educational and learning research. The Discussantthen provided comments for 10 minutes followed by 25 minutes for small group discussions and audiencequestions.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1328© ISLSMethodological applications of the CSCFL: Quantitative and qualitativemethods meet agent-based modelingMichael J. Jacobson, The University of Sydney; Manu Kapur, ETH Zurich; and Peter Reimann, The Universityof SydneyOur respective research activities have generally employed a range of quantitative methods (e.g., experimentaland quasi-experimental designs, discourse analysis, data mining) and we have also used conceptual aspects of theCSCFL in our research, such as Kapur, Voiklis, and Kinzer (2007) (e.g., sensitivity to initial conditions) andJacobson et al. (2017) (e.g., system levels, emergence). In this presentation, we propose to extend the applicabilityof the CSCFL from considerations of theory to another key issue in the field: methodologies for doing researchand their suitability for studying learning as an emergent phenomenon. Our reading of the educational researchliteratures associated with cognitive and situative empirical studies is that researchers in these “camps” typicallyuse different methodologies. In general, we find papers based on cognitive perspectives tend to employquantitative research methods, whereas situative researchers tend to use qualitative and descriptive methods (i.e.,design research), with some use of mixed methods (of course, we recognize there are exceptions).Why is this important? There is an issue about whether either quantitative or qualitative methods aresufficient for explaining the emergence of learning. That is, we need to ascertain if and how these methods candeal with critically important facets of complex systems of learning such as emergence, the dialectical coexistence of linearity and nonlinearity, and issues of scale and hierarchical levels of systems. Unfortunately forquantitative approaches generally used in education, its major tools involve mathematical modeling (e.g.,differential equations, statistical models) that are primarily (but not exclusively) linear tools to break a systeminto its components or parts, study the parts individually, and then add the parts together to form the whole.Unfortunately, emergent phenomena have important characteristics that are nonlinear and that cannot be analyzedby “adding up the parts” (Jacobson & Kapur, 2012). There also are limitations for using qualitative approaches tounderstand the emergence of learning. While qualitative methods have certain advantages over quantitativeapproaches (Firestone, 1097), we argue qualitative techniques still have certain limitations for understandinglearning as an emergent phenomena. For example, the spatial-temporal scale of learning as it emerges fromcomplex neural, cognitive, social, and cultural systems poses challenges for qualitative approaches that must focuson a humanly-manageable portion of the entire space and time over which a learning or educational phenomenonunfolds.From the perspective of the CSCFL, a significant way to address these inherent limitations in the existingquantitative and qualitative approaches used in educational research is a hybrid approach that incorporatesmethodologies being used to study other types of complex physical and social systems (Jacobson & Kapur, 2012).We expect that research informed by the CSCFL would likely employ computer modeling methodologies such asagent-based modeling (ABM) and network models that are increasingly being used in the natural sciences(Holland, 1995; Mitchell, 2009) as well as in social science areas (Epstein, 2006), including economics (Arthur,Durlauf, & Lane, 1997), sociology (Elder-Vass, 2010), and organizational science (Carley, 2002). Thesymposium presentation discussed research employing such hybrid methods (Abrahamson, Blikstein, &Wilensky, 2007; Kapur, Voiklis, & Kinzer, 2008; Levin & Datnow, 2012; Maroulis et al., 2010), and consideredchallenges and issues for using such approaches.Connecting the unit of analysis in learning researchSten Ludvigsen, University of OsloOver the last three decades, the conceptualization of the phenomena of learning and cognition has been a hottopic. In the award-winning paper published in Educational Psychologist, “Conceptualizing Debates in Learningand Educational Research: Towards a Complex Systems Conceptual Framework of Learning,” a new conceptualturn is suggested (Jacobson, Kapur, & Reimann, 2016). I will take a socio-genetic (cultural) perspective on theproblems of complexity raised in this symposium. “Socio-genesis” means understanding the multiple layersinvolved in activities when analyzing human learning. We thus need to avoid the fragmentation of the learningsciences in separate units of analysis and levels of descriptions. When the analysis of learning takes a startingpoint that involves social interaction and artifacts in complex systems, the question of connecting layers and theunit of analysis becomes urgent.In most stances in learning theory, the unit of analysis mainly focuses exclusively on the individualwithin an environment. The socio-genetic perspective, however, provides an analytic stance that encompassesICLS 2018 Proceedings1329© ISLSthree layers (social interaction, the individual in interaction, and social practices) that we must view asinterdependent (Ludvigsen & Arnseth, 2017).When taking socio-genesis as a premise, understanding learning starts with an analysis of microinteractions. The study of micro-interactions implies a detailed analysis or measurement of how students engagein reasoning and problem-solving in specific knowledge domains or in themes that cross areas of disciplinaryknowledge. Social interaction is crucial because it is here that history, tools, and human action come together andmutually shape one another. This is the first layer in the analysis. The second layer focuses explicitly on howstudents make their cognitive, social, and emotional competences relevant through a series of actions in interactionwith others (process analysis). This layer gives insight into how students manage to interact with others and intotheir mastery of specific forms of knowledge. The third layer focuses on the institutional and historic dimensionsthat create affordances and constraints for students’ actions (the social practices). Institutions will always involvea degree of complexity and emerging phenomena that requires a broader historical and institutional analysis usinga variety of methods.The socio-genetic (cultural) stance includes the complexity that creates the foundation for learning andthe kinds of concepts that the field needs to progress. It makes it possible to work with different types of analysisrather than with only one analytic layer. We need to recognize that multiple layers influence participant’sprocesses and performance. This will give us a more robust, nuanced, and sophisticated understanding of humanlearning and cognition. In modern society, this often involves the use of computational artifacts.The cognitive-situative divide and the perspective of a complex systemsframeworkStella Vosniadou, College of Education, Psychology and Social Work, Flinders UniversityI am a cognitive developmental psychologist who works in the area of conceptual development and conceptualchange. From my perspective, I find that the attempt on the part of the situated perspective to capture the dynamicand social nature of learning is in the right direction. However, I also consider that treating knowledge entirely asa process “an activity that takes place among individuals, the tools and artifacts that they use, and the communitiesand practices in which they participate” (Greeno et al., 1996, p. 20) is problematic, particularly for a theory oflearning that needs to explain phenomena like conceptual change. Nevertheless, I believe that it is possible tosoften the boundaries between the cognitive and situative perspectives and to allow for conceptual change, byaccepting that humans are processors of symbolic structures and that knowledge is something that can be acquiredand change, while also accepting that this acquisition happens through participation in socio-cultural activities(Vosniadou, 2007). In other words, there is no need to see a conflict between learning as acquisition as opposedto learning as participation if we consider that knowledge structures exist in the form of symbolic representations,but also accept that these symbolic representations were acquired through participation in socio-cultural activities.Conceptual change in this system is the result of a complex process of interaction between individuals and theworld through a rich variety of mediated symbolic structures. Further, it is proposed that teaching for conceptualchange cannot rely on the implicit methods of cognitive apprenticeship, but must aim towards developing instudents the metaconceptual awareness required for explicit and intentional belief revision through the appropriateuse of socio-culturally based practices and carefully designed research-based curricula.Jacobson, Kapur and Reimann (2016) propose a conceptual framework of learning based on the study ofcomplex systems—physical or social—arguing that such a framework can provide a theoretical rapprochement tothe cognitive versus situative learning debate. Although I am not sure that the complex systems framework canindeed provide such a rapprochement, I do agree that learning occurs in complex social and cultural contexts andthat a perspective which examines it as an emergent phenomenon brings to the study of learning and of conceptualchange theoretical constructs and methodologies that have the potential to yield new and innovative insights.The art and science of impact: Unlocking human potential from a dynamicsystems perspectiveSasha Barab, Anna Arici, and Earl Aguilera, Arizona State UniversityWe are arguing for a paradigm shift in the ways we think about unlocking human potential, one that sees contentas fundamentally linked to practice, people as having rich potential, and technology as one component of anempowered ecosystem.While unlocking human potential is clearly a complex endeavor, many of us working to innovate andpositively impact this area have been operating under the wrong paradigm for creating sustainable growth. WeICLS 2018 Proceedings1330© ISLShave created an artificial divide among the content what one needs to know, the context in which it has value, andhow it transforms the person who is doing the learning (Engeström, 1987). Quite problematically, we haveallowed for human capacity to be treated as a “commodity” that, in the form of knowledge, can be converted intosome “technological fix” and transmitted into the mind of a passive learner.From this starting point, too many efforts have failed to recruit the everyday individuals whose potentialwe are invested in catalyzing (Engeström & Saninno, 2010). Rather, many approaches to learning position themas objects to be changed (problems to be solved) rather than as change agents (problem-solvers) themselves,passionately invested in expanding their own ability to do great things (Barab, Cherkes-Julkowski, Swenson etal., 1999). When a design is focused on content transmission with an assumption of fixed and isolated minds, wedevalue the capabilities learners bring to the process and undermine those we are working to empower.In contrast, we are arguing for an ecological and optimistic perspective of learning that considers one’smotivation for learning as a key component of the complex learning ecosystem. More importantly, clearly thereare problems that are amenable to “technological fixes” (Sarewitz & Nelson, 2008) in which the solution is boundup within the technology itself; for example, the use of antibiotics to fight an infection. However, even in the mostdirect causal relationships of biochemistry, there is still a wide variability in how each person will respond to thesame treatment, with many contextual factors and complex interactions involved in the successful administeringof medication (e.g., getting a correct diagnosis, affording the cost, finishing the treatment, experiencing sideeffects, or over-prescribing that leads to drug resistance).Naturally, these variations are even less predictable when applying innovations to complex issues likeunlocking human potential. It is here, that complexity theory is essential to conceptualizing how one leveragesinnovation for impact. In creating innovations to address literacy, discrimination, health, or unlocking humanpotential more generally it is unlikely that any designed product alone, whether a pill or a technology, will provesufficient for achieving meaningful impact; too many other factors interplay. Instead, in this presentation we willdraw from complexity theory to offer a complicated and more optimistic view of how we leverage innovation tohelp people grow.When we shift from overly deterministic and mechanistic perspectives of how innovation can supporthuman growth we begin to look not at technological fixes but at empowered ecosystems (Barab & Arici, in press).Empowered ecosystems involve interpretive space where learners, technologies, and enabling resources can cometogether to produce solutions. They have elements of dynamic systems, especially in terms of the solutions livingin the dynamic interactions among the various components, but we will also argue for the investment of thelearner. Any intervention that does not leave room for interpretive space and allow for agency is unlikely tocultivate the necessary energy for growth to emerge (Engeström & Saninno, 2010).We view complexity theory as essential to accounting for the success of the platform revolution wherethe focus of the innovation is to connect consumers and producers who bring and create value—in contrast topipeline solutions that disseminate value (Choudary, Van Alstyne, & Parker, 2016; Van Alstyne, Parker, &Choudary, 2016). Pipeline technologies are based on linear cause-effect relations with the solution residing withinone component and the innovation focused on most effectively dispensing these solutions. A platform perspective,coupled with complexity theory, positions “solutions” as distributed among multiple interacting components withthe goal being to empower and catalyze dynamics (see Figure 1). In this way, we argue that innovations for impactshould be conceptualized, designed, and researched as complex ecosystems—not isolated technologies.Figure 1. An Ecosystem-Based Framework for Characterizing Innovation for Impact.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1331© ISLSDo the merits of the complex systems conceptual framework of learningextend to design-for-learning guidelines?Mitchell J. Nathan, University of WisconsinMy scholarship in STEM education is influenced by a theoretical perspective that characterizes learning anddevelopment as emergent phenomena that arise from interactions between processes that operate at a wide rangeof scales (Figure 2). In addition to this theoretical perspective, methodologically, I distinguish between systemicand elemental approaches to learning research (Nathan & Sawyer, 2016). Elemental approaches assume aspects(such as context) can be “factored out” and analyzed independently (Greeno & Engeström, 2016). Systemicapproaches reject this “factoring assumption.”Figure 2. A Log10 time scale of human learning. Systemic (above) and elemental (below) research methods areplaced in approximate scale.For example, I am intrigued by ways that fine-grained processes of embodiment operating at the level ofneural, perceptual, and motoric systems, contribute to, or supervene on, complex cognitive processes such asconceptual learning, inference making, teaching, and educational policies that operate at greater time scales (e.g.,Nathan & Martinez, 2015; Nathan & Walkington, 2017). This also motivates my use of a systemic perspective onclassroom learning by studying both learning/learners and teaching/teachers, and their interactions. Thesesystemic studies of situated learning and instruction combine with elemental investigations into potentialmediators of the complex behaviors of interest. Information from systemic and elemental studies each informearly stages of design based research on learning environments as experienced by teachers and students.One central outcome is that teachers are highly responsive to students’ in-the-moment learning needs,and that teachers and students each employ physical enactment of their thoughts, levels of cognitive development,and social communication along with spoken language to make sense of new ideas, be understood by one another,and manage the complexities of the environment to foster learning and engagement (Alibali et al., 2014; Nathan& Kim, 2009; Nathan et al, 2015). These studies demonstrate that much of what we know, as well as how weteach and communicate what we know (and what we think we know about what others know), is embodied, asexhibited by behaviors such as gesture and movement, the use of objects and space, and metaphors linking abstractideas to concrete experiences. This seemingly formative role embodied processes have on complex cognitivebehaviors has significant implications for learning environment design and for formative and summativeassessment, which I would discuss during the presentation.Fit of CSCFLIn my view, learning, and behavior more generally, is a complex system, with many processes and subsystemsinteracting dynamically to produce the emergent phenomena that we observe. My questions enter on how to usecomplex systems theory to advance our understanding of learning and produce effective learning environments.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1332© ISLSFirst, we need to move beyond what Cognitive Science has achieved in defining and measuring initial conditionsand constraints in areas such as attention, perception, and memory, to tackle the question of supervenience: Howdo the processes operating at different scales interact to produce observed and intended behaviors? Second, wemust also acknowledge that studies of learning always under constrain the design guidelines needed to create andimplement effective learning environments. I would push the panel to weigh in on whether and how CSCFL canbridge the design-for-learning question.ReferencesAbrahamson, D., Blikstein, P., & Wilensky, U. (2007). Classroom model, model classroom: Computer-supportedmethodology for investigating collaborative-learning pedagogy. In C. Chinn, G. Erkens, & S.Puntambeka (Eds.), (Vol. 8, pp. 46-55). New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University.Alibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. J. (2012). Embodiment in mathematics teaching and learning: Evidence fromlearners' and teachers' gestures. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(2), 247-286.Alibali, M. W., Nathan, M. J., Wolfgram, M. S., Church, R. B., Jacobs, S. A., Johnson Martinez, C., & Knuth, E.J. (2014). How teachers link ideas in mathematics instruction using speech and gesture: A corpusanalysis. Cognition and Instruction, 32(1), 65-100.Barab, S. A., & Arici, A. (in press). Producing sustainable and scaled impact: A Human-centric framework. Toappear in M. Y. Young & S. T. Slota. (Eds.) Exploding the Castle: Rethinking how video games & gamemechanics can shape the future of education. Information Age.Barab, S. A., Cherkes-Julkowski, M., Swenson, R., Garrett. S., Shaw, R. E., &Young, M. (1999). Principles ofself-organization: Ecologizing the learner-facilitator system. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8,349–390.Box, G. E. P., & Draper, N. R. (1987). Empirical Model-Building and Response Surfaces. New York: John Wiley& Sons.Carley, K. M. (2002). Computational organizational science: A new frontier. Proceedings of the NationalAcademy of Sciences, 19(3), 7257-7262.Choudary, S. P., Van Alstyne, M. W., & Parker, G. G. (2016). Platform revolution: How networked markets aretransforming the economy--and how to make them work for you. WW Norton & Company.Elder-Vass, D. (2010). The causal power of social structures. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding. Helsinki, Finland: Orienta-konsultit.Engeström, Y., & Saninno, A. (2010). Studies of expansive learning: Foundations, findings, and future challenges.Educational Research Review, 5(1), 1–24.Greeno, J.G., Collins, A.M., & Resnick, L.B., (1996). Cognition and learning. In D.C. Berliner & R.C. Calfee(Eds.), Handbook of Educational Psychology. New York: McMillan.Greeno, J., & Engeström, Y. (2014). Learning in activity. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of thelearning sciences (pp. 128–150). New York: Cambridge University Press.Holland, J. H. (1995). Hidden order: How adaptation builds complexity. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.Jacobson, M. J., & Kapur, M. (2012). Learning environments as emergent phenomena: Theoretical andmethodological implications of complexity. In D. Jonassen & S. Land (Eds.), (Second ed., pp. 303-334).New York: Routledge.Jacobson, M. J., Kapur, M., & Reimann, P. (2016). Conceptualizing debates in learning and educational research:Towards a complex systems conceptual framework of learning. Educational Psychologist, 51(2), 210218. doi:10.1080/00461520.2016.1166963Jacobson, M. J., Markauskaite, L., Portolese, A., Kapur, M., Lai, P. K., & Roberts, G. (2017). Designs for learningaboutclimatechangeasacomplexsystem.LearningandInstruction.doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2017.03.007Kapur, M., Voiklis, J., & Kinzer, C. (2007). Sensitivities to early exchange in synchronous computer-supportedcollaborative learning (CSCL) groups. Computers and Education, 51, 54-66.Kapur, M., Voiklis, J., & Kinzer, C. K. (2008). Sensitivities to early exchange in synchronous computer-supportedcollaborative (CSCL) groups. Computers & Education, 51(1), 54-66.Levin, J. A., & Datnow, A. (2012). The principal role in data driven decision making: Using case study data todevelop multi-mediator models of educational reform. School Effectiveness and School Improvement,23(2), 179-201. Available online at http://dx.doi.org/110.Ludvigsen, S. & Arnseth, H.A. (2017). Computer-supported collaborative learning. In E. Duval, M. Sharples &Sutherland, R., Technology Enhanced Learning, 47-58. Cham, SC: Springer International.Maroulis, S., Guimerà, R., Petry, H., Stringer, M. J., Gomez, L., Amaral, L. A. N., & Wilensky, U. (2010).Complex systems view of educational policy research. Science, 330, 38-39.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1333© ISLSMitchell, M. (2009). Complexity: A guided tour. New York: Oxford University Press.Nathan, M. J., & Kim, S. (2009). Regulation of teacher elicitations in the mathematics classroom. Cognition andInstruction, 27(2), 91-120.Nathan, M. J., & Martinez, C. V. (2015). Gesture as model enactment: the role of gesture in mental modelconstruction and inference making when learning from text. Learning: Research and Practice, 1(1), 437.Nathan, M. J. & Sawyer, K. (2014). Foundations of Learning Sciences. In K. Sawyer (Ed.). The CambridgeHandbook of the Learning Sciences (Second Edition) (pp. 21-43). Cambridge, England, UK: CambridgeUniversity Press.Nathan, M. J., Srisurichan, R., Walkington, C., Wolfgram, M., Williams, C., & Alibali, M. W. (2013). Buildingcohesion across representations: A mechanism for STEM integration. Journal of Engineering Education,102(1), 77-116.Nathan, M. J., & Walkington, C. (2017). Grounded and embodied mathematical cognition: Promotingmathematical insight and proof using action and language. Cognitive Research: Principles andImplications, 2(1), 9.Sarewitz, D., & Nelson, R. (2008). Three rules for technological fixes. Nature, 456(7224), 871-872.Toyama, K. (2015). Geek heresy: Rescuing social change from the cult of technology. New York: PublicAffairs.Van Alstyne, M. W., Parker, G. G., & Choudary, S. P. (2016). Pipelines, platforms, and the new rules of strategy.Harvard Business Review, 94(4), 54-62.Vosniadou, S (2007). The Cognitive-situative divide and the problem of conceptual change. EducationalPsychologist, 42(1),55-66.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1334© ISLS