Examining Parent-Child Communication and Affect DuringTabletop Gameplay in a Children’s Museum: Implications forLearningKristen Missall, University of Washington, kmissall@uw.eduSalloni Nanda, University of Washington, salloni@uw.eduCaitlin Courshon, University of Washington, courshon@uw.eduBenjamin DeVane, University of Iowa, benjamin-devane@uiowa.eduJeremy Dietmeier, University of Iowa, jeremy-dietmeier@uiowa.eduBen J. Miller, University of Iowa, ben-j-miller@uiowa.eduMichala Brand, Central College, brandm1@central.eduAbstract: Parent-child communication during collaborative play in children’s museums canstrengthen exhibit engagement and contribute to child problem-solving and content learning.We present pilot data examining parent-child communicative acts and affect during digitaltabletop gameplay. Across dyads, results show diverse communication and affect. However,consistently less nonverbal communication was observed compared to verbal communication,and almost no touch was observed. Within dyads, patterns of verbal and nonverbal acts weresimilar across parent and child partners.Importance of studyParent-child interactive play with museum exhibits increases child engagement and learning (Crowley et al.,2011). Supportive parent communication encourages children to have a positive experience, and includes usingquestions that produce meaningful discussion, warmth and a positive tone, immediate positive feedback, andbuilding on previous knowledge (De Ru et al., 2015; Jant et al., 2015). Museum visitors make meaning of theirmuseum experiences by interacting with people and materials, and focusing more on process than knowledge(Falk & Dierking, 2012). Although published literature has reported on the importance of both positive tone andspecific types of communicative acts for parents and children separately, there is a dearth of remarks on the studyof communication, affect, and content together during parent-child play. Therefore, this presentation of data froma pilot study describes affect and communication during parent-child interactive tabletop play and implicationsfor parent-child learning experiences.MethodParticipantsSeven parent-child dyads participated with children between the ages of 4 years 11 months and 8 years 8 months(Mage = 6 years 4 months), who were beginning kindergarten through third grade. Of the parent-child dyads, 2were father-daughter, 2 were father-son, 2 were mother-son, and 1 was mother-daughter.Coding measuresData were generated using project-developed observation codes for verbal and nonverbal communication appliedto videotaped and transcribed sessions of parent-child tabletop gameplay. Observation codes were developed bymodifying existing parent-child interaction codes (see Eyberg et al., 2009; Roggman et al., 2013). For each dyad,and separately for parent and child, each verbal communicative act was coded as one of six possiblecommunication categories (e.g., command, question, response/answer, behavioral description, evaluation, neutraltalk) and additionally as one of three categories of affect (e.g., positive, negative, neutral). Each category is definedfor coding. For example, the category “command” is defined as “a statement in which speaker directs vocal ormotor behavior of the other.” Examples and non-examples are provided. Similarly, affect for verbalcommunication is defined. For example, “positive” verbal communication is “positive, tender, enthusiastic,warm;” “neutral” is “flat, lacking inflection and identifiable support or criticism;” and “negative” is “critical,sharp, directive without warmth or encouragement.” Nonverbal communicative acts were coded as touch ornonverbal and as either positive or negative. Each communicative act could be coded as verbal and nonverbal ortouch communication; however, only one category per code could be recorded per act.Study and coding proceduresUpon IRB approval and consent, each dyad was scheduled by the museum Director for a one-hour session at theChildren’s Museum to allow at least 15 minutes for gameplay and 10 minutes for paperwork. When sessions wereICLS 2018 Proceedings1747© ISLScomplete, two coders transcribed videos of parent-child gameplay independently, producing a written record ofall communicative acts. Every disagreement was discussed until consensus was reached. Then, using bothtranscripts and videos, parent-child conversations were coded by two coders independently. Inter-coder reliabilitywas calculated between coders with attention to agreements and disagreements using Cohen’s kappa (k = .96verbal; k = .95 nonverbal).Data analysisCoded data were analyzed for parent-child partners in dyads to produce seven unique case studies, allowing forexamination of communicative acts of individuals within dyads and across dyads.ResultsOverall, coded data for individual and collective dyads represented the full range of verbal communicationcategories, and within dyads, the verbal communications were fairly consistent across parents and children. Formost dyads, neutral affect dominated verbal communication. Within and between dyads, verbal affect, touch, andnonverbal communication varied substantially. Overall, children were more likely to engage in verbalcommunicative acts with negative affect than parents, although infrequently overall. Additionally, verbalcommunication with negative affect was most often attributed toward gameplay rather than toward the parent.Numerous occurrences of nonverbal communication were observed across parents and children, and minimalcommunicative touch was observed from both parents and children. Figure 1 shows data from one dyad.Figure 1. Occurrences of verbal and nonverbal communications and affect from one dyad.ImplicationsGiven that parent-child dyads naturally engaged most often in verbal interaction and within dyads, parents andchildren tended to produce similar types of communication, this pilot study suggests dyads may benefit fromexamples of approaches to gameplay to increase what appears to be naturally-present collaborative and problemsolving verbal communication. Further, given that a range of affect was observed across dyads and children weremore likely to engage in negative verbal communication than parents, parent-child dyads may benefit fromstrategies to help children use positively-framed verbal communication during gameplay. Results indicate that theinteractive gameplay platform encourages parents to use positive verbal communication, which is known tosupport learning in museum settings (De Ru et al., 2015; Jant et al., 2015).ReferencesCrowley, K., Callanan, M. A., Jipson, J. L., & Shrager, J. (2011). Shared scientific thinking in everyday parentchild activity. Science Education, 85, 712–732.DeRu, J., Peters, C., Stokking, K., TenCate, O., & VanDeRidder, J. (2015). Framing of feedback impacts studentsatisfaction, self-efficacy, and performance. Advances in Health Science Education, 20, 803-816.Eyberg, S. M., Nelson, M. M., Duke, M., & Boggs, S. R. (2009). Manual for the dyadic parent-child interactioncoding system (Draft 3.07). Author.Falk, J. H., & Dierking, L. D. (2012). The museum experience revisited. New York, NY: Routledge.Jant, E. A., Haden, C. A., Uttal, D. H., & Babcock, E. (2014). Conversation and object manipulation influencechildren’s learning in a museum. Child Development, 85(5), 2029-2045.Roggman, L., Cook, G., Innocenti, M., Norman, V., Anderson, S., & Christiansen, K. (2013). Parentinginteractions with children: Checklist of observations linked to outcomes. Baltimore, MD: Brookes.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1748© ISLS