Investigating Third Grade Students’ Collaboration in Project-BasedLearning to Inform Curriculum DesignKathleen Easley, Miranda Fitzgerald, and Annemarie Sullivan Palincsareasley@umich.edu, mfitzge@umich.edu, annemari@umich.eduUniversity of Michigan—Ann ArborAbstract: This case study examines the extent to which the Multiple Literacies in Project-basedLearning Curriculum supported students to (a) understand scientific concepts (b) engage inscientific inquiry and (c) collaborate successfully. It examines two dyads collaborating overseveral months to construct, test, and re-design a toy rocket. Although the collaborative processwas not without limitations, students were generally positively engaged, used executivethinking to support scientific inquiry, and showed conceptual growth on pre/post assessments.Keywords: Collaboration, Project-based Learning, 21st Century Skills, Science and EngineeringIntroductionCollaboration is regarded as an essential “21st century” skill (Griffen, Care, & McGaw, 2010). Collaborativelearning refers to learning in which students both (a) engage in cooperation and b) engage with the same problem,building on one another’s ideas (Webb and Palincsar, 1996). In addition to the benefits offered by cooperation(Gillies, 2016), collaboration additionally supports students to engage in distributed cognition by providing a“joint problem space” where students can reason together (Roschelle & Teasley, 1995). By focusing on the samework and building on each other’s ideas, collaborating students can, hypothetically, accomplish more togetherthan any individual could have accomplished alone. Nevertheless, although collaboration has significant potential,it can also play out in ways that are neither enjoyable to students nor conducive to their learning (Salomon &Globerson, 1989). Hence, it is essential to examine how students’ experiences with collaboration unfold “on theground” as they engage in sustained inquiry over time. This study contributes to that examination, guided by thefollowing research questions:(1) How do the children in a 3rd-grade classroom environment engage in and interpret a goal-orientedcollaborative endeavor involving both science and engineering?(2) What is the evidence regarding how these experiences and opportunities influenced student learning?Methods and theoryThe theoretical framework for this study draws from socioconstructivist theory (Palincsar 1998), which viewslearning as highly influenced by social interactions. The study was conducted in a third-grade classroom at aschool in rural Michigan, which was engaged in a year long, project-based learning curriculum integrating science,literacy, and mathematics. Participants were four focal students, who worked in partnerships to build rockets,model their rockets’ motion, test and improve their rockets, and prepare a design portfolio. Data sources include:(a) video recordings of collaboration, (b) student and teacher interviews, (c) pre/post tests, (d) student artifacts,and (e) student attitude surveys. Transcripts were coded by interaction type and conceptual content. A second,trained, rater coded a randomly selected 20% of the data (94% agreement for levels of conceptual talk; 84% forinteraction type; 83% for whether questions received response). Analytical memos examined student engagementin inquiry.Results and interesting points for discussionThis study found mixed results regarding student collaboration. Collaboration provided a venue for students to(a) engage in self-direction and executive-thinking, (b) engage in disciplinary practices such as describing andmodeling the rockets movement (literacy), discussing force, pressure, and friction (science) and comparingdistances that the rocket traveled (mathematics), and (c) practice and improve collaboration skills. Duringinterviews and on the attitude survey, all focal students reported enjoying the collaborative process. Together withthe relatively low levels of conflict (5% of talk turns) and off-task behavior (11% of talk turns), this suggests thatstudents were typically engaged, respectful, and enjoying themselves. Furthermore, the pre- and post- assessmentsshowed learning gains across all four focal students. Nevertheless, the students’ collaboration was marked byunbalanced participation and a scarcity of conceptual talk (7% of total talk). Participation was most symmetricwhen students worked hands on with the rocket, or when students worked in distinct partnerships, rather thanICLS 2018 Proceedings1629© ISLSjoining together to work as a group of four. Conceptual talk, when it occurred, was often supported by discussionssurrounding how to answer questions in the science notebook (see Figure 1, below).Figure 1. Example of one student’s science notebookImplicationsThere may be a benefit to teachers and curriculum designers balancing small-group collaborative learningopportunities with whole-class, teacher-guided learning opportunities. During the collaborative activities, theteacher must, by necessity, yield some control to the students. When students have control, they may not be asconceptually-oriented as the teacher would be. On the other hand, if the teacher always has control, the studentswill not have the opportunity to build collaborative and executive thinking skills or to independently discussconcepts. This suggests benefits to a balance of whole-class and collaborative time. Furthermore, it may bebeneficial for curriculum designers to include scaffolds to support students’ conceptual talk, during collaboration.In this study, the science notebook was particularly important in prompting conceptual talk. Additionally, thehands-on learning opportunities supported more balanced participation. In curriculum design and planning,guiding questions may be key to supporting student conceptual talk, while diverse learning opportunities may bekey to supporting student engagement and participation. Future research might focus on identifying additionalscaffolds to support conceptual talk or considering ways that students might use additional mediums (such asblogs, film, etcetera) to respond to guiding questions.ReferencesGillies, R. (2016). Cooperative learning: Review of research and practice. Australian Journal of TeacherEducation, 41(3), 3.Griffin, P., Care, E., and McGaw, B. (2012). The Changing Role of Education and Schools. In: Griffin, P.,McGaw, B., Care, E. (eds). Assessment and Teaching of 21st Century Skills. Springer, Dordrecht.Palincsar, A.S.(1998). Social constructivist perspectives on teaching and learning. Annual review of psychology,49(1), 345-375.Roschelle, J., & Teasley, S. D. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving.Computer supported collaborative learning (pp. 69-97). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.Salomon, G. & Globerson, T. (1989). When teams do not function the way they ought to. International Journalof Educational Research. 39 (1-2), 89-99.Webb, N. M. (1989). Peer interaction and learning in small groups. International Journal of EducationalResearch. 13(1), 21-39.Webb, N. M., & Palincsar, A. S. (1996). Group processes in the classroom. In D. C. Berliner, R. C. Calfee, D. C.Berliner, R. C. Calfee (Eds.) Handbook of educational psychology (pp. 841-873). New York, NY, US;London, England: Macmillan Library Reference Usa.AcknowledgementsThe research and development reported in this paper is being supported by a generous grant awarded to JosephKrajcik, Annemarie Palincsar, and Emily Miller from the George Lucas Educational Fund entitled, MultipleLiteracies in Project-Based Learning. Any opinions, findings, and recommendations expressed in this paper arethose of the authors. Special thanks to Deborah Peek Brown who led the design of the unit of study central to thispaper and to the students and teachers at our partner school.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1630© ISLS