Assessing Prerequisites and Processes of Self-, Co- and SharedRegulation During Collaborative LearningLiesje De Backer (chair), Ghent University, Liesje.DeBacker@UGent.beIngo Kollar (chair), Augsburg University, ingo.kollar@phil.uni-augsburg.deChristopher Williams, University of Ulm, christopher.williams@uni-ulm.deTina Seufert, University of Ulm, tina.seufert@uni-ulm.deArmin Weinberger, Saarland University, a.weinberger@edutech.uni-saarland.deNadine Melzner, University of Augsburg, nadine.melzner@phil.uni-augsburg.deMartin Greisel, University of Augsburg, martin.greisel@phil.uni-augsburg.deMarkus Dresel, University of Augsburg, markus.dresel@phil.uni-augsburg.deJolique Kielstra, Radboud University, Nijmegen, J.kielstra@pwo.ru.nlInge Molenaar, Radboud University, Nijmegen, i.molenaar@pwo.ru.nlHilde Van Keer, Ghent University, Hilde.VanKeer@UGent.beMartin Valcke, Ghent University, Martin.Valcke@UGent.beRaija Hämäläinen (discussant), University of Jyväskylä, raija.h.hamalainen@jyu.fiAbstract: To conceptualize regulation processes that may occur within groups, adifferentiation between self-regulation (i.e., individual members regulate their own learningduring collaboration), co-regulation (i.e., single learners regulate the learning of one or moreof their learning partners), and shared regulation (i.e., the whole group regulates its learning)has been proposed. This symposium assembles four papers that offer various ways regardingthe measurement of prerequisites and processes of such regulatory efforts during grouplearning. The presented methods range from Likert-scale self-report questionnaires over videocase vignettes towards an analysis of real group processes by aid of logfiles and discoursecoding schemes. These methods will be critically discussed, especially in terms of theirtransferability to studying collaborative learning in diverse educational contexts, both formaland informal. That way, the symposium will significantly expand previous methods for theassessment of self-, co- and shared regulation during collaborative learning.The importance of regulation processes during collaborative learningCollaborative learning is often described as an ideal context for individuals to engage in high-level cognitiveprocesses that are closely related to knowledge acquisition. Examples for such high-level cognitive processesare asking and reacting to thought-provoking questions (King, 2007) or exchanging arguments andcounterarguments with learning partners (Vogel et al., 2016). Activities like these occur almost naturally oncestudents learn together. Not surprisingly, positive effects of collaborative learning on knowledge acquisitionhave been reported (Springer, Stanne & Donovan, 1999). However, research has also shown that learning ingroups is not always superior to learning individually. For example, in a study by Weinberger, Stegmann andFischer (2010), students were asked to analyze three problem cases by aid of a psychological theory. Whilesome students worked individually on this task, others collaborated in groups of three. Results showed that – atleast when groups were not appropriately scaffolded – students who had learned individually outperformedstudents who had learned in triads on a subsequent domain-specific knowledge test. As possible reasons forsuch suboptimal effects of collaborative learning, both motivational (e.g., social loafing effects; Karau &Williams, 1993) as well as (meta-)cognitive issues (e.g., a lack of cognitive and metacognitive learningstrategies; Wang, Kollar & Stegmann, 2017) have been discussed. Thus, to make collaborative learning asuccessful endeavor, groups need to be able to effectively regulate such problematic processes.Self-, co-, and shared regulation: Three levels of regulating collaborativelearningTo conceptualize regulation processes within groups, Järvelä and her colleagues (e.g., Järvelä & Hadwin, 2013;Järvenoja, Järvelä, & Malmberg, 2015) suggested a theoretical model that distinguishes regulation processes atthree social levels: First, at the “self”-level, individual group members may regulate their own learning, e.g., bysetting goals for what they would like to learn by collaborating with their partners or by mentally monitoringtheir understanding of the subject matter during collaboration. Second, at the “co”-level, an individual groupmember may regulate the learning of one or more of her learning partners, e.g. by asking probing questions orby telling them what content to repeat for the following collaborative learning session. Third, “sharedICLS 2018 Proceedings1296© ISLSregulation” happens when the whole group more or less deliberately engages in regulation processes, e.g. byjointly discussing what content to learn and in what order or by setting up time plans for the whole group.Goals and structure of the symposiumWhereas theoretical models on self-regulated learning are well established and validated by an abundance ofempirical studies over the past decades, theorizing social forms of regulation has only recently gainedmomentum (Panadero & Järvelä, 2015). Previous studies in this respect are mainly focused on conceptuallydifferentiating individual versus social forms of regulation and at identifying the latter in collaborative learners’(online) discussions. Empirically validating the theoretical constructs of self-, co- and shared regulation,however, unraveled methodological questions on how to assess social forms of regulation in an objective,reliable, valid, and economic way. Optimizing collaborative learners’ regulation behavior furthermore demandsfor correlational studies unraveling facilitative conditions towards students’ adoption of self-, co- and sharedregulation. The symposium makes an important contribution to both aspects. First, it provides insights into theeffects that different kinds of prerequisites have on the employment and selection of different strategies for self-,co- and shared regulation. In this realm, the paper by Williams, Seufert and Weinberger specifically looks atprerequisites on the learners’ side (i.e., their competence to co-regulate learning processes) and reports on thedevelopment of a self-report questionnaire to measure learners’ co-regulation competence. They also provideinformation on the validity of the instrument: co-regulation competence as assessed by aid of their CRCQdemonstrated to be predictive for achievement as well as learners’ goal orientations. The paper by Melzner,Greisel, Kollar and Dresel investigates the effects of different characteristics of the situation (i.e., whether thegroup currently exhibits motivational or cognitive problems) on how individuals intend to engage in self-, coand shared regulation processes during collaborative learning. Their results show that groups seem to reactdifferently to different regulation problems, and that – at least when it comes to exam preparation – students putmore emphasis on regulating their own learning than the learning of other group members or of the group as awhole. Second, the symposium offers insights into the methodological challenges and requirements whenstudying social forms of regulation, given that the different papers make use of different assessment methods,allowing for a critical methodological discussion. In this respect, the paper by Kielstra and Molenaar describesthe development of an app that provides learners both with guidance on how to engage in task-oriented readingin individual and collaborative learning settings and with an automated way of measuring students’ use of taskoriented reading strategies, based on logfile data. First results indicate that groups can successfully be scaffoldedwith the app, and that the app holds large promise for an in-depth assessment of regulation processes at theindividual and the social level. The paper by De Backer, Van Keer and Valcke provides an in-depth look intotime-bound evolutions in students’ regulation behavior as well as in the quality (instead of only the kinds) ofcollaborative learners’ regulation strategies. The results demonstrated that collaborative learning particularlyevokes co-regulation but that truly sharing regulation is rather challenging for students. They need time andpractice before they demonstrate sharing regulation. Findings further revealed qualitatively different types ofshared regulation. Overall, all four papers offer valuable contributions especially regarding the question how toassess and manipulate (individual and situational) prerequisites and/or processes of self-, co- and sharedregulation within groups. The availability of such assessment methods is of utter importance for theinvestigation of further research questions on self-, co- and shared regulation, especially regarding theeffectiveness of self-, co- and shared regulation for successful collaborative learning and the question how toscaffold these social forms of regulation. Furthermore, the results of the four papers will spark furthertheoretical discussions and enable elaborating and refining current theoretical models on self-, co-, and sharedregulation. From this perspective, the papers imply an important step forward in the emerging literature on self-,co-, and shared regulation. The papers will be critically discussed by Raija Hämäläinen, specifically also withregard to the limitations of the proposed instruments.Are we closer? Measuring co-regulation competencies in collaborativelearning environmentsChristopher Williams, Tina Seufert, and Armin WeinbergerRegulation research has seen a shift of focus from an individual perspective of self-regulated learning (SRL) tomore emphasis on social modes of regulation (Panadero, Kirschner, Järvelä, Malmberg & Järvenoja., 2015). Inthe literature, the two social modes of regulation often discussed are co-regulation and socially sharedregulation. Hadwin, Järvelä and Miller (2011) claimed co-regulation is the temporary coordination of selfregulation amongst self and others” (p. 68). With the increased importance of investigating social modes ofregulation like co-regulation, the question of how to properly measure this phenomenon also follows.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1297© ISLSThere are several self-evaluated learning strategies assessments, like Pintrich’s (1991) MotivatedStrategies for Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ), but there have been few attempts to measure co-regulation withquestionnaires. Schoor, Narciss and Koerndle (2015) argued that even though researchers possess an in-depthunderstanding of methods to investigate self-regulation, co-regulation is a separate phenomenon and requiressuitable method consideration. In our studies, the Co-Regulation Competencies Questionnaire (CRCQ) wasdeveloped and tested. The development of CRCQ aims to complement other qualitative methods. Moreover, thedevelopment of our multi-dimensional framework for coding co-regulation manifestations provides a specificapproach to evaluate co-regulation.Our research questions were: (1) Are we able to reliably measure co-regulation competencies and itssub-facets using a questionnaire? (2) Are co-regulation competencies measured with the CRCQ related tolearning performance in a collaborative learning task? (3) Can the CRCQ be validated by qualitative measuresof the learning process?To answer our research questions, we conducted two studies. In the first descriptive study, the CRCQwas developed and analyzed with respect to the reliability of its subscales (N=212). Based on these results, weconducted a second study where 34 participants learned in a collaborative group setting. Their task was tounderstand biochemical concepts by integrating multiple representations learning materials that were distributedamongst the learners. The learning process required shared knowledge construction and hence, co-regulation.With this sample, we addressed the second research question and relate learners’ co-regulation competencies –measured with the CRCQ – to their individual learning outcomes after the group learning process. Additionally,to answer the third research question, we analyzed group discourse by using our coding scheme to categorizeactual co-regulation manifestations (up to now with N=9).In the first study, the participants (N=212) were between 18 and 74 years old (M=35.88, SD=10.89).The CRCQ contains 84 items and aims to measure the learners’ co-regulatory competencies by asking learnersto assess the sharedness of their strategies: cognitive (e.g. rehearsal, organization, elaboration, critical thinking,collective efficacy), metacognitive (e.g. planning, monitoring, goal setting), and motivation (e.g.intrinsic/extrinsic motivation, task value, control beliefs). Participants rated statements, which assessed theirlearning strategies, by asking to what extent do they share their strategies either at all (e.g. self-regulation), witheither one group member (e.g. co-regulation) and /or with the whole group (e.g. socially shared regulation). Anexample of a CRCQ survey statement assessing motivation strategies was “My expectations that we will do wellwith our group work”. The study revealed, that 15 out of 17 CRCQ scales had an α > .72, which made usconfident to use the questionnaire further on with slight amendments.In the second study, participants (N= 34) were between 20 and 43 years old (M=27.56, SD=6.00). Aweek before the learning activity, they completed several online questionnaires including the CRCQ andMSLQ. Before the learning activity, participants completed the CRCQ, and a biochemistry pre-test. In thelearning phase, participants were presented with six different inter-linked representations in the domain ofbiochemistry. Each representation contributed vital information to understand the whole subject matter. Afterthe learning activity, the participants completed a biochemistry post-test. Participants were encouraged to thinkaloud during the learning phase. They were also recorded and an observation protocol was implemented.To answer RQ2, a regression analysis was applied for the biochemistry post-test (e.g. performance) asdependent variables with the following predictors: cognitive, motivational, and metacognitive competenciesfrom the CRCQ and MSLQ. The regression model for co-regulation motivational competencies was significant(F(6, 27)=2.74, p=.05, adjusted R2=.24). Co-regulation intrinsic goal orientation (β=.53, t(13)=2.82, p=.01) andco-regulation control belief (β=.62, t(13)=-2.05, p=.05) were significant predictors of performance. Thecognitive and metacognitive predictors showed no significant influence on learning outcomes.To answer RQ3, we coded up to now two groups based on our multi-dimensional framework forcoding co-regulation. Participants (N = 9) were between 22 and 33 years old (M = 25.2, SD = 3.38), and werecategorized as either 1) high (N = 3) or 2) low co-regulators (N = 6) based on a median split for their CRCQscore. The raters were trained (Vogel & Weinberger, in press) and obtained a significantly high level ofagreement with a Kappa of above .95. The individual learner’s co-regulation competency score was calculatedby combining the raters’ scores for each of the learners based on the 4 subcategories of the COPES model:operations, product, standards, and evaluation (Hadwin, Järvelä & Miller, 2011). The individual learner’s totalscore was divided by the total maximum point available. The individual co-regulation score ranges from 0%(e.g. self-regulation) to 100% (e.g. socially shared regulation). A median split was conducted to create anindependent categorical variable identified as co-regulation score. The dependent variables were (a)biochemistry post-test performance and the (b) co-regulation score. Concerning (a) the biochemistry post-testperformance, we found differences between high and low-regulators (high: M = 9.75, SE = 1.75; low: M =10.38, SE = 1.42). Regarding (b) the co-regulation score, we discovered no effect for metacognitive or cognitiveICLS 2018 Proceedings1298© ISLSlearning strategies (metacognitive high: M = 30.89, SE = 24.19; low: M = 19.78, SE = 17.52; cognitive high: M= 28.92, SE = 6.05; low: M = 22.54, SE = 7.56), but we did find a meaningful difference for extrinsic goalorientation (high: M = 11.60, SE = 10.54; low: M = 27.37, SE = 6.17).Considering the first research question, the CRCQ and sub-facets’ alpha scores displayed a positivesign that the questionnaire has potential to reliably measure co-regulation competencies. The sharedness ofone’s motivations showed a positive effect on the learners’ performance. Similar to the CRCQ initial study, thehigh inter-rater reliability with our multi-dimensional framework for coding co-regulation is anotherencouraging sign for future research and fairly validates the initial CRCQ results. Furthermore, the effects ofhigh co-regulators on their external goal orientation is evidence that sharing one’s motivations can have positiveinfluences on performance but also is potentially a defining characteristic of high co-regulators.How different regulation problems influence self-, co-, and shared regulation instudent groupsNadine Melzner, Martin Greisel, Ingo Kollar, and Markus DreselResearch revealed that learning collaboratively may positively impact knowledge acquisition (Kyndt, Raes,Lismont, Timmers, Cascallar & Dochy, 2013). Therefore, it is not surprising that students often meet in groupsvoluntarily, for example when comes to preparing for important exams. Nevertheless, research has shown thatgroups often struggle during collaboration, especially when they experience motivational (e.g., a low interest inthe learning material) and/or knowledge-related problems (e.g., little understanding of the subject matter athand). To effectively regulate their learning when being faced with such problems, groups need to select andemploy effective regulation strategies. Yet, an open question is how an adaptive choice of strategies would looklike with respect to the social level on which these strategies operate. In this respect, Järvelä and Hadwin (2013)suggested to differentiate between strategies at (a) the self-level, at which group members regulate their ownlearning, (b) the co-level, at which they regulate the learning of other group members, and (c) the shared level,at which they jointly negotiate regulation processes within the group. In other words, it is unclear at what sociallevel(s) groups mainly regulate motivational and knowledge-related problems that pop up during collaboration.By using a video-vignette paradigm together with open-ended questionnaires, this study therefore aims toelucidate the effects of present vs. absent motivational and/or knowledge problems in student groups (1) on theextent to which (individuals within) groups apply cognitive learning strategies and (2) on the extent at whichthey show these learning strategies at different social levels (self-, co-, and shared level).Subjects were N=197 university students (M Age =22.14, SD Age =4.33) from educational science and froma pre-service teacher education program. On average, participants were in their 2nd semester of studies(M Study =2.27, SD Study =1.72). They watched four videos that presented groups preparing for an upcoming exam.Videos were shot from a first-person view perspective to increase the level of participants’ immersion. Acrossthe four videos, we varied the presence vs. absence of the two problem types (motivational and knowledgeproblems). Presentation sequence of the videos was randomized and balanced. After each video, participantswere asked to write down what they would do in each situation to guarantee a high-quality learning process(separately for the self-, co-, and shared level). To that end, an open-answer format was used. First, all studentanswers were segmented into single idea units. Reliability of segmentation as the relative portion of twoindependent coders‘ overlapping sequences (Strijbos, Martens, Prins, & Jochems, 2006) was sufficient (82.2%vs. 85.1%, calculated from both coders‘ perspectives). Next, we coded the social level at which the mentionedstrategy operated (Cohen’ s κ = .78). After that, we applied a self-developed coding scheme to capture the kindsof strategies participants mentioned (six categories; Cohen’s κ = .87). For the purpose of this paper, we onlyfocus on cognitive strategies such as elaborating or organizing the learning material.To answer our research questions, we ran a 2x2x3-factorial ANOVA with the within-subject factors‘motivational problems’, ‘knowledge problems’, and ‘social level’ and the frequency of cognitive strategies asdependent variable. Regarding RQ1, we found a significant main effect for ‘knowledge problems’, F(1,196) =30.451, p < .01, η² = .134, and for ‘motivational problems’, F(1,196) = 62.813, p < .01, η² = .243: With bothproblem types being present in the group, participants mentioned less cognitive learning strategies than whenthese problems were not present. The interaction between knowledge problems and motivational problems wasnot significant (F(2,392) = 0.034, n.s.). Concerning RQ2, we found a significant main effect for ‘social level’,F(2,392) = 21.851, p < .01, η² = .100. Bonferroni-corrected post-hoc comparisons revealed that participantsmentioned significantly more strategies at the self- than at the co- and shared level (p = .00). The differencebetween strategy use at the co- and at the shared level was not significant (p = .42).The results seem to indicate that once students experience any kind of problem (be it motivational or beit knowledge-related), they react with a reduction of their use of cognitive learning strategies. With motivationalproblems being present, a reason for this might be that the application of such strategies itself is dependent onICLS 2018 Proceedings1299© ISLSstudents’ motivation (as suggested for example by Boekaerts, 1997). Watching an unmotivated group andimagining being a member of that group might reduce one’s own motivation as well and that way cause a loweruse of cognitive learning strategies. In turn, when knowledge problems occur, students may switch the kinds ofstrategies they are currently using in the direction of applying more metacognitive strategies, in order to searchfor reasons for the current problems and to update the plans for the subsequent learning phase. Further analysesare necessary to test this assumption. Interestingly, at least when it comes to exam preparation, students seem tobe mostly concerned with regulating their own learning (rather than the learning of other group members or thegroup as a whole). This may be specific to the particular situation we chose: Since exams typically are takenindividually, students might regard a possible engagement in social regulation processes as an unnecessaryburden. At least, students do not seem to expect to get a lot out of an engagement in such processes. This isunfortunate, given that prior research has particularly underscored the importance of socially shared regulationto promote individual learning outcomes (Järvelä, Volet, & Järvenoja, 2010). Future research should investigateto what extent these results can be transferred to other, possibly less externally-regulated learning situations.An app to measure self- and shared regulation during task-oriented readingJolique Kielstra and Inge MolenaarTask-oriented reading involves reading with the purpose of processing information for the execution of aspecific task (Anmarkrud, McCrudden, Bråten, & Strømsø, 2013). Research shows that task-oriented reading isinfluenced by how students apply reading strategies (Vidal-Abarca, Mañá, & Gil, 2010). For example, Rouet,Vidal-Abarca, Erboul, and Millogo (2001) show that application of reading strategies during task executionexplains differences in students’ reading comprehension. Although this provides evidence for the importance ofreading strategies during task-oriented reading, it does not inform us how students regulate during task-orientedreading. A number of elements are put forward as important. Prior to reading, a task can act to signal relevance,allowing readers to understand which sections of the text are relevant for a task (Anmarkrud et al., 2013). Thus,task representations play an important role in strategy application as they allow students to select a readingstrategy that supports successful task accomplishment (Rouet, Britt & Durik, 2017). Also, proficient readerstend to use reading strategies more frequently compared to less proficient readers and also use more diversestrategies (De Milliano, van Gelderen & Sleegers, 2016). The above indicates the need for a more profoundunderstanding of how less proficient readers regulate their task-oriented reading. Moreover, this group seems toneed additional regulation support. We hypothesize that reciprocal peer tutoring can improve collaboration,students’ understanding of a task and the usage of appropriate reading strategies (De Backer, van Keer,Moerkerke & Valcke, 2016) and that it can enhance less proficient readers’ regulation of task-oriented reading.To examine this hypothesis, we first need to develop a measurement instrument to assess how studentsregulate their task-oriented reading both in individual and collaborative settings. We performed a literatureresearch to examine current methods to measure students’ regulation of task-oriented reading. Current methodsfocus on task performance and strategy execution (Vidal-Abarca, Mañá, & Gil, 2010). As discussed above, weexpect that a student’s regulation is dependent on the students’ task representation, their ability to select anappropriate strategy and to reflect on their strategy use. Therefore, we included these elements in a newlydeveloped scaffolding and measurement app. Moreover, the app also has to be used to measure sharedregulation in collaborative settings. We developed a macro script directed at supporting shared regulation on thespecific elements of task-oriented reading during reciprocal peer tutoring. To the best of our knowledge, thisapp is the first measurement tool to measure self- and shared regulation in this way.The app measures the interrelated aspects of task-oriented reading in individual and collaborativesettings. Students’ self-regulation of task-oriented reading is measured through a) the indicated task complexity,b) the selected reading strategy, c) the applied reading strategy, d) the execution of the task and, e) the reflectionon the applied reading strategy. We trace a students’ use of reading strategies with blurring. The text is maskedexcept for the sentence the student deblurs, which allows us to capture the students’ reading process. The logdata from the app are used to measure self- regulation of task-oriented reading.Students’ shared regulation during reciprocal peer tutoring is scaffolded by including the five steps in amacro script to guide the groups’ interaction around shared regulation of task-oriented reading. The groups’ taskrepresentation, their strategy selection, their collaborative reflection on strategy execution as well as theirindividual reading, task performance and reading strategy awareness are included in the script. The script isdesigned to enhance group interaction by creating interdependency among the group members. Each member isprovided with different information in the App which is necessary to fulfil the task. Students are assigned todifferent roles, i.e. tutor, task guard, text guard and writer. The tutor guides the shared regulation with a numberof questions about task perception and reading strategies. The task guard has access to the task and explains thetask to the group. The text guard has access to the text and describes layout of the text. The writer writes downICLS 2018 Proceedings1300© ISLSthe groups’ answers to the questions. Under guidance of the tutor, the group discusses the task representationand the appropriate reading strategy. After this collaborative stage, each member continues to individually readthe text and complete the task. Upon completion, each student indicates which reading strategy s/he applied.After all group members finish, the tutor again guides the collaborative discussion reflecting on the applicationof the reading strategies. The groups’ answers are recorded in the logs as a measure of their shared regulation.To validate the measurement instrument, audio recordings record the interaction between the groupmembers. The dialogue is analysed to validate the app’s measurements by aligning the logs with the groups’discussion of their shared task representation, strategy selection and reflection on their strategy use after taskperformance. Existing coding schemes from Molenaar, Sleegers and Van Boxtel (2014) will be used to analysethe groups’ interactions.Currently, 45 students in two classes of grade 4 in vocational secondary school are using the App. Thestudents first completed 9 task-oriented reading tasks individually, after which they engaged in four reciprocalpeer tutoring lessons in which they collaboratively engaged in 3 task-oriented reading tasks using the macroscript in the app. First results indicate great diversity in all elements of self-regulation of task-oriented reading.The macro script indeed supports reciprocal peer tutoring during the lessons and students indeed engage inshared regulation of their task-oriented reading.Overall, this contribution introduces an App that is developed to measure how students regulate taskoriented reading both in individual and collaborative settings. In this way, we aim to better understand howshared regulation during reciprocal peer tutoring influences students’ individual regulation during task orientedreading. As such, the development of this tool is of essential importance to further our understanding howstudents enact regulation and how shared regulation can influence self-regulation.A process-oriented analysis of peer tutoring participants’ shared regulationbehaviorLiesje De Backer, Hilde Van Keer, and Martin ValckeThe metacognition research recently shifted the focus from individual to social forms of regulation for there isconsensus that collaborative learning not only encourages self-regulation, but shared regulation at interpersonallevels as well (Panadero & Järvelä, 2015). Socially shared metacognitive regulation (SSMR) refers to a jointengagement of multiple learners operating on each other’s metacognitive contributions when regulating thegroup’s cognition (De Backer, Van Keer, & Valcke, 2015; Iiskala, Volet, Lehtinen, & Vauras, 2015). AlthoughSSMR is expected to advance collaborative learning, empirical evidence in this respect is limited and sometimesinconclusive (Panadero & Järvelä, 2015). This inconclusiveness raises theoretical questions regarding theexistence of different types of SSMR, as well as methodological questions on how to measure utterances ofshared regulation. It could be that not all of students’ shared regulation benefits collaborative learning to thesame extent and, consequently, that more fine-grained analyses are needed to enable the identification (andmeasurement) of these possibly different types of shared regulation. The present study investigates the existenceof qualitatively different types of SSMR, demonstrated by higher education students collaborating in a peertutoring context. Peer tutoring (PT) is a type of collaborative learning characterized by specific role taking: themore knowledgeable tutor supports the learning of less experienced tutees. The present study opts for a microlevel, process-oriented analysis of PT-participants’ shared regulation. Its aims are twofold, directed atunravelling time-bound evolutions in students’ SSMR and at identifying quality differences in the acts of SSMRdemonstrated by the PT-participants.A semester-long PT-intervention was implemented as part of the curriculum of freshmen in theEducational Sciences program. Sixty-four students weekly tutored one another in small groups of six. All PTsessions of five randomly selected PT-groups were videotaped (70 hours of video recordings). The PTintervention consisted of eight weekly face-to-face sessions (2 hours each). PT-interactions were structured byweekly session-specific tutor manuals. Students participated in a compulsory preliminary training to mastertutoring skills and received ongoing support through interim feedback. During the PT-sessions, students workedon authentic assignments, demanding high levels of cognitive processing and directed at co-constructingdomain-specific knowledge on “Instructional Sciences”.Students’ shared regulation was assessed through systematic observation of the video data by means ofliterature-based coding instruments (De Backer et al., 2015), allowing process-oriented study of self-, co- andshared regulation. Coding the video data and analyzing PT-participants’ shared regulation followed subsequentsteps. First, statement coding was used to identify utterances of metacognitive regulation in students’ verbalizedinteractions (n= 14968). A statement referred to a single thematically consistent verbalization of a singlemetacognitive action by a single student. Second, metacognitive statements were reanalyzed through interactioncoding to check the regulative agents involved and the reactions following the statement, aimed at identifyingICLS 2018 Proceedings1301© ISLSutterances of SSMR (n=397). A unit of SSMR encompassed interdependent regulative actions, represented by asequence of reciprocal conversational turns reflecting a particular regulation skill, proceeding through at leastthree PT-participants’ metacognitive statements. Third, mixed models for logistic regression allowing changepoints were run to unravel time-bound evolutions in PT-participants’ adoption of SSMR. Fourth, all identifiedSSMR-units were analyzed in more detail to unravel possible quality differences. The latter were coded basedon the following parameters: (a) the number of students’ involved in a SSMR-unit (Iiskala et al., 2015); (b) levelof (dis)agreement with peers’ regulative thinking; and (c) the level of elaboration in the regulative reactions topeers’ regulative contributions (Näykki, Järvenoja, Järvelä, & Kirschner, 2017). Fifth, a two-step clusteranalysis was run to identify variations in the quality of segmented SSMR-units, based on the cluster variables(i.e. parameters a-c). Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC) was adopted as a measure of fit for the clustering,whereas Euclidian distance was adopted as a measure of similarity.Despite a limited adoption of SSMR, the findings reveal an evolution towards increased SSMR fromthe starting (2.04%) to the closing PT-session (8.06%). During the second intervention half, SSMR isincreasingly adopted during orientation and monitoring in particular. Whereas the odds of SSMR do not changeduring the first intervention half (p= .185), they increase 2.58 times (p<.001) during the second half. Asignificant change point was revealed at PT-session 5, implying a considerably larger evolution towards SSMRupon completion of the PT-intervention. It should be noted, however, PT-participants’ engagement in SSMR ismuch more limited as compared to their involvement in self- (24.71%) and co-regulation (70.11%).Further, results reveal the existence of variations in the quality of segmented SSMR units, based on thecluster parameters taken into account. More particularly, a two-cluster solution was revealed. After examinationof the subscale means in both clusters, two types of quality were defined: surface-level SSMR (n=1489; 49.9%)and in-depth SSMR (n= 1494; 50.1%). Surface-level SSMR, is characterized by the involvement of a ratherlimited number of students (M=4.03), who mainly react to each other’s regulation with paraphrasing comments(M level of elaboration = 1.65) and who mainly confirm or only shortly discuss peers’ regulative thinking, aimed atquick consensus-building (M level of (dis)agreement = 1.65). In-depth SSMR is characterized by the involvement of alarge majority of students (M=4.93), who react to each other’s regulation with elaborative comments (M level ofelaboration = 2.55), and who mainly question and challenge peers’ regulative thinking during SSMR (M level of(dis)agreement =2.98).The study’s process-oriented scope on time-bound evolutions in SSMR enhances our theoreticalunderstanding of SSMR but also provides instructors with input on when to scaffold SSMR. Acknowledgingqualitative variations in SSMR further allows refining current theoretical models, as well as validating thedifferential impact of SSMR- acts on collaborative learners’ outcomes in future studies.ReferencesAnmarkrud, Ø., McCrudden, M. T., Bråten, I., & Strømsø, H. I. (2013). Task-oriented reading of multipledocuments: Online comprehension processes and offline products. Instructional Science, 41, 873-894.Boekaerts, M. (1997). Self-regulated learning: Where we are today. International Journal of EducationalResearch, 31(6), 445-457.De Backer, L., Van Keer, H., Moerkerke, B., & Valcke, M. (2016). Examining evolutions in the adoption ofmetacognitive regulation in reciprocal peer tutoring groups. Metacognition Learning, 11, 187-213.De Backer, L., Van Keer, H., & Valcke, M. (2015). Exploring evolutions in reciprocal peer tutoring groups’socially shared metacognitive regulation and identifying its metacognitive correlates. Learning andInstruction, 38, 63-78.De Milliano, I., van Gelderen, A., & Sleegers, P. (2016). Types and sequences of self-regulated reading of lowachieving adolescents in relation to reading task achievement. Journal of Research in Reading, 39(2),229-252.DiDonato, N. C. (2012). Effective self- and co-regulation in collaborative learning groups: An analysis of howstudents regulate problem solving of authentic interdisciplinary tasks. Instructional Science, 41, 25-47.Grau, V., & Whitebread, D. (2012). Self and social regulation of learning during collaborative activities in theclassroom: The interplay of individual and group cognition. Learning and Instruction, 22(6), 401-412.Hadwin, A. F., Järvelä, S., & Miller, M. (2011). Self-regulated, co-regulated, and socially shared regulation oflearning. In B. J. Zimmerman & D. H. Schunk (Eds.), Handbook of Self-Regulation of Learning andPerformance (pp 65-84). New York, NY: Routledge.Iiskala, T., Volet, S., Lehtinen, E., & Vauras, M. (2015). Socially shared metacognitive regulation inasynchronous CSCL in science: Functions, evolution, and participation. Frontline Learning Research,3, 78-111.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1302© ISLSJärvelä, S., & Hadwin, A. F. (2013). New Frontiers: Regulating Learning in CSCL. Educational Psychologist,48(1), 25-39.Järvelä, S., Volet, S., & Järvenoja, H. (2010). Research on motivation in collaborative learning: Moving beyondthe cognitive–situative Divide and Combining Individual and Social Processes. EducationalPsychologist, 45(1), 15-27.Järvenoja, H., Järvelä, S., & Malmberg, J. (2015). Understanding regulated learning in situative and contextualframeworks. Educational Psychologist, 50(3), 204-219.Karau, S. J. & Williams, K. D. (1993). Social loafing: A meta-analytic review and theoretical integration.Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 65(4), 681-706.King A. (2007). Scripting collaborative learning processes: A cognitive perspective. In F. Fischer, I. Kollar, H.Mandl & J. M. Haake (Eds.), Scripting computer-supported collaborative learning: Cognitive,computational, and educational perspectives (pp. 13-37). New York, NY: Springer.Koivuniemi, M., Panadero, E., Malmberg, J., & Järvelä, S. (2017). Higher education students’ learningchallenges and regulatory skills in different learning situations Infancia y Aprendizaje, 40(1), 19-55.Kyndt, E., Raes, E., Lismont, B., Timmers, F., Cascallar, E., & Dochy, F. (2013). A meta-analysis of the effectsof face-to-face cooperative learning. Do recent studies falsify or verify earlier findings? EducationalResearch Review, 10, 133-149.Malmberg, J., Järvelä, S., & Järvenoja, H. (2017). Capturing temporal and sequential patterns of self-, co-, andsocially shared regulation in the context of collaborative learning. Contemporary EducationalPsychology, 49, 160–174.Molenaar, I., Sleegers, P., & Van Boxtel, C. (2014). Metacognitive scaffolding during collaborative learning: Apromising combination. Metacognition and Learning, 9(3), 309-332.Näykki, P., Järvenoja, H., Järvelä, S., & Kirschner, P. (2017). Monitoring makes a difference: quality andtemporal variation in teacher education students’ collaborative learning. Scandinavian Journal ofEducational Research, 61, 31-46.Panadero, E. & Järvelä, S. (2015). Socially shared regulation of learning: A review. European Psychologist, 20,190-203.Panadero, E., Kirschner, P. A., Järvelä, S., Malmberg, J., & Järvenoja, H. (2015). How individual self-regulationaffects group regulation and performance: A shared regulation intervention. Small Group Research,46(4), 431-454.Pintrich, P. R. (1991). A manual for the use of the Motivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ).Rouet, J., Britt, M. A., & Durik, A. M. (2017). RESOLV: Readers ’ representation of reading contexts andtasks. Educational Psychologist, 52(3), 200-215.Rouet, J., Vidal-Abarca, E., Erboul, B., & Millogo, V. (2001). Effects of information search tasks on thecomprehension of instructional text. Discourse Processes, 31(2), 163-186.Schoor, C., Narciss, S., & Körndle, H. (2015). Regulation during cooperative and collaborative learning: Atheory-based review of terms and concepts. Educational Psychologist, 50(2), 97-119.Springer, L., Stanne, M.E. and Donovan, S.S. (1999) Effects of Small-Group Learning on Undergraduates inScience, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology: A Meta-Analysis. Review of EducationalResearch, 69, 21-51.Strijbos, J.-W., Martens, R. L., Prins, F. J., & Jochems, W. M. (2006). Content analysis: What are they talkingabout? Computers & Education, 46(1), 29-48.Vidal-Abarca, E., Mañá, A., & Gil, L. (2010). Individual differences for self-regulating task-oriented readingactivities. Journal of Educational Psychology, 102(4), 817-826.Vogel, F., Kollar, I., Ufer, S., Reichersdorfer, E., Reiss, K., & Fischer, F. (2016). Developing argumentationskills in mathematics through computer-supported collaborative learning: the role of transactivity.Instructional Science, 44(5), 477-500.Vogel, F. & Weinberger, A. (in press). Quantifying qualities of collaborative learning processes. In F. Fischer,C. Hmelo-Silver, P. Reimann, & S. Goldman (Eds.). International Handbook of the Learning Sciences.London: Routledge.Wang, X., Kollar, I., & Stegmann, K. (in press). Adaptable scripting to foster regulation processes and skills incomputer-supported collaborative learning. International Journal of Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning, 12(2), 153-172.Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K., & Fischer, F. (2010). Learning to argue online: Scripted groups surpassindividuals (unscripted groups do not). Computers in Human Behavior, 26(4), 506-515.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1303© ISLS