A Focus on Contribution Towards Product and Performance inCollaborative DesignColin Hennessy Elliott, Sarah C. Radke, and Jasmine Y. Mache217@nyu.edu, scr274@nyu.edu, j.ma@nyu.eduNew York UniversityAbstract: This paper presents a comparative case study to illustrate how resources are used forcontribution in collaborative design. One case draws from video data of an urban high schoolrobotics team which designs a robot for competition, and the other from a program where youthproduce a documentary film for a public showing. Building on a view of participation aslearning (Lave & Wenger, 1991), we use video-based micro-analysis to make sense of howmembers participate through contributions to design. We frame learning as a collaborativepractice where contributions are used to make arguments with different resources. Across bothcases, materials and laminations of space-times (Leander, 2002) are used as: 1) evaluativeresources, and 2) knowledge constructing resources for design. In this view of learning, the finalproduct and performance are not only end goals but used as resources in the design processthrough laminations of imagined future space-times.PurposeCollaboration is an important practice in the learning structures of Problem Based and Project Based Learning(Barron et al., 1998) as well as many other pedagogical practices in school (e.g, learning communities, Brown &Campione, 1994). Learning Sciences literature has shown that youth engage in learning through collaboration inmany settings outside of school as well (e.g, The Fifth Dimension, Cole & Distributive Literacy Consortium,2006). Further, the effectiveness of collaboration as a learning structure is dependent on the contexts and qualityof interactions (Barron, 2003). Therefore, it is important to gain an understanding of how collaboration unfoldsin learning settings that are not directly framed as part of schooling. This case comparison study focuses on makingsense of the participation structures of collaboration, particularly how to contribute to design, for two distinctafter-school activities involving secondary school youth.In each of these cases, although we classify them as learning spaces, content learning is not typically theprimary goal of the community. Rather, an end-of-semester product and its performance drive the goals of allactivities for these groups; yet learning is necessary to participate in the knowledge-building process of design.The first case focuses on youth participants on an urban high school robotics team that co-produced a robot (aproduct) in 8 weeks, and then used the robot in competitions (a performance). The second case is set in anafterschool program called Digital Studio (all names in the paper are pseudonyms). Over the course of 14-16weeks, youth, typically aged 16-21, developed, captured, edited, and publicly presented (a performance) a 20minute social justice/critically engaged documentary (a product) about a social issue that impacted their lives. Weclassify each setting as a “semi-formal” learning space because, while occurring temporally outside of school theystill exist in spaces and places that are typically considered part of school.In both cases, being part of the community means taking action and contributing to the final product andits performance. We frame the activities portrayed in the chosen episodes as indicative of contribution, buildingon Lave and Wenger’s (1991) view of legitimate participation, to understand how participants contribute incollaborative interaction towards collective goals. Analyzing learning with a focus on the community provides uswith the ability to make sense of contribution to design as a kind of participation. Using such a lens for analysiscrafts a view of learning that privileges the shared collaborative space rather than a view of an individual’sparticipation trajectory within a community of practice that most analyses of learning centered on participationtake. Further, it pays particular attention to the socio-historical and material contexts of contribution by membersof the learning community and their differing opportunities to contribute.In this study we analyze a set of interactions from each case, seeking to compare the different dynamicsof each group engaged in collaboration as an ensemble (Ma & Hall, in press). We are interested in how thesecollaborative episodes unfold, what resources are used and how community members (youth andmentors/coaches/facilitators) use them to make arguments about possible design. Particularly, we are interestedin how the imagined futures of the product and performance, as a lamination (Leander, 2002) of the driving goalsof the design activity, are animated in the interaction and how they are taken up. The study’s guiding questionsare:ICLS 2018 Proceedings48© ISLS●●What kinds of resources are used for contribution to the collaborative design activity in the process ofmaking arguments?How are the imagined future products and performances used as resources in interaction for the purposesof collaborative design?Collaboration-as-learning: A Collective ApproachTaking a sociocultural view of learning and development informed by Lave and Wenger’s (1991) conception oflearning as a progression of participation we view the design practice of both settings in this study as instanceswhere participants of a community learn and develop by collaboratively engaging in creative activity. Further wetake up the lens of “collaboration-as-learning” (Enyedy & Stevens, 2014) where the analytical unit of interest isthe collective group engaging in, in this case, a design task with a focus on describing and making sense of howcollaboration is organized and enacted.In the cases of this study, the learning environment is framed around activities of collaborative designby a community of practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991) with the goal of creating a product to be used in performance.Therefore, with an analytic focus on the collective work of collaborative design, the way contributions to thedesign are brought to bear is important in making sense of the participation structures. Here we focus oncontribution as a particular type of participation, specifically how contribution happens including what resourcesare needed and used to collaborate.Contributing to the design of a product and performance like in these two cases requires access toresources for contribution which can be brought to bear on the interactions of collaborative work. Influenced byLatour’s (2005) view of social practice in scientific work as ongoing assembling of associations of material andhuman experiences, we treat the work of these communities of practice as authentic authoring of activity whereassociations are assembled to contribute to design. The remaking of associations takes the form of resources usedfor contribution; these resources are animated interpretations that participants bring, through interaction, to thecollaborative activity to make an argument. They are derived directly from the material experience at hand in theinteraction, from a remaking of past space-time, or imagining a future space-time (Leander, 2002). Building onLeander we call “laminations” the co-creations of space-time representations (chronotopes), or instances wheremembers of an interaction take up, add to, and utilize social representations of past, present, or future space-times.Data and methodsData comes from two distinct studies of semi-formal learning. In each study data includes video and audiorecordings, ethnographic field notes, and images. Hennessy Elliott collected the data of the Robotics Teamanalyzed in Case 1. Data from Case 2 came from a larger study of the Digital Studio by Radke and Ma.Analytically, we focus on interactions where youth contribution to collaborative design of the product andperformance is the driving activity. This focus structured our search for and selection of episodes for analysis tothose in which the facilitators were either not physically present or were not directly guiding the activity. Theepisode for the Robotics Team in Case 1 occurred just after the competition rules for that year were released. Itportrays a portion of the team collaborating with two coaches and a mentor on crafting robot design ideas andcompetition strategy. The episode from Digital Studio in Case 2 also occurred early in the design process (in thiscase, of the documentary) and shows a subgroup of youth building a topic idea to pitch to the rest of the group.Methods of multimodal and interaction analysis (Goodwin, 2010; Jordan & Henderson, 1995) were used toexamine instances of contribution during design activity.Case 1: Robotics TeamThe Robotics Team’s home is in the basement mechanics shop of Engineering High School (EHS) in a midsizednortheastern city. EHS is a technology and engineering focused high school that serves students from all over thecity, the large majority of whom are Black and or Latinx. The team has participated for over 20 years in annualrobotics competitions which are re-imagined and remade every year by an international governing organization.The particular episode for this study was chosen because it occurs shortly after the year’s competition rules werereleased. It portrays a moment where different members of the team collaborated on 1) developing ideas for thisfuture robot, and 2) developing a better understanding the rules of the new competition style (see Table 1 for asummary of all participants in the episode). The coach, JF, had a youth participant print out the competitionmanual and put it into a three-ring binder for access during discussions like the one analyzed here. In this episode,Matt, the college student mentor, holds the manual near the table that all of the participants are crowded around.ICLS 2018 Proceedings49© ISLSTable 1: Participant list robotics clubNameMajor Position/DutiesGradeYear # on TeamJavSpockCaptain, builderBuilder11th10th3rd2ndHarrisonDVJFSupport for scouting and designMath Teacher and CoachCoach and Engineering Teacher12thTeacherTeacher1st1st year as coach4th year as CoachMattMentor/ Driving coachAlumnus, current undergraduate2nd year as mentorThree youth members of the Robotics Team collaborate with two coaches and a college mentor (See Table 1) totalk through the design of a robot and the new rules of competition that would influence both in-game strategyand how the robot should be designed. This analysis focuses on the resources brought to bear on this set ofinteractions over a five-minute period.Multiple times in this episode, members use references to previous competitions in order to gain tractionwith their own ideas for how the future robot should be designed. For example, responding to JF’s suggestion tobuild a conveyor belt in order to gather competition balls that need to be shot into a certain goal, Spock attemptsto contribute to the design discussion by sharing an idea in terms of another robot he saw at a competition theprevious year:JF: No matter what the balls have to be picked up. Ahh conveyer belt won't be a problem todo. ((looks down to the table))Spock: Are we gonna do it, uhh, Remember last year's team. The giant one with the((gestures up and points with right hand, index finger; looks away)) like the … it was...Basically, last year there was a um, a robot that ((gestures with arm as grabbing something))grabbed the ball and it was like a conveyer belt ((spins arm in a circle)) and it just wentstraight into the shooter and they just kept like rotating the whole time...While he struggles to get his ideas out, Spock’s continued gestures fortify his attempt to describe a pastcompetition that they should learn from. Here, the experience of a past time-space at a previous competition is aresource for contributing to the design discussion, linking to JF’s idea that this year’s robot could have a conveyorbelt for picking up balls. This is an example of laminating a past space-time into the present as a resource to buildon the collective knowledge of a design. Once brought into the discussion it is picked up and responded to,particularly by JF:JF: Yeah but that. Remember how tall that was.Spock: Yeah but it. Can we do some[thing like that]JF:[And there were only]. They were only doing it with one ball.Spock: Yeah but I mean is, can we do something like that but on a larger scale like make itwider ((gestures out with both hands, a widening gesture))In this exchange, JF rebukes Spock’s contribution with another frame of the previous year’s competition,“remember…” only one large ball was picked up and shot; whereas in the current competitions multiple smallerballs needed to be picked up and shot at a goal to score points. The “but…remember” sequence frames theexchange as an evaluative resource that references the same space-time. Here, while referring to the samehistorical time-space as Spock, this is also an example of bringing the resource of the competition rules to thiscollaborative design process in order to make an argument against basing their design off of the previous robotSpock refers to. Later, JF, as the mechanically inclined coach, clarifies that a design suggested by Spock and Javwas an “overly complex design” that would have too many spots of possibly not working, using mechanicalknowledge to laminate an imagined future space-time. In this comment JF brings the proposed robot design intotalk by describing a space-time where something could go wrong if the robot were designed that way.ICLS 2018 Proceedings50© ISLSBesides the mention above by JF, the competition rules, as a resource, are brought into the collaborativediscussion into the interaction in two different ways. First, they are recruited as a reference to physicalmanipulations of the game pieces built to scale out of wood in the shop around them. Second, they reference thecompetition game manual printed and placed in a binder which sits in front of Matt in this specific interaction.Both examples mediate the rules of the competition through physical artifacts that can be referenced.At one point in the collaboration, the group begins to construct a strategy for how the robot should movearound the competition field, in addition to constructing a working design of the robot itself. In the example below,Matt (the mentor) is seated in front of the game manual which is flipped to the page with a figure that shows thelayout of the competition field with dimensions and labels:Jav: Everything's fair game in this=Matt: You have to go here ((points end of screwdriver to field map)) and then ((dragsscrewdriver to a new spot)) right here ((moves screwdriver back and forth)) diagonalSpock: I mean I'd guard our neutral zone ((points to the field map)) or retrieval zone.Matt: [Cause if you] go down here you run that risk as well. ((Points, with screwdriver to thefield)) Remember there's one here. ((moves screwdriver to another point on field map)) Andthere's one here.Spock: Que--- I mean ((points to the field map)) uh…Competition strategy has large implications for design choices here. In this set of utterances, Matt usesthis representation of the field, or field map, to argue his view of what their strategy should be in the competition.The game manual animates the rules of the competition and structures its vocabulary (“neutral zone” and “retrievalzone”) for Matt, Spock, and those looking on. It also directly mediates the lamination of a future time-space wherean imagined robot moves through a competition (“you have to go here”). As Matt points with the screwdriver tothe map of the competition field, he merely has to bring the imagination into the future while the map in themanual does the work of constructing the spatial relationships for other participants. The screwdriver he touchesthe page with becomes the future robot. Spock takes this up pointing to the map and also speaking in future tense“I’d guard…” These resources, the map in the competition manual and space-time representation, are used tobuild the collective knowledge of the rules (“you have to…”) and competent strategy in future performance (“yourun the risk of”).The use of the physical game manual is picked up by JF, and DV, all referring to the representation ofthe field in order to bring the future competition into the design conversation, as seen in the excerpt below.JF: Is there a danger zone in front of the, ((leans in to the binder)). Oh there it is. Yeah I see itMatt: Right hereDV: So Andy was talking about that pattern ((Spins finger in a vertical circle)) (0.4s)remember, the board he had that loop pattern? … So I think that loop pattern ((Spins hands inloop)) will keep us away ((points to the field map)) (0.2s) from the penalty spot.In these turns at talk, the game manual becomes an integral resource for the collaborative design process,even mediating other space-time resources. The two excerpts above show that the manual is a materialization ofcompetition rules, which is taken up to laminate the future performance of the robot to make arguments abouthow the robot should move, and how it should be designed. As these contributions are brought to bear on theinteraction the learning community collaboratively negotiates their implications and legitimacy.Overall in this case, members bring 1) previous competition experience, 2) the competition rules manual,and 3) mechanical knowledge into the interaction to drive collaborative design. These are called upon throughtalk and gesture with reference to experiential time-spaces, past and future, and material resources physicallyavailable in the room. They are used to recruit other participants in the group to engage in building collectiveknowledge for design, and strategizing for the performance of the robot in future competition.Case 2: Digital StudioThe Digital Studio is a non-profit youth media organization focused on engaging underserved youth populationsin documentary film production and civic engagement. The program is offered for school credit or as a paidinternship and emphasizes community building and cooperative problem solving. Over the course of one schoolICLS 2018 Proceedings51© ISLSsemester, interns work together to develop, capture, edit, and publicly present a 20-minute documentary. Startingwith students’ own questions and their own lived experiences, these documentary inquiry projects look tochallenge social issues and institutions. Digital Studio youth are supported by one adult facilitator, but ultimately,they were responsible for all the footage collection and editing, as well as for developing and realizing a strongstory line (called the line of inquiry).The episode below occurred early in the semester as the interns worked to choose the topic of theirdocumentary. We meet six male youth as they prepare for their pitch presentation where they will attempt toconvince the whole group to select their production idea. The episode was chosen because it was a moment offacilitator-free collaborative negotiation in an effort to 1) formalize their answers the Pitch Packet questions, and2) develop or share understandings of the critical components of a documentary film. Table 2 provides namesand other pertinent background information for the participants in this episode.Table 2: Participant list Digital StudioNameBenjaminCarlElliotIanJorgeNicholasHankRoleInternInternInternInternInternInternDS FacilitatorAge181716171818N/AGrade111010101112N/AththththththOther pertinent information(1)(2); First language is Spanish(2); First language is EnglishNominated to be the scribe(1)(1)(1); Second year as a DS Facilitator(1) Does not appear in transcript excerpts but is part of the data analyzed for this paper.(2) Recent immigrant to the United StatesThe small group collaborates to finalize their documentary idea and complete their Pitch Packet. Thispacket, created by the facilitator, Hank, is a collection of questions they must be able to answer during their formalpitch. The packet’s questions are divided into the following five categories: Line of Inquiry, Personal Profile,Relevance, Professional Interviews, and Closing Argument. They will have to present a formal pitch later thissame day and have been researching and developing their idea for the past three days. During the formal pitch,the packet they are finishing now will be available to them as a reference for their talking points. Similar to theRobotics Club, resources are called upon through talk and gesture with reference to experiential time-spaces, pastand future, and material resources physically available in the room. These are used to contribute to thecollaborative design for both evaluation and knowledge building purposes. In the following excerpt, their workto finalize their pitch turns to a discussion of one aspect of the documentary, the personal profile.Carl: Oh, and also for example history profile ((Gestures towards Nicholas)).Ian: What? ((Holding the Pitch Packet))Carl: The history of? profile.Ian: Personal profile?=Carl: =Uh huh?Ian: Like, every single video that you watch uh, is is connected to uh personal profile. So it’s,i-if you don’t have a personal profile you cannot, you cannot start working on yourdocumentary.In this excerpt Ian, who is in charge of recording their ideas in the pitch packet, leads the discussion.Carl’s first utterance was originally in response to the question, “How will this be different from other DigitalStudio films?” However, Ian takes it up as a content question. This is evidenced in his reply of what a personalprofile is and why it is important to a documentary. Carl rejects Ian’s interpretation of his idea as a request forinformation.Carl: No but I say, no but I, no, I means that they history, in the history, always different foreach people uh the history of the don’t trust the internet like that.ICLS 2018 Proceedings52© ISLSIan: Well::: ((Still holding the Pitch Packet)) I didn’t get your question I’m sorry but like Iwant you to elaborate a little bit for me, [like explain it.Carl:[Yes. For example - for example, not to trust theinternet because I ha:::ve one day I have to computer it? ((make typing motion)) that’s why - Iwas::: five years old, no? ((gestures with hand to the height of a five year old)) And I put uh,computers like that ((typing motion)) and appear a virus in my computer like that...and I don’ttrust the internet. Another person for example, hack or like that or um, anything else, anythinglike that um::: don’t trust the internet because eh, security of the pages is low.Ian: Okay, I got, I got what you said, but is that, is that a real personal story? Like, it-it mustbe real. It-it must be something that happened to you already. I-you cannot make from yourown. That’s what I was tryin’ to do. When - when I spoke to Hank, told me like, this shouldbe a real his-story.Carl’s example seems to clarify for Ian that he understands what a personal profile is. For Ian this leadsto a new issue of authenticity. We see Hank animated through Ian’s talk when he refers to a past interaction(“Hank told me…”). Carl never replies to Ian’s authenticity question and the group moves on when Carl admitsthat he is, “sleepy” and “[doesn’t] even know what [he’s] talking about.” Because of his responsibility to recordtheir ideas, Ian has been positioned as the leader. His uptake of this role is evidenced by his multiple returns tothe pitch packet from which he produces lines of direct questioning, one of which he poses to Carl in the excerptabove. Furthermore, he animates lessons from Hank (“it must be real”) to clarify what counts as a personal storyand why it is relevant to documentary making. Finally, he uses a past experience with Hank (“when I spoke toHank”) to evaluate their answers and work to negotiate the final record. Across the excerpt the pitch packet actsas a mediating artifact, connecting the lessons on documentary making Hank has taught and their currentcollaborative work efforts.The pitch packet also becomes useful in elucidating a historical framing which the youth take up indeveloping and evaluating their answers. This first occurs when the youth work to answer the question, “Howwill this be different from other Digital Studio films?”When Nicholas begins to say their topic has never been covered, Elliot interjects, relying on hisknowledge of past production topics. Another student, Ian, recalls that the Digital Studio has produced over 190documentaries so, “even Hank haven’t watched uh the videos, like all the videos, there might be one.” In thisutterance grouping the youth work collaboratively to evaluate the strength of their originality argument. Iananimates the then-absent facilitator, Hank, in reminding them of the multitude of completed projects. This couldbe taken as an evaluation of Nicholas’s first comment and support of Elliot’s warning that they “don’t want tomake assumptions,” about uniqueness. This historical framing then becomes crucial in formalizing their finalargument. The three youth decide to skirt the absoluteness of Nicholas’s original statement and change theiranswer to say, “It’s an unexplored topic.”Across the episode learners collaboratively produce the documentary and position both the pitch packetand the facilitator as resources in their work to develop and finalize their group’s documentary idea. In theseexcerpts, the pitch packet becomes an integral resource for the collaborative design process. It laminates theirshared lessons from Hank about documentary making and the future completed film as resources for completingthe final draft of their pitch. The interns bring three different kinds of resources to this collaborative exercise: 1)shared historical framing, 2) the pitch packet, and 3) Hank’s ideas and lessons. These resources get recruited bythe youth producers in the collaborative process of negotiating and evaluating ideas as well as in support ofknowledge-building.DiscussionCollaborative design work is driven by the ways resources are brought to bear on the interaction in each of thesesettings. As Barron (2003) argues, focusing on the group as the analytic unit allows us to analyze the resourcesthey use, the “types of contributions they make and how they are taken up or not,” (p. 311). Learners interact inauthentic practice of designing and do the work to position each other as active members of the “epistemiccommunity,” (Kim, et al., 2015). In the theoretical view we take, this positioning in the community is facilitatedby learners’ access to usable resources, crafting their context for contribution and the ways contributions arelegitimated by the group. Across both cases these resources are used as: 1) evaluative resources, or resources tolegitimate an emerging part of the design, and 2) knowledge constructing resources, or resources to furtherconstruct local knowledge needed for the design or as part of the design. In each analysis it proves difficult toICLS 2018 Proceedings53© ISLSseparate product from performance in what future collaborators are designing. Therefore, both cases take on futureoriented analyses that do not directly distinguish the two.Above we identified three resources used in interaction in each case. Each resource was used, at times,in both evaluative and knowledge constructing contexts. These two lists of three, while somewhat different, mapquite well onto each other. First, previous competition experience, a resource identified from the Robotics Teamcase, matches well with Digital Studios’s shared historical framing. Each resource indicates the agentic use of theinstitutional historical contexts. This points directly to the importance of historical framing and experience in howyouth can contribute to design work. Second, both the competitive game manual (Robotics Team) and the pitchpacket (Digital Studio) are physical material resources that facilitate the interaction and are used to structure thedesign process including creations of imagined future space-times. Third, Hank’s ideas and lessons (DigitalStudio), which youth take up, can be construed as the mechanical (technical) knowledge of making a documentary.JF and others clearly use mechanical knowledge of robot construction to design and evaluate possible design.Youth interpretations of past space-times were used in both cases to help construct a vision of a futuredesign. On the Robotics team, previous experience at a past competition was repeatedly used as a resource throughlamination of past time-spaces. In the Digital Studio, youth reimagined the past program documentaries to arguefor the originality of the idea they were proposing. Both are examples of how this type of contribution resourcerequires knowledge of or experience with past iterations of the type of product they were aiming to design. In theRobotics example, the learner had the previous experience and therefore was able to bring that to bear on theinteraction though a lamination of a past space-time while the learner in the Digital Studio example needed tospeak to a historical context by referring to previous time-spaces where the facilitator discussed yet anotherprevious time-space, limiting the possible lamination. This is a secondary layer of space-times for reference.Kim and colleagues (2015) describe integrating the design process into classroom learning as an“emerging learning process” where learners define the learning trajectory. This lens can also be taken in thesesemi-formal learning spaces. Ways to contribute are continually re-created depending on both the resources athand for youth, how previous contributions have been legitimated, and the collaborative interactions that comebefore it, laying the groundwork for what is needed to be learned in order design and create the artifact. Thisrequired us to pay attention to the ways that future products, and in these two cases their performance, werebrought to the design process as both evaluative resources and knowledge construction resources. In both cases,the groups interacted, constructing imagined products with past and future space-times, and articulatingunderstandings of the goals of future performance to make arguments.Future space-time representations are particularly important in design work for a product and aperformance. Participants frequently try to make arguments and build consensus for a design choice by animatingtheir imagining of a future product and/or their performance through talk and gesture. Learner contribution to thedesign process in both cases required directly constructing and sharing an imagined future of the final product andthe final performance of the learning community. Therefore, the product and performance become part of thedesign process, instead of simply being end goals. Learners, and mentors in the case of the robotics team, usedresources, including imagined and interpreted space-times, physical objects, and technical knowhow, to bringthese final goals into interaction in the design process. In both cases these resources were used to evaluate a currentdesign idea and to build collective knowledge about the rules for the products and their performances and thedesign itself. While the pitch packet and the game manual, themselves, were designed to do this work for learnersin collaboration, many other time-spaces and objects were used to further construct design ideas. These caseanalyses illustrate the nuanced ways youth contributing to design discussions bring together constructions ofvaried space-times, including interpreted past and imagined future, as resources in conjunction with the materialresources at hand, i.e. the pitch packet or the game manual.Therefore, in collaborative work for learners in semi-formal learning spaces, it is important to recognizethe different resources (material and temporal-spatial) that learners have access to, how contributions arecollectively taken up, and to be intentional about how they are facilitated. It is that access, or perceived access inconjunction with the ways the group takes up learner contributions which gives learners the agency to contributeto the design and, in turn, the construction of the learning environment.SignificanceThe analysis showed the ways in which collaboration is guided by the youths’ knowledge and imaginings of theirend goals in each setting—both the physical products and the final performances. Hmelo-Silver writes, “the goalof becoming a good collaborator and the process of learning collaboratively are often woven together,” (2004,p.214). With this view of the learning community, it becomes clear that differentiated access to resources, bothmaterial and spatio-temporal, structure the types of contribution learners can collaboratively make to a designprocess. Further, the ways in which contributions are valued, evaluated, and taken up play a large role in laterICLS 2018 Proceedings54© ISLSaccess to resources and contribution. Therefore, designing and facilitating these types of learning spaces whichinclude a focus on a final product and/or performance requires paying attention to learners’ previous experiences,their developing imagined final product and performance, and their material contexts for design. This is alsoimportant for crafting more formal learning spaces with project-based and problem-based learning pedagogies.ReferencesBarron, B. (2000). Achieving coordination in collaborative problem-solving groups. Journal of the LearningSciences, 9, 403–436. https://doi.org/10.1207/S15327809JLS0904_2Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12), 307–359.https://doi.org/10.1207/S15327809JLS1203_1Barron, B. J. S., Schwartz, D. L., Vye, N. J., Moore, A., Petrosino, A., Zech, L., & Bransford, J. D. (1998). Doingwith understanding: Lessons from research on problem- and project-based learning. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 7, 271–311. https://doi.org/10.1080/10508406.1998.9672056Bielaczyc, K., & Collins, A. (1983). Learning communities in classrooms: A reconceptualization of educationalpractice. In C. M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional-design theories and models. Hillsdale, NJ: LawrenceErlbaum Associates.Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.),Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 229–255). Cambridge, MA:MIT Press.Cole, M. (2006). The fifth dimension: an after-school program built on diversity. New York: Russell Sage.Enyedy, N., & Stevens, R. (2014). Analyzing collaboration. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook ofthe Learning Sciences (2nd ed., pp. 191–212). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139519526.013Goodwin,C.(2010).Multimodalityinhumaninteraction.Calidoscopio,8,85–98.https://doi.org/10.4013/cld.2010.82.01Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2004). Problem-based learning: What and how do students learn? Educational PsychologyReview, 16, 235–266.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Barrows, H. S. (2008). Facilitating collaborative knowledge building. Cognition andInstruction, 26, 48–94. https://doi.org/10.1080/07370000701798495Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4, 39–103. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327809jls0401_2Kim, B., Tan, L., & Bielaczyc, K. (2015). Learner-generated designs in participatory culture: What they are andhow they are shaping learning. Interactive Learning Environments, 23, 545–555.Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor-network-theory. New York: OxfordUniversity Press.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.Leander, K. M. (2002). Silencing in classroom interaction: Producing and relating social spaces. DiscourseProcesses, 34, 193–235. https://doi.org/10.1207/S15326950DP3402_4Ma, J. Y., & Hall, R. (in press). Learning a part together: Ensemble learning in a competitive high school marchingband. Instructional Science.Miyake, N., & Kirschner, P. A. (2014). The social and interactive dimensions of collaborative learning. In R. K.Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the Learning Sciences (2nd ed., pp. 418–438). Cambridge,UK: Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139519526.026Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge, UK: CambridgeUniversity Press.AcknowledgmentsWe are thankful to our colleagues in the New York University Interaction Analysis Lab who participated in datasessions. Their analytic expertise greatly assisted this research. We are also grateful to the insightful reviewerswho provided comments that pushed our thinking.ICLS 2018 Proceedings55© ISLS