Identifying Shifts in Agency by Analyzing Authority in DiscussionMary Bridget Kustusch, DePaul University, mkustus1@depaul.eduEleanor C Sayre, Kansas State University, University of Calgary, esayre@gmail.comScott Franklin, Rochester Institute of Technology, svfsps@rit.eduAbstract: Increasing students’ agency influences their persistence and has ramifications fortheir views of the nature of science. The idea of agency is closely tied to issues of authority andpower. Here we study how classroom group conversations are directed and who has theauthority to direct the conversation. We present a narrative analysis of a whole class discussion,analyze discourse patterns to infer the distribution of authority amongst relevant subgroups anddemonstrate a shift toward a more equitable distribution and an increase in student agency.IntroductionIncreasing learners’ agency, particularly in science, is dramatically important for their future persistence(Calabrese Barton and Tan, 2010). Here we introduce the idea of inchargeness: an individual or subgroup withhigh inchargeness is in a position to steer the conversation by setting the topic or choosing who speaks next.The context for this study is a pre-enrollment summer program that seeks to improve retention in STEMdegrees for incoming STEM undergraduates, specifically first-generation college (FG) students and Deaf andhard-of-hearing (DHH) students; the university studied is about 20% FG and 8% DHH overall. Participation isgender-balanced and racial distribution roughly matches the population of the United States. Participants developmodels of climate change, write reflective journals, and engage in activities to improve their metacognitive skilland sense of community. In 2014, there were 20 participants: four who identified American Sign Language (ASL)as their primary language (‘signers’), three who identified as DHH but did not use ASL as their primary language,and thirteen hearing students. All of the whole-group discussions employed simultaneous interpretation in ASL.For this study, we analyzed video of a whole-group discussion in which students created a sign for theword “metacognition,” which does not exist in ASL. The creation of new signs happens regularly in ASL, withvarying degrees of formality. We chose this activity because the instructor and researchers noted an increase instudent agency throughout the activity. We draw from Positioning Theory to explore the role of authority as thismixed group negotiated developing a new sign. Positioning Theory is “the study of local moral orders as evershifting patterns of rights and obligations of speaking and acting” (Harré and Van Langenhove, 1998, p.1).Positioning Theory involves three core ideas: communication acts, positioning, and storylines. Communicationacts are the socially negotiated meanings of linguistic and paralinguistic (facial expression, gestures, etc.) actions.Storylines are the patterns by which interactions develop and through which discursive actions are understood.Positioning is the process by which participants take up or are assigned positions. These three ideas interactdynamically. Participants interpret communication acts based on the storylines at play and their positions withinthem. These acts impact both the relevant storylines and the relative positioning of participants within thosestorylines. In addition, for most interactions, there are multiple positions and storylines at play which occur overmany timescales. We used the communication acts in each episode to infer the positions of individuals andsubgroups with regard to their authority in the conversation by comparing these patterns to common storylines.We introduce the concept of inchargeness, which is associated with directing the flow of conversation.An individual or subgroup with high inchargeness is positioned such that they are more likely to have successfulbids to steer the conversation. Inchargeness is a deliberately volatile measure; a person's inchargeness is intimatelytied to their current positioning, the positioning of the other participants, and the communication acts all engagein. Different storylines will promote different inchargeness distributions, from hierarchical to distributed.Inchargeness is not the same as expertise, nor is it about the amount of participation, but instead thecharacter of participation. There is no single discursive indicator of inchargeness, but we infer it based on patternsof who proposes, sets, or limits the topic(s) of conversation; whether talk is sequential or overlapping; types ofdiscourse; and to whom speech and/or questions are addressed. We use a combination of behavioral markers toidentify communication acts and infer the distribution of inchargeness by looking at positions within storylines.We analyze our data from the perspective of inchargeness and show a change in the distribution over time.Analysis of inchargenessWe divided the discussion into five episodes with distinct discourse patterns and characterized the communicationacts and inferred storylines within each episode. Given the nature of the activity, we were particularly attuned tosimilarities and differences between how the instructor, signers, and non-signers (including both hearing studentsICLS 2018 Proceedings1623© ISLSand non-signing DHH students) engaged in the discussion during each of these episodes. Here we present a verycondensed narrative of the activity highlighting the results for how we characterized inchargeness in each episode.Episode 1: The instructor began by eliciting information about ASL from the signers. The pattern ofcommunication acts is similar to a “panel discussion” storyline, where a moderator (instructor) has highinchargeness, panelists (signers) have some inchargeness, and an audience (non-signers) has little inchargeness.Episode 2: The instructor then asked all of the students to define metacognition. This episode shows a“call-and-response” storyline common in classrooms. In this storyline, the instructor still has the highestinchargeness, but now the signers’ expertise is no longer relevant and there was no distinction between how thesigners and non-signers engaged in discussion. Thus, all students have a similar level of inchargeness.Episode 3: The instructor redirected the conversation toward ASL and then removed himself from theconversation. The storyline here feels more emergent: the students are engaged in making sense of this problemcollaboratively, in contrast with the more constrained communication acts earlier. Students did the majority of thespeaking and built each other's ideas, suggesting higher inchargeness than Episode 2, but there was again a cleardifference in how signers and non-signers participated, such that signers had higher inchargeness than non-signers.Episode 4: One of the non-signers redirected the conversation back toward metacognition and led thediscussion like the instructor in Episode 2 (“call-and-response” storyline), indicating she had more inchargenessthan her peers. However, the other students (with no distinction between signers and non-signers) did not respondin the same way they did to the instructor (e.g., comments directed to the group and not just to her), indicating herinchargeness was less than the instructor’s and the other students had more inchargeness than in Episode 2.Episode 5: The conversation returned to the task of creating a sign and took on a free-for-all characterwith overlapping talk and many task-related side conversations, like an “informal dinner party” storyline. Thedifference between participation of signers and non-signers was much less noticeable than in Episodes 1 and 3,suggesting a more similar level of inchargeness. At one point, the instructor tried to redirect the conversation, butstudents quickly returned to their earlier conversations, suggesting that he had equal inchargeness to the students.DiscussionInchargeness, as we have introduced it here, is about one's position within a group to direct a conversation andthe degree to which one’s voice is heard and acknowledged. Thus, it directly relates to agency, as well as equity.We saw a variety of storylines represented, including some that were fairly constrained and recognizable(e.g., panel discussion, classroom call-and-response). Others were more emergent (Episode 3), where the studentswere collaboratively engaged in making sense of the task. The informal dinner party storyline in Episode 5 is themost interesting and unexpected for a classroom environment. Most classroom storylines position the instructorwith a high level of inchargeness. However, in Episode 5, the students treat the instructor’s bids to control theconversation without any particular deference, as if he has no more or less inchargeness than anyone else.With regard to agency, this last episode suggests that by treating the instructor as another peer, thestudents are exhibiting more agency in this storyline than in earlier storylines where they positioned themselveswith less inchargeness than the instructor. While we do not claim that any individual has an increased sense ofagency, we believe the group eventually transitions to a storyline where they collectively have more agency.Finally, inchargeness can potentially give us insight into issues of equity in group discussions. Equity isabout “a fair distribution of opportunities to learn or opportunities to participate” (Esmonde, 2009). This suggeststhat storylines with a flatter distribution of inchargeness may be more equitable than those with a more hierarchicaldistribution. In this case, our shift toward greater agency may also be associated with a shift toward greater equity.We plan to explore this connection by comparing inchargeness to other measures of equity.ReferencesCalabrese Barton, A. and Tan, E. (2010). We Be Burnin’! Agency, Identity, and Science Learning. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 19(2):187–229.Esmonde, I. (2009). Ideas and Identities: Supporting Equity in Cooperative Mathematics Learning. Review ofEducational Research, 79(2), 1008–1043.Harré, R. and Van Langenhove, L., (Eds.). (1998). Positioning Theory: Moral Contexts of International Action.Wiley-Blackwell.AcknowledgementsWe are deeply grateful to our research participants and instructors. Portions of this research were funded by NSFDUE #1317450, RIT CASTLE, and the KSU & DePaul Physics Departments. This paper's ideas developedcollaboratively among the PEER-Rochester field school; Rita Dawod contributed mightily to an earlier analysis.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1624© ISLS