Shifting Educational Activity Systems: A Cross-Case Analysis ofScience Education Reform Efforts in Large Scale SystemsDeb Morrison, Gina Tesoriero, and Philip Belleddeb@uw.edu, ginateso@uw.edu, pbell@uw.eduUniversity of WashingtonAbstract: Educational reform at a system scale is challenging due to issues of coherence. Inan effort to improve science education reform efforts in the United States, learning scientistsand educational leaders collaboratively engaged in design-based implementation researchwithin a research practice partnership. This study describes three state level case studiesresulting from this work and draws out the tensions and affordances that emerged.Keywords: Design based implementation research, collaborative inquiry, equity, coherenceIntroductionThe 2012 release of A Framework for K-12 Science Education (Framework; NRC, 2012) signified a shift inscience education in the U.S. with the inclusion of an explicit vision of equity within science education thatchallenged established teaching and learning practices. Subsequent implementation work has been fragmentedand uncoordinated with different actors in the system engaging in the new vision at different rates, amidst variedresources, and with diverse strategies due to localized control of educational decisions and funding mechanisms.Additionally, limited timely professional learning opportunities for all participants in science education aboutthese implementation efforts has hindered progress.Implementation efforts can potentially be improved by attending directly to the issue of coherence,having participants across a system come to a shared vision and a plan of coordinated action. In order toimprove coherence across large educational systems that span beyond a single school or district, all participantsin the system need to engage in sensemaking (Coburn, 2001) and find effective ways to collaborate to minimizechallenges during implementation.In this study we explored the implementation of the new vision of equitable science educationembodied in the Framework across large educational systems in the United States by asking the overarchingquestion, How can education systems design for shifts towards new visions of education? This study is situatedwithin a multi-state research practice partnership (Coburn & Penuel, 2016) focused on the use of formativeassessment to foster teacher learning.MethodsWe use the lens of activity theory to identify mediation points within the system to foster change (Cole &Engeström, 1993). From this perspective, individuals are viewed as situated within various communities ofpractice (Wenger, 1998) which have particular norms for activity, common historically based funds ofknowledge (Moll, Amanti, Neff, & Gonzalez, 1992) and repertoires of practice (Gutiérrez & Rogoff, 2003).Historically contextualized positionalities (Harré, Moghaddam, Cairnie, Rothbart, & Sabat, 2009) that dictateprivilege and power in any given interaction exist within and between a community’s participants. From thislens, we framed this study in design based implementation research (Fishman, Penuel, Allen, Cheng, & Sabelli,2013) to engage researchers and science education leaders from a wide range of settings and leverage theresources all participants bring to implementation of the Framework vision of equitable science education.In this study, we utilized individual and cross-case analyses (Merriam, 1998) of implementation effortsat the state scale. Cases were selected to provide a range of rural and urban contexts as well as spatialdistribution in the U.S. that intersected with differences in economic prosperity. Data were drawn from threefocal states using artifacts from two collaborative meetings that dealt with Framework implementationspecifically and 16 interviews of state science leaders conducted after the first year of collaborative work. Dataanalyses employed a critical ethnographic approach (Carspecken, 1996).FindingsThe three states used as case studies were working towards a shared vision of equitable science education;however, they took different pathways. State A focused on the creation and development of shared resources tosupport teachers, students and parents. State B took an approach that would help uncover gaps in studentICLS 2018 Proceedings1729© ISLSlearning to illuminate the need of a shared vision through professional learning opportunities. State C designedprofessional learning experiences that were informed by the work already being done by other states.Work that each state engaged in impacted the other three states. For example, State A played animportant role in drafting and prototyping shared resources with teachers develop three-dimensional formativeassessments which informed the work on State B as they scaled professional learning across a regionalcollective. In turn, State B developed example formative assessments across different domains that were sharedwith other states. State C used the examples developed by State B and worked to develop a shared vision onequity internally to provide insight into attendant pedagogical moves, which then impacted the work that State Awas undertaking.All states experienced tensions in their implementation work. For example, they all struggled tosupport rural teachers in the coherent shift towards a Framework vision of equitable science education due tovariations access to universities, limited numbers of substitute teachers to allow for teacher release, limitednumbers of Framework experts, and greater travel time to reach collaborative spaces. A second tension namedby all case study states, but experienced more profoundly by States B and C, was the issue of shifting ordiminishing state and educator personnel. This represented an ongoing challenge to implementation coherence,as individual actors who had extensive knowledge and practice in building capacity regarding equitable scienceeducation were then lost to the system. Two solutions were seen to be essential to this challenge: sharedvisioning and sustained professional development in practice.Conclusions and implicationsEngaging in design based implementation work with state leaders and learning scientists allowed for states tocollaborate in codesign and research work using tools such as practical measures, actor network models, andteacher education resources. The collaborative nature of this work, allowed state participants to customize thesetools to their specific needs, gaining valuable insights into issues of incoherence in their state systems. Theywere then subsequently able to design for and iterate on options for improved coherence that were well informedby the efforts of other states. Research into these collective efforts highlights potential pathways andmechanisms that states can engage to improve implementation of the Framework vision of equitable scienceteaching as well as more generally helping to illustrate the importance of networked activity in systems reform.ReferencesCarspecken, P. F. (1996). Critical ethnography in educational research: A theoretical and practical guide. NewYork, NY: Psychology Press.Coburn, C. E. (2001). Collective sensemaking about reading: How teachers mediate reading policy in theirprofessional communities. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 23(2), 145- 170.Coburn, C. E., & Penuel, W. R. (2016). Research–practice partnerships in education: Outcomes, dynamics, andopen questions. Educational Researcher, 45(1), 48-54.Cole, M., & Engeström, Y. (1993). A cultural-historical approach to distributed cognition. Distributedcognitions: Psychological and Educational Considerations, 1-46.Fishman, B. J., Penuel, W. R., Allen, A. R., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. O. R. A. (2013). Design-basedimplementation research: An emerging model for transforming the relationship of research andpractice. National Society for the Study of Education, 112(2), 136-156.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Rogoff, B. (2003). Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits or repertoires ofpractice. Educational Researcher, 32(5), 19-25.Harré, R., Moghaddam, F. M., Cairnie, T. P., Rothbart, D., & Sabat, S. R. (2009). Recent advances inpositioning theory. Theory & Psychology, 19(1), 5-31.Merriam, S. B. (1998). Qualitative research and case study applications in education: Revised and expandedfrom case study research in education. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers.Moll, L. C., Amanti, C., Neff, D., & Gonzalez, N. (1992). Funds of knowledge for teaching: Using a qualitativeapproach to connect homes and classrooms. Theory into Practice, 31(2), 132-141.National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge, UK: CambridgeUniversity Press.AcknowledgementsWe would like to acknowledge the financial support of the National Science Foundation’s Education andHuman Resources Core Research program (NSF Grant #1561300).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1730© ISLS