Personal Experience and Emotion in Making Sense of Literary TextsTeresa Sosa, Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis, tsosa@iupui.eduAllison H. Hall, University of Illinois at Chicago, ahall33@uic.eduAbstract: In academic contexts, students’ everyday knowledge and understandings are oftenundervalued as instruction attempts to supplant these with sanctioned content. However, inreading and interpreting literary texts, personal experience and emotional reactions can bothguide and inform reader sense-making of texts. This work looks at how students’ personalinsights, emotions, and experience enrich discussions of literary texts and contribute to broaderunderstandings of human nature and the world.IntroductionLiterary texts offer readers opportunities to explore ideas about the world and human nature in relation to theirown experiences and through discussion with others of various perspectives on the text. In making sense of literarytexts, readers rely on various types of knowledge, including knowledge of the genre, author, cultural and historicalcontext, and rhetorical devices. However, making meaning with literary texts is also informed by personalexperiences, social interactions, and cultural understandings (Lee, Goldman, Levine, & Magliano, 2016). Readersoften use literary narratives to make sense of human actions and events of the world as these texts mirror humanreality (Mar & Oatley, 2008). In addition, readers often react to characters and events with emotions rooted insympathy, empathy, or identification (Mar, Oatley, Djikic, & Mullin, 2011) that may alter the way readers see theworld. Therefore, in literary reasoning, what a reader brings to a text through personal experience or emotionalconnection is an integral part of reading and interpreting texts.Learning environments designed to support literary reasoning need to consider the importance of whatstudents bring to the interpretive process as well as the knowledge, skills, and strategies students need to be ableto make sense of literary texts. Research around instructional interventions to support literary reasoning practicesindicates the importance of sequencing texts and tasks (Sosa, Hall, Goldman, & Lee, 2016), of providing studentswith opportunities to learn explicit strategies related to literary interpretation (Lee, 2007; Levine, 2014), and ofusing class discussions to build understanding (Applebee, Langer, Nystrand, & Gamoran, 2003). Discussionsallow spaces for students to make sense of texts while listening and responding to the ideas of others. Indeed,discussions before, during, and after reading serve as bridges between students’ own world and experiences andthe texts as well as provide opportunities to listen to and explore others’ perspectives on text and on the world.Students’ personal experiences, emotions, and expertise play a pivotal role in meaning-making but areoften treated as less pertinent and, therefore, are rarely foregrounded. We base our work on the idea that drawingfrom student expertise about the social world promotes meaning making and transaction with texts. Accordingly,we examined classroom discussions to understand the role of student experiences, emotions, and expertise.MethodsThis work draws from a year-long study that focused on interactions and learning enabled by students sharingtheir embodied experiences and related understandings of the social world, while explicitly learning interpretivestrategies necessary to connect their insights to literary texts. The focus class was a regular tracked 9th grade ELAclass in a large urban district with a White male teacher and 30 students: 25 Black, three Latino, and two White.Table 1: Lesson descriptionsLessonABCDTextImages of racist mascotsShort poem: “For Black Poets WhoThink of Suicide”An autobiographical piece titled, “Witha little help from my friends.”Statements around themes for novel: OfMice and MenICLS 2018 ProceedingsObjectiveBuild socio-historical understandings of racism andexclusion of Native Americans prior to reading storyPractice discussion techniques and interpretive strategieswith unfamiliar poemConnect to the experiences of the author after readingautobiographical excerptsExplore ideas around themes related to novel prior toreading the novel1485© ISLSThis study examines four classroom lessons described in Table 1 that took place during the first semesterof the school year. Data sources were video recordings and field notes from classroom observations. The videowas transcribed, and each discussion was analyzed for the types of knowledge and practices that the participantsused to make sense of literary texts. Focus was on how personal experiences, emotional reactions, and culturalunderstandings were made explicit in the discussions and how those contributed to collective sense-making.FindingsAnalyses indicated that discussions that were centered on students’ ideas, experiences, connections, and feelingswith texts supported them in building understandings as a basis for literary interpretation. These discussionscreated a space in which students were willing to ask questions and seek clarity about surface aspects of texts.This is important as readers must know the basic character and plot information before engaging in higher levelinterpretation (Hillocks & Ludlow, 1985). For example, students were open about not being sure if NativeAmericans still existed in the United States, about assuming the main characters in Of Mice and Men were Blackduring the first few chapters, and about the reality that mascots many deem racist are still used by major sportsteams. Understanding characters and the implications of how authors portray them is essential for makinginterpretive arguments. Students also related character experiences and their own social world. For example,students connected the argument around the use of the N-word, a highly offensive racial slur for Black people,(Lesson D) to discussions related to racist mascots and Native Americans (Lesson A) by noticing how chargedracist names are and how heavily the offense is related to who uses the terms.In addition, analyses revealed that students connecting their understandings of the social world to thetext world focused attention to the ways language is used and its function such as symbolism, metaphors, andimagery. For example, students’ recognition of Native Americans rarely being discussed in the media, and thusmore easily portrayed in racist mascots (Lesson A), led them to read the short story as more than a one-time racistincident of a white police officer stopping a van of Native Americans and accusing the driver of drinking. Afterreading a character described as struggling “against his weight,” a student noted, “I think they are talking aboutemotional weight,” realizing that the weight was literal (the character is described as a 280-pound teenager) aswell as symbolic of ongoing racism. Similarly, students initially considered the poem (Lesson B) racist, butfocusing on certain language led to the idea that it might be a message to Black people not to be like White people.Ultimately, a student noted that the last stanzas were not about racism and began to identify with the people of thetext: “The author says all these things that make us who we are. He's like, ‘Black people are flutes, the warriorsand survivors through this situation.’ Like we never gave up.” Her focus on the explicit language of Black voiceand expression allowed for personal identification with the poem as well as reflection on its broader message.SignificanceOverall, this work indicates the value of allowing space for student experience, emotion, and expertise in makingsense of texts and the importance of teachers leveraging these understandings and connections as ways to clarify,extend, and deepen meaning making and transaction.ReferencesApplebee, A. N., Langer, J. A., Nystrand, M., & Gamoran, A. (2003). Discussion-based approaches to developingunderstanding: Classroom instruction and student performance in middle and high school English.American Educational Research Journal, 40, 685–730.Lee, C. D. (2007). Culture, literacy, and learning: Taking bloom in the midst of the whirlwind. New York, NY:Teachers College Press.Lee, C. D., Goldman, S. R., Levine, S., & Magliano, J. (2016). Epistemic cognition in literary reasoning.Handbook of epistemic cognition, 165-183.Levine, S. (2014). Making Interpretation Visible With an Affect-Based Strategy. Reading Research Quarterly,49, 283–303.Mar, R. A., & Oatley, K. (2008). The function of fiction is the abstraction and simulation of socialexperience. Perspectives on psychological science, 3(3), 173-192.Mar, R. A., Oatley, K., Djikic, M., & Mullin, J. (2011). Emotion and narrative fiction: Interactive influencesbefore, during, and after reading. Cognition & emotion, 25(5), 818-833.Sosa, T., Hall, A. H., Goldman, S. R., & Lee, C. D. (2016). Developing symbolic interpretation through literaryargumentation. Journal of Learning Sciences, 25, 93-132.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1486© ISLS