Redistributing Epistemic Agency: How Teachers Open Up Spacefor Meaningful Participation in ScienceMon-Lin Monica Ko, Learning Sciences Research Institute, University of Illinois at Chicago,mlko@uic.eduChristina (Stina) Krist, Curriculum & Instruction, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,ckrist@illinois.eduAbstract: Taking the practice turn (Ford & Forman, 2006) necessarily involves students inmaking judgements about the state of their knowledge and in making decisions about how theirinvestigations should proceed. In this study, we investigate how teachers open up aspects oftheir curricular activities and invite students to partner in the epistemic decisions that driveclassroom activity. We draw on work in 3 classrooms as instrumental cases to illustrate whatteachers did to ‘open up’ the curriculum and how these moves re-distributed epistemic agency.In each of the three cases, what teachers opened up had different implications in terms of theirreach: the resulting “ripple effect” of the impact of the decisions that students were involvedmaking. These cases illustrate the “disciplined improvisational” work (Sawyer, 2004) requiredto open up space within the constraints and boundaries of the curriculum to create opportunitiesfor re-distributing epistemic agency.Role of epistemic agency in scientific practiceOne of the key challenges of the “practice turn” in science education (Ford & Forman, 2006), captured in part bythe Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013), is supporting learners’ participation in buildingexplanatory model-based accounts of natural phenomena (Lehrer & Schauble, 2006; Passmore & Svoboda, 2012).As embodied by this “practice turn,” students should be involved in both making judgements about the state oftheir knowledge so far and in making decisions about how their investigations should proceed accordingly (Ford,2015; Stroupe, 2014). Involving students in this way is often cited as a distinguishing factor between “rote”versions of doing science and more meaningful forms of participation in science practices (Barton & Tan, 2010;Berland et al., 2016).We describe this aspect of this vision for meaningful science learning as supporting students’ epistemicagency. We view epistemic agency as a dynamic and multidimensional construct negotiated through interaction,rather than as a binary property that one either has or does not. More specifically, we view student agency inclassrooms as “the way in which [a student] acts, or refrains from acting, and the way in which her or his actioncontributes to the joint action of the group in which he or she is participating” (Gresalfi, Martin, Hand, & Greeno,2008, p. 53). We add the modifier of epistemic because we are focused on the actions (or refrains from action)that are consequential to the collaborative construction of a shared knowledge object (Damsa et al., 2010). In ourcase, this shared knowledge object is an explanatory account of a natural phenomenon. To make the “practiceturn,” there needs to be significant redistributions of agency in the classroom, in ways that invite students topartner in the epistemic decisions that drive classroom activity. What this looks like, and how teachers do this inthe context of a set curriculum, is the focus of this study.What makes epistemic agency epistemic?Actions that we consider consequential to the construction of a shared knowledge object are those that areconnected to, or have an impact on, the intellectual nature of the task itself. For example, imagine an engineeringchallenge designing a fast CO 2 -powered car. In this challenge, students are charged with designing the car andexplaining how and why some cars in this context are faster than others. Students might take actions such asdeciding on the type of material used for the body of the car. We would say their doing so indicates agency. Butwhether this action reflects epistemic agency depends on the rationale behind this decision. For example, arationale for choosing balsa wood instead of oak because it has less mass and therefore requires less force to speedit up has implications for the explanatory account. We would argue that this action + rationale reflects epistemicagency. However, the same decision with a different rationale could be non-epistemic in nature: if balsa wood isprettier or easier to paint, for example, then the action of choosing balsa wood is not (in that moment) a reflectionof epistemic agency.In the engineering task described above, there are different “levels” of activity that can be opened up forstudents’ decision-making (Figure 1). For example, when students decide between balsa wood and oak whenconsidering speed, this decision is directly tied to the claims they can make based on that data (Claims, Figure 1).ICLS 2018 Proceedings232© ISLSStudents could also be involved in deciding how they should go about investigating that one car is faster thananother, such as choosing whether to measure instantaneous speed at a single point, or the average speed across aset or total distance. These decisions influence the methods for investigation (Methods, Figure 1), and the datagenerated from the trials have a direct impact on the claims that can be generated, supported, or refuted usingthose data. At yet another “level,” one could imagine students making choices about what the engineering goal isin the first place (Goal, Figure 1), such as deciding whether they are investigating how to make cars fast, orwhether they want to make cars that are both fast and use sustainable energy sources. This decision would haveimplications for the entire duration of the explanatory arc: all the subsequent twists and turns in the models theygenerate, the methods they use, and the claims they support or refute. Decisions at each of these “levels” invitestudents into doing substantive intellectual aspects of the work. But they have a different resulting “reach” interms of the impact on students’ subsequent learning.Figure 1. “Levels” at which teachers can open up space for epistemic agency within scientific activity.Teacher decision-making that opens up space for epistemic agencyFor students to be able to make any of these decisions, teachers need to do work to renegotiate the positionalframing (Shim & Kim, 2018) of students in their classrooms, as these kinds of epistemic decisions are typicallyconsidered to be the teacher’s responsibility. Following Hand’s (2012) conceptualization of students “taking upspace” in mathematics classrooms, we call this teacher work “opening up space”: creating room for students tobe able to make disciplinarily substantive decisions about their science inquiry. In considering when and how toopen up space, teachers are fully aware that they themselves have significant responsibilities and constraints thatprevent them from giving “full reign” over to students: limited time with students, accountability to contentstandards, responsibility for student safety and well-being, etc. Therefore, teachers must make strategic decisionsabout when and how to open up space for students to take on greater epistemic responsibility.We focus in this paper on the different “levels” at which teachers might strategically decide to open upspace for student decision-making, and how opened spaces at those different levels impact students’ subsequentparticipation in science practices. As such, we focus on curriculum materials as a guiding resource for teachers’noticing and decision-making about opening up space. We pay particular attention to the consequences of openingup space at each gradient level in terms of both teacher facilitation and students’ subsequent activity.Curriculum as resource in teacher decision makingCurriculum has historically been designed and used as a resource for shaping science learning in K-12 classrooms.The design principles and features of curriculum materials influence what teachers teach because they specify theICLS 2018 Proceedings233© ISLSset of activities or phenomena that cohere to a set of learning objectives or student performances. But how lessonsare enacted is subject to a great deal of variation. Curriculum enactment is a function of the social interactionbetween teachers and students, embedded in specific questions or phenomena, and influenced by how schools anddistricts support and assess teachers and students. Thus, teachers are constantly engaged in the work of adaptationand improvisation (Brown & Edelson, 2003; Sawyer, 2004); how they frame, launch, and enact tasks can directlyinfluence the epistemic goals and knowledge building processes that students engage in (Kang et. al, 2016).In the context of engaging students in scientific practices, taking the practice turn requires that teacherscreate room for uncertainty and contention (Ford, 2015; Manz, 2015). It also requires that teachers scaffoldstudents into norms for sensemaking and evaluation. Teachers need to notice and respond to students’ ideas, butalso provide opportunities for students play a key role in doing the substantive work of proposing claims andquestions and evaluating candidate ideas in the face of emerging evidence (Maskiewicz & Winters, 2012).Although teachers’ responsiveness to students’ ideas and their adaptive use of curriculum materials is necessary,it also creates varying degrees of uncertainty in how science learning unfolds in the classroom. This uncertaintypushes back on the very purpose of clear and tractable learning objectives and outcomes that teachers areaccustomed to designing their instruction around. That is, by shifting epistemic agency, teachers subject theirclassrooms and instructional plans to uncertainty.In this study, we explore variation how teachers shift epistemic agency by opening up aspects of theirclassroom activities. The research questions guiding this study are: when and how do teachers create space forstudents’ epistemic agency? How does that impact students’ participation?MethodsThe primary data source for this paper is a corpus of transcripts derived from video recordings of middle schoolscience classrooms collected as part two NSF-funded projects. The goal of both projects was to understand howstudents learned to participate meaningfully in science knowledge-building practices and how teachers supportedthat participation over time in the context of the same curriculum, Investigation and Questioning our WorldThrough Technology, or IQWST (Krajcik, Reiser, Sutherland, & Fortus, 2011). As a part of that work, bothauthors conducted classroom observations and generated field notes, analytic memos, and preliminary analysesthat focused on how aspects of the enactment differed from other observed classes and from the writtencurriculum. Multiple lessons (and sometimes, the same lessons) were observed over 3 years.Guided by our working definition of epistemic agency, we worked to identify candidate moments fromour preliminary analyses as instrumental cases (Stake, 1995) in which teachers did significant work to open upaspects of the IQWST curriculum to students’ decision-making. That is, we were looking for moments in whichthe “opening up” was notable and even surprising to us as observers. We took this approach because our goal isto carefully examine and develop a rich, contextualized description of epistemic agency and the teaching workand tensions involved in supporting it rather than to make claims about, for example, how often or regularlyteachers opened up spaces for students’ epistemic agency. We then verified that each of the selected momentswere instances in which epistemic agency was re-distributed, from the teacher to the student. To be considered aninstrumental case each selected moment had to fit the following criteria:1. when something that was written as taken-for-granted in the curriculum materials was presented in classas problematic, uncertain, or open to negotiation, OR2. when teachers added a discussion that was not in the written curriculum materials at all; AND3. when students responded to the teachers’ invitations in 1 and/or 2 by generating multiple possibilities forclaims and provided rationales for those possibilities.For each of the cases, we then characterized the level at which space was being opened to a redistribution ofagency: that is, what was it that there was now room for discussion and deliberation about (see Figure 1)? Foreach of the 3 identified cases, space was being made around: 1) Phenomena or problem space that are beingexplored; 2) Methods for exploration, including both whether and how to conduct investigations; OR 3) Claimsabout the underlying causes of a phenomenon, including both claims drawn from previously constructed modelsand new observations or conjectures. Taken together, these cases represent variations in what the teacher openedup, and in turn, differences in the levels of epistemic agency for students to take up. For each case, we describethe context of the lesson, what aspects of classroom activity were being opened up to uncertainty, what the teacherdid to shift epistemic agency, and how these decisions shifted student participation.FindingsCase 1: Opening up space for developing methods for investigationICLS 2018 Proceedings234© ISLSThis Chemistry lesson took place in the Spring semester of the 6th grade IQWST unit centered on the drivingquestion, “How can I smell things from a distance?” The unit spanned multiple weeks and explored the molecularnature of matter. Rather than starting the unit by introducing students to the particle nature of matter, studentsexplore a variety of phenomena to develop a model of how people smell odors. This model is then used to explainthe behaviors of solids, liquids, and gases. The model that is generated and revised throughout this unit reflectsthe understanding that matter is made of particles that are in constant motion.The focal lesson, as specified in the curriculum materials, asks the teacher to begin with a demonstrationthat involves two unlabeled flasks of clear liquids. Students are asked to generate observations that can potentiallydifferentiate between the two liquids, and that they “should recognize that further investigation is needed”. Theteacher is then asked to demonstrate how an indicator paper, like other detectors explored in lessons prior, detectsthe presence of different materials by changing colors. The teacher would then carry out a demonstration thatshows that the two liquids are different by placing the indicator paper into the two flasks. Because one flaskcontains ammonia and the other, acetic acid, the indicator paper turns blue and red, respectively. Thus, theindicator provides observable evidence that the flasks contain different liquids.Instead of following instructions outlined above, Ms. K began the lesson by showing students the twounlabeled containers of clear liquids, and then asked her students, “...how can we tell the difference between thesetwo sources of odor? Who can tell me? What’s different? Let’s put a list on the board here of what’s differentbetween these sources of odor.” After the students identified their similarities (e.g. both liquids were clear) anddifferences (e.g. one seemed “foamier” than the other), Larry conjectured that the two flasks might containdifferent liquids. Ms. K then asked how they might test Larry’s claim, saying, “They might be different types ofliquids. How can we figure that out? How could we tell?” Rather than jumping in and using the indicator paperto show that the liquids were different, Ms. K’s invitation re-distributes agency by opening up the method ofinvestigating whether the two were different, rather than taking this as a stated fact.Students took up Ms. K’s invitation by proposing a variety of ideas for investigation, such as smelling,shaking, freezing, weighing, and tasting the liquids (to which Ms. K responded that this was not allowed in thescience lab) to determine whether they were the same or different. Another student proposed combining eachliquid with another chemical to see how they react, or weighing the two flasks to detect differences in density.Finally, Steven suggested a method of investigation that mirrored how the indicator paper would be used:Steven: So you could get a turkey baster or a syringe or something, and then put [it] inthere, take some of the liquid, and put it on a paper and do the same thing with the otherone. And then if something different happens, then you’ll know the difference betweenwhat it is.”It is important to note that Steven not only suggested what materials that could be used (turkey baster, syringe,paper), how they might be used, but also what the results would imply about the liquids. Inviting students into thiswork has important epistemological implications because students are invited into the work of making decisionsabout how they might go about investigating the difference between the two liquids, which impacts the type ofdata that might be used as evidence to support alternative claims.Case 2: Opening up space for generating alternative claims and motivating modelrevisionThis focal lesson comes early in an IQWST unit centered on the driving question “How do my eyes allow me tosee?” The unit began with an optical illusion that seeded uncertainty in whether students could really believe theireyes. The beginning lessons explore the behavior and properties of white light as “interacts” with various objects,and progresses to an exploration of how light moves, how light is detected by the eye, and how light is perceived.Over the course of the unit, students co-construct and refine a model of light’s behavior, based on the data fromtheir data collection activities. Notably, this unit is used in the Fall semester, and students’ very first introductionthe practices that are emphasized in the curriculum. Thus, there are a number of lessons dedicated to discussingwhat counts as scientific model, an exploration of how to depict ideas and relationships in model form, as well asthe various types of models that count as a scientific model.In line with the written curriculum, Ms. B began the lesson with a demonstration. She turned off all thelights in her classroom and closed the blinds and aimed a flashlight at a piece of white paper that has been tapedto the whiteboard, and asked students to explain why they were able to see the paper. She then directed the beamof light at a handheld mirror, rotating the mirror so that it reflected the light around the room, and, to the students’dismay, directly at their eyes! In the written curriculum, this initial demonstration was intended to “generateevidence about the difference between the ways light bounces off a mirror and off a [paper]”. The curriculumICLS 2018 Proceedings235© ISLSspecifies that after this demonstration, the class should move directly to gathering empirical data using a lightmeter, a piece of paper, and a mirror, so that they can use these patterns to describe how light bounces differentlyoff these objects (e.g. scattering, reflecting).Instead of moving directly to the activity involving light meters, Ms. B engaged her students in a wholeclass discussion that spanned half of the class period. During that discussion, she explicitly used the differencesin how light behaves with a mirror and a piece of paper to problematize their current model. For instance, whenMs. K directed the beam of light toward the students, who reacted by laughing, grimacing, and talking over oneanother when the beam of light was aimed directly at them. Ms. B called out this discrepancy in light’s behavior,saying, “When I [aimed the light at the] paper you weren't yelling.” She then asks the students to explain why:“So what makes it different when light bounces…why do you think it’s different from when the light hits yourpaper and when it hits the mirror?”Students responded to Ms. B’s invitation by proposing candidate explanations. Adam first proposed thatthese differences might be happening because light is carrying different information when it bounces off a mirrorversus a piece of paper. Later, Illiana weighed in and conjectured that the light is shining off of the paper, butbouncing off the mirror. Although the class agreed that the light was behaving differently, Ms. B pointed out theirexisting model was insufficient for explaining why:Illana: when you use paper, it's just shining (inaudible) but when it hits the mirror it’sbouncing…Ms. B: So why does it do it for a mirror and not for a paper?(Many hands raised in the front of the room)Illana: ‘Cuz the mirror is like if we look you can see your reflection...(inaudible)Ms. B: Why (asking Illana, who seems stumped)…Anne?Anne: Because that's the mirror and...(inaudible) its cuz the light...(inaudible) lightanymore because some light (inaudible)Ms. B: So is the light hitting different objects differently?Students in unison: Yes….Ms. B: But how does light know that? How does light know…to act differently when ithits this (pointing the flashlight at the paper) and react differently when it hits this (pointingthe flashlight at the mirror)?Ms. B’s continued press for why encouraged students to propose alternative claims about what might be causingthe observed differences in how light behaves with a mirror and paper. These questions emphasized that theircurrent model was unable to account for these different behaviors. Notably, the curriculum materials specify thatthis demonstration should be used to help students see that light behaves differently, but it does not articulate howthese observations problematize the existing model. Opening up their model to uncertainty encouraged studentsto consider reasons for the different behaviors.At the conclusion of this opening discussion, Ms. B positioned the data from their upcoming investigationas an opportunity to gather evidence for or against those claims, saying, “Should we get some data, collect somemore information about this? Try to figure this out?” Thus, the data generated through their subsequentinvestigation were positioned as evidence for refining their current consensus model.Case 3: Opening up space for expanding the explanatory goalsThis case took place during the first few days of an 8th grade biology unit organized around the driving question,“Why do organisms look the way they do?” Over the course of the unit, students worked to build a Mendelianmodel of genetic inheritance. As written, the first lesson in the curriculum had students a) look at a photo of fishand birds and speculate about the functions of their different traits; b) record the frequencies of various humantraits amongst their classmates, such as hitchhiker’s thumb and attached vs. detached earlobes; and c) discusswhether these traits were inherited or acquired.Instead of beginning the unit as written, Mr. M skipped the pictures of birds and fish and had studentsmake observations about the traits of people around them. This motivated a conversation about whether thesetraits were inherited or acquired, which (unexpectedly) lasted for two class periods. Mr. M had planned for thisdiscussion to then lead into an investigation in which students collected data on a specific trait by observing aspecific group of people (e.g., their families; people who came into Burger King over the course of an hour; theICLS 2018 Proceedings236© ISLSfirst 20 people whose photos came up on a Google Image search for “celebrities”; etc.).During the discussion about human traits, a debate began about whether height was inherited or acquiredwhen a student made a claim that height was inherited: if your parents are tall, you are likely to be tall, and if theyare short, you are likely to be short as well. Several students immediately responded to this claim withcounterexamples from their own families: a sibling who was very tall even though their parents were short, or amother who was short but an aunt who was tall like them. In addition, a few students brought up ideas aboutnutrition, such as that they should not drink coffee because it would stunt their growth, or that they should drinkmilk because it would make them grow tall and strong, leading them to argue that it was at least partially acquired.Still other students argued that it was totally random: height was unpredictable based on either your parents orgrandparents, or from your nutritional choices.Mr. M allowed this discussion to continue for nearly the entire 40-minute class period, much longer thanin any of his other sections. Towards the end of class, he made a move to transition them into the planned datacollection activity (Activity 1.2), still leaving open the possibility of continuing the discussion:Mr. M: I’m not going to resolve this but I’m feeling like, if this is becoming a compellingquestion, [...] if we’re going to figure out if something is random, I feel like we shouldcollect some data. So uh. Let’s take a couple more comments and if we’re kind of movingtowards that ‘what’s the pattern’ question, then I want to move to [Activity] 1.2. If not, ifwe’ve just got, if we’re generating some questions, cool, let’s do it now. So um. [points toCarmen] Did you have--?In response, Carmen brought up how her hair is very similar to her aunt’s but not to either of her parents’ andasked if inheritance could work that way rather than only through parents and grandparents:Carmen: I actually wanted to make a counterarg—like you said not aunts and uncles, butlike I have really wavy and like sometimes curly hair, but like my mom and my sister andmy dad all have like the straightest hair, but like my aunt has really curly hair like me, solike, can’t like that be a thing too?It is important to note here that Carmen’s input was a direct interruption to Mr. M’s bid to “move on” to the nextplanned activity, and to Mr. M’s insistence earlier in the conversation that students stick to “direct” lines ofinheritance (parents and grandparents). It also demonstrates that students were bought into this additionaldimension of complexity. In response, Mr. M pointed out it sounded like there was a pattern that a lot of peoplewere noticing: they had traits that didn’t come directly from parents or grandparents. Mr. M then explicitlyacknowledged the push-back they had been giving him and allowed space for the four students who still had theirhands up to share their ideas:Mr. M: Let’s here, so, I’ve been trying to pull us in a certain direction, I like where youguys are pulling us though, I like that you’re wanting to stick with examples from our ownfamilies. In our last four I want us to make sure that you’re turning to our speakers [...], soI want us to face this way and let’s go to Elena.The bell rang after Elena shared. Before they left, Mr. M gave each student an index card and asked them to recordthe patterns from their families that they thought were important "clues" to helping them understand inheritance.When students returned the next day with their index cards with family patterns, they made a second drivingquestion board with those “family cases.” As they were constructing this driving question board, the discussionabout whether each trait mentioned was inherited or acquired continued, including conversations about traits suchas athleticism, spoken language, and race. After another entire class period of this discussion, Mr. M askedstudents to pick one of these traits to observe and to pick a population in which to observe it over the course ofthe weekend (Activity 1.2 as planned).Mr. M’s decision to allow the classroom conversational space to be opened to students’ persistent interestin the patterns in their own families, and his in-the-moment response to create a second driving question board,broadened and made more complex the set of phenomena that students were trying to explain. In addition, hisdoing so allowed students to jointly decide, through conversation, what kind of explanation they were going to beworking to build over the course of the unit. This was no longer a unit about different traits in different species,or quirky differences between humans like hitchhikers’ thumbs. Instead, it was a unit about complex patterns ofinheritance within their own families—the thing that was both interesting and bothersome to them. It set theexpectation that whatever models they were developing should be able to at least partially explain these complexICLS 2018 Proceedings237© ISLSpatterns, and that whatever their models could not explain should drive their future investigations. And that wasthe case: students continued to draw on family-based examples throughout the unit, even while discussing thegenetics of plants and moths.DiscussionIn each of the three cases, what teachers opened up had different implications in terms of their reach: the resulting“ripple effect” of the impact of the decisions that students were involved making (Table 1). Ms. K opened up themethods for investigation in Case 1, creating the opportunity for students to shape how they conducted theinvestigation and the claims they could draw from it. In Case 2, Ms. B problematized their existing model of light,which opened up space for students to make alternative claims. These decisions framed their subsequentinvestigations for the next few days, leading to revisions to an aspect of their light model. Finally, in Case 3, Mr.M opened up the opportunity to expand the phenomenon that anchored the entire unit. The “reach” of this decisionwas long-ranging: even though his students completed most of the activities in the unit as written, they wereframed by, and constantly connected to, a need to explain the puzzling patterns of inheritance that studentsobserved in their families.Table 1: Overview of casesWhat aspect is theteacher opening up?Case 1(Ms. K)The methods forinvestigationCase 2(Ms. B)Their currentexplanatory model forlightCase 3(Mr. M)Anchoringphenomenon thatmotivates explanatorygoalHow do students participate?Students brainstorm candidate methods &tools that will generate evidence to helpdistinguish two unknown liquidsStudents propose alternative claims for theobserved phenomenon. This leads to a newphase of evidence collection and subsequentmodel revision in later lessonsStudents continued to bring up puzzlingpatterns of trait inheritance in their ownfamilies, which eventually become part of theanchoring phenomenon.ReachWithin the investigation ina single lessonInvestigations and modelrevision within days of asingle unitInfluences explanatorygoals (and models,investigations, and claims)for the entire unitImportantly, none of these cases were instances where students did the “opening up” spontaneously orintentionally (cf. Calabrese Barton et al., 2013; Engle & Conant, 2002). This was purposeful on our part. Whenteachers open up space for students to make choices about acting or not, and how that action contributes to thejoint action of a group (Gresalfi et al., 2008), they also subject their own instructional practice to uncertainty—about what students will bring to the table, whether it fits in with their instructional goals, etc. These cases describethe “disciplined improvisational” work of teaching (Sawyer, 2004). They illustrate how teachers can open upspace while still maintaining some of the constraints and boundaries of the curriculum (and therefore limiting thedegree of uncertainty they are introducing to their teaching) to create opportunities for re-distributing epistemicagency. Seeing aspects of their curriculum—the methods, models, and anchoring phenomena—as entry points forre-distributing epistemic agency may help teachers make inroads to shifting their classroom instruction towardsmore responsive instruction: not all teachers may feel capable of shifting their instructional practice to look likeMr. M’s at the start, as it requires substantive changes to in one’s instructional sequence. But they may be able totake a step towards it on the level of a single lesson, like Ms. K. The language of “opening up space” andconsidering the resulting “ripple effect” may scaffold productive ways of talking about these goals with teachersas we work to increase opportunities to re-distribute epistemic agency in science classrooms.Highlighting this as an area for supporting teacher learning suggests that it may be productive to thinkabout how we might develop educative curriculum materials that support these teacher learning goals. In additionto getting teachers to attend to places in their curriculum that they can invite students’ participation in ways thathelps students to develop accurate content knowledge, we should also be considering whether and how to designmaterials that focus teachers’ attention on ways to increase students’ ownership and agentive participation inknowledge-building work. For example, as in the case of Ms. B, this could be positioning data collection activitiesas opportunities for students to apply their knowledge to design procedures and predict their outcomes, rather thanan exercise in obtaining a target outcomes. Repeated attempts at creating space for epistemic agency may scaffoldteachers toward accepting uncertainty as productive tension for teaching.The cases presented here are exemplary cases of how teachers hold the need to meet specific learningobjectives in tension with the desire to provide students with opportunities to make meaningful and consequentialICLS 2018 Proceedings238© ISLSdecisions, and how they navigate both goals well. The decision-making involved in navigating this tension isimportant to address and support in professional development and teacher preparation. Generating languagearound these improvisations can be fruitful beginnings for thinking about how we might support teachers toincrease opportunities to re-distribute epistemic agency.ReferencesBarton, A. C., & Tan, E. (2010). We be burnin'! Agency, identity, and science learning. The Journal of theLearning Sciences, 19(2), 187-229.Berland, L. K., Schwarz, C. V., Krist, C., Kenyon, L., Lo, A. S., & Reiser, B. J. (2016). Epistemologies in practice:Making scientific practices meaningful for students. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 53(7),1082-1112.Brown, M., & Edelson, D. (2003). Teaching as design: Can we better understand the ways in which teachers usematerials so we can better design materials to support their changes in practice. LETUS Design Brief).Evanston, IL: The Center for Learning Technologies in Urban Public Schools.Calabrese Barton, A., Kang, H., Tan, E., O’Neill, T. B., Bautista-Guerra, J., & Brecklin, C. (2013). Crafting afuture in science: Tracing middle school girls’ identity work over time and space. American EducationalResearch Journal, 50(1), 37-75.Damşa, C. I., Kirschner, P. A., Andriessen, J. E., Erkens, G., & Sins, P. H. (2010). Shared epistemic agency: Anempirical study of an emergent construct. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(2), 143-186.Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction,20(4), 399-483.Ford, M. J., & Forman, E. A. (2006). Redefining Disciplinary Learning in Classroom Contexts. Review ofResearch in Education, 30, 1–32.Ford, M. J. (2015). Educational implications of choosing “practice” to describe science in the next generationscience standards. Science Education, 99(6), 1041-1048.Gresalfi, M., Martin, T., Hand, V., & Greeno, J. (2009). Constructing competence: An analysis of studentparticipation in the activity systems of mathematics classrooms. Educational Studies in Mathematics,70(1), 49-70.Hand, V. (2012). Seeing culture and power in mathematical learning: Toward a model of equitable instruction.Educational Studies in Mathematics, 80(1-2), 233-247.Kang, H., Windschitl, M., Stroupe, D., & Thompson, J. (2016). Designing, launching, and implementing highquality learning opportunities for students that advance scientific thinking. Journal of Research inScience Teaching, 53(9), 1316–1340.Krajcik, J., Reiser, B., Sutherland, L., & Fortus, D. (2011). IQWST: Investigating and questioning our worldthrough science and technology. Activate Science.Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2006). Scientific thinking and science literacy. Handbook of Child Psychology.Manz, E. (2015). Resistance and the development of scientific practice: Designing the mangle into scienceinstruction. Cognition and Instruction, 33(2), 89-124.Maskiewicz, A. C., & Winters, V. A. (2012). Understanding the co‐construction of inquiry practices: A case studyof a responsive teaching environment. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 49(4), 429-464.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next generation science standards: For states, by states. National Academies Press.Passmore, C. M., & Svoboda, J. (2012). Exploring opportunities for argumentation in modelling classrooms.International Journal of Science Education, 34(10), 1535-1554.Sawyer, R. K. (2004). Creative teaching: Collaborative discussion as disciplined improvisation. EducationalResearcher, 33(2), 12–20.Shim, S. Y., & Kim, H. B. (2018) Framing negotiation: Dynamics of epistemological and positional framing insmall groups during scientific modeling. Science Education, 102(1), 128-152.Stake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study research. Sage.Stroupe, D. (2014). Examining classroom science practice communities: How teachers and students negotiateepistemic agency and learn science‐as‐practice. Science Education, 98(3), 487-516.AcknowledgmentsThis research was funded by the National Science Foundation Grants ESI-0227557, ESI-0439493, ESI-0101780,and DRL-1020316, and by the NAEd/Spencer Dissertation Fellowship Program. Any opinions, findings,conclusions, or recommendations expressed here are those of the author and do not reflect the official views ofthe organizations above.ICLS 2018 Proceedings239© ISLS