Co-construction of Knowledge Objects inComputer Engineering EducationCrina Damșa, University of Oslo, Norway, crina.damsa@iped.uio.noAbstract: This study examines Computer Engineering undergraduate students’ collaborativedesign and development of knowledge objects (e.g., webpages). Computer Engineering is aresource-rich, dynamic domain, which offers opportunities for inquiry and the construction ofcomplex knowledge objects. However, the students must learn how to engage meaningfully insuch knowledge production practices and to make use of the domain’s large pool of availableresources. This study provides a better understanding of how students employ programmingstrategies, select and mobilize knowledge resources and collaborate to co-construct knowledgeobjects. A rich set of data enabled a detailed examination of these aspects. The findingsemphasize the necessity for students to understand the strategies and knowledge underlyingthe (collaborative) programming practices, besides knowing how to apply these and todevelop the capacity to explore, select and assess new knowledge resources; and, for theinstitutions, to provide the appropriate guiding structures for this type of learning activities.IntroductionThis study examines Computer Engineering undergraduate students’ participation in the collaborative designand development of knowledge objects (e.g., webpages) and aims at providing a better understanding of howstudents employ programming strategies, select and mobilize knowledge resources and collaborate to coconstruct knowledge objects.In recent years, higher education programs are challenged to prepare students to be competent knowledgeworkers. This implies ambitions for students to be more than just users of knowledge, mere “course-takers”, butto develop capacities to process, assess and employ knowledge, and to become knowledge producers (Shaw,Holbrooke & Burke, 2011). Generally, there is wide agreement that such activities can be beneficial for students’later involvement in knowledge work (Spronken-Smith & Walker, 2010) and study programs are, progressively,including this type of learning activities in their curricula. Recent studies (Aditomo et al., 2013) indicate,however, that meaningful participation in learning activities that involve investigative work with knowledge andknowledge construction is not a straightforward matter, and more research is needed to understand, and be ableto support, students’ engagement in this type of activities within the context of knowledge domains.Empirical studies in higher education that examine inquiry-based learning and collaborative work, whichare characterized by a question-driven mindset and require sharing, understanding and building new knowledgecollaboratively, appear to focus predominantly on the students’ discursive participation and experiences withinvestigative work. These studies identified collaborative problem solving, processing of information from(scientific) sources or creating shared understanding of ideas and concepts as main features of the inquiryprocesses. They also indicated misunderstandings regarding the nature of these activities, which students’described as knowledge gathering (Levy & Petrulis, 2011) and difficulties they encountered when required tosolve open-ended problems or to participate in unstructured tasks (Spronken-Smith & Walker, 2010). Fewstudies examined knowledge construction, the knowledge objects being developed and the way collaborativework is organized around these. Studies of collaborative knowledge creation in small project groups showed thatsuch processes involve shared understanding, joint actions at the epistemic level, and a good balance betweenwork with knowledge and the management of the process (Damşa, 2014; Muukkonen & Lakkala, 2009). Thislead to the conclusion that students have difficulties to accomplish both the knowledge-productional aspect, andan active participation in the collaborative process.This study aims at providing a better understanding of the process of collaborative work that involvesthe construction of knowledge objects (i.e., webpages) and the use of domain-specific knowledge resources bystudents in computer engineering education. The study addresses the following questions: 1) How are theseknowledge objects co-constructed by the student groups through collaborative programming? 2) How do groupsmobilize and use domain-specific knowledge resources? and 3) Do the developing knowledge objects and theused resources enhance the inquiry process? Ultimately, the study aims at accounting for how these activitiesfacilitate the emergence of programming practices students are expected to learn.CSCL 2015 Proceedings489© ISLSCharacteristics of the computer engineering domainThe characteristics of the computer engineering domain practices create a specific context for the knowledgepractices students are expected to learn. The knowledge artifacts are a prominent feature of the domain(Mackenzie, 2005), which appears to have a high degree of structure and specialization in terms of collectivelyshared technologies, standards, and procedures, and a broader, outwards orientation towards evolving anddynamic epistemic practices. The knowledge content of this domain is geographically dispersed and oftenrepresented in online resources (professional databases and forums). Professionals are oriented towards theseglobal information structures and take responsibilities for keeping up with new skills and technologicaladvancements. Furthermore, studies of the computer engineers’ epistemic practices (Nerland & Jensen, 2010)have shown a tendency to engage in solving problems and developing knowledge artifacts by usingsophisticated solutions because these are considered intellectual challenges. In this context, for students, thechallenges emerge to construct a deep and solid understanding of the domain-specific knowledge, develop theability to apply key technical and professional skills fluently, and engage in authentic engineering projects(Litzinger, Hadgraft, Lattuca & Newstetter, 2011).Knowledge object: Conceptualizations and empirical insightsSocio-cultural perspectives of learning serve the purpose of depicting the mechanisms and arrangements throughwhich knowledge is produced and circulated (Knorr Cetina, 1999). At a micro-level of these activities, ideasregarding the mediated nature of learning, i.e., by various (intellectual) means and tools (Säljö, 2004) are ofrelevance. Knowledge resources are such mediational means that accumulate collective knowledge andexperience and have instrumental value. Knowledge objects, inter alia, are developing entities and can beaddressed in collaborative settings by negotiating, drafting, developing and materializing new ideas andsolutions (Miettinen & Virkkunen, 2005).Knowledge objects are depicted as being the same with research objects or epistemic things, which are“material entities or processes […] that constitute the objects of inquiry” (Rheinberger, 1997, p. 28). An innercontradiction in relation to the nature of the object is highlighted, namely, that it is considered to be both of amaterial and ideational nature; thus, it can be both a realization of a material reality, respectively, the object ofthought. Rheinberger (1997) and Knorr Cetina (1999) distinguish technological objects or objects asinstruments, i.e., clearly defined and finished objects with an instrumental role, from the epistemic or knowledgeobjects, which are question-generating, open to transformation and further exploration, and have the potential toopen new lines of inquiry.For the purpose of this study, it is exactly the dual potential of the knowledge objects that is important.The complexity of this construct lies in its dynamic position in relation to inquiry processes, which can allot theobject the role of mediating tool or object of inquiry. In the case of the former, the knowledge objects arerepresented by an amalgam of material and conceptual (ideatic) resources, which activate a set of opportunitieswhen they are employed. In the case of the latter, it is the open character of the knowledge objects, which makesthem more processes and projections rather than definitive things. The defining features are the changing,unfolding character and their incomplete, continuously evolving nature, which makes them rather open-endedprojections and generators of new conceptions and solutions.MethodsAs part of a larger research project examining knowledge practices and student learning in higher education, thisstudy was conducted in a Computer Engineering bachelor’s degree program at a university of applied sciences.This program offers bachelor’s degrees in the engineering and information technology field and was selectedbecause of its specific domain delimitation and the measures taken to introduce a research-based curriculum.Direct access to the sample group was obtained through a call to the students and teachers, with the participatingstudents signing up voluntarily. The sixteen participating (2 female, 14 male) students were organized in fourproject groups. Activities in an introductory course in web design and development – Web Project, wasobserved and documented. The course contained varied learning and instructional strategies aimed atintroducing students to the domain. Bi-weekly lectures were provided during a period of seven weeks tointroduce the programming languages of web design and development (i.e., HTML5, CSS, PHP, Java software);ten other lectures introduced students to the field of project management. In bi-weekly lab sessions, the studentsworked on individual assignments on basic programming skills. A four-weeks collaborative web developmentproject required student groups to design and develop a functional webpage, by using the programminglanguages learned during the course and web-based resources, and to write a justification report. Each groupemployed online platforms and tools, tailoring the use in accordance to their own needs. Github, an onlineCSCL 2015 Proceedings490© ISLSrepository and collaborative platform used by programmers, was used by the teacher to make available coursematerials, assignments, guidelines and links to resources. All groups used this platform to access these materials,and one group also as a workspace. All four groups used Facebook group pages for communication. Threegroups used Dropbox to store and share their developed object versions, resources and other materials. Variousonline platforms (e.g., w3schoools, Stack Overflow) were used as main resources for the programming work; anonline tool was used to assess the codes at different stages of the programming process.Interaction data (video recordings of group meetings, online communication), knowledge objects(notes, mock-ups, versions of the products), and course materials were collected. The qualitative analysisfocused on identifying: a) how the design and development took place through the collaborative process; b) theway knowledge resources were accessed and mobilized; and c) how the developing object mediated thecollaborative work. In the analyses, relevant aspects were allowed to emerge from the data (an inductiveapproach). I employed a technique building on thematic analysis (Braun & Clarke, 2006) of the conversationaldata, the knowledge objects and resources to examine how and what the groups constructed and used in terms ofknowledge. In addition, a thick description of the process was created.FindingsThe student groups organized their collaborative programming, aimed at the development of the knowledgeobject, by employing a structured set of steps. The programming work consisted of individual coding andfrequent discussions of coding strategies, problems emerging, and an iterative trial-and-error strategy. The latterinvolved mutual progress updates, identification and improvement of errors, integration of individualcontributions when correct, re-assessment when invalid; followed by a new iteration and the production of anew version of the knowledge object. The group discussions frequently raised new issues and questions, whichcontributed to advancing both the inquiry and the knowledge object. Generally, the discussions were objectbound, employing technical language and content, without much elaboration of knowledge but attempting to“fit” the process and product in a pragmatic way. The data excerpt below illustrates such a discussion.Data excerpt 1. Group 3 discussion: Collaborative search for a solution; references to used resources1. Paul:… Does it need an ‘ID’ there? (points with the mouse on the screen)2. Lee:Yeah, does it need an ‘ID’? Ethan, can you take a look?3. Ethan: Yeah… ehm…(looks at the screen and takes his time to think), that would be akey to click on, right?4. Paul:Ehm….5. Ethan: Oh, not a key, but you use it to retrieve that (points with his finger at the screen).No, something like… you use JavaScript, remember? […] We figured that outwith the w3schools, remember?6. Ethan: …ehm… we must make a jQuerry to (points at the code)… call up, to make thiskey work, that part of the menu (stands up and walks to the screen, talks whileindicating specific points the code with his finger). So here is the button youneed to press (points in the code), and then you can use JavaScript to calljQuerry, to call this up (points in another place in the code), so you can call itup.7. Paul:Ok, then I’ll try to make something in CSS… we have to find out how to putthese together…We observe in this excerpt how the group deals with a problem identified in the coding work. Theproblem emerging in the individual programming (performed by one of the group members, but projected on ascreen) is addressed by the entire group. First, the group members try to identify the exact problem (turns 3-5).This is done in conversation, by considering alternatives, identifying and pointing (though physical gestures) atthe problematic point, and by drawing upon resources (turn 5, 6). Strategies learned during their own inquiryand resources mobilized are being identified as instrumental in generating a solution. The collaborativediscourse, and the problem-solving actions are closely bound to the knowledge objects itself – Ethan is thinkingaloud to identify the problem and, at the same time, envisioning the future use of the object. This short excerptCSCL 2015 Proceedings491© ISLSshows how the work on the object triggers a problem solving behavior, elicits knowledge and resources, anddirects both the collaborative discourse and the programming work.The use of online knowledge resources provided by the expert programming community was oneaspect revealed by the analyses so far. Some of the sources were suggested by the teacher, such as thew3schools and the online validation tool. The students searched themselves for other resources that couldsupport them in solving programming problems, in finding alternatives for and improving the quality of theirdesign.Data excerpt 2. Group 4 end interview–On the use of sources1. Interviewer:… why online resources?2. Emma:Because it's the most updated one. Because programming and stuffchanges and the books are getting outdated.3. Seb:And speed as well. Indexing. You’re right there on your computer. Youjust need to look it up instead of ‘oh, is that book, in the index, andwhich page and which word’. It’s instant access to exactly what isnecessary to continue the work...The end interview with the four groups shows that the pursuit of online resources was not incidental orrandom. The students appeared very aware of the characteristics and practices of the programming domain,where the knowledge resources can be found and how they must act in order to access them. In the aboveexcerpt, members of Group 4 explain that the online resources are the most updated ones, and that in a dynamicfield such as the one of software programming working with up-to-date knowledge is essential (turn 2). Also,resources that can be accessed fast and efficiently are preferred (turn 3), because of the pressure to finalize theproject in time. They mentioned also that it is the instant access to resources that is appealing, which indicateslesser focus on in-depth processing of knowledge or strategies, but inclination to use ready-made procedures andmaterials to support their programming work.DiscussionPreliminary results show that creating a concrete knowledge object appeared to serve the construction of sharedimaginations of this object, which guided the co-construction process at various stages. In the case analyzed inthis study, the process is supported by a domain rich in easily accessible coding strategies and guidelines,procedural structures, validation standards and tools, all artifacts that enable the pursuit of productional work.Students were able to access various resources, which facilitated their programming, and opened their horizonstowards the practices of the professional programmers.The design and development work was supported by a set of procedural structures, validation standardsand technologies that supported the coding process. Such knowledge artefacts (programming techniques,techniques, tools, troubleshooting procedures) offer alternative strategies and tools for programming (Mackenzie2005). A challenge that may emerge from the existence of this rich and continuously changing pool of resources,but which is in essence ‘blackboxed’ within the community of expert web developers, is that it can lead to asuperficial application. Rather than opening tools and representations for in-depth investigation and developingan understanding of the logics of programming, there is a danger that the resources are used merely as technicalobjects. While the students envisioned ways of dealing with this challenge, this study suggests, in agreementwith Litzinger et al. (2011), that close guidance and support in opening up resources for scrutiny is a challengein this domain. More concretely, I suggest that these programs support their students’ entrance into this practiceby providing an introduction to the conceptual knowledge underlying the web development domain. Showingpersonal interest and performing applied inquiries does not mean students are completely aware of thecomplexities that accompany such interesting tasks or that they will pursue in-depth understanding of the logicsof inquiry and the knowledge construction principles of the domain. Sustained guidance and feedback duringthis process are also desirable to support students in exploring both the technical and the epistemic aspects ofknowledge resources. Depending on how the knowledge domain is organised, different mediating tools andsupport structures are needed for the students to make sense of knowledge and utilise resources in productiveways.This study yields implications for education programs that attempt to employ knowledge constructionelements in the learning activities and, more generally, to support students to develop capacities to,independently, generate knowledge. From a general research perspective, this study opens up further lines forCSCL 2015 Proceedings492© ISLSinvestigation and analysis that can provide deeper insights into strategies that enable students to participatemeaningfully and become competent in constructing knowledge objects.ReferencesAditomo, A., Goodyear, P., Bliuc, A-M.,& Ellis, R.A. (2013). Inquiry-based learning in higher education,Studies in Higher Education, 38(9), 1239-1258.Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using Thematic Analysis in Psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3(2), 77–101.Damşa, C. I. (2014). The multi-layered nature of small-group learning: Productive interactions in objectoriented collaboration, ijCSCL, doi: 10.1007/s11412-014-9193-8Knorr Cetina, K. (1999). Epistemic cultures. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Levy, P., & Petrulis, R. (2011). How do first-year university students experience inquiry and research, and whatare the implications for the practice of inquiry-based learning? Studies in Higher Education, 37(1), 85–101.Litzinger, T., Lattuca, L. R., Hadgraft, R. and Newstetter, W. (2011), Engineering Education and theDevelopment of Expertise. Journal of Engineering Education, 100, 123–150, doi: 10.1002/j.21689830.2011.tb00006.xMiettinen, R. & Virkkunen, J. (2005). Epistemic objects, artifacts and organizational change. Organization,12(3), 437-456.Muukkonen, H., & Lakkala, M. (2009). Exploring metaskills of knowledge-creating inquiry in higher education.ijCSCL, 4(2), 187–211.Nerland, M. & Jensen, K. (2010). Epistemic practices and object relations in professional work. Journal ofEducation and Work, 25(1), 101- 120Rheinberger, H. J. (1997). Toward a History of Epistemic Things. Stanford: Stanford University Press.Shaw, K., Holbrook, A., & Bourke, S. (2011). Student experience of final-year undergraduate research projects:An exploration of 'research preparedness. Studies in Higher Education, 36,(6), 711-727.Spronken-Smith, R., and R. Walker. 2010. Can inquiry-based learning strengthen the links between teachingand disciplinary practice? Studies in Higher Education, 35(6), 723–40.Säljö, R. (2004). Learning and technologies, people and tools in co-ordinated activities. International Journal ofEducational Research, 41, 489–494. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijer.2005.08.013CSCL 2015 Proceedings493© ISLS