“That’s What Everyone Else Is Saying…”:Collaborative Reflection-in-Action during Creative ActivitiesMichael P. Downton, St. John’s University, downtonm@stjohns.eduAbstract: With the progression of more user-friendly music production software packages(i.e., Apple’s GarageBand) and the importance of social media, learners are engaging withmusic without having any formal education on important musical concepts. It has beensuggested that novice music learners should start with what they know how to intuitively doalready, which will allow them to move to more sophisticated musical concepts (e.g., notation,intervals). However, music production is becoming more a group project than a solitary onein which everyone in a group has a voice. A fourth grade classroom (N = 36) engaged in amusic curriculum using the learning software Impromptu. Findings suggest that whenstudents are able to reflect-in-action, their reflections become building blocks for others in thegroup to use and add to their knowledge base.Keywords: music, intuitions, social negotiationIntroductionSince the release of “How Popular Musicians Learn” (Green,2002), there has been a stark divide in the field ofmusic and music education about her claims that traditional (musical) literacy (e.g., note reading, note writing,formal instrument training) through formal instruction is not the norm in the changing musical culture. Morespecifically, musicians are learning their craft by engaging in constructionist and sociocultural practices (e.g,playing in bands) and learning from each other (Green, 2002; Sawyer, 2008). And with the advancement oftechnology-based consumer music production tools, learners are able to create music with no prior musicalknowledge or performance skills.This is exemplified when looking at tools like Apple’s GarageBand. Since its release in 2004, onlineweb communities have begun to emerge that give users a place to share, critique, and collaborate with otherGarageBand users. Not even 15 years ago was this possible; space was limited and the technology to create tooexpensive. This is a major shift in how music is both consumed and, more importantly, created. What was onceperceived as a solitary act of music composing via paper and pencil is now a group activity (e.g., rock and rollband).This provides a challenging area for CSCL and the Learning Sciences to investigate because it requiresresearchers to design environments that emphasize an intuitive approach to (music) learning within groupsettings using technological tools that are not normally used in music learning environments. It has beensuggested that utilizing an intuitive approach to music learning provides a “doorway-in” (Wiggins, 2009 p. 39)into more formal musical concepts. Bamberger (1996) further suggests that if beginning music learners can startoff at a mid-level structure (what they already intuitively know) this allows them to move to more sophisticatedmusical concepts (e.g., pitches, whole song evaluation).The purpose of this paper is to present data guided by the question: How do fourth-grade students takeup and utilize intuitive discourse during computer-aided music making activities? Fourth-grade students (N =36) took part in a five-week music learning course using the software Impromptu (Bamberger, 2000). Duringthe course, students worked as a whole group to compose different tunes based on the goals of the specificactivity. Data includes transcribed audio from video that was taken during whole class activities. Thetranscribed data was coded and mapped onto the structural musical ladder (Bamberger, 1996) and furtheranalyzed to detect when students took up and used other student’s ideas in the creation of a musicalcomposition.BackgroundThe National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) in the Arts show students in 8th grade averaged ascore of 150 out of 300 in music (Keiper, Sandene, Persky, & Kuang, 2009). Unfortunately, this low score isconfounded by the fact that both time and money are being cut from most arts related programs in schoolstoday. However, the larger issue is the way in which music educators approach the teaching and learning (e.g.,the transmission model) of music. Commonly, novice learners are introduced to concepts like musical notation,rhythm, and tempo via instrument performance, dancing, and body movement exercises. If the goal in musicCSCL 2015 Proceedings31© ISLSeducation is to get learners to identify, describe, and demonstrate their knowledge, then the activity of musiccomposition aligns well with these goals.One glaring omission from the 2008 NAEP was that youth were not given the opportunity to createtheir own music. And, out of all the activities that do take place in a music classroom, giving learners theopportunity to make their own songs was least valued by educators (Keiper, Sandene, Persky, & Kuang, 2009).Giving young learners the opportunity to create their own music gives teachers and researchers a more clearinsight into the development and knowledge of the learner (Swainwick & Tillman, 1986). Music composition,while arguably a creative and aesthetic activity, is also an ongoing and evolving problem solving activity. Thecomposer is constantly solving new and interesting problems that emerge in the composition process bothduring and after the composition has been constructed (e.g., melodies, harmonies, counterpoint, tempo,dynamics). Composing a tune previously meant putting pencil to (staff) paper and then waiting to hear thefinished product. Technology has changed that and the feedback is instant. Users do not need to know aboutmusical literacy concepts (e.g., notation, chords,intervals) in order to compose music.Yet, Webster (2006), in his extensive review of technology’s role in music learning, asserts that stilllittle is known about the true impact of technology in music learning because 1) we do not know howtechnology is being integrated, 2) how much do music teachers know about the technology, and 3) there seemsto be no philosophical consensus on why and how technology should be used in music learning.Webster’s (2006) assertion that there is no consensus on why and how technology should beused in music learning is one that should be addressed first. If there is no theoretical or philosophicalframework for using technology to support learning, then the technology and the time in classrooms and afterschool programs is wasted. While there have been calls for a theory of technology in the music classroom,much of the discourse has been nothing more than making the technology available and reporting on how usersengage with the technology (c.f., Savage, 2005; Bray, 1997; Dalgarno, 1997). This is where CSCL can play alarge contributing role. Educators who are concerned with music learning must recognize that the computer andother technologies are fundamentally changing the way in which people participate and interact. The best wayto understand how these technologies support learning is to incorporate already established theories of learning,design, instruction, and analysis that have technology incorporated into its framework (Webster, 2006).Composition and constructionismSimply giving the learner access to the technology is not sufficient. While they may create a musiccomposition, without giving them a chance to reflect on their work, both during and after—what Schön (1983)calls reflection-in-action (during the creative process) and reflection-on-action (after the creative process toaffect future decisions)—does not provide a clear lens at viewing what the learner knows. Constructionism, Iargue, provides that lens.Constructionism is the idea that learning happens when learners can construct their knowledge and thishappens best when they are building (constructing) something that is personally meaningful to them (c.f. Papert,1991; Kafai, 2006). Building on this, sociocultural constructionism (Pinkett, 2000; Peppler & Kafai, 2007;2009) argues that both individual and community development are better understood when the artifacts are anexpression of the individual and the community as a whole and our understanding of the artifacts changesbecause of the sociocultural nature of the activity. Unpacked further, a sociocultural constructionist modelplaces greater emphasis on exploration and the distributed nature of knowledge that happens between teacherand student or between groups of students working together (Papert, 1993). Both the sociocultural nature oflearning and interaction as well as the opportunity to reflect through discourse are central themes in the field ofCSCL, but virtually non-existent in formal music education (c.f., Green, 2002).Reflection-in-action and intuitionsApproaching music literacy (e.g., reading, writing, and performing) from an intuitive perspective provides thelearner the opportunity to engage with music at a level she feels most appropriate. Intuitions have garneredsome attention in the Learning Sciences over the years. Specifically the work of diSessa (1993), who promotedthe idea that through our experiences in the world, we develop a “sense of mechanism” (p. 106) of how thingswork. This sense of mechanism is then further broken down into phenomenological primitives (p-prims) thatare small pieces of knowledge that help us explain some phenomena (e.g., Ohm’s P-prim). Intuitions in musichave experienced greater attention through the work of Jeanne Bamberger. However, there are no musicalanalog’s similar to p-prims. For example, there is no “rhythmic p-prim” that has been identified.The reason for this is because of the cultural and contextual nature of music. Bamberger (1996) andothers (c.f., Swainwick, 1994; Wiggins, 2009) have suggested that giving learners the opportunity to start withwhat they intuitively know already is key to moving to other, more sophisticated forms of musical knowledge.CSCL 2015 Proceedings32© ISLSBamberger promotes the notion that novice music learners begin at a mid-level structure; that is, what theyunderstand and then move up and down a musical ladder; recognition and use of sophisticated musical literacyconcepts (1996) (see Figure 1).Figure 1: The Structural Musical Ladder – Adapted from Bamberger (1996, p. 45)Through students interactions with music, especially when using the computer tool Impromptu,learners move to more detailed, or low-level, structures (e.g., notation, pitches, chords) as well as larger, orhigh-level structures (e.g., evaluation, developments, similarities and differences). This is because as theyinteract with the software and each other, their hearing of a tune, and thus their intuitions, change. To makesense of what is going on, they must deconstruct the tune to lower-level structures and/or think about higherlevel structures of the tune they are composing (Bamberger, 1999). This is why it is crucial to give learners theopportunity to express what it is they know or think they know (Chi, et al, 1994). To do this, learners should beencouraged to talk while they are in the act of making something.Reflecting both in- and on-action is, in essence, a metacognitive process in which professionals /experts can express what they know—via a demonstration, performance, or talking—within a specific domain(Schön, 1983; 1987). When a professional (e.g., an expert) engages in their domain specialty, the knowledgethey use is located within the activity itself and any new knowledge gained is constructed through a reflectionin-action process. More specifically, when the feedback during an activity is, for example, surprising, thispromotes a reflection-in-action. This reflection, in turn, allows for explicit knowledge to be used and newknowledge to be constructed. A component of these reflections are the professional’s intuitions (Schön, 1983;1987). I contend that intuitions and a reflection-in-action activity can help the non-professional construct newknowledge.MethodsThe research in this paper specifically addresses the impact of utilizing reflection-in and on-action approaches incomputer-aided music composition activities. More specifically I ask: How do fourth-grade students take upand utilize intuitive discourse during computer-aided music making activities?The data and subsequent analysis is drawn from two fourth-grade classroom (N = 36) working toconstruct musical compositions using the music learning tool Impromptu (Bamberger, 2000). The 20-hourcurriculum, grounded in a constructionist framework (Papert, 1980), involved students reconstructing tunes,building rhythmic patterns to tunes, and composing their own tunes while engaged in a dialog with thepractitioner and others in the class.The tool and curriculumThe computer software Impromptu (Bamberger, 2000) was used throughout the study. Impromptu is a musiclearning tool that allows users to construct and manipulate tunes and rhythmic patterns using what is known astuneblocks (see Figure 2). Users pick a tune from the library. Once the tune is selected, they are presented withan assortment of tuneblocks. These tuneblocks can be arranged in any order and repeated as many times as theuser sees fit in the playroom. Users can also manipulate the tuneblock itself. For example, the user can click onthe magnifying glass icon in the tuneblock editor, click on a tuneblock, and then proceed to change the pitch,duration, and/or rhythmic structure of the block.This tool is unique, especially to this study, in two ways. First, Impromptu is not a composition tool,but a learning tool. Bamberger (2000) explicitly designed to the software to allow users to question theirintuitive notions about music and thus modify or change their intuitions based on their interactions with theCSCL 2015 Proceedings33© ISLSmusical tuneblocks. Second, and most importantly, the users begin at a mid-level structure or, as Bamberger(1996) argued, with what they already know. Studies of intuitions both within music and other domains suggestthat the learner should be engaged with something familiar so that an intuition may be triggered when engagingwith a problem (Bamberger, 1996; Bowers, et al., 1990; diSessa, 1993; Easen & Wilcockson, 1996; Fischbein,1982; Laevers, 1998; Wiggins, 2009).Figure 2: Impromptu screenshot with labels addedThe 20-hour curriculum for this project is taken from Bamberger’s (2000) college level curriculum andadapted for a fourth-grade classroom. The activities included Reconstruction, Construction, Building Meter,and the Final Project. Briefly, the Reconstruction activity involved choosing a particular tune from theImpromptu library (e.g., Hot Cross Buns) and using the given tuneblocks to put the tune back together. TheConstruction activity consisted of picking a pre-determined tune from the library and using the blocks to create anew composition. The tuneblocks for this activity were rhythmically and melodically balanced (e.g., tonal) anddid not require the student to alter the individual tuneblock. The Building Meter activity consisted of choosing apre-determined tune from the Impromptu library (e.g., Lanner) and building a beat to the tune using the givenrhythmic tuneblocks. The Final Project activity allows the students to make their own tune. This involvespicking a tune from the Impromptu library that consists of blocks that are atonal (no melodic or rhythmicbalance) and, should the student feel it is necessary, edit the given blocks and/or create new blocks in order tocompose their music.Data and analysisThe data are comprised of audio and video of the activities made during the composition activities. Thequalitative excerpts provided were analyzed using a microdevelopment approach in which learning anddevelopment is investigated over relatively short periods of time (Granott & Parziale, 2002). Specifically,during each of the whole-class activities (Reconstruction, Construction, Building Meter, and Final), units ofanalysis were based on turn-taking events between practitioner and student or between student and student.These turn taking events were coded based on the Structural Musical Ladder (Bamberger, 1996) (see Table 1).CSCL 2015 Proceedings34© ISLSTable 1: Description of the structural musical ladder and the specific codes that applyStructural Musical LadderHigh-Level StructureOverall organization of piece of music,motiv, or phrase (e.g., tuneblock).Includes style, mood, and evaluationMid-Level StructureDescribes the ways in which elementsof the tune function within a specificcontext. This can include melodiccontour, repetition, rhythm, tempo,tonal center, resolution (i.e., endings),antecedent/consequence, and divisionof beatsLow-Level StructuresA deconstruction of mid-level structuresincluding pitches, chords, and metricvalues.CodeDescriptionStyleStyle refers to the genre (e.g., rock and roll) of thepiece being heard or createdMoodMood refers to the feeling the piece of music has onthe listenerEvaluationEvaluation is an assessment of the piece beingheard or createdInstrumentationDescribes the instrument(s) used in the piece ofmusicRepetitionDescribes/notices how patterns (e.g., tuneblocks)repeatRhythmDescribes rhythm of the piece and how the beatswork together to form the rhythmTempoDescribes the speed of the pieceTonal CenterDescribes the overall tonality of the piece. That is,the notes in the piece compliment one another andare pleasingResolutionDescribes the ending of a tune or how a tune shouldend/resolveAntecedent/ConsequenceDescribes a “question and answer” functionality ofthe music. Usually happens when one phrase endswith either a high or low note (or sequences ofnotes) and the subsequent phrase ends with theopposite of the preceding phrase.Division of BeatsDescribes how the beats in the music are divided upMelodic ContourDescribes the relationship of the notes and how theywork together in the context of what is being heard /createdPitchesDescribes or demonstrates (e.g., hums) theindividual notes and or sound of individual notesbeing usesChordsDescribes the use of chords (e.g., two or more notesplayed together) in the tune being createdInterval – Melodic /RhythmicDescribes or demonstrates how melodic (e.g.,pitches) or rhythmic elements are divided.Specifically I was looking for instances when students would discuss and/or put to use anotherstudent(s) suggestion and how this impacted their movement on the Structural Musical Ladder.FindingsDue to space limitation, one excerpt from the “Final Activity” is presented. Students were told they couldconstruct any type of tune they would like using any or all of the strategies that were employed throughout theintervention. At this point in the excerpt, the class had spent considerable time deciding on the genre or style ofCSCL 2015 Proceedings35© ISLSmusic they would like to compose. The style they chose was called “techno-adventuresome” indicating that thesong should be exciting—like what would be heard in the movies—but also electronic sounding. As studentsmade suggestions, the practitioner would build the blocks and play them. Opinions were mixed on what wasbeing constructed at this point. For this specific excerpt, the practitioner played a newly constructed beginning.When asking the class what they thought, a student—Sam—has suggested that in order for it to be “techno”, itneeds to be faster and the conversation develops from that point (see Table 2).Table 2: “Final Activity” whole-class excerptLine #NameTranscription12PractitionerConnor3Ali45PractitionerOwenHow do we want to change it? Owen, go ahead?I think we should make a new block and, um, make it take littler steps andthen make another block and add on to it, like from the note we stopped atand then keep on going. Or we could just put them all in one block…6PractitionerSo how is that going to sound? Can you hum it for me? Can you…7Owen8Practitioner9Owen10Practitioner11Owen12Practitioner13OwenMaking it faster really didn’t workIt’s a war song (uses hands to act like he’s holding a gun) (Teacher walksin—class gets quiet)I don’t like it at the beginning. Now it’s like way to deep and makes you feellike you’re in a weird movie and it’s getting really scary. And then um, Ithink it should be like Sam said and more techno, like change theinstrument…Instead of just…it’s gonna take, like, steps up and it’s gonna go every othernote. It’s gonna go…it’s gonna start higher, then we’re gonna go all the wayhigh, then we’re gonna start, uh, a little bit lower, then were gonna go down,uh, to the next octave then your gonna just do nothing. Then your going touse a couple more notes on the next octave. Like uhh..So you’re saying, for example, we go A, B, C, D. Then the next blockwould be…No, C, D, D--C, D, E, F, G, A, B, C…Next octave…C, D, DOk, I see what you are saying, same notes, just an octave higher.Yeah, just an octave higher. Because that is what everyone else is sayingand they want it to build up and um…Build up to what though?Build up uhh…Build up to the red. And, and if it is already past the red,we’ll just, um, knock it down and do this (points to block on the screen)Both Ali and Owen take up other students’ intuitive thoughts and use them to try and come up with asolution to the problem. They also seem to move fluidly up and down the musical structural ladder by beingable to think about the melodic phrases that are being heard (e.g., mid-level structure) and how those phrasesmay impact the entire piece as a whole (e.g., higher-level structure) and how concepts like the pitches of notes(e.g., low-level structures) may be used.Ali (line 3) mentions that she does not like the beginning of the piece and agrees with Sam that the tuneshould be more techno sounding. Her explanation of how the beginning sounds using metaphors like “weirdmovie” and “really scary” highlights her focus on the genre and style of the piece (high-level structure). To finda solution on how to make the song more techno, echoing Sam’s earlier statement along with other classmatessentiments, she suggest changing the instruments. This is important because, to this point, the students havetried speeding up the tune, which was not effective. Other than starting over and making new blocks, the otheralternative is to change the instruments. By focusing on the instrumentation, Ali draws on her own intuitiveknowledge about what it means for a song to be techno by deducing that changing the speed did not work—assuggested by Sam—but changing the instrument may impact the overall tune.It is important to remember that considerable time has been taken in discussing and agreeing what“techno-adventuresome” music was and sounded like and also constructing a beginning to the tune. It wasevident that the students were not happy with what has been done to this point. The practitioner asks forsuggestions on how the song could be changed for it to meet the goal of being “techno-adventuresome” (line 4).Owen then devises an elaborate plan for addressing the issues being raised. Like Ali before, Owen takes in theCSCL 2015 Proceedings36© ISLSsuggestions of his peers and constructs a plan of action he think will work. Specifically, he states “…that iswhat everyone is saying…” indicating that he has heard what everyone has been saying and his plan might workin order to solve the problem at hand (line 11).The movement up and down the structural musical ladder is apparent in his explanation. Owen’s initialdescription of his solution (line 5) indicates he has thought through what he wants to do, but it is incomplete. Itfocuses on both the mid-level structure (e.g., making a new block) and moves fluidly to a low-level structureabout what the block should be (e.g.,notes and their function). When the practitioner asks for clarification (line6), Owen then is able to refine his thinking and get rather specific about his plan (line 7) again, focusing on lowlevel structures. When the practitioner asks for further clarification (lines 8 and 10) Owen is able to summarizehis plan and relate it to his peers issues with the tune (line 11) indicating that he has not only thought about howthe notes should function in his plan, but how they will impact the overall tune signifying a movement to a morehigh-level structure.Conclusions and implicationsThe connection to reflecting-in-action suggests that even younger students, who are not professionals or expertsin a domain (e.g., music), can use their intuitions to reflect on what it is they are doing, similar in ways to whatprofessionals do. This also suggest that the reflection (e.g., the talk) needs to be closely tied to what the studentis doing in the moment so that the reflection becomes more meaningful and promotes further construction ofknowledge beyond, for example, mid-level structures (e.g., what they already know). More interesting,especially to the CSCL community, is that when students have a commonly shared goal (e.g., composing a pieceof music), their reflections-in-action become building blocks for others to construct their understanding. Itshould be noted that the above excerpt was taken at during the last project of the curriculum. However, even atthe beginning of the curriculum, students were incorporating someone else’s ideas into their explanations ofwhat was happening in the composition.Intuitions, both their impact on learning and how to encourage their use despite their correctness, islargely overlooked in education research. Intuitions help us in seeing the whole of a problem and fill in gaps inour experiences to give us a complete picture of how things work in the world (Bruner, 1977; diSessa, 1993;Fischbein, 1982; Noddings & Shore, 1984). Literature in the Learning Sciences and elsewhere tends to treatintuitions as a ‘catch-all’ phrase that lacks a clear operational definition (c.f., Clement, 1993; Resnick &Wilenski, 1998; Zietsman & Clement, 1997) and seems to encompass what people know, yet do not know howthey have come to know (Noddings & Shore, 1984). Intuitions are extremely useful in understanding bothlearning and teaching within specific domains (e.g., music) (Bamberger, 2013; diSessa, 1993; Schön, 1983;1987).More research needs to be done to understand what types of reflection-in-action activities encouragecollaboration, the size of the groups working together, and the domains that this would be ideal for. Creativeactivities like music composition provide learners with the experience of doing what an expert does, or asResnick and Wilensky (1998) state, it gives the student an opportunity “dive in” (p. 155) or play the role of amusic composer. This “diving in” allows learners to make use of what they know how to do already. Musiccomposition and intuitions are relatively understudied in areas of educational research like CSCL and theLearning Sciences and this study provides a way in which to investigate them. This research can solidify theidea that intuitions should not just be used as a ‘catch-all’ phrase to explain what cannot be explained. Intuitionsprovide key foundations to critical thinking and problem solving if there is a clear foundation given forintuitions and how it relates to the researchers theoretical framework.ReferencesBamberger, J. (1996). Turning music theory on its ear: Do we hear what we see; do we see what we hear?International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 1, 33-55.Bamberger, J. (1999). Learning from the children we teach. Bulletin of the Council for Research in MusicEducation, 142, 48-74.Bamberger, J. (2000). Developing musical intuitions: A project-based introduction to making and understandingmusic. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.Bamberger, J. (2013). Discovering the musical mind: A view of creativity as learning. Oxford, England:Oxford University Press.Bowers, K. S., Regehr, G., Balthazard, C., & Parker, K. (1990). Intuition in the context of discovery. CognitivePsychology, 22, 72-110.Bray, D. (1997). CD ROM in music education. British Journal of Music Education, 14, 2, 137-142.CSCL 2015 Proceedings37© ISLSChi, M. T. H., DeLeeuw, Chiu, M-H., & Lavancher, C. (1994). Eliciting self-explanation improvesunderstanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.Clement, J. (1993). Using bridging analogies and anchoring intuitions to deal with students’ preconceptions inphysics. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 30, 1241-1257.Dalgarno, G. (1997). Creating an expressive performance without being able to play a musical instrument.British Journal of Music Education, 14, 2, 163-171.diSessa, A. (1993). Toward an epistemology of physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10, 105-225.Easen, P. & Wilcockson, J. (1996). Intution and rational decision-making in professional thinking: A falsedichotomy? Journal of Advanced Nursing, 24, 667-673.Fischbein, E. (1982). Intuition and proof. For the Learning of Mathematics, 3, 9-18.Fischbein, E. (1987). Intuition in science and mathematics: An educational approach. Boston, MA: D. ReidelPublishing.Granott, N. & Parziale, J. (Eds). (2002). Microdevelopment transition processes in development and learning.New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Green, L. (2002). How popular musicians learn: A way ahead for music education. Burlington, VT: Ashgate.Kafai, Y. B. (2006). Constructionism. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.) The Cambridge Handbook of the LearningSciences (p. 35-46). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Keiper, S., Sandene, B. A., Persky, H. R., & Kuang, M. (2009). The Nation’s Report Card: Arts 2008 Music &Visual Arts. Retrieved July 2, 2012 from nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/pubs/main2008/2009488.aspLaevers, F. (1998). Understanding the world of objects and of people: Intuition as the core element of deeplevel learning. International Journal of Educational Research, 29, 69-86.Noddings, N. & Shore, P. J. (1984). Awakening the inner eye: Intuition and education. New York, NY:Teachers College Press.Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful Ideas. New York, NY: Basic Books.Papert, S. (1991) Situating constructionism. In I. Harel & S. Papert (Eds.) Constructionism (p.1-12). New York,NY: Ablex.Papert, S. (1993). The children’s machine. New York, NY: Basic Books.Peppler, K. A. & Kafai, Y. B. (2007). From SuperGoo to Scratch: Exploring creative digital media productionin informal learning. Learning, Media, and Technology, 32, 149-166.Pinkett, R. D. (2000). Bridging the digital divide. Sociocultural constructionism and an asset-based approach tocommunity technology and community building. Presentation at the 81st Annual Meeting of theAmerican Educational Research Association, New Orleans, LA.Resnick, M., & Wilensky, U. (1998). Diving into complexity: Developing probabilistic decentralized thinkingthrough role-playing activities. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 7, 153-172.Savage, J. (2005). Working towards a theory for music technologies in the classroom: How pupils engage withand organize sounds with new technologies. British Journal of Music Education, 2, 167-180.Sawyer, R. K. (2008). Group genius: The creative power of collaboration. New York, NY: Basic BooksSchön, D. A. (1983). The reflective practitioner. How professionals think in action. New York, NY: BasicBooks.Schön, D. A. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner: Towards a new design for teaching and learning.San Francisco, CA: Josey-Bass.Swanwick, K. (1994). Musical knowledge: Intuition, analysis, and music education. New York, NY:Routledge.Swainwick, K. & Tillman, J. (1986). The sequence of musical development. A study of children’scomposition. British Journal of Music Education, 3, 305-339.Webster, P. R. (2006). Computer-based technology and music teaching and learning: 2000–2005. In L. Bresler(Ed.) International Handbook of Research in Arts Education, (p. 1311–1328).Wiggins, J. (2009). Teaching for musical understanding (2nd Ed.). Rochester, MI: CARMU OaklandUniversity.Ziestman, A. & Clement, J. (1997). The role of extreme case reasoning in instruction for conceptual change.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 6, 61-89.CSCL 2015 Proceedings38© ISLS