Don’t Just Do It, Explain It: A 5th Grade Worked ExamplesCurriculum Supports Transfer to Algebra ContentNicole R. Hallinen, Temple University, nicole.hallinen@temple.eduJulie L. Booth, Temple University, julie.booth@temple.eduAbstract: 5th graders (n=527) were randomly assigned to self-explain worked examples (WE)or solve problems during a yearlong study. WE students learned more algebra skills whengiven algebra worked examples on an end-of-year transfer measure. Comparing attempts,conceptual, and mechanical correctness by condition, results demonstrated that the conditiondifference in accuracy was attributable to better understanding of conceptual ideas in the WEcondition, not to greater willingness to try or fewer mechanical errors.A mathematics curriculum using worked examplesPrevious research has shown that using worked examples in an algebra curriculum supports student learning(Booth et al., 2015). This curriculum translates learning sciences principles into practice, drawing on ideas fromthe worked example principle (Sweller, 1999), the importance of using incorrect worked examples (e.g. Siegler,2002), and the role of self-explanation prompts (e.g., Chi, Leeuw, Chiu, & LaVancher, 1994).In the current investigation, we explore the effectiveness of using a worked example curriculum forteaching 5th grade mathematics. We extend previous research by measuring whether learning 5th grademathematics with worked examples supports transfer to a new content area (algebra) using items designed tomeasure students’ Preparation for Future Learning (PFL; Bransford & Schwartz, 1999).MethodFifth grade students (n=527) in 32 classrooms (19 teachers) across the Midwestern US participated in a yearlongrandomized control trial. Students completed 69 assignments covering multi-digit numbers, place value,decimals, basic operations with fractions, multiplying and dividing fractions, geometry and volume, and orderedpairs. To maintain ecological validity, teachers chose when and how to incorporate the problems into thecurriculum; the main stipulation was that the problems be used during class time instead of as homework.Students were assigned to either a Worked Examples (WE) or Control condition. Students in thebusiness-as usual Control condition solved problems for each arithmetic content area. In contrast, the WEcondition received correct and incorrect worked examples and targeted prompts to self-explain features of theexamples. After each example, WE students solved an isomorphic problem. Both conditions worked with thesame problems; WE students self-explained worked examples of half and solved half whereas students in theControl condition solved all of the problems.At the start of the year, students completed a pretest consisting of standardized test items measuringknowledge of 4th grade math concepts and skills plus research-based measures of student explanation, erroranticipation, and flexibility. At the end of the year, students completed several measures, the results of whichare reported elsewhere. Here, we analyze a PFL transfer measure. In this measure, students received learningresources (worked examples involving solving algebraic equations) and were asked to solve isomorphicproblems. The algebra content was not addressed in the 5th grade curriculum; problems were designed tomeasure whether students could interpret worked examples and solve problems about new content.ResultsAverage scores on the algebra transfer measure were 27.2% correct (SD = 3.53) for the WE condition and19.7% correct (SD = 3.16) for the Control condition. Even controlling for pretest, students in the WE conditionperformed significantly better than Control (F(1, 524) = 7.16, p = .008, η2= .013). Though performance wasrelatively low, likely because this was a more challenging math topic for this age group, the significantcondition difference suggests that learning from worked examples helped students learn in a new content area.To further understand this condition difference, we investigated whether students' errors resulted fromleaving the problem blank or making a conceptual error, a mechanical error, or both. Conceptual errors includedmistakes that indicated misconceptions about the mathematical concepts tested, such as order of operations andperforming equivalent operations on both sides of the equals sign, whereas mechanical errors includedmiscopying numbers (e.g. 13 vs. 31) or simple arithmetic errors (e.g. 2+3=6). This analysis, visualized inFigure 1, allowed us to address three possible mechanisms for the condition difference in accuracy.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1647© ISLSFigure 1. Likelihood of students attempting and correctly solving the algebra problems on the PFL transfermeasure by condition. The highlighted level indicates a difference in conceptual understanding.AttemptsOne potential hypothesis is that students in the WE condition were more likely to attempt the problems becauseof their yearlong experience with worked examples. To answer this, we compared the percent of problems thatstudents attempted: 67% in the WE condition vs. 64% in the Control condition. There was not a significantcondition difference in the likelihood to attempt the problem (χ2=1.67, p=.20); the condition difference inaccuracy does not stem from a difference in the conditions’ willingness to try.Conceptual correctnessAlternatively, the condition difference in accuracy may result from a difference in students' ability to transfertheir conceptual understanding, recognize the deep structure in the worked example, and apply it to the newproblems. We compared the amount of conceptually correct problems as a percent of the attempted problems bygroup. In the WE condition, students were conceptually correct on 45% of their attempts as compared to 34% inControl. This was significantly different by condition (χ2=10.76, p<.01); students in the WE condition werebetter able to understand concepts presented in the transfer resources and less likely to make conceptual errors.Mechanical correctnessA final mechanism for the difference in accuracy could lie in students’ attention to surface features. Of theproblems that students got conceptually correct, did one condition make more mechanical errors? Mechanicalcorrectness was high: 94% in the WE condition and 91% in Control. There was no significant conditiondifference (χ2=1.33, p=.25); learning from worked examples did not lead to fewer mechanical errors.ImplicationsThis study extends previous translational research on worked examples to an elementary classroom setting andincludes new error analyses to understand the mechanism though which worked examples can promote learning.Our results demonstrate that learning 5th grade mathematics from worked examples leads to greater learning in anew algebra content area. Importantly, this difference can be attributed to a deeper understanding of conceptualideas among the WE students rather than an increased willingness to try solving the problems or a greaterattention to surface feature mechanical details. These findings offer insight into the importance of carefullydesigning instructional materials that support learning and enable students to learn in future tasks.ReferencesBooth, J.L., Oyer, M.H., Paré-Blagoev, E.J., Elliot, A.J., Barbieri, C., Augustine, A., & Koedinger, K.R. (2015).Learning algebra by example in real-world classrooms. Journal of Research on EducationalEffectiveness, 8(4), 530-551.Bransford, J.D., & Schwartz, D.L. (1999). Chapter 3: Rethinking transfer: A simple proposal with multipleimplications. Review of Research in Education, 24(1), 61-100.Chi, M.T., Leeuw, N., Chiu, M.H., & LaVancher, C. (1994). Eliciting self-explanations improvesunderstanding. Cognitive Science, 18(3), 439-477.Siegler, R.S. (2002). Microgenetic studies of self-explanation. Microdevelopment: Transition processes indevelopment and learning, 31-58.Sweller, J. (1999). Instructional design. In Australian Educational Review.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1648© ISLS