Teacher Noticing Associated With Responsive Support ofKnowledge BuildingDarlene Judson, University at Albany, djudson2@albany.eduAbstract: Knowledge building is a student-centered, principle-based approach whereinstudents assume collective responsibility for collaboration and the co-regulation of activity ininquiry within a domain of study with the support of the teacher. Little is understood about theways in which teachers support knowledge building in the classroom. This paper analyzes towhat and how a teacher attends as noteworthy events in the classroom and investigates hisassociated enacted responses. The construct of teacher noticing was used to identify examplesof teacher noticing attuned to students’ ideas associated with responsive actions in the classroomin which the teacher supported knowledge building by empowering students to see and makeconnections to their own and one another’s knowledge work and the ongoing trajectory ofinquiry.Keywords: knowledge building, teacher noticing, responsive teachingIntroductionKnowledge building in the classroom is a principle-based approach in which students’ ideas and emergingunderstandings are the objects of inquiry in a domain of study, commonly with a Knowledge Forum database.Individuals, groups, and the class as a whole define and refine problems of understanding, hypothesize, research,design experiments, share and build on findings, and monitor progress collaboratively with the support of theteacher. The approach is grounded in 12 principles such as community knowledge-collective responsibility,democratizing knowledge, and epistemic agency rather than predetermined curriculum (Scardamalia & Bereiter,2006). Extant literature primarily focuses on student interactions, idea progression, and achievement often notingthat teachers help, encourage, support, and facilitate. But little is known about how teachers support students inknowledge building. The construct of teacher noticing provides a framework for analyzing idea-centeredresponsive teaching. This paper represents first steps in understanding what a teacher attends to and associatedenacted responses in a knowledge building classroom.Knowledge building with Knowledge ForumThe Knowledge Forum (KF) database and companion software, Idea Thread Mapper (ITM), serve as both a recordand tool of community progress. Students use customizable scaffolds to (co)author notes recording questions,theories, findings and results of their inquiry in pages in the KF database called views where they can read andbuild on one another’s contributions. They monitor and co-regulate activity based on advances in KF togetherwith face to face interaction, student created artifacts, and knowledge building discourse in the classroom. Afterinitial cycles of inquiry, ITM can be used to display notes related to a specific thread of inquiry along a timelineto help students visualize and assess important knowledge advancement, and to identify potential areas foradditional progress (Zhang, Lee, & Chen, 2014). The co-creation of knowledge is driven by students’ ideas. Theteacher must be aware of and attend to students’ evolving thinking in order to make decisions responsive to it,supporting students’ productive inquiry (Hammer & van Zee, 2006).Responsive teaching and teacher noticingThe notion that effective teaching builds on students’ own ideas promoting connections between students’understandings and to the domain, and recognizing potentialities is not new. Dewey was a proponent a centuryago and episodes from classrooms such as Deborah Ball’s are oft cited (Richards & Robertson, 2016). Recently,however, there has emerged a growing research interest in teacher noticing in the field of mathematics education,and in responsive teaching, especially in science education. Researchers from the two fields note concordance andhave begun to explore broader questions and purpose (Elby et al., 2014).Noticing is defined by Jacobs, Lamb, and Philipp (2010) as the interrelated skills of attending tochildren’s strategies, interpreting children’s understandings, and deciding how to respond on the basis ofchildren’s understandings (p. 172). Noticing expertise embodies the central components of responsive teaching.Importantly, studies with mathematics teachers find that these skills are not necessarily commensurate withteaching experience (Jacobs, Lamb, & Philipp, 2010). Teachers tend to focus on impressions or themselves, takean evaluative stance, and provide little evidence to support their observations (van Es, 2011). Responsive teachingICLS 2016 Proceedings986© ISLSinvolves making sense of student thinking rather than evaluating or correcting, attending to the substance ofstudents’ ideas and recognizing disciplinary connections (Robertson, Atkins, Levin, & Richards, 2016). Thisinvestigation builds on the research on knowledge building by drawing on the foundation established in teachernoticing for identifying teacher attention to students’ ideas. In particular, the following research questions explorehow a teacher supports knowledge building when his attention is attuned to his students’ thinking.1. To what and how does a fifth grade teacher attend in a knowledge building inquiry on the human body?2. What teacher actions in the classroom are associated with noticing attuned to students’ ideas?MethodsOne teacher, Mr. C, was selected from three fifth grade teachers implementing knowledge building inquiry forthe study of the human body in five science classes in a suburban public elementary school in New York’s CapitalRegion. The data consisted of recordings of monthly teacher meetings and Mr. C’s science class periods over thecourse of the second year of implementation in this setting. Mr. C’s classroom recordings afforded the greatestdetail in teacher-student interaction enabling the tracking of noted events.Analyses included two stages. To address the first research question and the first two component skills,teacher meeting transcripts were divided into idea units separated by a shift in topic following van Es's (2011)framework for learning to notice student thinking. Statements made by Mr. C about his class were selected foranalysis similar to the focus on individual teachers as is common in studies on noticing (e.g., Jacobs et al., 2010).Mr. C’s statements were coded along two dimensions, what and how he noticed, using the descriptors of theframework (van Es, 2011). What encompasses to whom he is referring and the topic, for example behavior,pedagogical strategies, or thinking about the human body. How concerns the analytic stance of the remarks(evaluative or interpretive) and depth indicated by detail and evidence in support of his analysis. Segments wereconsidered attuned to students’ ideas when Mr. C attended to (what) students’ thinking and the relationship tospecific aspects of the ongoing trajectory of inquiry, and when his analysis (how) was interpretive and groundedin evidence from events and interactions.To address the second question, instances in which Mr. C discussed his decision making in response towhat he noticed in his class, the third component skill of noticing, were compared to his actions taken in class. Inanalyzing teachers’ deciding how to respond, Jacobs et al. (2010) noted (a) whether the teacher referenced thestudent’s thinking and (b) whether the suggested response left room for the student’s future thinking as opposedto only the teacher’s. Stated responses, or response options, were analyzed according to these criteria. However,in Mr. C’s case, classroom video allowed for the inclusion of actions actually taken. Patterns emerged regardingthe types of enacted responses associated with what and how the teacher noticed. Actions associated with noticingattuned to students’ ideas are discussed in the next section.ResultsMr. C attended to a range of issues from student motivation and participation, pace of progress, and pedagogicalstrategies related to inquiry, to students’ ideas and how they connected to students’ own and others’ work.Statements that were evaluative, based on impressions without supporting evidence, and/or related to the pace ofprogress tended to be associated with assigned whole class activities or options discussed in the teacher meetingsthat were not enacted. Though some of these statements referenced student thinking in some way, comments wereevaluative and the associated teacher decisions and actions did not leave room for students’ future thinking orbuild on inquiry advances. These findings are similar to those in the literature on noticing.Reports of math teachers’ decision making in the extant literature rely on teachers selecting or creatinga fictitious next task. In Mr. C’s class recordings there is evidence of how he supports knowledge building.Instances of noticing attuned to students’ ideas were associated with teacher decisions and enacted responses inthe classroom that helped students make connections to ongoing knowledge building and left space for futureadvances. The following examples illustrate to what and how Mr. C attended in his statements in the teachermeetings and how he decided to respond, as evidenced by statements and classroom actions, in two such instances(Table 1).In the first, Mr. C brings students’ prior work to the group’s attention to help them build on earlieradvances and understand their new interest area more deeply through current understandings. He tries to “lead”them from researching disease as a brand new inquiry to thinking about how it connects to their expandingknowledge based on prior work. In the excerpt below he goes beyond suggestion to leading them through stepsof connective reasoning. Knowledge building occurs along a trajectory. It is not a collection of isolated inquirieswithin a domain. Mr. C notices enthusiastic interest developing in a group but interprets the students’ interactionsas a possible disconnect from the ongoing knowledge building.ICLS 2016 Proceedings987© ISLSThe second example shows how the teacher pulls students together from diverse areas of inquiry to helpthem see that their research and new questions are converging into a promising direction that is new to the class.He suggests a similarity in that their new interests are related to what is going on in the body while it sleeps whileemphasizing the diversity of their questions. He allows students to share thoughts and experiences but then bringsthem back, twice, to the connections between their interests. He suggests that this could be an area of researchthat is new to the class, but leaves it to the students to decide if it fits within an existing topic or needs its own. Heasks them to consider how they will word a question that encompasses the diversity of their interests and picks upwith the formulation of that question in the next class. Mr. C notices the inquiry of several students in diversegroups heading in the direction of sleep which is not a big topic area for the whole class. He interprets this as anopportunity for new collaborations and advancements in understanding. He encourages collective responsibilityfor wording a single question that can encompass their diverse interests.Table 1: Actions associated with noticing attuned to students’ ideasStatement from teacher meetingMr. C: If you’ve done this work,the knowledge that you have aboutwhite blood cells. Look into thatand then diseases may pop upinstead of the opposite way around.Try to lead them in that direction.Mr. C: The sleep people, they haddifferent parts. One was interestedin REM sleep. And one wasinterested in like sleepwalking.Another one was sleep disorders.They all kind of have like differentareas. Dreams, that’s another one.That they’re interested in. Wefigured that there’s enoughsubtopics of it for it to be its ownthing.ICLS 2016 ProceedingsAction taken in the classroomMr. C: A good way to get into the field that you find exciting is to use yourinformation about blood that you know, circulatory system, things like that, to getto diseases. Because there is definitely a connection, literally and figuratively.S1: Oh, I know what you mean. You’re talking about since we’re blood, we won’thave to start a new group. We can start moving toward the disease.Mr. C: Right. That’s exactly right. But it’s not even so much that. You can probablyend having a new one, a new section. But it’s that fact that you’re kind of buildingoff of the information that you already know. Instead of starting from scratch.S2: I don’t think we should go off from what we already have.Mr. C: Well, how do I say this? This is what you’ve got to remember. Anothername for circulatory system is the cardiovascular system. It delivers. What does thecirculatory system deliver to the. .S3: Blood.Mr. C: Blood. What’s in blood besides. .S1: CellsS3: Blood cells, white blood cells, oxygen, nutrientsS2: GermsMr. C: Germs. And the white blood cells fight them. That was one of our things.S3: Sometimes there may be too many germs.Mr. C So fatal diseases are infecting your blood. . . It sounds like you guys areinterested in fatal diseases but you should use what you already know.Mr. C: Could I throw this out to you? Now if you think about how does the brain doits job. So you’re sleeping. Your whole body is, sleeping. Right? It’s resting.Whatever it is. Your heat’s still beating. You’re still breathing. You still have thosethings, those parts of your body that you’re not consciously thinking about,breathing, heart beating, digestion, things like that. So, all of a sudden, now you addinto it, um, there’s other things happening as well, right? Like you guys weretalking about dreaming. Talking about if you were sleepwalking, like you’reunconsciously using your motor skills.(student stories)Mr. C: I guess what I hear is you guys have a lot of questions about unconscioustimes when you’re kind of, really sleep. What’s happening during sleep.(student stories)Mr. C: This is like, what I’m hearing you guys say is a ton of different questions orobservations that you have, that you’ve either experienced, heard about, you’rewondering about. And, it seems like a very large area of research. It seems like alarge place that you could all, so would you like to make it its own question? Or doyou think it’s part of brain and part of its jobs?S1: Its own question. (Others agree)[End of class. Mr. C asks group to think of wording for a big question.](Next class) Mr. C: People who had some interest in having dreams beingsomething about, or sleeping, or dreams, and it’s something a lot of people weretalking about so let’s come up with a big, juicy question for it. And then people cango about what they’re going to do. . . What do you guys think that could be a wayof phrasing this big juicy question that could include kind of what everybody’sinterested in. What were people interested in?988© ISLSConclusionThe implementation of knowledge building depends on responsiveness from the teacher as students’ ideas are theobjects of inquiry. Mr. C’s above responses demonstrate instances of noticing attuned to students’ thinkinghighlighting connections between students’ ideas, to the domain of study, and to the trajectory of understandingadvancement in support of knowledge building.This paper represents an exploration of teacher noticing as a framework for beginning to understand theways in which teachers can support students in knowledge building. There is no best response in teachingsituations. There is always a range of reasonable responses (Hammer & van Zee, 2006). The construct of teachernoticing provides a way to identify when teachers’ attention is attuned to students’ ideas and a means to classifydecisions as being responsive to the teacher’s interpretations of that thinking. The examples demonstrate that afocus on the teacher’s noticing may lead to a greater understanding of ways in which teachers can support studentsin knowledge building; they are not meant as exemplars. The above examples are but two from all that a singleteacher chose to discuss in teacher meetings. They are not necessarily representative of his in-the-moment decisionmaking in the classroom. The next phase of this work involves having teachers keep semi-structured reflectionjournals modeled on the dimensions of noticing throughout the current, full-year fifth grade inquiry on the humanbody.ReferencesElby, A., Richards, J., Walkoe, J., Gupta, A., Russ, R., Luna, M., … van Es, B. (2014). Differing notions ofresponsive teaching across mathematics and science: Does the discipline matter? In Proceedings ofInternational Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) (pp. 1406–1415).Hammer, D., & van Zee, E. (2006). Seeing the science in children’s thinking: Case studies of student inquiry inphysical science. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.Jacobs, V. R., Lamb, L. L. C., & Philipp, R. A. (2010). Professional noticing of children’s mathematical thinking.Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 41(2), 169–202.Richards, J., & Robertson, A. D. (2016). A review of the research on responsive teaching in science andmathematics. In A. D. Robertson, R. E. Scherr, & D. Hammer (Eds.), Responsive teaching in scienceand mathematics (pp. 36-55). New York, NY: Routledge.Robertson, A. D., Atkins, L. J., Levin, D. M., & Richards, J. (2016). What is responsive teaching? In A. D.Robertson, R. E. Scherr, & D. Hammer (Eds.), Responsive teaching in science and mathematics (pp. 1–34). New York ; London: Routledge.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In R. K. Sawyer(Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97–118). Cambridge, England: CambridgeUniversity Press.van Es, E. A. (2011). A framework for learning to notice student thinking. In M. G. Sherin, V. R. Jacobs, & R. A.Philipp (Eds.), Mathematics teacher noticing: Seeing through teachers’ eyes. New York, NY: Routledge.Zhang, J., Lee, J., & Chen, J. (2014, April). Using idea thread mapper to support collaborative reflection forsustained knowledge building. Presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational ResearchAssociation, Philadelphia, PA.ICLS 2016 Proceedings989© ISLS