How Do We Assess Equity in Programming Pairs?Elise Deitrick, Tufts University, Elise.Deitrick@tufts.eduR. Benjamin Shapiro, University of Colorado Boulder, Ben.Shapiro@colorado.eduBrian Gravel, Tufts University, Brian.Gravel@tufts.eduAbstract: We comparatively apply methods for assessing equity to find ways that allow us tobetter interrogate, describe, and understand the construct’s complexities. To do so, we replicateprior work assessing equity in programming pairs (Lewis & Shah, 2015; Shah, Lewis, & Caires,2014) by creating distributions of coded (1) computer use, (2) turns of talk, and (3) questionsand commands; furthermore, we build upon their application by (4) examining students’embodied interaction and social positioning. Using these four methods to analyze the discourseof a pair of students programming, we identified numerous examples of positioning shifts, andsee how inequities could potentially emerge through discursive mechanisms. We then reflecton what each of these four different methods foreground, their strengths and shortcomings,including their sensitivity to time-scope and pedagogy, and triangulate the quantified andqualitative results.Keywords: equity, collaborative learning, research methods, computer scienceIntroductionMany researchers are investigating issues of equity in STEM contexts, in particular, equity within collaborativeSTEM learning environments, like group work. A place that has received particular attention recently is ComputerScience (Margolis & Fisher, 2003; Margolis et. al, 2010). Computer science, and in particular programming,which typically uses a computer, presents a particular challenge in studying. The literature contains studies thatuse multiple methods encompassing multiple aspects to look at how and why equity can emerge in computer use(Cole, 1995; Lewis & Shah, 2015; Shah, Lewis, & Caires, 2014). In terms of methods, these studies account fordistribution of computer use as well as types of talk (e.g. questions and commands). These papers all contrast twogroups doing a computer task and discuss how their selected research measures show different facets of socialdynamics being more or less equitable given the group. In addition, their conclusions are similar in they cite withingroup context as having the power to invalidate their methods: Cole (1995, p.73 ) concludes that “the way themouse gets used in a group has much more to do with the interpersonal meanings brought to the group anddeveloped during the interaction” and Shah, Lewis, and Caires (2014, p. 501) conclude that “it may be more usefulto conceptualize equity as contextual.” These studies highlight the need for a re-evaluation of how we study equityin computer science.The studies cited above as well as others focus on a singular, monolithic definition of equity: Chizhik(2001) looked at how task characteristics (e.g. the number of solutions) affected the distribution of forms ofparticipation and achievement on a test; Sullivan and Wilson (2015) looked at how positioning via “playful talk”affected status within the group, which has been shown to affect opportunities to learn. This is problematic becausethere are many aspects affecting and constituting equity and “these relationships [between aspects and facets ofequity] turn out to be much more complex than one would expect” (Cole, 1995, p.68). So, we ask “what doesequity mean in programming pairs?” To address this question we employ the methods presented in Lewis andShah (2015) and Shah, Lewis, and Caires, (2014) because they specifically address Computer Science and includemultiple measures of equity including quantitatively coding turns of talk, questions, and commands. However,we want to further elaborate on what equity means.In an attempt to better inform how these research methods can account for the multiple aspects that affectand constitute equity, we turn to a well-cited definition for equity, which accounts for the multi-faceted nature ofequity. Esmonde (2009, p.249) defines “equity as the fair distribution of opportunities to learn.” She furtherbreaks down this definition into two parts: (1) “opportunities to make sense of mathematical ideas and toparticipate in mathematical discourse practices” and (2) “students’ opportunities to develop positive positionalidentities that place them as authoritative and competent members of the classroom community.” We can mapour selected methods onto Esmonde’s definition by slightly modifying it. First, we are going to look at actualizedengagement as supposed to “opportunities to learn” due to the difficulties associated with measuring anopportunity. For example, if a student is working in a group, and she does not engage in the activity, how can wedifferentiate whether she had the opportunity and chose not to take it, or whether she never had the opportunityin the first place, perhaps due to factors beyond our view? This complexity makes it very challenging to assessICLS 2016 Proceedings370© ISLSopportunity in classroom examples of group work. In addition, we divide Esmonde’s first branch further into (1a)sense making and (1b) practicing disciplinary discourse to help differentiate these two observable facets of equityshe is presenting. The resulting definition is mapped to our quantitative methods below. We first explain how wetriangulate that this mapping is theoretically sound by using interaction level positioning to see what thesequantitative indicators are capturing.Cole (1995, p.71) states that “surface indicators alone, as convenient as they may be, cannot tell us at aglance whether a group is working well together.” In order to get a better sense of group interactions, we extendLewis and Shah’s work (2015) by using the construct of positioning to examine discourse . Michaels et. al (2007,p.294) states that “all social relationships are in play in the accomplishment of deliberative discourse.” VanLangenhove and Harre (1999, p.17) define “the act of positioning” as “the assignment of fluid ‘parts’ or ‘roles’to speakers in the discursive construction of personal stories that make a person’s actions intelligible and relativelydeterminate as social acts.” Positioning in discourse could look like supporting an idea or critiquing an idea, whichleads to the speaker being positioned as more knowledgeable or not. For example, a passing teacher may positiona student towards the project by asking how it works. The student in turn could position him or her self away fromthe project by replying their partner built it so they do not know. In our study, we avoid presenting data aboutteacher and student interactions because of the intrinsic power dynamics between students and teachers in aclassroom, making the positioning inherently inequitable. In addition to discursive positioning, we incorporateanother facet to positioning: embodiment.We apply the construct of embodied positioning used in math education (Leander, 2002; Dookie, 2014).Engle, Langer-Osuna, and McKinney de Royston (2014) present a framework that includes not only degree ofintellectual authority and access to the conversational floor, but also degree of spatial privilege. Leander (2002,p. 193) also argues “that 2 key processes are active: narrating social ‘scenes’ through talk and producing embodiedspaces.” Embodiment is relevant to analyzing pair programming because pair programming typically involves apair of people sharing a computer with a single mouse and keyboard; the person whose hands are on the keyboardand mouse has more power than the person who does not. By accounting for this embodied power via analysis ofwho has control of the computer at what points in time, we can better understand equity in the situation.Using our two modifications of Esmonde’s (2009) definition, we operationalize equity into threeobservable and quantifiable equity indicators that can provide an approximate measure of equity: Tool use, talkdistribution, and question/command distribution. These indicators form the basis for a coding scheme (describedbelow) that we use to analyze video recordings of students’ discourse.Our first equity indicator, tool use, ties back to the first part of our definition - sense making. Activecomputer use could indicate engagement with disciplinary ideas. While it is unlikely that computer use is the onlyway to engage with disciplinary ideas or that all computer use signals engagement in disciplinary ideas, the twoare related. “Inequitable access to the computer becomes… a lack of exposure to the curriculum” (Cole, 1995,p.67) and computer use has been used previously as a metric in studies of equity in paired programming (Plonkaet al, 2012). Theoretically, in an equitable pair, we would see a near equal distribution (50-50).Our second equity indicator, talk distribution or “air time”, ties back to the first part of our definition –practicing discourse. By measuring the distribution of student talk (Lewis & Shah, 2015; Shah, Lewis, & Caires,2014) we can see indications of engagement with discourse practices. While it is unlikely that every turn of talkuttered by a student is engagement with discursive practices, we have a couple of reasons to believe that thismetric, in our data, will still reflect an approximation of the ratio of discourse practices: (1) the students in ourstudy have the same level of programming experience, so it is reasonable to assume that they engage in discursivepractices at approximately the same rate and (2) “verbal matching within a group is a significant indicator of howwell members of that group like one another” (Gonzales, Hancock, & Pennebaker, 2009, p.9), meaning that sincethe students presented below are very friendly towards one another, if one student starts or stops engaging indiscursive practices then the other student will likely follow. If we then assume equitable collaboration, “thenumber of turns would be near equally distributed (i.e., 50-50)” (Shah, Lewis & Claires, 2014, p. 497).Our third equity indicator, authority, ties back to the second part of our definition – authoritative andcompetent identities in the classroom. Commands and questions are of particular interest because they can indicatepositioning. Questions generally give status to those being asked by positioning them as a relativelyknowledgeable since “asking a partner a question can be seen as actively positioning that person as competentand, alternatively, not asking a partner a question can be seen as passively positioning that person as lesscompetent ” (Shah, Lewis, & Caires, 2014, p.499). Commands generally give status to the speaker, positioningthem as relatively knowledgeable since “issuing many directive statements may indicate a lack of respect for theintellectual capacity of that individual to contribute” (Shah, Lewis, & Caires, 2014, p. 499). We use the wordrelative to indicate that when a speaker asks someone a question or commands the listener to do something, thispositioning is not global, it is a relational shift between the speaker and listener. This position of knowledgeableICLS 2016 Proceedings371© ISLSis relative to the other person and only exists within the pair at that moment. We use coding to give us a roughidea of equity within the pair since one would assume about a 50-50 distribution of questions to each other to keeppositioning equitable.Now we can address our research question: How do different nominal indicators of equity differentiallydescribe peer interactions? In this paper, we present the results gathered by applying these methods, we thenreflect on what each of these methods foregrounds, their strengths and shortcomings, including their sensitivityto time-scope and pedagogy, and triangulate the quantified and qualitative results. We conclude by suggestingways in which future would could more sensitively theorize about and assess equity in students’ collaborativeactivity.MethodsThe data in this paper were collected in a New England high school’s recently established makerspace, where wetaught a single-semester elective course in digital making. The high school is highly diverse with 70% minoritystudents and 58% of students coming from low-income families. The school’s diversity is reflected in the 21elective students (8 Haitian-Americans, 6 Hispanic, 2 African-Americans, 2 Asian-Americans and 3 other nonWhite students). The project captured approximately 260 hours of video, copies of student notebooks, pictures ofartifacts, and the staff’s daily field notes.The data in this paper (a 35 minute segment of video) were collected when students had alreadycompleted one project and were working on their second project. The objective of this project was to make themakerspace “smart,” where students were asked to use technology to make the space interactive in similar waysto home automation. Students were using BlockyTalky, a tangible networked tool kit used to build custom devicesconsisting of motors, sensors and LEGO pieces for structure. BlockyTalky devices can send messages overwireless networks to other units, to computers with music synthesizers and to Android apps created on MIT AppInventor.In this paper, we present an episode of a pair of two sophomore girls. This pair was selected becausefrom the outside, it was hard to tell whether the pair was inequitable or equitable. One girl did the vast majorityof programming but the two girls seemed open to talking to one another. The traits of unequal tool use andopenness to talk were widespread throughout the groups, making this pair representative of the groups in the classat different points in time, but not necessarily representative of the pair for the entire duration of the project.In order to quantitatively assess how equitable a pair is, we use Shah and Lewis’s scheme (Shah, Lewis& Claires, 2014; Lewis & Shah 2015) to quantify the students’ relative distributions of computer time, talk,commands and questions. Computer time was attributed to the student who was actively using the keyboard ormouse. We then computed the ratio of computer time between the girls to arrive at a measure of equality. We alsocreated transcripts for the selected episode, dividing them into turns, and tagging all turns containing a questionor direct command. We counted the number of turns and tags for each girl and created a distribution of talk andtalk type.We also employ a more qualitative method, positioning, to investigate how these indicated inequities arecreated. To find instances of positioning, we consider each utterance and identify any positioning. In interpretingthese utterances we code intentional positioning moves in the data (i.e. “I am going to program”), and tacitpositioning (i.e. you are not programming). In the presentation of this coding below, we talk about positioning asauthoritative or knowledgeable as positioning up and positioning as less authoritative or knowledgeable as down.In a few instances we also code positioning towards or away from the project itself, which is different in that it ispositioning one as an owner or doer of the project. We make this distinction because positioning towards or awayfrom the project is more likely to be in conjunction with embodied positioning. We also take note of embodiedpositioning by noting for each turn of talk who has control over the computer, paying close attention to transfersof possession and considering how it affects the meaning of the verbal positioning or vice versa.ResultsThe pair of girls chose to address the teacher’s inability to hear the bell within the woodshop because this problemhad been causing students to be late for class. These two students attempted to make this “smart” bell byprogramming a BlockyTalky device with a sound sensor in the hall to sense the bell ringing, and then send amessage to a second BlockyTalky device to have a synthesizer make noise in the room. This episode starts on aFriday afternoon, only a few days into starting the project. Sarah and Alice are sitting at a laptop at a tableprogramming two BlockyTalky devices named Bruce and Eve.From the quantified perspective, the pair looks inequitable (Figure 1). Computer time was distributed16% to 84% in Sarah’s favor (N = 12:48 minutes). Overall talk distribution was 37% to 63% in Sarah’s favor(N=316 turns). Commands were distributed 53% to 47% for Alice and Sarah respectively (N=17 turns). QuestionsICLS 2016 Proceedings372© ISLSasked were distributed 58% to 42% for Alice and Sarah respectively (N=50 turns). Our coding of these data ismarked using boxes around the transcript in the qualitative findings section below with the following notation:coded as command and coded as question. Tool use, including computer time, is described within the analysisfollowing the transcript.Figure 1: Computer and Talk Distribution by StudentWe now have an indication of how equitable the pair was. The pair appears to be inequitable in themeasures of computer use and turns of talk, but equitable in the measures of commands given and questions asked.In theory, the dynamics of positioning we see in the qualitative analysis should approximately match theproportions above. It then follows that if we see Sarah making moves to keep tool usage or a lack of Alice makingbids to use the tools, a similar yet less extreme dynamic should be seen with air time, and an almost equaldistribution of moves to position oneself as knowledgeable – these indicators are good approximations of actualpositioning. If not, we would need to question whether these indicators are a reasonable construct to apply in thiscontext.We start the qualitative analysis about 24 minutes into the episode where we see a transition from talkingto active programming on the computer. This piece of the episode was chosen due to the lack of programming inthe first 20 minutes and the fact that teacher interactions were minimal in this piece of the episode. While most ofour methods would work on student discourse without tool use, our aim is to present all of the indicators inconjunction with the qualitative analysis and we cannot study the effect of positioning on tool use when there isno tool use.[23:39] S: Wait, stop.[23:42] A: That was fun[23:43] S: As you can tell, I didn't program it to do any kind of actual sound. I just did a bunchof random buttons.[23:56] S: Hold on a second, stop stop.The transcript above is presented based on time stamps, not turns of talk as defined in the methods section, sowhen trying to understand this coding, each line needs to be dissected into turns. For example, [23:43] has twoturns of talk within the single time stamp.Our equity indicators in this snippet show Sarah dominating through computer use, more turns of talkand multiple commands. This matches the qualitative analysis where we see Sarah positions Alice away bycommanding her to stop pressing the buttons multiple times ([23:39], [23:43]). Sarah explains to Alice that sheprogrammed the device to make random noises when triggered, emphasizing the randomness with a gesture.Looking at embodied positioning, Sarah is on the computer for most of it ([23:39]- [23:43.]). At the beginning,Figure 2: (a)Left - Alice reaches across table to touch phone(b) Right – Sarah motions to Alice to stop pressing button on phoneICLS 2016 Proceedings373© ISLSAlice reaches over to touch the phone in front of Sarah (Figure 2a) then Sarah relocates the phone in front of Alice([23:39]) before making an embodied move in conjunction with her command ([23:56], Figure 2b). By reachingout to prevent Alice from touching the phone it emphasizes Sarah’s authority. In isolation, these few turns couldbe misleading, but as part of the whole episode we see how this temporarily lop-sided interaction leads to skewingthe equity indicators of commands.[24:08] A: Hey, did you want me to make an actual beat?[24:11] S: If you want to. I was just going to go ahead and [inaudible][24:14] A: Alright, well that sucks.Our equity indicators in this snippet show almost equal distributions, as Sarah stops using the computer, allowingAlice to start using it, there are almost equal turns of talk and only a single question. This almost matches thequalitative analysis where we see Alice volunteers and then starts programming an actual beat ([24:08]) – thoughin terms of disciplinary content this is arguably a peripheral part of the programming project. Additionally, Sarahpositions Alice’s contribution as minimal (“If you want to”), positioning Alice down. Sarah starts this snippet onthe computer but Alice’s question ([24:08]) leads her to move away from the computer and leave the table whileAlice get’s a chance to program ([24:14]). Shortly after, Alice finishes programming and asks Sarah for helpuploading her code to the BlockyTalky. Notice how drastically different the equitability of the pair is between thetwo presented snippets – in a matter of seconds we go from Sarah dominated to almost equitable just because ofwhere these turns of talk were grouped.[26:06] A: How did you upload it?[26:13] A: This is the old one still[26:19] S: Upload ....[26:28] S: Stop hitting it for a second. That was really weird. Okay. We'll leave it at that.Okay. Now we just need the sound sensor[26:50] S: Oh you changed the sound[26:53] S: Please stop because [inaudible] over load the program.Our equity indicators in this snippet show Sarah dominating the pair again, as Sarah takes over the computer,dominates turns of talk and issues two commands – exacerbated by Alice asking a question. This almost matchesthe qualitative analysis where we see Sarah returns to the table and to the embodied position of computer userafter Alice positions her as knowledgeable by asking a question ([26:06]). Alice presses the start button on thephone ([26:13]) and notes the lack of difference – a meaningful contribution not picked up by the indicators - andSarah responds by showing Alice the upload button ([26:19]). While this enables Alice to contribute, Sarahcontinues to use the computer, not returning it to Alice. Sarah then proceeds to once again command Alice to stoppressing the button, emphasized by a less drastic gesture than illustrated in Figure 2b ([26:28]). Alice startsrepeatedly pressing the button enthusiastically once her new tune starts coming out of the synthesizer ([26:50]).Sarah issues another command, gesturing by touching the phone ([26:53]). This interaction positions Alice furtheraway from the project. Sarah’s comment about Alice’s contribution is a little hard to interpret since there is novalue statement in it ([26:50]) – she is simply stating that she observed Alice’s contribution. It could be arguedthat she accepts the modification and thus positions Alice up since Sarah does not change the modification.[27:00] S: We need a sound sensor or a sensor that senses sound, okay[27:03] A: Sound sensor? What do you mean? Something that picks up sound?[27:05] S: Yeah. But I think it's already doing that.[27:09] A: Go on the phone. The phone screen then get the music one and drag it over[27:17] S: Hmm?[27:17] A: Go on the phone[27:19] S: No, this is for Bruce[27:20] A: Oh[27:21] S: Then Bruce to that[27:27] A: Don't we need two phones then?ICLS 2016 Proceedings374© ISLSOur equity indicators in this snippet are hard to interpret by themselves - during this whole snippet, Sarah is usingthe computer, but neither girl dominates turns or types of talk. Turning to the qualitative analysis where we seeSarah maintains her position as knowledgeable by making a statement and having Alice ask clarifying questions([27:00] - [27:03]). Sarah clarifies what she means by the sound sensor, resulting in Alice being positioned down.Alice, in return, positions herself up by starting to direct Sarah to program a sound sensor using the App Inventor([27:09]), making gestures in the air of where to go on the screen. Sarah clarifies that the sound sensor is for theBlockyTalky Bruce, adding emphasis by touching the device with her left hand, not the phone ([27:19]). However,Alice does not seem to understand, positioning Sarah up yet again by asking if they need two phones ([27:27]).Sarah ignores the final question from this snippet so Alice asks her again.Almost all of the commands and questions position the speaker and listener as theorized with exceptionof the final command in this snippet, which due to Sarah’s rejection of Alice’s positioning ([27:19]) results in anoverall downward positioning for Alice. This error within the equity indicator construct, however, seems to bethe exception, not the rule. When looking at other instances of commands in this episode, we notice this is theonly instance of a command resulting in the speaker ultimately being positioned down.[27:49] A: Don't we need two phones then to transmit it?[27:50] S: No. Because if this hears sound, it will set off Eve. If someone looks at the time andrealizes the time they hit E-they hit the button and it sends a message to Eve[28:01] A: Okay[28:12] S: Sound sensor port 1, yes. But what do we do with the sound sensor?Our equity indicators in this snippet are also hard to interpret by themselves, distributed similarly to the previoussnippet. Turning to the qualitative analysis where we see Alice reiterates her question ([27:49]) and Sarah replies([27:50]). Sarah, who is on the computer with the exception of this ([27:50]), not only fully explains the flow ofexecution so Alice knows how the project works, but stops using the computer to touch each object she referencesas she walks through it. Alice replies “Okay” but sits back in her chair so she cannot see the computer screen andstarts looking towards the back of the room. Unlike the last snippet where this mixture of indicators shook out tobe about equitable, we see Alice unengaged and leave Sarah to dominate the project. This is an interesting caseof where the indicators – despite having similar quantities – mean different things. Sarah continues by positioningAlice up by starting off the next step of the project saying “we” as supposed to “I” ([28:12]) and asking Aliceabout what to do with the sound sensor.In Figure 3, the lines represent the ratio from the start of the episode to that turn of talk. The lines climbas measures are coded as Sarah, and the lines go down as measures are coded for Alice. As these are cumulativesums of the codes, they start to level off to indicate an average ratio. Looking at where these indicators level offthe emerging averages even for the subset of the total coded set show the same trends discovered by coding thewhole episode.Figure 3: Equity indicators in favor of each student over the presented transcriptDiscussionWe discuss the four measures of equity in terms of what each measure lets us see, the strengths and weaknessesof each measure, and agreement between each of the measures.ICLS 2016 Proceedings375© ISLSWe investigated how the girls’ tool use would help us quantify engagement with disciplinary ideas.Overall, we see a disparity between computer use, Sarah using it actively for 84% of the time. While one of thismeasure’s strengths is that it can pick up embodied moves, like Alice and Sarah reaching for/starting to useunoccupied tools with no verbal indications, and that it aligns with the dialogue when present, we do notice thatin this learning environment, there are more tools than just the computer. In addition, in learning environmentssuch as in Shah and Lewis’s study, where students are in a paradigm where keyboard use is forced to be equal,this measure would be an artificial indicator– meaning that this measure is sensitive to the structure of the activity.Finally, in contexts such as this where there are multiple tools and multiple ways to interact with computer scienceskills, this measure would struggle to mirror reality without being modified to account for this change. Mostnotably, every time the girls test the bell, they both can hear the test since sounds are being played – making itextremely difficult for one student to try to prevent the other from participating in testing. As researchersexperiment with different pedagogical models or technological tools for learning computing, the structuresembedded in these models could have large impacts on the quantitative measures used in this study, withoutnecessarily impacting overall equity in a collaboration. Developing ways to triangulate between multiple ways ofassessing equity, as we do in this paper, may help to ameliorate over- or under-estimation of equity that singlemethods might cause.We investigated how the girls’ distribution of talk would help us quantify practicing disciplinarydiscourse. The two girls enacted a dialogue with lots of back and forth in the form of typical conversation turntaking. This dynamic results in about equal turns of talk and could be held as standard and the deviations fromthis as being where the power shifts occur. While we do see engagement with disciplinary ideas happeningdiscursively, this measure has no way of differentiating between an engagement with a disciplinary idea and anon-disciplinary utterance like “Okay, let’s see.”Despite the weaknesses in both this measure of talk and the measure of computer use, we see that on alarger scale, both of these measures are in agreement that Sarah engaged in more disciplinary knowledge building– both through activity and discourse. Looking at the transcript and video, we would agree with thischaracterization of the pair. Since both girls seemed to engage in disciplinary content when talking and using thecomputer at the same rate, these measures reflect researcher perceptions of the data. However, both of thesemeasures are sensitive to differences. For example if someone is a much slower typist, or if the style whichsomeone speaks, for example Sarah, is choppier than Alice, resulting in more but shorter turns of talk, thesemeasures might be artificially inflated.We claimed commands issued and questions asked would help us quantify authoritative and competentidentities in the classroom. Overall both of these measures indicated equity of authority. This makes sense giventhat throughout the episode there were numerous examples of authority being shifted between the two girls. Thesalient positioning mechanisms that used commands and questions have been mentioned above – commands,asking for tool use, monologues and questions. This also makes sense given that causing inequities in the othermeasures requires a power shift. In terms of weaknesses, there were a couple of instances where Sarah used “I”or “we” to describe working on the project, which caused power shifts that are not accounted for by the indicator.We claimed positioning would help us triangulate the other coding schemes. To get an idea for a largerscope with this method, we attempt to distill trends in the codes seen throughout the episode to compare them tothe quantified indicators. First, a lot of the discourse around the tools, even the phone that was not included in thecomputer use code, was power moves by Sarah who was actively using the computer or commanding Alice tostop using the phone to test. This trend of inequity in tool use is reflected in the quantified measure. Second,looking at talk distribution, we see that Sarah occupies the conversational floor for the majority of the time,expressing more disciplinary thoughts than Alice. This trend of inequity is reflected in the quantified measure.Third, we see almost constant shifting in authority between Alice and Sarah, without any long periods of timebeing dominated by one girl’s authority. This trend of relative equity is reflected in the quantified measure.One major weakness of models from current literature, which look at change over time, is their drasticsensitivity to scope – or the amount of time the method is applied over. For example, one difference between thepositioning analysis presented above and the one presented by Shah and Lewis (2015) is scope is instead of adozen of turns of talk that are supposed to characterize the pair’s interaction as a whole, we present multipleminutes of transcript. There are many ways to slice the data into a small series of turns, however, because of howfluid these measures are, the picture captured in those series looks drastically different depending on where youselect them (Figure 3). The cumulative coding over time is rather messy though they start to level out over time.This variability within the measures means that applying these measures to short pieces of data will result inunreliable and not necessarily valid findings. In the same vein, analyses that only show small snippets of the datahide a lot of the complexity and overall trends. This indicates that we need a theory and methods that reflect thetime-course of real-world phenomena.ICLS 2016 Proceedings376© ISLSConclusionEquity is a complex construct. This research illuminates the need for theories and analytical methods that betterengage with these complexities. This analysis reflects results from methods from the literature, and adds supportto the claim that the quantifiable metrics serve as a proxy for the different facets of equity we investigated. Thereare many other forces, including socio-cultural processes that can empower some students and disempower others,that while we did not wade into them, we hope future efforts to put this work in conversation with critical andstructural frameworks for equity could further advance the field. We also highlight the pedagogical andtechnological sensitivities within the methods of the literature, meaning that quantitative methods need to beadapted to the context that they are applied in. Because of the variance in how measures can quantify interactions,researchers must be careful to select equity measures that are appropriate to the contexts that they are studying,as well as to explain their processes for selecting those measures. We argue that the scope of data used needs tonot only be carefully considered to avoid selection bias, but justified in these studies, possibly through quantitativeanalyses, due to the sensitivity of qualitative methods to local maximums and minimums illustrated in selectedclips. Lastly, we urge researchers to define and present the type of equity they are prioritizing when we talk aboutdesigning and implementing equitable learning environments to help increase clarity in the field. Ultimately weare left with the question: how would someone go about convincingly evaluating equity within a pair?ReferencesChizhik, A. W. (2001). Equity and status in group collaboration: Learning through explanations depends on taskcharacteristics. Social Psychology of Education, 5(2), 179-200.Cole, K. A. (1995, October). Equity issues in computer-based collaboration: Looking beyond surface indicators.In The first international conference on Computer support for collaborative learning (pp. 67-74). L.Erlbaum Associates Inc..Dookie, L. (2014) A Case Study Examining the Microdynamics of Social Positioning within the Context ofCollaborative Group Work. Proceedings of the 2014 Annual Conference of the Learning Sciences.Boulder, CO. Boulder, CO.Engle, R. A., Langer-Osuna, J. M., & McKinney de Royston, M. (2014). Toward a model of influence inpersuasive discussions: Negotiating quality, authority, privilege, and access within a student-ledargument. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 23(2), 245-268.Esmonde, I. (2009). Mathematics learning in groups: Analyzing equity in two cooperative activity structures.Journal of the Learning Sciences , 18 (2), 247-284.Gonzales, a. L., Hancock, J. T., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2009). Language Style Matching as a Predictor of SocialDynamics in Small Groups. Communication Research, 37(1), 3–19.Leander, K. M. (2002). Silencing in classroom interaction: Producing and relating social spaces. DiscourseProcesses, 34(2), 193-235.Lewis, C. M., & Shah, N. (2015, July). How Equity and Inequity Can Emerge in Pair Programming.In Proceedings of the eleventh annual International Conference on International Computing EducationResearch (pp. 41-50). ACM.Margolis, J., & Fisher, A. (2003). Unlocking the clubhouse: Women in computing. MIT press.Margolis, J., Estrella, R., Goode, J., Holme, J. J., & Nao, K. (2010). Stuck in the shallow end: Education, race,and computing. MIT Press.Michaels, S., O’Connor, C., & Resnick, L. B. (2008). Deliberative discourse idealized and realized: Accountabletalk in the classroom and in civic life. Studies in philosophy and education, 27(4), 283-297.Plonka, L., Segal, J., Sharp, H., & van der Linden, J. (2012). Investigating equity of participation in pairprogramming. In AGILE India (AGILE INDIA), 2012 (pp. 20-29). IEEE.Shah, N., Lewis, C. M., & Caires, R. (2014) Analyzing Equity in Collaborative Learning Situations: AComparative Case Study in Elementary Computer Science. Proceedings of the 2014 Annual Conferenceof the Learning Sciences. Boulder, CO. Boulder, CO.Sullivan, F. R., & Wilson, N. C. (2015). Playful talk: Negotiating opportunities to learn in collaborativegroups. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 24(1), 5-52.Van Langenhove, L., & Harré, R. (1999). Introducing positioning theory.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the teachers and students who participated in this research. This work was supported by the NationalScience Foundation (IIS-1450985 and CNS-1418463) and LEGO Education.ICLS 2016 Proceedings377© ISLS