Expanding Outcomes: Exploring Varied Forms of TeacherLearning in an Online Professional Development ExperienceMaxwell Yurkofsky, Sarah Blum-Smith, and Karen Brennan,mmy949@mail.harvard.edu, sgb839@mail.harvard.edu, karen_brennan@gse.harvard.eduHarvard Graduate School of EducationAbstract: The field of teacher professional development has long been characterized bytensions surrounding the articulation and measurement of learning outcomes. These tensionsare amplified as new technologies are used to provide online learning experiences that servelarger and more varied audiences. This paper uses a case study of the Creative ComputingOnline Workshop—a large-scale online learning experience for teachers—to explore the varietyand breadth of teacher learning outcomes that can be considered meaningful. Through in-depthinterviews with teacher participants we find that teachers make use of their learning in fourdistinct, but related, ways: engagement with new ideas, varied enactment in practice, rethinkingof role and identity, and changing interaction with the world outside their classroom. Weconclude by considering the implications of this expanded framework of teacher learning forfuture design and evaluation of professional development.Keywords: teacher learning, professional development, learning outcomes, online learning, MOOCsIntroductionResearch about teacher learning has long asserted the importance of professional development but has often beenfrustrated in attempts to demonstrate the impact and outcomes of professional development experiences (Borko,2004). This ongoing frustration has given rise to increasingly refined and narrow measures of the effectiveness ofprofessional development, obfuscating the complexity and variety of potential learning outcomes—often withdisappointing results (Hill, Beisiegel, & Jacob, 2013). While acknowledging the importance of research that seeksto demonstrate the value of professional development experiences in clear and quantifiable outcomes, we areconcerned about what is overlooked by this approach. We therefore ask in this paper: What can we learn aboutthe value of professional development by broadening both our definition of legitimate or substantive outcomesand the way in which we seek to uncover such outcomes in teacher learning?To investigate this question, we present a case study of the Creative Computing Online Workshop(CCOW), an online professional learning experience focused on supporting teachers working with the Scratchprogramming environment in the classroom. We use in-depth, qualitative interviews to explore the outcomes fromCCOW that teachers considered meaningful for their learning and teaching and compare these with outcomesemphasized by more traditional evaluations of professional development. Drawing on these findings, we ask howa broadened conception of outcomes might influence both the evaluation and design of professional learningexperiences for teachers. We are particularly concerned with implications for the field of online learning, wherenew platforms such as Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) serve a large number of teachers with diversebackgrounds, needs, and interests.We present our study of professional development outcomes from CCOW in four parts. First, we reviewthe literature on professional development to identify both the traditional ways in which the outcomes of PD havebeen valued, understood, and measured and the ways in which these traditional approaches have been critiqued.We then describe the context of our research, CCOW itself, and our methodological approach to understandingteachers’ own conceptions of their learning outcomes. In the findings, we highlight four types of teacher learningoutcomes from CCOW. We conclude by considering these findings in light of relevant literature on teacherlearning outcomes, as well as implications for further research and design of professional development.Literature reviewOver the past two decades, a number of foundational observational studies have cohered around a set ofprofessional development characteristics associated with positive valuations by teachers (Garet, Porter, Desimone,Birman, & Yoon, 2001), increased self-reported use of particular instructional practices (Desimone et al., 2002),and enhanced teacher knowledge (Penuel, Fishman, Yamaguchi, & Gallagher, 2007). The characteristics notedby these studies include content focus, opportunities for active learning, and coherence with other learningactivities (Garet et al., 2001). Underlying this consensus is a logic model, wherein professional development withICLS 2016 Proceedings330© ISLSthese characteristics results in changes in teachers’ knowledge and beliefs, which in turn changes their practicesand improves student outcomes (Desimone, 2009; Supovitz, 2001). Nevertheless, efforts to scale up professionaldevelopment models that emphasize these characteristics have repeatedly been unable to demonstrate positivechanges in student outcomes (e.g., Garet et al., 2011).Broadly, there have been two categories of response by researchers to this problem. The first has been totighten the alignment between various parts of this logic model. Wayne, Yoon, Zhu, Cronen, & Garet (2008) andDesimone (2009) each set a research agenda for the measurement of effective PD that focused on capturing thecausal mechanisms between PD, teacher actions, and student learning. Following in this trend, a number of recentstudies have measured the impact of professional development by evaluating teachers’ adoption of practices basedon a fairly narrow checklist of behaviors in specific instructional settings (e.g., Polly, 2011; Walker et al., 2011).Other similar approaches have focused on different aspects of the causal chain at different points of the researchdesign (e.g., Hill, Beisiegel, & Jacob, 2013). While these kinds of research designs and questions representimportant attempts to better understand the mechanisms through which professional development results inchanges in teaching and learning, we are concerned about what may be lost when researchers focus exclusivelyon evaluation through these frameworks—and as a result, design professional development experiences with veryspecific outcome measures in mind.Accordingly, we turn to the second category of response, which more openly embraces the complexityof both teacher and student learning processes. Some work has questioned the over-reliance on studentachievement metrics in the evaluation of professional development (Cochran-Smith et al., 2012; Shulman, 1986).Others have questioned the time frame in which the impacts of a learning experience are considered, arguing thatsome effects of PD may only become evident after longer periods of time (Supovitz, 2001; Wayne et al., 2008),that sustainability itself is an important and valuable measure (Coburn, 2003; Zehetmeier & Krainer, 2011), orfurther that there are more indirect ways that teachers can internalize and enact new learning over time (Kennedy,2005; Muijs, Day, Harris, & Lindsay, 2004).Other work has continued this embrace of complexity by focusing on the socio-cultural and contextualnature of teacher learning and practice. Considering teacher knowledge less as abstract principles, and more asbeing situated in their local context (Putnam & Borko, 2000) raises questions about our ability to effectivelymeasure what teachers across a variety of contexts have learned from a professional development experience. Amultiplicity of factors influence how teachers make choices about what aspects of learning to implement inpractice, in light of the particulars of their localized student needs (Ball & Cohen, 1999; Cuban, 2001; Guskey,2002). These understandings have led to research that foregrounds teacher learning as embedded in organizationsand communities, thus questioning individualized measures of learning (Johnson, 2015; Schlager & Fusco, 2003).The emergence of MOOCs and other forms of online learning platforms as prominent sites of teacherlearning has furthered the need to rethink the metrics we use to evaluate learning experiences. An ongoing tensionwithin the field of research on MOOCs is how to define assessment (Haggard et al., 2013). Many MOOC designersand researchers challenge the application of traditional metrics to understand the learning of MOOC participantsdue to both the diverse and often unique intentions learners bring to these platforms and avenues for asynchronousand individualized engagement (e.g., DeBoer, Ho, Stump, & Breslow, 2014). Part of the purpose of the presentstudy is to more fully understand the results of the interaction between the variability of learner intention andparticipation and the variability of what counts as meaningful learning.MethodsThis study builds on these approaches in seeking to broaden the conception of meaningful outcomes for teacherlearning experiences. We use the Creative Computing Online Workshop (CCOW) as a case study to explore acentral question: What outcomes do teachers identify as important to their professional learning experiences? Byframing our central research question in this way, we are intentionally not applying a pre-determined definitionof success or effectiveness, and instead using an in-depth qualitative interview approach to enable teachers tohighlight which outcomes were most meaningful and valuable to them (Kvale, 1996). Rather than presenting achecklist of outcomes to be applied to future learning experiences, the findings from this case-study model arepresented with the goal of illuminating possible alternative places to look in the hopes of understanding the rangeof ways that teacher learning can manifest (Shulman, 1983).Research contextThe Creative Computing Online Workshop (CCOW) was a six-week online course designed for teachers to learnabout Scratch (http://scratch.mit.edu). Scratch is a free graphical programming environment that enables youngpeople to create their own interactive games, stories, animations, and art—and then share their creations withothers in an online community. CCOW was hosted from June 3 to July 12, 2013, and had international enrollmentICLS 2016 Proceedings331© ISLSof ~2,100 people, with 51% indicating that they intended to participate beyond “just browsing”. Both Scratch andCCOW were inspired by constructionist approaches to learning, which emphasize learning through designing,personalizing, sharing, and reflecting (Brennan, 2015). The design of CCOW reflected these principles asparticipants created their own projects with the Scratch programming language, shared and remixed one another’sprojects, connected through the Scratch online platform and CCOW online forums, designed and pursued a finalproject motivated by their interests (ranging from curriculum design to hosting workshops to exploring forms ofexpression), and maintained online design journals that served as a record of and reflection on their participationthroughout the workshop. Over the six weeks of the workshop, participants watched workshop videos 24,000times, created 4,700 Scratch projects, and wrote 5,000 discussion posts in the course forums, Twitter, and viaGoogle+. The teachers described in the present study represent a core group of participants whose engagementand activity in the workshop far surpasses the “average experience” indicated by such broad metrics, as is typicalfor MOOCs (DeBoer et al., 2014).Data collectionThe data analyzed here were collected as part of a larger study investigating what teachers found meaningful abouttheir learning experience in CCOW (Brennan, Blum-Smith, & Yurkofsky, 2015). To obtain a sample of teacherparticipants who had completed the course, we identified 57 full-time teachers out of the 127 participants whohad completed an exit survey and expressed a willingness to be interviewed. We intentionally sampled this groupfor diversity across curricular areas, ages taught, country of origin, programming and Scratch-specific experience,and extent of participation in CCOW. Of the 36 teachers that we contacted, 15 agreed to be interviewed. Themajority of teachers in our final sample taught technology, lived in the United States, and had at least someprogramming experience. Six teachers in our sample worked in primary schools and the other nine in secondaryschools. Eleven identified as “experienced” or “very experienced” with Scratch.To investigate the question of what teachers took away from their learning experience in CCOW, weconducted semi-structured interviews with each of the 15 teachers. Interviews lasted around 90 minutes and wereconducted in-person or over Skype or Google Hangouts by one of the authors. Interviews were audio recorded,transcribed by a third party service, and then checked for accuracy by one or more of the authors. We developedand followed an interview protocol structured into four major sections: (1) teachers’ demographic and professionalinformation, (2) descriptions of meaningful learning experiences from the past, (3) discussion about which aspectsof CCOW teachers found more or less meaningful, and (4) whether (and how) teachers made meaning of theirlearning in CCOW following course completion. The analysis and findings discussed below focus on this finalpart of the interview.Our approach to data collection had three key limitations. First, our sample was biased towards US-basedtechnology teachers who had prior experience with Scratch and programming. While this sampling certainlydiminished our ability to understand the breadth and diversity of learner experience in the course, it should alsobe noted that there was individual and experiential variety amongst those we interviewed in terms of the contextof their work and ways they made use of their learning. Second, because they were people who completed thecourse and elected to fill out an exit survey, it is also likely that the sample was skewed towards participants whohad had positive experiences in the course. However, all the teachers with whom we spoke felt comfortable notingaspects of the course that had little or no influence on their practice. Finally, given the variety of ways, both formaland informal, through which teachers gain new knowledge, ideas, and practices, it can be difficult to preciselyidentify the experiences that resulted in specific pieces of new learning. We were unable to observe teachers’practices either before or after their experience in CCOW and it is certainly possible that learning attributed toCCOW was, in fact, from another source. While the year that elapsed between CCOW participation and ourinterviews exacerbated this possibility, it also enabled us to see the ways that teachers reflected on their learningover time.Data analysisWe began our analysis with line-by-line emic coding of the interviews and organized the emic codes thematically(Boyatzis, 1998). We considered relevant language in which teachers discussed their classroom practices in thetime following CCOW, made reference to thinking or action that differed after the course, and reflected upon theirapproach to teaching and learning in the context of their course experiences. Following this initial coding, weattempted to articulate themes that would capture what teachers said they learned from their experiences inCCOW. Our review of the literature suggested that changes in teacher knowledge, skills, practices, and beliefsmight be categories through which to consider the outcomes of teacher learning. As we analyzed teacherinterviews, we saw these categories reflected but were also struck by unexpected outcomes such as ways thatparticipants thought more broadly about the process of learning and their own role as a teacher. We searchedICLS 2016 Proceedings332© ISLSpurposefully for examples of learning that did not match these initial findings, and returned repeatedly to the rawdata to ensure that our emerging conceptualizations remained grounded (Maxwell, 2010). We used an iterativeprocess of visual mapping and memoing (Luttrell, 2010) to relate these themes to one another before developingan overall framework that moved through four categories of learning outcomes: teacher and idea, teacher andpractice, teacher and self, and teacher and world.FindingsThe following section will explore CCOW learning outcomes that teachers reported as meaningful. In teacherand idea, we look at how teachers took away particular facts, skills, and knowledge from the course. In teacherand practice, we consider the different ways that teachers applied those ideas to their own classrooms and students.In teacher and self, we explore how engagement with these ideas and practices led to changes in participants’thinking about how they approached teaching and learning in general. In teacher and world, we discuss howlearning outcomes involved changing conceptions of learning and work beyond an individual teacher orclassroom.Teacher and ideaWhen reflecting on the impact of CCOW, many teachers discussed specific knowledge and skills that they gainedfrom the learning experience. Although CCOW was designed as a creative and constructionist learningexperience, one particular purpose of the workshop was to support teachers in building skills and knowledgearound using and teaching Scratch in the classroom. Indeed, most of the teachers we spoke to expressed that theyhad participated in the course in order to gain this knowledge, particularly because of the recent release of Scratch2.0. Justin, a middle-school digital art and design teacher, was interested in learning more skills about how toteach Scratch, and saw the workshop as a resource in his self-directed skill development. He reflected, “I thinkteaching-wise, I got more comfortable with different uses of screencasts and video lessons . . . it was like anorientation to Scratch 2.0, where it kind of like forced me to do some of the stuff I might have skipped from timeto time.” As Justin’s description indicates, some of the ideas teachers gained from the course included particularprogramming tools and activities and ways to use them.Others noted how engaging with activities in CCOW helped them learn new skills and ways of thinkingabout programming. Justine, an elementary instructional technology teacher, described how the Debug Its—programming tasks where participants had to fix a program that wasn’t working—helped her to “read scripts,think iteratively, how to just decompose or pull things apart.” When referring to the ideas that they learned fromCCOW, there was considerable variety in how teachers articulated the value of that knowledge. In addition tosimply increasing their knowledge base, some teachers focused on how building their own facility with Scratchenabled them to support more complex and in-depth student work with the program.Teacher and practiceAs teachers integrated ideas from the course into their existing practice, the nature of that integration varied, fromdirect reuse of course activities to changes in underlying approach to teaching. Some course activities—and theideas embedded in their design—resonated with teachers and, in particular for those who taught Scratch in theclassroom, were easily applicable to their own contexts. Aamir, a middle school computer science teacher,described how using “About Me” projects (an activity in CCOW where teachers created a program that introducedthemselves to other course participants) allowed students to learn from models while developing a personal vision.Other teachers discussed using Debug Its and remixing activities, as well as showing students the “nuts and bolts”videos that the course designers had made to introduce core concepts and skills.Beyond directly importing course activities into their classrooms, some teachers adopted less contentspecific practices. Prompted by her own experience with keeping a design notebook—a place to record what shewas doing during the course and how it was making her think—Sharon, an elementary computer lab manager,began to use more reflection-based activities with students. She designed prompts similar to those that guided herreflections on CCOW in order to help students develop metacognitive capacities and enable her to gain greaterinsight into their needs. Sharon, like other teachers, related these new practices to shifts in pedagogy, commentingthat “I think I did a little too much lecturing . . . it worked better just to let them in there, and play around . . . itwas finding that balance, and I think after CCOW, I found a better balance of how much information you givethem to start with.”Some of the most interesting ways of turning ideas from the course into changes in practice came fromteachers who taught different content and were less able to directly apply lessons or activities. For example, Laura,a sixth grade math and science teacher, found the experience with Scratch helpful in resolving an instructionaldilemma. In describing the application to math, she reflected, “I could say—oh, use the Wait Block, but I don’t. IICLS 2016 Proceedings333© ISLSsay—check and see what could help you . . . There’s just so many connections I think, with the habits of mind,the way that you work through something.”It is important to stress that many of the teachers we spoke to were unsatisfied with the extent to whichthey had incorporated lessons from CCOW into their own practice. For some teachers, this was a result of theirschool’s stricter control over curriculum and pedagogy that discouraged classroom-level experimentation withnew approaches. Other teachers expressed that they simply did not yet have the time to invest in substantivechanges to their classroom practice, but were still hoping to use upcoming breaks to implement such changes.Teacher and selfFor some teachers, these changes in practice were connected to more fundamental changes in how they thoughtabout what it meant to teach and be a teacher. Raphael, a high school math and physics teacher, already had aclearly articulated constructivist pedagogy, one in which he purposefully structured classroom activities to invitestudent inquiry and collaboration while minimizing his own role in transmitting knowledge. Yet, he describedhow meaningful the experience of reflection had been for him during CCOW, and what it meant to him to practicereflection in his own classroom. Noting that reflection had been “completely absent before,” he described his newapproach: “I try to walk around the classroom, and I take a lot of notes about the way they’re working, and theway they’re interacting, the way they’re discussing, or not discussing to each other.” For Raphael, reflection hadnot explicitly been a part of his approach to teaching, but he saw it as valuable toward his goals of deeply engagingwith his students’ understanding of content and supporting their exploration.Many of the teachers that we spoke to highlighted how CCOW supported a shift away from the teacheras locus of authority and knowledge, towards students learning through exploration and collaboration. Laura, whodiscussed learning how to let students solve problems differently in math, described how she began to see her roleas a teacher in science instruction change in the year following CCOW. “From the very beginning this year I juststood back. . . . Whereas last year . . . I would intervene a lot more. . . . Sometimes they need to learn by failureand I didn’t want to let that happen. . . . And it’s funny because this year’s kids are a little more rambunctious thanlast year’s kids.” Laura mentions changes in her practice, but also relates these changes to a new conception ofherself as a teacher, as someone who is not a “hoverer” but feels comfortable standing back and letting studentsmake mistakes. Some teachers emphasized that greater confidence in their programming knowledge and skillsallowed them to be more comfortable with letting go of some control and allowing for greater student exploration,despite the increased potential for messiness and uncertainty.Teacher and worldSome teachers articulated the value of their experiences in CCOW in terms of new or different ways of engagingwith the world beyond their individual classrooms. While this theme was less widespread amongst the teacherswe spoke with, its power for some speaks to the importance of broadening our conceptions of meaningfulprofessional development outcomes.CCOW served a legitimating function for some, giving them confidence and knowledge to advocate forcreative computing with school administrators. Diane, an elementary director of educational technology, reflectedthat “the final project helped to clarify in my mind and to be able to validate it and to better be able to present itto my administration,” adding that she was able to use this clearer articulation of the kind of work she wanted todo to leverage the purchase of new computers. This kind of support was especially important given that many ofthe technology teachers we spoke with were often isolated from general school improvement work.A number of teachers reported that their experience in CCOW helped them to make better use of theInternet to find ongoing professional support and information relevant to their teaching. As Kelly, a high-schoolcomputer studies teacher described, “I think I really learned about the power of the Internet for educators, of howconnected we can be. . . . I usually go when I have a need, or I’m looking for something, or I’m going to show itto somebody else.” In this sense, ongoing access to information and peers working through similar endeavorshelped teachers in actually implementing some of the instructional practices highlighted in CCOW.For others, tapping into an online community of educators with similar ambitions and values hadadditional benefits. Aamir, who was the only technology teacher at a more rural school outside the United States,reflected on the impact of the online community that developed as a result of CCOW.[The online course and community] also gives you the feeling that even if you are in a smallvillage in the countryside, and any place on earth, you can be part of this huge community. It isvery important. It is very important. It’s like you are more connected, you are part. You do exist.Very important. You do exist. You can speak with a lot of teachers in the countryside, I knowICLS 2016 Proceedings334© ISLSthem and they feel like they really don’t exist. With online courses, even if you are in thecountryside, or very isolated, you can be part of a community.As reflected in many of these experiences, it can be meaningful and powerful for teachers to locate theirindividual work, thinking, or approach within broader communities. The teachers that we spoke with came intothe course with a range of experiences with Scratch, the world of computer science, creative computing, andconstructivist approaches to teaching and learning. Some, like Raphael and Aamir, had a strongly developedpedagogical approach that was already aligned with CCOW and could locate that approach within conversationsof theory and practice beyond their schools. For others, their CCOW experience helped them to see that the workthey were doing, or wanted to be doing, was connected to larger communities. Diane, who noted the value ofCCOW in advocating with her administration, reflected on how the course experience opened her up to a worldof practice that she hadn’t known about, but that deeply resonated with her vision of teaching.Conclusions and implicationsOur study builds on prior research that seeks to understand complex processes of teacher change (Ball & Cohen,1999; Kennedy, 2005) and how best to design and evaluate professional development in light of these processes(Putnam & Borko, 2000; Muijs et al., 2004). Through in-depth interviews with teachers, we found that teacherswere influenced by the ideas and practices they encountered in CCOW in a variety of interconnected ways—adapting their classroom practices, adjusting their roles as teachers, and/or securing organizational andinformational resources to support their continued improvement.This methodological lens allowed us to see a range of important shifts in teachers’ behaviors and attitudesthat might not have been captured by traditional metrics for evaluating professional development. Many of theways in which teachers were influenced by specific practices in the course fall under what Spillane & Jennings(1997) call below-the-surface changes in instructional practice, which are more difficult to observe or evaluatebut potentially more impactful (Coburn, 2003). The interconnections between the affective and cognitivedimensions of teacher learning in the course and the ways in which CCOW provided some teachers with thevalidation and confidence necessary to pursue changes in practice highlight the importance of the cultural surroundin teacher development (e.g., Kirkpatrick & Johnson, 2014). Further, Cohen’s (2011) discussion of the challengesof ambitious teaching, in which uncertainty and difficulty increase in the quest for deeper understanding, speaksto the messier terrain that teachers described themselves as being better able to traverse with heightened skills,validation, and confidence—benefits derived from both their learning experiences in CCOW, as well as theirongoing online interactions with peers.The varied impact of professional development on teachers has important implications for the evaluationof professional learning experiences. Even when combined, traditional approaches to measuring the effects ofprofessional development would have missed much of what teachers found meaningful about CCOW. Teachersdid change their practices, but often in subtle or unexpected ways that the observational rubrics used in assessingmany professional development programs might miss. While measured knowledge and skill likely increased forsome teachers, for many teachers discrete knowledge gain had little to do with their changed approach to teaching.Additionally, as others (e.g., Johnson, 2015) have noted, traditional metrics rarely capture teachers’ ability to sharethe practices they learned with others, advocate for resources that may support student learning, or learn morefrom colleagues in and outside of their school. Perhaps most importantly, because CCOW specifically valuesstudent outcomes that are difficult to capture on standardized tests (e.g., creativity, ability to collaborate withothers, debugging), assessments of student outcomes might not capture what students gained from their teachers’engagement with CCOW. It is therefore worth considering what kinds of professional development experienceswe may be labeling as “ineffective” because the outcomes they supported did not align with the metrics used toevaluate them.This study also has implications for the design of online professional development experiences, andwhether the traditional criteria used for evaluating professional development may constrain such design. Indeed,were CCOW designed to cultivate outcomes measurable by traditional evaluations of professional development,many aspects of the learning experience that influenced teachers’ practices in important but unanticipated waysmay have been cut or underemphasized. This raises the broader question of how to design for diverse outcomes,both those which have and have not been consciously articulated by course designers. One way in which thedesigners of CCOW left room for course participants to take the learning of the course in individually or locallymeaningful directions was through the final independent project, where teachers took the concepts and skills aboutScratch they had learned in the course and applied them in their own way. CCOW was also purposefully designedto build connections that teachers could access beyond the active time period of the course. As described by Kelly,learning how to make use of such connections can enable future learning by gaining greater knowledge andICLS 2016 Proceedings335© ISLSconfidence with utilizing the Internet as a tool for professional growth and development. Because the substanceof such future learning cannot be entirely predicted by those designing a learning experience, designers mustnegotiate tensions that arise between providing teachers direct alignment of learning experience and current issuesof practice and allowing for the possibility of new and unexpected ways of using that learning. In particular, whileMOOCs can seem to leave room for varied learner intentions and styles through the privileging of learnerautonomy, they leave open the question of how designers can anticipate the fact that participants may not alwaysknow what they want or need.As a case study, the present work has only begun to explore the ways in which teachers might makemeaning of, and take value from, their learning in a professional development experience. As CCOW was aconstructivist learning experience around a content area (Scratch) with its own very particular embeddedassumptions about learning, we wonder how the range of teacher learning outcomes would be different in a moretraditional setting. Additionally, emerging technologies for online learning have the potential to complicate thepicture of what teachers learn from professional development and how that learning can be measured. As such,there is an ongoing need for research that continues to investigate the relationship between the structure andcontent of the learning experience and the varied forms of learning that may result.ReferencesBall, D. L., & Cohen, D. K. (1999). Developing practice, developing practitioners: Toward a practice-based theoryof professional education. In L. Darling-Hammond and G. Sykes (Eds.), Teaching as the learningprofession (pp. 3-31). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.Borko, H. (2004). Professional development and teacher learning: Mapping the terrain. Educational Researcher,33(8), 3-15.Boyatzis, R. E. (1988). Transforming Qualitative Information: Thematic Analysis and Code Development.Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.Brennan, K. (2015). Beyond technocentrism: Supporting constructionism in the classroom. ConstructivistFoundations, 10(3), 289-296.Brennan, K., Blum-Smith, S., & Yurkofsky, M. (2015, April). Supporting constructionism in the classroom:MOOC as platform for teacher learning. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the AmericanEducational Research Association, Chicago, IL. Retrieved from the AERA Online Paper Repository.Coburn, C. (2003). Rethinking scale: Moving beyond numbers to deep and lasting change. EducationalResearcher, 32(6), 3-12.Cochran-Smith, M., Cannady, M., Mceachern, K., Mitchel, K., Piazza, P., Power, C., & Ryan, A. (2012).Teachers’ education and outcomes: Mapping the research terrain. Teachers College Record, 114(10), 149.Cohen, D. K. (2011). Teaching and its predicaments. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Cuban, L. (2001). Oversold and Underused: Computers in the Classroom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UniversityPress.DeBoer, J., Ho, A. D., Stump, G. S., & Breslow, L. (2014). Changing “course”: Reconceptualizing educationalvariables for Massive Open Online Courses. Educational Researcher, 43(2), 74-84.Desimone, L. M. (2009). Improving impact studies of teachers’ professional development: Toward betterconceptualizations and measures. Educational Researcher, 38(3), 181-199.Desimone, L. M., Porter, A. C., Garet, M. S., Yoon, K. S., & Birman, B. F. (2002). Effects of professionaldevelopment on teachers’ instruction: Results from a three-year longitudinal study. EducationalEvaluation and Policy Analysis, 24(2), 81-112.Garet, M. S., Porter, A. C., Desimone, L., Birman, B. F., & Yoon, K. S. (2001). What makes professionaldevelopment effective? Results from a national sample of teachers. American Educational ResearchJournal, 38(4), 915-945.Garet, M. S., Wayne, A. J., Stancavage, F., Taylor, J., Eaton, M., Walters, K., … others. (2011). Middle schoolmathematics professional development impact study: Findings after the second year of implementation.NCEE 2011-4024. National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance. Retrieved fromhttp://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED519922Guskey, T. R. (2002). Professional development and teacher change. Teachers and Teaching: Theory andPractice, 8(3), 381-391.Haggard, S., Brown, S., Mills, R., Tait, A., Warburton, S., Lawton, W., & Angulo, T. (2013). The maturing of theMOOC: literature review of massive open online courses and other forms of online distance learning.Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, UK Government.Hill, H. C., Beisiegel, M., & Jacob, R. (2013). Professional development research consensus, crossroads, andICLS 2016 Proceedings336© ISLSchallenges. Educational Researcher, 42(9), 476-487.Johnson, S. M. (2015). Will VAMS Reinforce the Walls of the Egg-Crate School? Educational Researcher, 44(2),117-126.Kennedy, A. (2005). Models of continuing professional development: a framework for analysis. Journal of InService Education, 31(2), 235-250.Kirkpatrick, C. L., & Johnson, S. M. (2014). Ensuring the ongoing engagement of second-stage teachers. Journalof Educational Change, 15(3), 231-252.Kvale, S. (1996). Interviews: An introduction to qualitative research interviewing. Thousand Oaks, CA: SagePublications.Luttrell, W. (2010). Interactive and reflexive models of qualitative research design. In W. Luttrell (Ed.),Qualitative educational research: Readings in reflexive methodology and transformative practice (pp.159-163). New York, NY: Routledge.Maxwell, J. A. (2010). Validity: How might you be wrong? In W. Luttrell (Ed.), Qualitative educational research:Readings in reflexive methodology and transformative practice (pp. 279-287). New York, NY:Routledge.Muijs, D., Day, C., Harris, A., & Lindsay, G. (2004). Evaluating CPD: an overview. Retrieved fromhttp://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/55785Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Yamaguchi, R., & Gallagher, L. P. (2007). What makes professional developmenteffective? Strategies that foster curriculum implementation. American Educational Research Journal,44(4), 921-958.Polly, D. (2011). Examining teachers’ enactment of technological pedagogical and content knowledge (TPACK)in their mathematics teaching after technology integration professional development. Journal ofComputers in Mathematics and Science Teaching, 30(1), 37-59.Putnam, R. T., & Borko, H. (2000). What do new views of knowledge and thinking have to say about research onteacher learning? Educational Researcher, 29(1), 4-15.Schlager, M. S., & Fusco, J. (2003). Teacher professional development, technology, and communities of practice:Are we putting the cart before the horse? The Information Society, 19(3), 203-220.Shulman, L. S. (1983). Autonomy and obligation: The remote control of teaching. In L. S. Shulman & G. Sykes(Eds.), Handbook of teaching and policy (pp. 484-504). New York, NY: Longman.Shulman, L. S. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational Researcher, 15(2), 414.Spillane, J. P., & Jennings, N. E. (1997). Aligned instructional policy and ambitious pedagogy: Exploringinstructional reform from the classroom perspective. Teachers College Record, 98(3), 449-481.Supovitz, J. A. (2001). Translating Teaching Practice into Improved Student Achievement. In S. Fuhrman &National Society for the Study of Education. (Eds.), From the capitol to the classroom: standards-basedreform in the states (Vol. 100th, pt. 2, pp. 81-98). Chicago: National Society for the Study of Education:Distributed by the University of Chicago Press.Walker, A., Recker, M., Robertshaw, M. B., Olsen, J., Leary, H., Ye, L., & Sellers, L. (2011). IntegratingTechnology and Problem-based Learning: A Mixed Methods Study of Two Teacher ProfessionalDevelopment Designs. Interdisciplinary Journal of Problem-Based Learning, 5(2).Wayne, A. J., Yoon, K. S., Zhu, P., Cronen, S., & Garet, M. S. (2008). Experimenting With Teacher ProfessionalDevelopment: Motives and Methods. Educational Researcher, 37(8), 469-479.Zehetmeier, S., & Krainer, K. (2011). Ways of promoting the sustainability of mathematics teachers’ professionaldevelopment. ZDM, 43(6-7), 875-887.AcknowledgmentsWe would like to express our sincere appreciation to all of the Creative Computing Online Workshop participants,particularly those who were so generous with their time to respond to surveys and participate in conversationswith members of the research team. This material is based upon work supported by Google and by the NationalScience Foundation under DRL-1019396. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressedin this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of Google or the National ScienceFoundation.ICLS 2016 Proceedings337© ISLS