Technology-Enhanced Learning Communities on a Continuumbetween Ambient to Designed: What Can We Learn bySynthesizing Multiple Research Perspectives?Yael Kali (Co-organizer), University of Haifa, yael.kali@edtech.haifa.ac.ilIris Tabak, Ben-Gurion University, itabak@bgu.ac.ilDani Ben-Zvi, University of Haifa, dbenzvi@univ.haifa.ac.ilAdi Kidron (Co-organizer), University of Haifa, adi.kidron@edtech.haifa.ac.ilMeital Amzalag, University of Haifa, Meital@ruppin.ac.ilAyelet Baram-Tsabari, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, ayelet@technion.ac.ilSarit Barzilai, University of Haifa, sarit.barzilai@edtech.haifa.ac.ilUzi Brami, Ben-Gurion University, bramiu@post.bgu.ac.ilOshra Duek, University of Haifa, oshradu@gmail.comNelly Elias, Ben-Gurion University, enelly@bgu.ac.ilCarmel Kent, University of Haifa, kent.carmel@gmail.comEsther Laslo, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, stlaslo@gmail.comKeren S. Levy, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, kerenl@technion.ac.ilSheizaf Rafaeli, University of Haifa, sheizaf@rafaeli.netTali Tal, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, rtal@ed.technion.ac.ilPatrice L. (Tamar) Weiss, University of Haifa, tamar@research.haifa.ac.ilChristopher Hoadley (Discussant), New York University, tophe@nyu.eduPaul A. Kirschner (Chair), Open University, The Netherlands, Paul.Kirschner@ou.nlAbstract: This symposium brings together the theoretical and practical tools of scientists inboth the social and educational sciences in order to examine the types of interaction,knowledge construction, social organization and power structures that: (a) occurspontaneously in technology-enhanced learning communities or (b) can be created by design.We refer to these, respectively, as the study of ambient, naturally occurring, environments,and of designed environments. We present a set of seven studies that demonstrate the strongpotential for the cross-fostering of ideas between educational scientists, who focus on theinterventionist design-based study of learning, and social scientists, who focus on the analyticstudy of ambient social interaction and knowledge construction. Each study demonstratesspecific insights regarding lessons that can be learned from the ambient to the designed arena,and vice versa, using lenses that integrate our various disciplinary research perspectives.Keywords: Technology-enhanced learning, Learning communities, Networked society, DesignThe overall focus of this symposiumOne of the most significant developments in contemporary education is the shift of research and practice awayfrom the focus on the individual learner to the view that knowing and understanding are anchored in culturalpractices within communities. This shift coincides with technological advancements, such as the introduction ofthe World Wide Web and subsequently Web 2.0 technologies, which reoriented end-user computer interactionfrom individual work to communication, participation and collaboration. However, while daily interactions areincreasingly engulfed in mobile and networked Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), in-schoollearning interactions are, in comparison, technologically impoverished, creating the phenomenon known as theschool-society digital disconnect (Selwyn, 2006).We can no longer consider “schooling” and “society” as separate entities. Rather, we must bringtogether the theoretical and practical tools of scientists in both the social and educational sciences in order toexamine what types of interaction, knowledge construction, social organization and power structures: (a) occurspontaneously in technology-enhanced learning (TEL) communities or (b) can be created by design of TEL. Werefer to these, respectively, as the study of ambient, naturally occurring, environments, and of designedenvironments. By adopting a definition of learning as the co-creation of knowledge in TEL communities, and bybringing together a cohort of expertise within the fields of education and the social sciences (i.e., education,learning sciences, communication, health and social welfare, knowledge management, information sciences,law, and instructional design), the Learning in a NetworKed Society (LINKS) Center seeks to study thecontinuum between the ambient and the designed arenas (LINKS, 2013).CSCL 2015 Proceedings615© ISLSIn this symposium, we present a set of seven studies that are conducted as part the LINKS Center,which explore learning in various settings on the continuum between ambient and designed technologyenhanced environments (Figure 1). Each study demonstrates a particular aspect of learning and highlights aspecific insight regarding what can be learned from the ambient to the designed arenas, and vice versa, usinglenses that integrate various disciplinary research perspectives.Figure 1. The studies of this symposium on an ambient-designed TEL communities continuumThe symposium will be carried out as a structured poster session, starting with a rationale and backgroundpresented by the organizers (10 minutes), then brief introductions from each of the poster presenters (15minutes), followed by concurrent poster interactions (30 minutes), remarks from the discussant, ChristopherHoadley (15 minutes), and finally, a discussion with the audience facilitated and summarized by the chair, PaulKirschner (20 minutes).Theoretical backgroundThe turn to community and communication in education and technologySeveral sociocultural theoretical frameworks have been developed to describe learning as active participation ina community. Communities of practice (Wenger, 1998), communities of learners (Rogoff, 1994), andknowledge-building communities (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994) are three frameworks that have considerablyinfluenced the learning sciences research and educational practice. Though they have some nuanced distinctions,they share three fundamental tenets: Activity, Participation and Enculturation. The active nature of learning isembodied in students’ participation in negotiating meanings, developing understanding, evaluating, andorchestrating their own learning in collaborative environments. These forms of participation are, in turn, viewedas processes of enculturation: students assume increasingly central roles in the community, and immersethemselves within a culture of learning through which they acquire competence in language, social practices,rituals, and values.Interestingly, this shift in education coincides with technological advancements, such as theintroduction of the World Wide Web and subsequently Web 2.0 technologies, which reoriented end-usercomputer interaction from individual work to communication, contribution and collaboration. Thus, there appearto be concomitant and complementary changes in pedagogy and technology. Several technological innovationshave been designed to enhance learning processes in communities to streamline particular activities and functionas partners in thinking and as agents of enculturation. For example, dynamic visualization tools (Kali, Linn &Roseman, 2008) provide participants with a shared focal point for the explicit external visual display ofinformation, enabling them to visually inspect, comment on, and modify each other’s ideas vis-à-vis theserepresentations. Furthermore, some of these tools reflect the ways in which experts conceptualize, visualize andrepresent knowledge in their disciplines. These specialized tools can guide learners’ interactions in accordancewith the norms of the discipline (Tabak & Reiser, 2008), and serve as agents of enculturation.Blurring school-society boundaries to overcome disconnects and dividesDespite the strong educational potential, and the increasing presence of ICT in formal and non-formaleducational environments, there is little evidence of an overall positive effect of the use of ICT on the quality oflearning. Technologies in education tend to sustain rather than challenge traditional pedagogical approaches. ACSCL 2015 Proceedings616© ISLSnumber of methods have been adopted to address this limitation, including studies devoted to scaling-up ofeducational innovations (Roschelle, Tatar, & Kaput, 2008), engaging in participatory design with schools (e.g.,Penuel, Roschelle, & Shechtman, 2007), and in forming research-practice partnerships (Kali et al., 2008). At therisk of oversimplification, we suggest that these approaches share a focus on disseminating learningenvironments that were designed from a school-centered approach.We are proposing a new tack—partnership between scientists in the field of the social sciences and ineducation to create a productive synergy between the study of ambient and designed technology-enhancedcommunities. Educational science has much to offer on the ways in which representations and participantstructures can effectively advance specific learning goals. However, this understanding is mostly applicable tothe existing structures of schooling with rather rigid, hierarchical definitions of student and teacher roles.In contrast, social scientists examine the ways in which people adopt these technologies in their dailylives. They primarily take an analytic stance and study, without explicit intervention, the numerous virtualcommunities that interact using social networking platforms (e.g., Facebook, Twitter), or Web 2.0 platforms(e.g., Wikis, Blogs) without any overt educational intention. In this way, social scientists can offer importantinsights into the means by which “crowds” can self-organize in pursuit of shared information-based goals,building on ideas such as Schelling’s (1978) classical notion that micro-motives of individuals create macrobehaviors in a society. Network analysis techniques enable characterization of the structure of communities intechnology-enhanced endeavors such as Wikipedia or YouTube. Other advances in the study of social networkshave uncovered how these entities are characterized by power law distributions (Barabasi & Albert, 1999),rather than the more familiar normal distributions. This, in turn, raises questions about the nature of expertise,access and equality, and about whether there is room for more intervention in order to address these new sourcesof potential inequity. Studies of online communities in the social sciences can further help us understand theinherent motivation to engage in social media, and the impact that this has on identity and social well-being(Elias & Lemish, 2009).The understanding that the social scientists glean from the study of ambient technology-enhancedcommunities is a powerful force in directing our attention to learning that may occur incidentally within onlinecommunities, offering new interpretations of learner interactions, and inspiring new ways of conceiving ofdesigned learning environments. At the same time, educational research offers important new directions forsocial science research. In particular, it provides theoretical frameworks and methodological approaches forfine-grained analysis of the development of specific knowledge structures. In addition, social scientists may bemotivated to a more interventionist stance to enhance the study of equality and digital divides. Despite thestrong potential for the cross fostering of ideas between the educational and social sciences, a key question iswhether educational scientists, who focus on the interventionist design-based study of learning, and socialscientists, who focus on the analytic study of ambient social interaction and knowledge construction, can engagein a productive collaboration. We believe that the answer lies in adopting a shared focal point for ourcollaborative research lens.Co-creation of knowledge: Bridging school-society, educational-social sciencesWe focus our collaborative investigative lens on the notion of co-creation of knowledge (Lewis, Pea, & Rosen,2010). This reconceptualizes learning from a school-based, individual acquisition of knowledge and skills to anongoing process of the production of knowledge through joint activity. This also repositions the study of ICTfrom a dichotomy of “educational” versus “generic” tools, to a streamlined study of the role of technology in theco-creation of knowledge across the various contexts that comprise an information-based networked society.In adopting co-creation of knowledge as our focus, rather than the conventional view of learning as anactivity accomplished in schools (and other intentional, circumscribed environments), we view it as an endeavorthat occurs throughout the day and across the lifespan; people continually engage in collaborative activitieswithin different communities and for a variety of purposes. In some cases, knowledge goals may be more clearlyspecified and directed, and in other cases they may be more loosely defined and emergent. For example, in asecondary mathematics classroom, students and teachers annotating a digital textbook may have the specific,institutionally-specified goal of achieving a basic understanding of the nature of mathematical functions; butthese same students, later in the day, while communicating with other youths and adults throughout the worldabout methods for determining the top achieving players on a Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Game(MMORPG), may derive shared insights concerning statistical analysis techniques, without having this as a prespecified, intentional educational goal.Adopting the same lens to understand the processes in both education and social sciences highlights theresearch prospects that lie beyond the artificial pitfalls and blind spots that may have constrained past studies ofambient and designed learning environments. More importantly, it diminishes the boundaries between schoolingCSCL 2015 Proceedings617© ISLSand society, opening the door for extended conceptual frameworks that can help minimize the school-societydigital divide, and better equip citizens for lifelong learning in an information-based networked society. In thefollowing sections we describe seven LINKS studies that illustrate how education and social sciencescomplement each other, and how the ambient-designed continuum can contribute to our understanding oflearning in technology-enhanced communities.The role of social network tools in the integration of immigrant students intoacademic lifeMeital Amzalag, Nelly Elias, and Yael KaliStudents of Ethiopian origin belong to one of the weakest and poorest groups in the Jewish population of Israel.These students face social and cultural gaps in addition to economic hardships and racist stereotypes. Thepresent study seeks to examine whether social media, and specifically social network groups, used by studentsto communicate course issues, could provide social, cultural and educational resources for their integration inthe Israeli higher education system.This poster represents part of a larger research project, which will gradually progress from nointervention at all, i.e., examining spontaneous processes in the ambient arena, through a series of minimalintervention stages designed to take advantage of the social media to support these students' integrationprocesses. As such, the first stage of the research consisted of observation of the learning processes as theyoccurred spontaneously, while in the second stage students were told about other courses where students haveestablished their own social network group to communicate course issues. Through this second stage, weexamined (a) who were the students who became members of the Facebook study group; and (b) how studentsof Ethiopian origin have participated in that group, as compared to students from the majority group. Thefindings are based on a survey of 136 students from the majority group and 36 students of Ethiopian origin, andan analysis of 28 posts from the Facebook study group opened by students.A significant digital divide was found in the spontaneous stage between students of Ethiopian originand students from the majority group, which was reflected in their lower usage of internet in general, and ofstudy groups in particular. Students of Ethiopian origin were not aware of the advantages of internet resourcesfor advancing their academic goals and social integration. Findings from the second stage indicate that thesestudents’ pattern of participation in the study group was peripheral and limited to passive observation.Lessons learned from the ambient to the designed arena: The minimal progression from the totallyspontaneous setting towards the designed study enabled the examination of patterns of participation by studentsof Ethiopian origin in online social media. Next stages will use a design-based research methodology to exploremeans for supporting the integration of students of Ethiopian origin in the Israeli higher education system.Designing future learning spaces based on ambient analysis of epistemicsocializationUzi Brami and Iris TabakIn this poster, we draw on an ambient setting analysis to present an initial design framework for the support ofepistemic socialization in history in a future learning space (FLS). Epistemic socialization is the process throughwhich classroom interactions influence learners' views about knowledge in the domain of study (Tabak &Weinstock, 2008). A case study of the epistemic socialization in a university introductory history course (Brami,in preparation) revealed continuities and discontinuities between views of historical knowledge and classroompractices. We use these to identify practices that advance or hinder mature views of historical knowledge.One example is the continuity between views of history and note taking practices. Nascent viewsconsider written accounts of the past to be certain, while mature views consider these historiographies aspossible justified versions of the past (Wineburg, 1991). Students in the course used shared “master notes” of aclassmate. Students with nascent views perceived these notes as an account of the class lectures as well as anaccount of the past, and considered their accurate transfer to the exam a formula for success. It seems thatnascent learners view the past, historiographies, the lecture and “master notes” as versions of the same canonicaltext. Thus, reframing the class notes from a canonical to a contestable text could pave the way to viewinghistoriographies as such. Changing note taking practices from an exclusively learner activity to a joint teacherlearner activity can create a third space where note taking is guided, subject to debate, and is part of the formalscript of the classroom. Note taking and other practices of learners who held more mature views, and literatureon learning in history, inform the design of tools that structure and support the process of analysis, critique andcorroboration. The shared notes will be displayed on the FLS wall mounted computer screens. We will study theCSCL 2015 Proceedings618© ISLSrole of features such as the prominence and omnipresence of these displays in epistemic socialization. Theposter presents the main findings from the case study and an initial design framework for an FLS-basedcurriculum in history.Lessons learned from the ambient to the designed arena: This poster draws on an ambient settinganalysis to present a design framework for supporting epistemic socialization in FLS-based history curriculum.Designing network support for online discourse based on ambient groupcommunication studiesCarmel Kent, Esther Laslo, Sheizaf Rafaeli, and Ayelet Baram-TsabariAsynchronous online discussions are commonly used to support collaborative learning in both fully online andblended higher education courses. While online discussion holds a promise for learning and collaborativeknowledge building, there remains a challenge. The opportunity to share ideas, learn from peers, and buildknowledge collectively in virtual settings is the promise. Yet, in practice, online discussions often do not meetengagement expectations. Contributions are frequently disjointed or not responsive, and discussions maybecome shallow and incoherent.This poster represents a synergistic study that combines educational psychology and learning sciencestheoretical roots of socio-constructivism and collaborative knowledge building, with theories and frameworksfrom the field of knowledge management and information sciences, such as perceptions on groupcommunication and interactivity (Rafaeli, 1988). With this joint research lens, we propose a focus on shared anddynamic construction of knowledge during a discussion, using semantic network structures for the discussioninstead of the classic thread-based discussion structure. For this purpose we developed Ligilo, a peer learningonline platform for networked based discussions. Ligilo enables learning communities to create collectiveconcept maps through discussions. Ligilo provides a hyperlinked learning environment, where the relationsbetween content items are generated collaboratively and connections are made explicit.The system was used during 2014-15 in several academic institutions and study groups in differentsettings. Field studies were conducted to evaluate the learning afforded by the semantic networked onlinediscussion forums. Initial research insights shed light on the process of collaborative knowledge building, andthe new roles of learners and teachers in learning communities. For instance, initial evidence shows thatinteractivity level was directly affected by the structure of the discussion, the request to relate new contributionsto other students' contributions, and to explicitly tag those relations. Additionally, teachers used Ligilo's tools tomanage (or delegate management of) the discussion towards their instructional goals, thus shifting theirpedagogies into more learner-centered, rather than teacher-centered approaches.Lessons learned from the ambient to the designed arena: Building on a theoretical framework that wasdeveloped by studying ambient computer mediated communication (Rafaeli, 1988), this research developed aninnovative TEL environment to support online discourse in a designed setting. The lessons learned from theambient to the designed arena include qualitative insights regarding interest, argumentation and knowledgetypes, as well as quantitative measurement of metrics regarding outcomes, learning behavior, sharing andinteractivity at the community and individual levels of learning.Scientific literacy in public media reader comments as interpreted usingcurricular lensesEsther Laslo and Ayelet Baram-TsabariEducation for informed citizenship, knowledge-based decision-making, and application of scientific ways ofthinking to everyday life are the main goals of the science literacy movement (Ryder, 2001). In today’snetworked society the internet is the public's primary source of science and technology related information.Social media is ever more prominent in this landscape as a provider of both science-related information andopinions, and as enabler of bottom-up engagement with and deliberation on science-related issues.This poster presents a study in which expressions of scientific literacy in reader comments in a leadingonline news site (Ynet.co.il) were sought. Specifically, over a thousand reader comments to articles on animalexperimentation and on climate change were analyzed. Based on the definitions above, we view this onlinereader comments infrastructure as an ambient TEL environment. The contents of the items in this ambientenvironment were studied using an analytical framework based on a designed learning context - the schoolscience curriculum. The curriculum was chosen as an analytical lens in order to describe how the aims of schoolscience (embodied by the curriculum) are echoed in an authentic public engagement with science setting and itsreal-world suitability as a provider of scientific literacy. For this reason, the formal Israeli biology curriculum'sCSCL 2015 Proceedings619© ISLSdefinition of scientific literacy was adopted, encompassing scientific knowledge, perceptions of the nature ofscience, scientific skills and structuring an informed position.Our findings show that over half of the scientific concepts used by the commentators are at the highschool or academic level, in which science is elective. This means that even if all the people taking part in thediscussion took elective science (an unlikely assumption considering the percentage of those choosing to studyscience) than in order to take part in the discussion or follow it passively as readers, members of the public needto learn many new science concepts independently—probably from the media. We also found that expressionsof scientific literacy do not necessarily go hand-in-hand with the scientific consensus. Many times scientificknowledge is used to support different individual beliefs which are at opposition with the scientific consensus.Lessons learned from the designed to the ambient arena: The environment investigated is an authenticexample of lifelong learning and the application of science literacy to everyday lives of the wide public.Methodologically, it demonstrates how lessons learned from the designed arena (the conceptualization andoperalization of science literacy in formal science curricula) may be used to explore authentic processes in anambient environment such as reader comments in public online media.Promoting teacher professional growth for technology-enhanced outdoorinquiry teachingKeren S. Levy, Yael Kali and Tali TalInquiry in the outdoors may promote cognitive, emotional, and social aspects of science learning, however,teachers face various challenges while implementing this approach. Mobile technologies may provide somesolutions, yet teachers need support in developing the knowledge and skills required to successfully integratethese technologies in their teaching.This poster presents a unique professional development (PD) program that applies a "Teachers-asDesigners" (TaD) approach (Voogt, McKenney & Kali 2014), in which teachers are engaged in collaborativedesign of learning materials. Our intervention involved 24 teachers of environmental sciences, who used a TELenvironment we designed, which integrates mobile applications to support outdoor inquiry. As part of theprogram, teachers worked in collaborative teams to design a similar learning environment for their students, bycustomizing a replica of the environment they used as learners. The study examined the potential of the TaDapproach to contribute to teacher professional growth, with a specific focus on the integration of technology inoutdoor inquiry teaching. Data sources included: observations in the PD program, quantitative measuresregarding teachers' activity in the team websites, and interviews with nine teachers.In order to follow teacher professional growth, data were analyzed using the Interconnected Model ofProfessional Growth (Clarke & Hollingsworth, 2002). Findings indicate that all teachers developed theirknowledge and ways of thinking regarding the integration of technology in their teaching, and somedemonstrated professional growth as reflected in long-term changes in their classroom practice (referred to asgrowth networks in Clarke and Hollingsworth framework). For instance, changes in teachers' practice (reflectedin the design of the websites during the PD), led to changes in their personal domain (e.g., higher selfconfidence), which further led to long-term changes in their school practice (integration of collaborativedocuments to enhance collaborative learning) months after the PD ended.Lessons learned from the designed to the ambient arena: This poster demonstrates how the use of atheoretical framework of professional growth can track the change sequences in teachers' learning from theirexperiences in the designed environment (during the PD) to their continued learning and practice in the ambientenvironment (in their school practice, long after the intervention was over).Tracing the emergence and growth of epistemic norms in a designed TELcommunitySarit Barzilai, Dani Ben-Zvi, and Oshra DuekEpistemic cognition research has highlighted the importance of epistemic standards for evaluating achievementof epistemic ends (Chinn et al., 2014). This poster illustrates how two different research perspectives –epistemic cognition and learning community research – can jointly contribute to the conceptualization andexamination of the ways epistemic norms emerge and grow in a learning community. With this dual perspective,we define epistemic norms as socially negotiated standards of what counts as knowledge within the communityand of acceptable epistemic practices of constructing, justifying, and communicating knowledge. We argue thatemergence and growth of epistemic norms is an essential part of the formation of learning communities and isCSCL 2015 Proceedings620© ISLScritical for achievement of their aims. The specific objectives that guide the current project are: (1) to identifyand characterize the epistemic norms; and (2) to trace the emergence and growth of these norms.This research is set within an innovative, graduate level course that is designed as a technologyenhanced classroom learning community. The characteristics of this learning community include emergentdesign, process-content integration, reflective discourse, dialogic-humanistic approach, and use of a Wikicollaborative editing environment. Thus this learning community has an overall design, yet, within this design,both members and moderators take part in shaping emergent epistemic norms as well as shaping thetechnological and social infrastructures which support these norms. These emergent practices are viewed asambient within the designed environment. To provide multiple perspectives on the epistemic norms within thissetting, this research traces the micro-development of both individuals and the group throughout a semester ofstudy over several years.To illustrate our approach we report on one epistemic norm identified in our data. This norm maintainsthat the knowledge created by community members, individually and collaboratively, has a tentative andevolving nature and hence community products can be continually developed. The norm was first introduced inthe community by the moderators by explicitly stating that course products can be shared in draft form andrepeatedly reworked and was supported by the Wiki technology which enables co-editing of the communitywebsite. However, the uptake, re-interpretation, and negotiation of the norm, originally introduced by themoderators, continued throughout the semester as community members struggled with accepting the change inknowledge construction and sharing standards and strove to define and communicate the new norm.Lessons learned from the designed to the ambient arena: This study examines how both the designedand ambient practices of a learning community jointly contribute to the negotiation and formation of epistemicnorms. Examination of epistemic standards through a learning community lens sheds light on the socialprocesses by which epistemic standards arise and attain a normative status, and also elucidates a key componentin the development of learning communities.Dimensions of collaboration on a tabletop interface for children with autismspectrum disorderPatrice L. (Tamar) Weiss (Joint work with M. Zancanaro, E. Gal, N. Bauminger and S. Eden)Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a pervasive developmental disorder which involves deficits in socialrelationships, communication impairments, repetitive behaviors and restricted interests. Recently, interventionstudies to treat the social deficit of children with high functioning ASD (mainly without the use of technology)have adapted techniques of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) to help these children engage in more effectiveinteractions with peers as well as to enhance their socio-cognitive understanding of social constructs andprocesses (e.g., Beaumont & Sofronoff, 2008).This poster represents a combination of two very different fields of research, namely CBT and CSCL.Specifically, CBT principles and techniques (e.g., problem solving, concept clarification, role play and feedbackand behavioral rehearsals), were translated into a CSCL environment -- computer-mediated games to teach theunderstanding of collaboration through actions and conversation as well as to facilitate children’s socialengagement with peers while implementing collaborative behaviors during shared actions and conversations.The Join-In Suite, a 3-user touch-based application was implemented via the DiamondTouch mutli-user touchtable (Weiss, et al., 2011). The Join-In Suite uses the multi-user capabilities of this device to foster collaborationbetween pairs of children and to provide ways for a teacher or a therapist to control the pace and process of theeducational or therapeutic interaction. The design of the application explored different types of collaborativeinteraction patterns in a multi-user context: Joint Performance where collaboration is the performance of anaction together; Sharing: where collaboration is the sharing of personal resources to achieve a commonobjective; and Mutual Planning where collaboration is the elaboration and performance of a joint plan. Thecapability of a multi-user device to recognize the actions of different users allows actualization of thesedimensions by embedding them in the operations of the interface. For example, if a play piece is assigned to onechild, the other child cannot move it; in order to obtain a successful result they have to play in a collaborativeway (in this case, via the sharing dimension).Lessons learned from the designed to the ambient arena: Field testing has demonstrated that the Join-InSuite appears to have found a delicate balance between the world of gaming (e.g., motivation, excitement,feedback) and the world of therapeutic intervention (e.g., control, empowerment). This balance in the designedenvironment, can assist children with high functioning ASD to develop the cognitive understanding of the socialconstructs, and ultimately, to more adaptive interpersonal functioning in the real (ambient) world.CSCL 2015 Proceedings621© ISLSReferencesBarabási, A. L., & Albert, R. (1999). Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science, 286(5439), 509-512.Beaumont, R., & Sofronoff, K. (2008). A multi-component social skills intervention for children with Aspergersyndrome: The junior detective training program. The Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 49,743–753.Brami, U. (in preparation). When Disciplined Knowledge Meets Relevance Seeking: A case study of theepistemic socialization in a university intoductory history course. (M.A.), Ben-Gurion University of theNegev, Beer-Sheva, Israel.Chinn, C. A., Rinehart, R. W., & Buckland, L. A. (2014). Epistemic cognition and evaluating information:Applying the air model of epistemic cognition. In D. Rapp & J. Braasch (Eds.), Processing inaccurateinformation (pp. 425-454). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Clarke, D., & Hollingsworth, H. (2002). Elaborating a model of teacher professional growth. Teaching andTeacher Education, 18(8), 947–967.Elias, N., & Lemish, D. (2009). Spinning the Web of identity: Internet’s roles in immigrant adolescents’ searchof identity. New Media & Society, 11(4), 533-551.Kali, Y., Linn, M. C., & Roseman, J. E. (2008). Designing coherent science education: Implications forcurriculum, instruction, and policy. New York: Teachers College, Columbia University.Lewis, S., Pea, R., & Rosen, J. (2010). Beyond participation to co-creation of meaning: Mobile social media ingenerative learning communities. Social Science Information, 49(3), 351-369.LINKS research team (2013). Learning In a NetworKed Society (LINKS): Co-creation of knowledge intechnology-enhanced learning communities. Unpublished proposal.Penuel, W. R., Roschelle, J., & Shechtman, N. (2007). Designing formative assessment software with teachers:An analysis of the co-design process. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 2(1),51-74.Rafaeli, S. (1988). Interactivity: From new media to communication. In R. P. Hawkins, J. M. Wieman, & S.Pingree (Eds.), Advancing communication science: Merging mass and interpersonal processes (pp.110–134). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.Ryder, J. (2001). Identifying science understanding for functional scientific literacy. Studies in ScienceEducation, 36, 1-44.Rogoff, B. (1994). Developing understanding of the idea of communities of learners. Mind, Culture, andActivity, 1(4), 209-229.Roschelle, J., Tatar, D., & Kaput, J. (2008). Getting to scale with innovations that restructure deeply howstudents learn mathematics. In A.E. Kelly, R.A. Lesh and J.Y. Baek (Eds.), Handbook of designresearch in mathematics, science and technology education: Innovations in science, technology,engineering, and mathematics learning and teaching (pp. 369-395). Routledge.Schelling, T. C. (1978). Micromotives and Macrobehavior. UK: W. W. Norton & Company.Selwyn, N. (2006). Exploring the 'digital disconnect' between net-savvy students and their schools. Learning,Media and Technology, 31(1), 5-17.Tabak, I., & Reiser, B. (2008). Software-realized inquiry support for cultivating a disciplinary stance.Pragmatics & Cognition, 16(2), 307-355.Tabak, I., & Weinstock, M. (2008). A sociocultural exploration of epistemological beliefs. In M. S. Khine (Ed.),Knowing, Knowledge, and Beliefs: Epistemological Studies across Diverse Cultures (pp. 177-195).Amsterdam: Springer.Voogt, J., McKenney, S., & Kali, Y. (2014). Teachers as designers. In proceedings of the InternationalConference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) 2014, Volume 3 (p.14). Boulder, CO: InternationalSociety of the Learning Sciences.Weiss, P.L., Cobb, S., Gal, E., Millen, L., Hawkins, T., Glover, T., Sanassy, D., S. Eden, Giusti, L., andZancanaro, M. Usability of Technology Supported Social Competence Training for Children on theAutism Spectrum. International Conference on Virtual Rehabilitation, Zurich, Switzerland, June 2011.Wineburg, S. S. (1991). On the Reading of Historical Texts: Notes on the Breach Between School andAcademy. American Educational Research Journal, 28(3), 495-519.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.AcknowledgementsThis research was supported by the I-CORE Program of the Planning and Budgeting Committee and The IsraelScience Foundation grant 1716/12.CSCL 2015 Proceedings622© ISLS