Embracing Learners With Visual Impairments in CSCLJooYoung Seo, Mona AlQahtani, Xueying Ouyang, and Marcela Borgejooyoung@psu.edu, moona@psu.edu, xuo2@psu.edu, mbs15@psu.eduThe Pennsylvania State UniversityAbstract: This autoethnographic study aims to shed light on the collaborative experience of alearner with a visual impairment in a blended CSCL environment. Through the analysis ofpersonal reflections, this qualitative study captures some emergent themes and challenges inboth the face-to-face and virtual environments with the intent to improve diversity,accessibility, and equity in CSCL.Keywords: CSCL, visual impairments, accessibility, inclusive designMarginalized attention to learners with visual impairments in CSCLMuch scholarly work has described the characteristics of CSCL relative to traditional learning and examined itsimplementation, such as the importance of learning with peers, active participation in a community of learners,and access to enhanced collective thinking processes with the aid of technology (see, Kreijns, Kirschner, &Jochems, 2003; Stahl, 2013). With all of the emphasis CSCL places on collective learning and community, fartoo little attention has been paid to how such CSCL can be experienced by learners with disabilities. With thesupport of legislation that advocates equal access to general education for individuals with disabilities (e.g.,Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act 1973; IDEA 1975; and ADA 1990), it has been increasingly moreimperative to address the needs of the growing number of learners with disabilities, who traditionally have hadlimited access to general education, in both K-12 and higher education (Rao, 2004). According to the U.S.National Center for Education Statistics, 95 percent of students with disabilities (ages 6 to 21) were served insecondary regular schools in 2012, and 11 percent of undergraduates reported having disabilities in 2011(Snyder, de Brey, & Dillow, 2016). This implies that the general education system, where CSCL is increasinglyprevalent, now embraces its responsibility to address students with disabilities in its discourse.Although the historical emergence of CSCL in the early 1990s is indebted to computer-aidedcomposition programs for learners with disabilities to some extent (see Stahl, Koschmann, & Suthers, 2006),recent literature reveals that a relatively small body of work has touched upon this imperative relationshipbetween CSCL and disabilities with limited focus on cognitive disabilities (see Lingnau & Bientzle, 2009).However, in a CSCL-dominant ecology where vision is largely required, learners with visual impairments(hereafter, LVIs) have been faced with inaccessible instructional technologies, such as inappropriate graphiclabels, ill-structured e-learning content for assistive technologies, and software/hardware interfaces designedwithout accessibility in mind (Babu, Singh, & Ganesh, 2010; Fichten, Asuncion, Barile, Ferraro, & Wolforth,2009; Taylor, 2016).While there have been some published accessibility guidelines which can significantly lower thebarriers previously mentioned (e.g., WCAG 2.0, 2008; VPAT, 2016) and some universal design principles forlearning (see Persson, Åhman, Yngling, & Gulliksen, 2015; Rose, 2000; Scott, Mcguire, & Shaw, 2003), LVIsstill have to “encounter a recurrent set of problems with commonly used instructional technology” in CSCLenvironments (Taylor, 2016, p. 123). According to the 2011 U.S. National Center for Education Statistics report,“Limited staff resources to provide faculty and staff with training on accessibility issues” has been identified asthe major barrier (by up to 52 percent of respondents) hindering the implementation of Universal Design in both2-year and 4-year post-secondary institutions (Raue & Lewis, 2011). This tendency highlights that the lack ofawareness of accessibility among faculty, staff, and instructional designers is the primary factor causing digitalbarriers for LVIs (Taylor, 2016) rather than technical or financial problems (Babu et al., 2010; Fichten et al.,2009; Lazar, Allen, Kleinman, & Malarkey, 2007). Understanding the CSCL experience of LVIs, therefore, isinstrumental to define which challenges LVIs would face, and how to address those issues to prevent them frombeing excluded. This paper is intended to respond to the paucity of studies on the learning experiences of LVIsin CSCL environments.MethodsDesign and participantsThis study follows an autoethnographic research method, which gives the authors an opportunity to expand theunderstanding of a social phenomenon by capturing personal experiences through the duality of their roles -CSCL 2017 Proceedings573© ISLSparticipants and researchers (Wall, 2006). All three participants are graduate students at a university in thenortheast of the United States. Only one of the participants is blind, and is experienced with assistive technologyand web programming; and not all sighted participants are familiar with the LVI’s needs.ProceduresThe study took place over a four-week period in an introductory graduate course on CSCL that also adopted ablended CSCL framework. The course implemented a virtual text-based discussion tool, known as CREATE(Borge & Shimoda, under review). This prototype is developed to improve collaborative learning skills. Thefirst virtual meeting on CREATE was considered a pilot designed to encourage participants to use and getfamiliar with the tool; while the second was structured to discuss questions that were posed by the instructor andrelated to the course content. The participants attended two face-to-face classes that were designed differently,requiring activities that adopted visual representations. Participants were asked to write self-reflections aftereach (face-to-face and virtual) meeting. Each participant wrote two reflections during face-to-face meetings andone through CREATE, giving a total of nine reflections. Two phases of data analysis were done, the first wasindividual and the group did the second collectively. In phase one, each participant reviewed all nine reflectionsand summarized each individually, highlighting the main themes and listing statements that focused on eitheremotional or technical challenges. In phase two, participants met twice to discuss the emergent themes, andreached a collective consensus about the three most significant ones. The analysis of the written reflectionsfollowed an iterative process, with a focus on common problems that interfered with the main collaborative taskon both the group and individual level. In order to structure the analysis, common technical and emotionalproblems, such as isolation and frustration, which could face the LVI, were outlined using previousaccessibility-related literature (Babu et al., 2010; Fichten et al., 2009; Lazar et al., 2007; Taylor, 2016).Emergent themesChallenges impeding the LVIThe distinct challenge the LVI encountered on the CREATE system resulted from the lack of web accessibilityand limited channels of communication. He used assistive technologies—a screen reader in conjunction with arefreshable braille display—to access and interact with the online system. In the course of the virtual activities,he recurrently struggled with a few technical issues, such as screen reader crashes and conflicts with webbrowsers, inappropriate forms, graphic labels, and missing HTML semantic tags. The student reported that morethan 5 additional hours were spent on testing the CREATE system, and familiarizing himself with some of itsinaccessible elements before participating in the session. It was found that the student's responsive participationin the text-based discourse was hindered by the absence of the Accessible Rich Internet Application (WAIARIA 1.1, 2016) technique, which caused the most frustration and delay in the online group discussion.CREATE only offered one channel of communication, text-based discourse. So, combined with the accessibilityissues, activities often led to misunderstandings between the sighted and the LVI. Seo (the first author)mentioned, “I wanted to talk more and add some more, but had to go with the flow due to the time and slowtechnology constraints. And, I often missed context. I said to myself, I wish we could have voice chat instead.Then, I would be more responsive and active” (Seo, Week 4 Reflection, September 18, 2016). The paucity ofmultimodality in CREATE made it expression of frustrations the LVI faced more difficult for the team torecognize.In the face-to-face environment, on the other hand, the technical problems were significantlyminimized because the sighted were able to identify visual and verbal cues that reflected the LVI’s moods andreactions. The fact that the LVI could verbally communicate with others in real time, without having toovercome the inaccessible chat entry, largely affected his preference for face-to-face interaction. Althoughcomputer-based collaboration was also required in some activities, he was given the flexibility to employ a moreaccessible combination of tools to his favor: “I hooked up my braille display to my laptop and passed to Mona[the second author], and had her type down what the professor was explaining on the screen in Microsoft wordso that I could read them in braille through the connected braille display device--it was successful!” (Seo,Week6 Reflection, September 29, 2016).The LVI repeatedly faced difficulties each time the class employed visual-based collaborations, such ascreating and sharing diagrams, watching videos, playing with flashcards, etc. In contrast to the onlineenvironment, the presence of his sighted teammates, the instructor, and other classmates in the classroom helpedhim address challenges immediately. Verbal descriptions for videos, and tactile graphics for visualrepresentations were the main alternatives. He preferred tactile materials to verbal descriptions for the complexdiagrams since it gave him a chance to decode the meanings by himself, rather than having someone elseCSCL 2017 Proceedings574© ISLSselectively describing it. The Swell Form heating machine (a heat processor) and swell touch paper (a chemicalpaper that allows dark and black lines to swell when inserted in the machine) were provided by the university.Using this technology permitted his class to easily produce the needed tactile graphics within a few secondsduring the activities. In sum, the analysis shows that the face-to-face CSCL environment is more likely toembrace students with blindness, relative to an inaccessible virtual space, by addressing and transforming theunique challenges of the LVI into a chance for group support and collaboration.Dissonant experiencesWhen looking at the reflections of all participants, it is clear that they faced similar challenges at the start of thecourse. However, when comparing the reflections across time, difficulties faded for the sighted, while remainingprominent for the LVI. In the face-to-face environment, inaccessibility issues persisted throughout. For example,one of the activities required the use of flashcards and some physical movement around the classroom to allowmore interaction with other groups. The sighted learners confronted some setbacks in the beginning of theactivity that they overcame by watching the visual demonstration of their peers. In contrast, the LVI neededmore explanation from the members of his team, and others. Team members acknowledged such struggles andnegotiated strategies that would allow them to work together cohesively and ensured equal participationopportunities in all activities. Such social strategies were the first step that the participants took before startingtasks and were constantly revisited by them. Through this form of social negotiation, the team was able toaddress inaccessibility problems as they occurred in the face-to-face context. Thus though the issues neverdisappeared the team got better at problem solving and creating more equitable access. Overtime the instructorand the rest of the class also became more aware of potential process problems for the LVI.Given the distributed nature of the online activities, inaccessibility issues compounded the difficulty ofonline activities for the LVI. As such, activities that became easier overtime for sighted members remainedequally difficult for the LVI. For instance, in the virtual environment and with the use of a new system such asCREATE, all participants struggled at first when completing the discussion activities because the activities werequite different from traditional instructional practices and it was a prototype system. Nonetheless, with practice,the activities became easier for the sighted participants. The LVI experienced constant frustration due to the lackof accessibility combined with the team’s inability to collaboratively mitigate problems in real-time settings.Impediments to collaboration were caused by the team’s inability to “see” what was going on for the LVI andwork together to solve problems.Team performanceIt is essential to highlight the strong relation between the challenges that individuals encounter and their impacton the dynamic of the team’s collaboration. What hindered the individual became a problem of the group.Accessibility issues caused delays for the LVI that not only influenced the LVI’s performance, but also deviatedthe focus of the group. After testing out the CREATE environment, all participants expected delays and showedwillingness to support each other by providing explanations and ensuring group cohesion. Nonetheless, theycould not predict the extent of the challenges during the CREATE discussion sessions until the LVI identifiedthem in a post to the team. Hence, in several incidents, sighted participants did not notice that their peer was leftbehind during discourse and the group was faced by a communication disconnect. Consequently, sightedmembers often spent time filling in the gaps and supporting their peer. Given time constraints and accessibilityissues, discussion quality often suffered.Discussion and conclusionThrough the personal reflections of the learners with and without visual impairments, we were able to exploresome of the struggles that could face learners with visual impairments in an inclusive and blended CSCLenvironment. While web accessibility issues can be addressed quickly with a limited amount of technical skill(Lazar et al., 2007) by simply adding some required HTML attributes, the problems it causes are far reaching.Recognizing the challenges faced by the LVI, the designers of the CREATE system have since partnered withthe participants as a means of documenting all of the accessibility issues and addressing them as part of thesecond iteration of the system. Many of the problems faced by the LVI in this context would likely be commonproblems for any LVI in a CSCL setting.Within the small group, team members agreed on creating their set of rules such as prioritizing theirtasks in order to meet the time constraints and having a checkpoint system to ensure that no one was left behind.As a result, a positive atmosphere allowed learners to feel safe and included, which made tackling difficultiesfaced by the LVI a community problem instead of an individual struggle. It is imperative to highlight that theinaccessible design was the cause of many setbacks, not the technical abilities of the learner with visualCSCL 2017 Proceedings575© ISLSimpairment. This study calls for the training of those in charge of designing and instructing inclusive courseswith a Universal Design strategy in mind, but also emphasizes the importance of cultivating an inclusivecommunity. Future research is necessary to delve deeper into the design of activities and tools and how theycould affect the social and cognitive performance of learners with disabilities.ReferencesAccessible Rich Internet Applications (WAI-ARIA) 1.1. (2016, July 21). Retrieved October 26, 2016, fromhttps://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.1/Babu, R., Singh, R., & Ganesh, J. (2010). Understanding blind users’ Web accessibility and usability problems.AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction, 2(3), 73-94.Borge. M. and Shimoda. T., (under review). Designing a computer-supported collective regulation system: Atheoretically Informed approach. Technology, Instruction, Cognition, and Learning.Braille Printers, Braille Paper & Supplies. (n.d.). Retrieved February 19, 2017, fromhttp://www.americanthermoform.com/Fichten, C. S., Asuncion, J. V., Barile, M., Ferraro, V., & Wolforth, J. (2009). Accessibility of e-learning andcomputer and information technologies for students with visual impairments in postsecondaryeducation. Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness, 103(9), 543-557.ITI: Voluntary Product Accessibility Template. (n.d.). Retrieved November 6, 2016, fromhttps://www.itic.org/dotAsset/5644ecd2-5024-417f-bc23-a52650f47ef8.docKreijns, K., Kirschner, P. A., & Jochems, W. (2003). Identifying the pitfalls for social interaction in computersupported collaborative learning environments: a review of the research. Computers in humanbehavior, 19(3), 335-353.Lazar, J., Allen, A., Kleinman, J., & Malarkey, C. (2007). What frustrates screen reader users on the web: Astudy of 100 blind users. International Journal of human-computer interaction, 22(3), 247-269.Lingnau, A., & Bientzle, M. (2009, July). A framework to structure CSCL for pupils with cognitive disabilities.In 2009 Ninth IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (pp. 50-52). IEEE.Persson, H., Åhman, H., Yngling, A. A., & Gulliksen, J. (2015). Universal design, inclusive design, accessibledesign, design for all: different concepts—one goal? On the concept of accessibility—historical,methodological and philosophical aspects. Universal Access in the Information Society, 14(4), 505-526.Rao, S. (2004). Faculty attitudes and students with disabilities in higher education: A literature review. CollegeStudent Journal, 38(2), 191-198.Raue, K., & Lewis, L. (2011). Students with disabilities at degree-granting postsecondary institutions. NationalCenter for Education Statistics, US Department of Education, Statistical Analysis Report, (2011-018).Rose, D. (2000). Universal design for learning. Journal of Special Education Technology, 15(1), 67.Scott, S. S., Mcguire, J. M., & Shaw, S. F. (2003). Universal design for instruction a new paradigm for adultinstruction in postsecondary education. Remedial and Special Education, 24(6), 369-379.Snyder, T. D., de Brey, C., & Dillow, S. A. (2016). Digest of education statistics 2014, nces 2016-006. NationalCenter for Education Statistics.Stahl, G. (2013). Theories of cognition in collaborative learning. In C. E. Hmelo-Silver, C. A. Chinn, C. K. K.Chan, & A. M. O’Donnell (Eds.), International handbook of collaborative learning (Chap. 4, pp. 74–90). New York: Routledge.Stahl, G., Koschmann, T., & Suthers, D. (2006). Computer-supported collaborative learning: An historicalperspective. Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences, 2006, 409-426.Taylor, M. A. (2016). Improving Accessibility for Students with Visual Disabilities in the Technology-RichClassroom. PS: Political Science & Politics, 49(01), 122-127.Wall, S. (2006). An autoethnography on learning about autoethnography. International journal of qualitativemethods, 5(2), 146-160.Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0. (2008, December 11). Retrieved November 06, 2016, fromhttp://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/CSCL 2017 Proceedings576© ISLS