Inclusive Collaborative Learning With Multi-Interface Design:Implications for Diverse and Equitable Makerspace EducationGabriela T. Richard, The Pennsylvania State University, grichard@psu.eduSagun Giri, The Pennsylvania State University, sqg5512@psu.eduAbstract: While the maker movement and its associated affordable and accessible practicesand toolkits have reinvigorated interest in pre-collegiate STEM, invention and creativity,many have critiqued makerspaces as implicitly exclusionary, particularly across gender, raceand ethnicity. In an effort to rectify past participatory inequities, we designed a makerworkshop for high school youth that capitalized upon multiple digital and physical interfacesto create simultaneously digitally and physically responsive projects, which encouraged teambased distributed creativity and development. We explore how the tools and the curriculardesign encouraged and fostered collaboration and inclusivity, as well as disrupted previousimplicit associations around computing and creativity. We discuss the teams, the projectscreated and how the learning activities provided opportunities for inclusion and equity.IntroductionThe maker movement and its associated affordable and accessible practices and toolkits have reinvigoratedinterest in pre-collegiate STEM, invention and creativity (e.g., Blikstein, 2013; Halverson & Sheridan, 2014;Honey & Kanter, 2013; Peppler, Halverson & Kafai, 2016). Most notably, scholars have proposed the benefitsof maker activities to foster collaborative learning, a growth mindset, interest-driven knowledge building, andresourcefulness (e.g., Dougherty, 2013; Halverson & Sheridan, 2014; Peppler, Halverson & Kafai, 2016). Inparticular, makerspaces are touted as increasing transparency in learning computation, both with the tools andactivities themselves (Resnick, et. al, 2000; Resnick & Rosenbaum, 2013) and in the spaces designed aroundthem (Peppler, Halverson & Kafai, 2016). Further, the general spirit of constructionist learning for all, asfostered through makerspace learning, has been celebrated widely for opening up previous participatory divides.However, many have critiqued makerspaces and associated interest-driven STEM and DIY learningactivities as implicitly exclusionary in different ways (e.g., Buchholz, et. al, 2014; Kafai, Fields & Searle, 2014;Richard, et. al., 2015). In other words, while maker tools and materials have opened up previous “black boxes”(Resnick, Berg & Eisenberg, 2000), the tacitly exclusionary assumptions and practices still remain. Some haveengaged in efforts to increase diversity in access to makerspace literacies directly, such as through recruitment,while others have focused on ways that learning activities or spatial designs can be more supportive or inclusiveto previously underrepresented groups (e.g., Kafai, Fields & Searle, 2014; Kafai, et. al, 2014; Kafai, Searle,Martinez & Brayboy, 2014; Richard, et. al., 2015). Still others have explored and capitalized on the toolsthemselves (particularly e-textiles) as avenues to inclusive participation (e.g., Buechley, et. al., 2008) or asdisruptive to gender exclusive patterns associated with making (e.g., Buchholz, et. al, 2014).Nevertheless, how the tools and arrangements of learning activities can support diverse participation isstill underspecified. This is not an immaterial question, as the lack of equitable participation in computing andtechnology is still a widespread issue from pre-collegiate education and beyond, particularly for AfricanAmericans, Latinos and young women, across race and ethnicity (e.g., Heitin, 2014; NSF, 2015). Herein, weexplore how a youth-oriented workshop that combined multiple maker digital and physical toolkits fosteredinclusive participation. For example, most past efforts have focused on one specific tool or activity, whereas theact of creating an e-textile-based multi-interface design that is both digitally and physically reactive andresponsive (i.e., bidirectional) purposefully incorporates several toolkits with differing affordances and implicitassociations. In an effort to rectify past participatory inequities, the first author designed two instantiations of amaker workshop for high school youth that integrated e-textile design, coding, digital media design andsimplified physical computing, each of which would elicit different interests and biases (Richard & Kafai,2015). We explore how the curriculum encouraged and fostered collaboration and inclusivity, as well asdisrupted preconceptions around computing and creativity, through our guiding research question: How doesdesigning multi-interface bidirectionally responsive projects foster collaboration and inclusivity?BackgroundIn recent years, there has been increasing attention paid to who participates in interest-driven digital learningactivities (e.g., Ito, et.al, 2013). While makerspaces can cultivate a variety of learning processes and practices,including low tech ones, many efforts have focused on computational thinking skills and creative practices.CSCL 2017 Proceedings415© ISLSEquity and inclusivity in computing and makingIn line with efforts to diversify toolkits and modalities, many have explored how makerspaces can promoteequitable and inclusive participation. For example, research has found that integrating crafting with engineeringdesign, in the ways enabled through the Lilypad Arduino, can change the ways that gendered interests areexpressed, often resulting in sewing being seen as valuable to computation, and young men being freer inexpressing these interests (Kafai, Fields & Searle, 2014; Kafai, et. al, 2014; Kafai, Searle, Martinez & Brayboy,2014; Richard et al, 2015). Others have found that e-textiles can disrupt past preconceptions and patterns aroundgendered ability, access and authority in making (Buchholz, et. al, 2014). Further, researchers have exploredhow utilizing the Lilypad Arduino and e-textile design could create cultural connections between NativeAmerican indigenous practices and computational thinking (Kafai, Searle, Martinez & Brayboy, 2014).However, some have noted that utilizing the Lilypad and e-textile design, as a standalone activity, does notnecessarily tap into a variety of interests and practices alone (e.g., Richard & Kafai, 2015).Moreover, research has shown that it is equally important to foster culturally supportive structures inthe design of technology-oriented learning spaces, in order to encourage and sustain diverse hobbyist activitiesand workforces (e.g., Scott, Sheridan & Clark, 2015). For example, scholars have noted that, while past effortsto engage youth in computing often included diverse participation, it did not necessarily result in more equitablecomputational participation (Scott, Sheridan & Clark, 2015). This lack of equitable participation can partially beexplained by the design of technologies that are theoretically value free, but fail to recognize the ways they maybe implicitly exclusionary (Lachney, Babbitt & Englash, 2016). In other words, inclusive participation needs tomake a concerted effort to recruit diverse participation, have diverse mentors, allow learners to explore theirintersecting and diverging experiences, critique and redesign media representations with accessible tools (suchas Scratch) and promote an overall supportive and inclusive environment, whether this is through tapping intoculturally relevant pedagogies and practices (Lachney, Babbitt & Englash, 2016; Scott, Sheridan & Clark, 2015)or through explicit efforts for inclusion (Richard, et.al., 2015).Collaboration and inclusivityIn this paper, we subscribe to Roschelle’s (1992) definition of collaboration, which is “building and maintaininga shared understanding of a problem or task, distributing responsibility across members, sharing expertise,mutually constructing, and negotiating cognition” (Van den Bossche, Gijselaers, Segers & Kirschner, 2006, p.494). Similarly to Peppler and colleagues (2015), we see collaboration as involving effective articulation ofideas and sharing responsibility and contributions. Making involves projects that are big and ambitious, whichcan necessitate collaboration and division of labor between participants, skills that are seen as essential aspectsof 21 st century skills. We additionally contend that providing an intentional diversity of physical and digitaltoolkits in maker activities further encourages collaboration because of both the complexity involved in thedesign and integration process and also the capitalization on varying participant interests and skills. We contendthat both aspects are important in meeting the goals of purposefully inclusive collaborative learning in making.We also challenge that collaboration has to be open, equitable, interdependent, and cohesive to fostereffective task performance. Effective collaboration results in deeper learning, critical thinking, collectiveunderstanding and long-term retention, and can help build group cohesion (e.g., Johnson & Johnson, 1989).However, simply placing students in groups is not sufficient for collaboration. There are social and interpersonalfactors such as social relationships amongst team members, collective efficacy of the group, team cohesion ontasks and feeling of safety within the group that are equally important to collaboration, inclusivity, and teamperformance. Miyake and Kirschner’s (2014) model of team learning beliefs and behaviors describes fourfactors that have positive effects on team learning and collaboration. We argue that these factors also can havepositive impact on inclusivity: making team members feel that they are a valuable part of the team whilepromoting a safe environment to share their ideas, knowledge and opinions, and take risks. These four factorsare psychological safety, cohesion, interdependence and group potency.Social conditions and team-level beliefs about interpersonal relations with team members, collectivebelief on the efficacy of the group, team cohesion on tasks at hand and a feeling of safety within the group areequally important to collaboration and team performance. Effective risk taking (Kreijns, Kirschner & Jochems,2002) requires a sense of safety with team dynamics. Team psychological safety is defined as a “shared beliefthat the team is safe for interpersonal risk taking” (Edmondson, 1999, pp. 350). For example, team membersmay not feel comfortable with each other, or, conversely, close-knit team members may isolate others.Promoting a sense of psychological safety has been found to improve team performance and innovation. Akin topsychological safety is a sense of assurance in the group’s ability – or group potency (i.e., collective selfefficacy) – which can lead to perseverance during predicaments and conflict (Shea & Guzzo, 1987).Additionally, Miyake and Kirschner (2014) suggested a shared commitment to a task leads to better learningCSCL 2017 Proceedings416© ISLSand performance. Team cohesion has two dimensions: task and social cohesion. Task cohesion emphasizes thecommitment to and enjoyment from the collective effort by all members to work collaboratively towardscompleting a task. Social cohesion, on the other hand, refers to group cohesiveness resulting from the emotionalbonds and friendship, which tends to be motivated towards completing tasks just to appease others. Tasksthemselves can viewed differently by team members. For example, task interdependence can lead to morecommunication since groups see interconnections between sub-tasks that contribute to overall groupperformance, whereas, positive outcome interdependence can lead to more constructive conflict since individualmembers’ benefits are associated with collective successful task completion (e.g., Van den Bossche, et. al, 2006).MethodsSetting and participantsThe setting was a hybrid formal/informal learning experience for 9th graders in a large city in the NortheasternUnited States. Participants (10 girls, 8 boys from diverse ethnic, racial and socioeconomic backgrounds) werestudents from a science magnet high school. As part of the school’s required out-of-school learning experience,students could choose from an assortment of informal workshops coordinated through a partnering sciencemuseum, covering a variety of science and technology topics and offering various forms of instruction. Theworkshop ran for eight weeks, once a week, for about 2 hours (time and duration limitations imposed by theschool). Eighteen students enrolled in the workshop and 17 completed all course activities (one left the school),working on teams of 2-3 students to create final projects (artifacts).CurriculumThe workshop had been taught previously but redesigned to respond to limitations during the previousinstantiation of its experimental curricula (Richard & Kafai, 2015). The novel curriculum of both instantiationswas designed and taught by the first author, and focused on utilizing novice friendly digital and physical toolkitsto teach youth how to create bidirectionally responsive projects. In other words, students learned how to createprojects that were responsive in multiple physical and digital interfaces. While past efforts have taught studentshow to create projects with digital and physical interaction, this curriculum was unique because they had toengage in designs that were simultaneously responsive in both environments (Richard & Kafai, 2015).Learners worked with Scratch, a block-based coding and media creation platform, the MakeyMakey, aphysical computing plug-and-play device that can make anything conductive control the computer, the LilypadArduino, a microcontroller to create e-textile-based wearable physical interfaces, and ModKit, a visual, blockbased coding environment, to code the Lilypad Arduino. The purpose was to encourage learners to createdigitally and physically responsive wearable games, which would mirror many of the kinds of design anddevelopment practices utilized in creating current high tech wearable products. Further, we wanted to foster thekinds of computational literacies involved in both designing these kinds of technologies and also in workingcollaboratively on a team to do so. However, they could also interrogate and redesign the systems behind them.Moreover, we felt they would learn that design involves the distribution of expertise, and how to collectivelynegotiate ideas and divide responsibilities. We anticipated that the process of team-based design would integratetheir unique interests and skills, making each part essential to the whole, so they begin to see the value ofcrafting, engineering design, art and media making, and coding as equally valuable to the final product.In the previous curriculum, youth learned how to use each of the toolkits during the first half of theworkshop, where they would engage in both didactic instruction and project-based work. However, based on thenovelty of the curriculum, it was more akin to problem-based than project-based learning. Between the first andsecond version of the workshop, the first author trained and worked with a former graduate student to createbuildable models of each aspect of the curriculum. During the second iteration, discussed here, students learnedthe material primarily by engaging with project-based work from model designs, such as a simple textile glovethat could connect to Scratch with the MakeyMakey and conductive fabric, and a standalone e-textile projectwith the Lilypad Arduino that would control LEDs with conductive fabric. They also learned how to remix inScratch, how to create basic interactions, such as movement, and how to create customized sprites. Finally, theylearned how to connect all of the pieces together with a more complex e-textile glove that produced lights,sound and vibration while controlling a Scratch game. They spent half of the fifth class learning design-thinkingprinciples and creating storyboards of their design ideas. Afterwards, they chose their own teams, andnegotiated their designs in order to start the final project creation process over the final three classes.MethodologyData utilized here is in the form of video recorded class observations and interviews with 16 students whoconsented (pseudonyms used to protect identity). A total of 3 fully bidirectional and 3 unidirectional projectsCSCL 2017 Proceedings417© ISLSwere created (unidirectional projects only utilized Scratch and the MakeyMakey to create wearable gamecontrollers with no physical responsiveness). This data analysis focuses on the bidirectionally responsive games,of differing complexity, and one unidirectional game, as case studies for the kind of affordances that can befostered through bidirectionally responsive making.In line with our research question, we explored observations and interviews to understand whether andhow collaboration and inclusivity were encouraged through the workshop and toolkits. We utilized Miyake andKirschner’s (2014) team learning model as a frame for understanding these interactions. Further, we exploredwhether team members felt safe to explore their own individuality within the group (psychological safety) and ifthe team helped cultivate an environment for open communication, diverse ideas, and supportive andconstructive feedback. Further, we analyzed whether teams valued task cohesion or social cohesion and howtheir choices may have affected overall team performance. To explore inclusivity, we looked at evidence of achange in computational perspectives (Brennan & Resnick, 2012) and perceptions of computing as a field(Kafai, et. al., 2014). We utilize perceptions to understand how the workshop fostered digital identity formation(i.e., technology self-efficacy), which is instrumental to equitable participation in computing (Goode, 2010).Findings and discussionBidirectional projectsThe “Dino Party” (see figure 1) project is a pet care game where players utilize a carefully crafted, visuallyresponsive, wearable bracelet to command a dinosaur pet to play and eat in a digital Scratch game of theirdesign. The team designed the physical controller so that both the MakeyMakey and Lilypad were connected.When different conductive fabric buttons were touched, the pet sprite would perform a sequence of actions inthe digital environment, which they had coded in Scratch and connected to the fabric with the MakeyMakey,and, simultaneously, the tricolor LED would change color in the physical environment, which they had designedthe e-textile circuit to do and coded in the Lilypad Arduino through the ModKit coding environment. Projectmembers consisted of 2 girls (Sadia and Elisa) and 1 boy (Andre). The “Dino Party” team consisted of teammembers who were mostly inexperienced with programming, digital design, e-textiles and circuitry. Andre andSadia, for example, did not have experience in any of the content areas, while Elisa had some background andexperience with Scratch and circuitry. Sadia explained that in the beginning “just Andre sewed, I made theglove and then Elisa programmed, but we alternated” so that everyone “got a fair chance of doing something.”Sadia, Elisa and Andre were initially “clueless” about their final project because all their ideas had “pros andcons.” They “listed the pros and cons and…the challenges,” divided up the tasks and also switched tasks. Thedivision of labor and the opportunity to perform other sub-tasks such as sewing, programming and designingshows that the team promoted a safe and collaborative group learning environment. The team created a practiceof collaboration where decision making was structured into a cost benefit analysis. Sadia described that the teamhad “different ideas” regarding the sprite design though they “didn’t really argue too much.” The team dynamicwas such that during instances of constructive conflict the team “compromised” and “talked it out.” The teamalso was not punitive when somebody “didn’t code right” and instead were “supportive of each other.”Figure 1 (left). “Dino Party” project; Figure 2 (right). “Scratch Cat…” project.Overall, the team seemed to be motivated more by task cohesion. The group had devised a strategyaround the division of labor such that “Andre sewed, [Sadia] made the glove and…Elisa programmed” but they“alternated” so that everyone had a “fair chance of doing something.” Sadia further described that the team“took a couple of weeks to get [the project] programmed, coded, [and] sewed [with] the conductive fabric” butthey felt “accomplished.” Andre mentioned that the team worked on “three different things going on at the sametime” and Elisa said that it was “fun to associate [all of the components] together.” All team members describedfeeling proud of what they had accomplished together, with Sadia stating that she felt “successful of what [she]made.” The Dino Party team had also high levels of group potency. While, according to Sadia, combining theLilyPad, the Makey Makey, and Scratch was “sometimes overwhelming” because of “all these wires andcoding” and the constant “plugging it up and unplugging,” the team pushed through it. Further, all members ofCSCL 2017 Proceedings418© ISLSthe Dino Party team expressed positive shifts in perceptions of computing. For example, Sadia, who originallythought computing was “boring” or something “computer geeks do,” realized that working with computers is“actually a lot of interactive work with your people.” While Elisa and Andre wanted to pursue careers inmedicine, they saw new diversity in how computing could be applied in their lives: Andre saw computing asincluding “tangible real world objects” and Elisa felt the workshop “helped [her] in engineering” so she can nowsay "you can do it this way instead of that way."“Scratch Cat Screeches at You” (figure 2) is a maze game, where players utilize a petal-like controller,with conductive fabric that serves to move the Scratch cat sprite up, down, left or right (figure 5). The project isbidirectional in that the e-textile controller is connected both with the MakeyMakey and Lilypad, and bothScratch and the Lilypad are coded for responsiveness. For example, pressing the upward facing petal on thetextile controller would trigger a “when [up arrow] pressed” sequence of events in Scratch, as well as turn on anLED connected via the Lilypad. Project members were two girls (Evelyn and Jackie). The “Scratch Cat…” teamwas a unique case, consisting of a member with lots of experience in coding and media making in Scratch butno experience in circuitry and e-textiles (Evelyn) and another member with no background in any of thedomains (Jackie). Jackie described how Evelyn set up the Lilypad and did most of the Scratch coding while she“designed the controller to be a flower.” Jackie also connected the “trilight [tricolor LED] to the thing that madeeverything light up [the Lilypad Arduino]” with Evelyn’s help. Evelyn stated that the project was “verycollaborative”: they “split off, the Makey Makey and the programming because Jackie could sew better than[Evelyn] could and [Evelyn] could program better than [Jackie] could.” Similarly, Jackie wrote a “few Scratchcommands” because she felt it was not “fair to have [Evelyn] do all the Scratch work.” Overall, they appearedmore motivated by task cohesion, partially because they didn't have social bonds before the workshop.However, there was evidence of a lack of psychological safety in the team dynamic. Due to Evelyn's priorexperience with Scratch, Jackie did not feel confident working with it because she feared that she might “mess”things up. Evelyn was highly invested in her Scratch coding expertise and this unspoken hierarchy was enforcedin the team. While she did ask Evelyn to let her write a “few commands,” she gave up because she could notcode one of the sprites. Jackie also complained that Evelyn “sometimes...didn't listen to [her] ideas” and viceversa, and that Evelyn “moved too fast” or they would “moved on” to other tasks without communicating.The team experienced instances of high and low group potency throughout the design process. Jackiefelt that “it was good” working with her partner because she helped her “deal with challenges.” The team waseffective at “keep [her] on task” and “helped her learn...about Scratch and Modkit.” Evelyn commented that “itwas frustrating” working with ModKit and Lilypad Arduino “because [they] never worked” and they were“angry at times” when combining the environments. However, the team pushed through their difficulties,finished the project, and even thought their partnership was strong enough to team up for a science fair.Moreover, despite some of the limitations in team dynamics, both team members expressed shifts in theirperceptions of computing. Jackie originally thought computing “would be boring or just dry” but afterwardrealized that it could be “fun,” “challenging,” and something she could “learn” from. She even discussedcreating gloves on her own that could keep someone warm in the winter. Evelyn felt the workshop helped her“work through” computational creation, and “felt better” about computing, which would “definitely” play animportant role in her future aspiration to be an astrophysicist.Figure 3. “Whack-A-Dragon” project.“Whack-A-Dragon” (figure 3) was a game akin to whack-a-mole that utilized dragons and ghostsinstead of moles. Sprites would randomly appear on the screen in Scratch: hitting a dragon sprite would rewardyou in the game, whereas hitting a ghost sprite would penalize you. A colorful felt-based board with conductivefabric served as the physical interface, where you could hit different parts of the board with a mallet createdfrom a recycled water bottle. The conductive fabric corresponded to screen coordinates in Scratch, and, whenhit, would trigger a musical sound in the physical environment (through the Lilypad Buzzer) and sounds andactions in the game. Three boys (Jeremy, Hayden and Eric) made up the project team. Most team members hadno prior experience with any of the domains or competencies associated, except for Jeremy, who had someminor circuitry experience and also had previously designed a car out of recycled materials. Hayden describedCSCL 2017 Proceedings419© ISLSthat “the work was shared [amongst the] group,” such that he was “the one who did Scratch” and the team“wanted another person mostly to do the sewing.” Observations showed that Eric coded the Lilypad in ModKitwith Jeremy’s help and Jeremy did all of the sewing exclusively. As Hayden explained, team members “wouldcontribute equally [to] each [of] their roles, and then other people would help them with their roles sometimes.”While class observations seemed to indicate a lack of psychological safety and cohesion, all membersindicated that they felt safe to communicate and negotiate. For example, Eric felt confident within the group to“ask questions” to team members and share “creative ideas.” He also described that one of the benefits ofteamwork was that he could “count on them to figure it out” if he “didn’t understand something.” Jeremyrecalled some disagreement when it came to the project but, while “com[ing] to an agreement… was prettyhard,” they “voted” and were able to resolve it fairly easily. While they demonstrated levels of task cohesion,such as when Hayden expressed feeling “good” about “figuring out” how to create the final project, they overallevidenced social cohesion. For example, Eric expressed that it was good to “collaborate with [his]friends…because you can ask your partner’s questions and have creative ideas,” as well as work on differentcomponents of the project in order to make “it into 1 big thing to show what we've learned and what we cannow do.” Jeremy felt the workshop “changed the design of the group” regarding “how [they all] workedtogether” in a “positive” way. While the literature asserts that task cohesion leads to better learning andperformance behavior (and the team did struggle with staying on task), by the end of the workshop, they allexpressed significant positive changes in their computing self-efficacy and identification. For example, Jeremyfelt the workshop “definitely” changed his perceptions of computing in that he “never really knew it was thatsimple to program” and was now “going to expand [his] experience.” Similarly, Hayden felt programming was“something [he had] wanted to get more into” and the workshop “helped reinforce [his] feelings about it.” Ericfelt Scratch “was fun” and enabled him to “create anything.” He also enjoyed working with the Lilypad and etextiles because “it brought more [of] the real world [where] you [can] create an actual game you can play usingphysical objects not just in the computer.” While he contended that he now thought “computing [was] morefun,” he also felt “it was more difficult” because “there’s so many possibilities,” though he could “takeadvantage of it.” He was especially motivated by design “because…you can have so many options and just becreative,” particularly with wearables because they “make it more realistic.”Figure 4. “Bad Hair Day” project.Unidirectional project“Bad Hair Day” (Figure 4) was a creatively designed wearable game that utilized the MakeyMakey to controlScratch. The textile controller repurposed a hat to represent the kinds of embodied interactions involved ingetting your hair done. Touching different parts of the hat would result in having a character on screen get herhair shampooed, blow dried and styled. Three girls (Aminata, Tyra and Mia) were project team members. The“Bad Hair Day” team had some past experience with some of the domain competencies and practices. WhileMia had no background, Aminata had had some limited experience with Scratch and Tyra had some experiencewith circuits. Surprisingly, Mia took on the group leadership role, encouraging the other members to collaborateand distribute aspects of project creation, while the other two members were mostly otherwise directed whenshe was not in attendance (due to her high school athletic obligations, she often missed classes). While Aminatawas instrumental in coming up with the design concept during the design thinking aspect of the workshop, shefound Scratch to be challenging, describing it as “hard for [her].” She also knew that she “would give up easily”if she worked alone, but her teammates encouraged her and - in her words - said “let’s try it out.”There were some arguments between Tyra and Aminata: according to Tyra, they were not“compromising,” and, according to Aminata, they had “different ideas.” Although there were arguments,constructive conflict and negotiation between Tyra and Aminata’s differing ideas meant that team members feltsecure to voice their concerns. For the most part, this group demonstrated more social cohesion than taskcohesion, which may partially explain why their project ended up being unidirectional. For example, whenasked about challenges with working the team, Tyra responded that they had to “sew everything on” and that“somebody had to take it home” and remember to bring it the next week. They “had to text each other” toremind people to bring the hat to class. Similarly, when asked about troubleshooting practices, Mia mentionedCSCL 2017 Proceedings420© ISLSthat they “had to” to code with a forever loop to create sounds that mimicked shampooing, washing, and blowdrying when different parts of the hat controller were touched. This frequent emphasis on having to dosomething implied that the team was more driven by social cohesion than task cohesion. However, they startedto evidence task interdependence. Tyra expressed that her group “took turns sewing everything together,”“helped each other” and did “everything together.” Aminata explained this was because if a team member “didnot understand something...maybe [their] friend will” and they would “correct it.” This task interdependencemeant that team members “taught each other” when some team members “were stuck” or “didn’t understandsomething.” Over the course of time, they expressed more task cohesion, coupled with group potency.Determined to finish the project, Aminata “slept over” at Tyra’s house “every Saturday…to work on [their]project” outside of the workshop. Class observations showed that Mia and Tyra were initially more activeworkshop members while Aminata had checked out early on. However, after the team adopted her hair salonidea, she was more engaged and rallied the team to complete the project. Tyra described that, initially, theycould not connect the MakeyMakey to the computer because “every time we would almost have it, it would be aproblem so we had to start over again.” However, they kept “com[ing] back” to the task and finally “made itwork.” According to Aminata, the team had nearly “[given] up” but decided that it was worth completing andwhen “it all came together” they were “proud.”While the team initially struggled, by the end of the workshop, each member expressed newfoundpositive changes in their perceptions of computing to varying degrees. For example, while Aminata wants to bea doctor and feels that she has not been “good at computers,” after participating in the workshop she “like[s]them because [she] was really into [them] here.” Similarly, Mia, who still has reservations about a career incomputing, expressed wonderment in what she learned during the workshop: “Until, like we came to theworkshop, I didn't know… I could be standing over here, and… doing something on my computer from rightthere.” She especially enjoyed creating wearable technologies, which she thought were “fun.” Tyra who “didn'thave anything really to do with computers or technology and stuff,” apart from schoolwork and entertainment,felt better about a career in computing. She previously thought that programming was a “basic job” wherepeople “sat at a desk and typed some stuff up and that was it.” After participating in the workshop, Tyra’sperspective is of admiration and appreciation, stating that programmers are “doing a really good job” because itis “hard.” Her perspective shifted from “know[ing] nothing about computers” to thinking “wearable technologyis fun,” and enjoying seeing “the wires and everything…[and] really play[ing] around with [them].”ConclusionFindings indicate that bidirectionally responsive making shows significant promise for fostering inclusivecollaborative practices in makerspaces by implicitly scaffolding and distributing making activities, and helpinglearners better appreciate the creative, diverse and meaningful ways computing could be used in their lives. Forexample, the tools themselves encouraged the distribution of activities, while also being attuned to the whole,enforcing task interdependence and often encouraging individual and group self-efficacy. Further, for mostteams, there appeared to be changes in the ways that gendered interests were expressed, as other studiesdiscussed previously have found. While the all boy team still expressed interest in the technical aspects (i.e.,“real world” and “tangible” connections over crafting), the mixed gender teams were more purposeful indistributing tasks and expressing diverse interests. However, unlike other interventions that integrate one toolkitor maker activity (such as standalone e-textile work) as a means of diversifying access or changing perceptions,bidirectionally responsive making encourages learners to distribute activities, such that collaboration is anessential aspect of design work. This process also helps integrate learners from their areas of interest orexpertise. While this can sometimes create friction, it can also produce opportunities for meaningful peripherallearning, both of which were evidenced on the “Scratch Cat…” team. Furthermore, learners from groupsunderrepresented in computing (on teams such as “Dino Party” and “Bad Hair Day”) expressed strongercomputing identity and self-efficacy. We contend that having a shared artifact of their efforts can be a powerfulmotivator and serve as evidence of mastery, regardless of their design team roles. We see this across teamswhose members expressed not only a greater understanding of computing and the diverse application it had intheir lives, but also awareness of aspects of the development process that were appealing to them, whether it becrafting, design, engineering or coding. During both instantiations of the workshop, allowing members tochoose their own teams mostly ended up being an added benefit, which helped them finish their projects.However, there is always the concern that some students will be left behind. While not all groups were focusedon task cohesion, most eventually demonstrated a shift from group cohesion (or friendship-oriented goals) totask goals, such as with the “Bad Hair Day” team.An important limitation in our findings is the cost associated once multiple maker toolkits areintegrated in the curriculum. This is an important consideration, despite the increased cost accessibility of makerCSCL 2017 Proceedings421© ISLSand DIY materials (Blikstein, 2013). Once each toolkit is factored in, the total cost of materials per team isestimated between $100-150 (or $30-50 per student); on the other hand, having a purposeful team-based activityallows learners to distribute the costs as well as the benefits of learning a variety of tools. Another limitationhappened when the school stopped providing PC laptops in favor of Chromebooks. However, Chromebookscannot download software, such as ModKit. Incorporating the Raspberry Pi in the curriculum would add a layerof complexity but also benefits such as learning computer hardware and providing a more affordable andextensible Chromebook alternative. A future direction for our work will be to further understand the benefits andlimitations of bidirectionally responsive making for inclusive collaborative learning for older and youngerlearners and with alternative toolkits and materials, such as paper or squishy circuits and Raspberry Pis.AcknowledgementsSpecial thanks to Yasmin Kafai for supporting the project, Lei Radium Yang for helping design the buildablemodels for the second iteration of the workshop, and R. William Ashley for assisting with data analysis.ReferencesBlikstein, P. (2013). Digital fabrication and ‘making’ in education: The democratization of invention. FabLabs, 1-21.Brennan, K & Resnick, M. (2012). New frameworks for studying and assessing the development of computationalthinking. Annual Meeting of AERA, Vancouver, BC, Canada.Buchholz, B., Shively, K., Peppler, K., & Wohlwend, K. (2014). Hands on, hands off: Gendered access in craftingand electronics practices. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 21(4), 278-297.Buechley, L., Eisenberg, M., Catchen, J., & Crockett, A. (2008). The LilyPad Arduino: using computational textilesto investigate engagement, aesthetics, and diversity in comp sci ed. In Proc of SIGCHI (pp.423-432). ACM.Dougherty, D. (2013). The maker mindset. In M.Honey & D.Kanter (eds.), Design, make, play (pp. 7-11). Routledge.Edmondson, A. (1999). Psychological safety and learning behavior in work teams.Admin sci quarterly,44(2),350-383.Goode, J. (2010). The digital identity divide. New media & society, 12(3), 497-513.Halverson, E. R., & Sheridan, K. (2014). The maker movement in education. Harvard Ed Review, 84(4), 495-504.Heitin, L. (2014, Jan 10). No girls, blacks or Hispanics take AP computer science exam in some states. Ed Week.Honey, M., & Kanter, D. (Eds.). (2013). Design, make, play. Routledge.Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., ... & Watkins, S. C. (2013). Connectedlearning: An agenda for research and design. Digital Media and Learning Research Hub.Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (1989). Cooperation and competition: Theory and research. Interaction Book Co.Kafai, Y., Fields, D., & Searle, K. (2014). Electronic textiles as disruptive designs. Harvard Ed Rev, 84(4), 532-556.Kafai, Y. B., Lee, E., Searle, K., Fields, D., Kaplan, E., & Lui, D. (2014). A crafts-oriented approach to computing inhigh school. ACM Transactions on Computing Education (TOCE), 14(1), 1-20.Kafai, Y., Searle, K., Martinez, C., & Brayboy, B. (2014). Ethnocomputing with electronic textiles. In Proc of the45th ACM SIGSCE (pp. 241-246). ACM.Kreijns, K., Kirschner, P. A., & Jochems, W. (2002). The sociability of computer-supported collaborative learningenvironments. Educational Technology & Society, 5(1), 8-22.Lachney, M., Babbitt, W. & Englash, R. (2016). Software Design in the ‘Construction Genre’ of LearningTechnology: Content Aware Versus Content Agonistic. Computational Culture, 5.Miyake, N., & Kirschner, P. A. (2014). The social and interactive dimensions of collaborative learning. In R.K.Sawyer (ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 418-438).NSF (2015). Women, Minorities, and Persons with Disabilities in Science and Engineering. NSF: Arlington, VA.Peppler, K., Maltese, A., Keune, A., Chang, S. & Regalla, L. (2015). Survey of Makerspaces, pt II. Maker Ed Initiative.Peppler, K., Halverson, E., & Kafai, Y. B. (2016). Makeology (Vol.1). Routledge.Resnick, M., Berg, R., & Eisenberg, M. (2000). Beyond black boxes: Bringing transparency and aesthetics back toscientific investigation. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(1), 7-30.Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Monroy-Hernández, A., Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., Brennan, K., Millner, A., Rosenbaum, E.,Silver, J., Silverman, B. & Kafai, Y.B. (2009). Scratch: Programming for all. Comm of ACM, 52(11), 60-67.Richard, G. T., & Kafai, Y. B. (2015). Responsive make and play: youth making physically and digitally interactiveand wearable game controllers. In A.Nijholt (ed.), More Playful User Interfaces (pp. 71-93). Springer.Richard, G. T., Kafai, Y. B., Adleberg, B., & Telhan, O. (2015). StitchFest: Diversifying a College Hackathon tobroaden participation and perceptions in computing. In Proc of the 46th ACM SIGSCE (pp. 114-119). ACM.Scott, K. A., Sheridan, K. M., & Clark, K. (2015). Culturally responsive computing: a theory revisited. Learning,Media and Technology, 40(4), 412-436.Shea, G. P., & Guzzo, R. A. (1987). Group effectiveness: What really matters? Sloan Management Review, 3, 25-31Van den Bossche, P., Gijselaers, W. H., Segers, M., & Kirschner, P. A. (2006). Social and cognitive factors drivingteamwork in collaborative learning environments. Small group research, 37(5), 490-521.CSCL 2017 Proceedings422© ISLS