Scaling Studio-Based Learning Through Social InnovationNetworksNatalia Smirnov, Matthew W. Easterday, and Elizabeth M. Gerbernsmirnov@u.northwestern.edu, easterday@northwestern.edu, egerber@northwestern.eduNorthwestern University, Delta Lab, Ford Design CenterAbstract: In this paper, we articulate a model for scaling Studio-Based Learning (SBL) via aSocial Innovation Network (SIN) – a distributed community of design studios collaborating tosolve social problems. We report findings from a case study of one SIN called Design forAmerica (DFA), using methods of “ethnography of infrastructure” (Star, 1999) that combineinterviews, surveys, and analysis of members’ communication on various channels tounderstand the ways SBL can be orchestrated as a distributed learning community. We arguethat principled design and use of cyberlearning tools and organizational routines can fostersociability and trust among members and promote routing of resources across the network,thereby alleviating orchestration challenges and infrastructuring a more effective environmentfor innovation and design learning.Keywords: design, innovation, networks, orchestration, studio-based learning, cyberlearningIntroductionTo solve society’s most pressing crises such as climate change, refugee displacement, and access to healthcare,21st century education should prepare social innovators, people who can recombine resources in creative waysin order to tackle complex, ill-structured problems (Trilling & Fadel, 2009). However, innovation is difficult tolearn, as it depends both on acquiring skills of creative problem-solving, and access to a favorable innovationecosystem–the resources, skills, collaborators and experts who can guide and support social innovation work(Gundry et al, 2011). Learning sciences is well positioned to improve innovation learning through research onproject-based learning, distributed cognition, and adaptive expertise (Blumenfeld et al, 1991; Hutchins, 1995;Hatano & Oura, 2006). Innovation learning on the other hand is a fruitful discipline for exploring the mostinteresting of learning sciences inquiries: the integration of STEM, arts, and social policy domains withinpressing, real-world problems; and the design of learning environments and technologies to support authentic,expert-guided communities of novice innovators.There is a timely opportunity to design and mobilize cyberlearning tools to support innovation learningthrough: (a) scaffolding studio-based learning via affordances of computer-mediated technologies; and (b)connecting design studios across institutions to facilitate sharing of resources, interdisciplinary collaboration andknowledge building. In this paper, we describe how the design studio model offers a promising prototype for anonline learning community to support innovation, what we call a social innovation network or SIN (Gerber andEasterday, 2015). We develop our proposal through a case study of Design for America (DFA), a network of 29university-based studios working to create local and social impact through interdisciplinary design. Using an“ethnography of infrastructure” approach (Star, 1999), we analyze the key features of this social innovationnetwork and the ways different practices and technological systems support and constrain accomplishment of itsunique learning goals.Studio-based learningThe studio model or Studio-Based Learning (SBL) is a promising approach to designing learning environmentsthat can promote both deep disciplinary learning and creativity (Sawyer, 2012). Characterized by open-endediterative problem solving, expert coaching, and a culture of sharing and critique, the studio model is especiallywell suited for supporting complex, project-based forms of learning like innovation. While prevalent in creativedomains such as art and architecture, and increasingly utilized in novel informal STEM learning environments,the studio model has not been extensively researched in the learning sciences (Sawyer, 2012). Even less attentionhas been given to the opportunity to use digital and networked tools to scaffold and scale SBL.While SBL might be organized similarly to and incorporate features of other learning arrangements,such as classroom, apprenticeship, or informal learning (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Ito et al, 2009), recentethnographies of studio-based learning (SBL) have found that the studio has a particular set of norms as acommunity of practice, where students are expected to: (a) iteratively generate and refine design solutions byincorporating peer and instructor feedback; (b) frequently communicate design ideas visually and verbally, andICLS 2016 Proceedings35© ISLS(c) collaborate with peers to give and receive help in achieving learning goals (Cennamo et al, 2011). Studioinstructors scaffold these activities through assignments that constrain the complexity of problems, coachingnovices through expert feedback, and explicitly reminding students of these cultural norms during critiques.Additionally, Sawyer (2012) found that the studio curriculum thrives on project complexity, engaging learners inproblems that require multiple and diverse solutions. Working through this complexity requires continuousexternalization of students’ insights, initial directions, and partial solutions, exposing them to expert and peerfeedback. Thus, the SBL model requires a culture of open sharing, capacity for self-regulation, collaboration, andongoing iteration. These unique practices make the design studio an especially fruitful context for learning socialinnovation. However, these distributed and collaborative practices are difficult to scale, because they depend ona complex orchestration of diverse resources and stakeholders, in the context of uncertain and ambiguousproblems.Social innovation networksOnline learning communities are increasingly being used to increase access to resources, solve orchestrationchallenges and help make classroom learning more authentically aligned to real-world contexts (Bruckman, 2006).But different online platforms afford different social and learning interactions. Online learning communitiesshould reflect the goals and organizational structures of prototypical learning communities, whether that prototypeis a classroom, a tailor apprenticeship, or a neighborhood samba school (Bruckman, 2006). Our goal is to createa widely adopted cyberlearning environment that will support innovation. To that effect, we have been developingthe Loft (http://loft.io)–an authentic online learning community based on the studio model. This platform enableslearners and instructors to share progress, exchange feedback, collaborate with each other on complex real-worldproblems, and develop transferrable skills by participating in scaffolded design challenges. While cyberlearningtools can enhance innovation learning within a single studio context by providing a system for projectdocumentation and resource exchange, internet technology can also enable us to take the affordances of studiobased learning further, by connecting people, resources, ideas, and feedback exchange across studios. Thus, weare also developing a new genre of a design learning community that is dependent on radical and distributedconnectivity. We call this new genre a social innovation network (SIN).We define a social innovation network (SIN) as a technologically connected, distributed community ofdesign studios working collaboratively to solve social problems and share design resources. A social innovationnetwork echoes the vision of a collaboratory, developed in the 1950s by William Wulf of National ScienceFoundation. Enabled by networked technology, a collaboratory is “a center without walls, in which the nation’sresearchers can perform their research without regard to geographical location-interacting with colleagues,accessing instrumentation, sharing data and computational resource, and accessing information in digital libraries”(Wulf, 1993). In the case of a SIN, the network-enabled collaboration supports the design of social innovationsinstead of scientific research.In this paper, we study a specific SIN called Design for America (DFA). DFA is a network ofextracurricular studios at 29 universities that brings together interdisciplinary teams of students, faculty,professionals, and alumni to solve real world problems through human centered design. Universities host oncampus DFA studios where student teams work on innovation projects throughout the academic year, by followinga systematic design process provided in a downloadable DFA Process Guide and detailed on the Loft platformthrough interactive challenges. University students who choose to participate in a DFA studio form project teamswith other studio members, identify challenges affecting their local community, such as reducing hospitalacquired infections or reducing water waste in cafeterias, and work over the course of a year to understand userneeds, ideate, prototype, test, and implement solutions. In the process, they partner with community organizations,and receive coaching from local design professionals, support from more experienced DFA mentors at the nationaloffice (5 full-time DFA staff), and regular feedback from their peers on campus. Because the studios are selforganized and participation of all the stakeholders is voluntary, the organization of the studios is very looselystructured and adapted to meet the culture and rhythm of the respective college campuses. Rather than mandatinga particular set of administrative roles and activities, the five full time DFA national staff provide ongoing supportto the different studios’ emerging challenges and needs through bi-annual campus visits, regular video conferencecheck-ins, email newsletters with tips and suggestions, and a yearly Leadership Studio that brings together studioleaders from all the DFA campuses for one week to learn the design process, share best practices, and troubleshootcommon studio problems. Since this community is distributed across the entire country, DFA leaders andmembers heavily rely on digital communication tools, including Google docs, Slack and the Loft.io platform, toICLS 2016 Proceedings36© ISLSconnect and collaborate with each other and support studio-based learning. Our study of DFA was designed toanswer the following questions:1. How does DFA currently orchestrate distributed Studio-Based Learning (SBL)?2. What are the affordances and constraints of existing communication and collaboration tools and practicesDFA leaders and members use for realizing the goals of the distributed SBL community?3. Which principles might we use to better design socio-technical systems (jointly optimized organizationalroutines and cyberlearning tools) to facilitate learning and social innovation in this type of learningorganization?MethodsThis inquiry into the communication and collaboration practices of DFA members and leaders followed an“ethnography of infrastructure” (Star, 1999) approach–examination of the “boring things” that reveal thebackground workings and assumptions of a complex socio-technical system. We followed this approach becausewe noticed that even though we had designed and implemented a platform specifically for Studio-Based Learning(e.g. the Loft), DFA members were using other tools in addition (e.g. Facebook, GroupMe, Google Docs, etc) toconnect and collaborate with each other, both within and across studios. Thus, the existing cyberlearning platformwas not adequately meeting the needs of members at the network level. Members and leaders of DFA repeatedlyexpressed desire for more resource sharing and coaching specifically at this scale. We wanted to understand whyDFA members chose to use certain communication and collaboration tools, how they used them (e.g. via whatroutines) and what those tools afford and constrain in terms of learning and collaboration. Studying both tools androutines helps us deepen our understanding of this learning community and generate design principles fordeveloping new tools and routines to better support the goals of this system. We believe that while specifictechnological designs can afford particular practices and interactions, technologies themselves do not determinesocial behaviors. Rather, social behaviors are mediated by users’ mental models, circumstances, goals and tactics(Geels, 2004, Fischer, 2007). As such, we emphasize the need for joint optimization of both organizationalroutines and technologies, and for attending to continuous emergence and adaptation mechanisms within a sociotechnical system (Trist, 1981; Bruckman, 2004).Data collection and analysisWe studied the network-level practices, strategies, and goals of DFA in three ways. First, we collected andanalyzed communication and collaboration practices of network members at the network level, or across studios.For example, we collected posts on DFA’s Student Network Facebook Page, cross-studio discussions on Loft,and other platforms and channels (GroupMe, Text, GoogleDocs). Second, we conducted interviews with networkleaders about their mental model of the DFA network and its goals, and the tools and routines they use to supportDFA studios to support their project teams and connect to each other. Third, we surveyed 72 studio leaders aboutwhat supports are needed for managing their studios and the current communication and collaboration tools in useby studio members.This data collection was iterative, with each phase of collection and analysis informing the next round ofquestions. For example, analysis of DFA social media practices prompted us to consider the network leaders’decision to setup and use particular tools and not others. We were interested in this group in particular becausethey are primarily responsible for orchestrating learning at the network level, whereas studio leads and facultycoaches support individual studio learning. In interviews, we first asked the five DFA leaders (4 full-time fellowsand 1 administrator) to draw a “map of the DFA community” while talking aloud about the different actors theywere illustrating. This drawing served as a useful representation for the rest of the interview, providing a referencefor the multiple stakeholders of the network and illustrating the ways different digital tools were used tocommunicate and collaborate by certain members of the DFA community and not others. We analyzed theinterview transcripts using a grounded theory approach, first open coding transcripts to generate emerging themes,then specifying a set of descriptive codes, and applying these codes systematically to the entire data set (Charmaz,2014). The coding was performed by the first author and discussed and refined in weekly research meetings withthe rest of the research team. This analysis revealed that individual DFA leaders’ communication practices wereidiosyncratic and relied primarily on anecdotal evidence rather than analytics or extensive understanding ofmember needs. This finding prompted us to conduct need-finding interviews and develop a survey to understandthe needs of DFA student members and the digital tools they already use to communicate and collaborate witheach other. The survey was completed by 72 studio leaders at the annual all-network training conference. WeICLS 2016 Proceedings37© ISLSanalyzed the digital tool use and needs of DFA members, comparing them with our findings from DFA staffinterviews. Finally, we continued to collect examples of cross-studio communication on various platforms,triangulating our emerging thematic categories with new evidence (Yin 2013; Stake, 1995). As we advanced inour analysis, we compared empirical findings to existing theoretical constructs (Snow, Morrill & Anderson, 2003),and created explanatory matrices and networks (Miles, Huberman, Saldaña, 2013) to model relationships betweenvarious parts of the system (See tables 1 and 2).FindingsHow does the Studio model scale?Studio-based learning (SBL) is characterized by a set of norms and practices including project complexity, publiccritiques, and expert coaching (Sawyer, 2012; Cennamo, 2011). These norms are realized in the DFA studio-levelorganizational practices and afforded by the cyberlearning tools, including the Loft (Easterday et al, 2015; ReesLewis et al, 2015). In this study, we have zoomed out to examine the learning infrastructures at the network levelthat allow DFA to realize SBL model across institutions to support studios to carry out design and innovationwork (see Table 1). In the table below, we present a concise summary of this 3-level dynamic, from the SBLtheoretical model to studio practices to network organization. The two columns on the right present the findingsspecific to this study. The DFA goals and practices column presents examples of network-building activities fromour ethnography, while the rightmost column summarizes organizational needs to inform future cyberlearningtools and routines. These needs combine suggestions and wishes of DFA network leaders and members,articulated in interviews and surveys and ideas generated by the research team through the analysis of the data.Some potential ideas for adapting existing practices and creating new tools and routines are listed in parenthesis.Table 1: Studio-Based Learning (SBL) Model at the Studio and Network LevelsFeatures ofthe LearningEnvironmentHow DFAorchestrates SBLwithin studiosTools androutines tosupport SBLwithin studiosStudentswork oncomplexreal-worldproblemsDFA Teamspartner with localcommunityorganizations towork on realworld dilemmas inhealthcare,education, etc.Tools to manageproject complexity(Scoping Wheel,Design Canvas)Studio leads confrontmany real-worldchallenges, such asmember recruitment,leadership organization,managing relationshipswith partners, workingwith coaches, etc.Help studio leadsanticipate, externalizeand respond to commonstudio challenges(Studio guides, FAQs,training, mentoring)supportprovided byinstructor(s)or systemScaffoldingthroughconstrainedassignments,expertmodelingandcoaching,and promptsStudio leads guideteams throughphases of thedesign process,using DFA processguide and LOFT.iotutorialsDesign ProcessScaffolds (Guides,DesignChallenges,Scoping Wheel,Coaching Stands,regular mentoringcalls)National staff supportstudio leads to facilitatelearning within theirstudios (e.g. recruitment,critiques) but mustmanage: (a) varied studiocalendars; (b) busystudent schedules; (c)unreliable communicationpractices; and (d) limitedtime of 5 staffJust-in-time remindersand prompts for how tofacilitate a studio-wideactivity (emailnewsletters; socialmedia reminders;Group Calls)demands onlearnersStudentsself-regulategoal-settingand progressmanagementProject Teamsconsistently meetindependently towork on projectsTools and routinesto support goalsetting andplanning (to-dolists, Workbench,Calendar)Studios must adaptprocess and governance totheir own campusstructure and culture;studio leads might havelittle to no experienceleading an organizationSupport studio goalplanning and flexibleadaptation to campusculture. (e.g. GroupCalls, Campus Visits)Studio crits allowTools and routines Annual DFA Leadershiptype ofproblemsolvedStudioBasedLearning(SBL)organizational RegularICLS 2016 Proceedings38DFA goals and practices Organizational needsto orchestrate SBLfor tools & routines tosupport distributedacross studiosSBLMake resources and© ISLSroutinesexhibition/teams to sharevisualization progress andof progress receive feedback& problems(Critiques orCrits)role of peers Reliance onand mentors peercollaborationand expertmentoring toachievelearninggoalstimescale ofworkCycles ofOngoingIterationto support progresssharing andfeedback withcoaches andmentors (VirtualStands, feedbackfeatures on Loft)Studio providesopportunity for studioleads to share best studiomanagement practicesand toolsprogress visible acrossstudios more regularly(Cross-studio meetups;email updates; ToolExpos; Group Calls;Facebook/TwitterUpdates; StudioDashboard)DFA projects arecollaborative;teams aresupported bycoaches andfaculty advisorsvia critiques andstandsTools and routinesto foster peersupport and helpseeking (Cheers,FeedbackRoutines, Stands)National staff want DFAmembers to connect toeach other directly toshare resources andprovide help and activatethe power of the DFAalumni network formentorshipFacilitate help seeking,giving and informationrouting across studiosbased on similarities(Help Forum, Tagging,Cross-studio meetups,Networking activities,Recommender system);Attract and retainprofessional mentorsDFA are teamsencouraged tocontinue workingon their projectsafter first yearNon-linear toolsfor authoring andarchiving multiplesolution prototypes(Challenges,Feedback)Network practices changeas network grows;Members join studios ona rolling basis, requireonboarding.Studio leadership turnsover as students graduate.Crowdsourcecurriculum authoringand revision, preservetraditions and train newleadership (Wiki,Leadership Ladder)DFA orchestrates Studio-Based Learning – guided, collaborative, iterative, real-world problem-solving – bothwithin and across studios (Table 1). Running a DFA studio is its own form of a complex, real-world challengethat requires ongoing problem refining, help-seeking, iteration, and just-in-time learning. Just like in an SBLcontext, there is no one right answer to the problem of “how to run a studio” and expertise is distributed acrossthe community of other novice learners and volunteer coaches. To support this SBL network, the organizationalleaders need to “scale”–replicate and adapt–the practices of SBL instruction to 29 universities, 120+ projects and900+ active student members. The limited capacity of 5 full-time staff to effectively support all these stakeholdersand their needs presents significant orchestration challenges. From our interviews with network and studioleaders, we found that the primary goals and needs of this SIN are to connect network stakeholders with eachother to promote resource sharing, help-seeking and giving, and orchestrate social and pedagogical support forthe studios and teams to follow the design process. Leaders and members of the network adapted variousinformation and communication technologies (ICTs) to orchestrate resource sharing and collaboration acrossstudios. In our interviews, DFA national staff mentioned 37 ICTs that they either currently used or consideredusing for DFA activities, including social media, video conferencing, project management and collaborationtools. In our survey of DFA studio leaders, students mentioned 18 separate digital platforms that they use on adaily basis. Below we analyze the affordances and constraints of the most frequently used ICTs for supportingthis Social Innovation Network.How do ICTs support and constrain SINs?To illustrate the use of ICTs to orchestrate distributed SBL, consider the following vignette of an hour-long videocall on Adobe Connect with leaders from the 29 DFA studios across the country. Three group calls happened atthe same time, with several studios per group, facilitated by 1 national staff member each. Two weeks prior,studio leads received an email asking them to fill out a Google Form and list their studio’s upcoming events andcurrent challenges. The results were organized by the DFA national staff in a Google Spreadsheet, based onsimilarity of the goals, the kinds of help each studio needs, variability of experience, and “diversity” of studios–one of the goals of this call is make studio leads talk with leaders from different universities than they did lastmonth. 10 participants from 3 different time zones joined one of the video calls. 3 of these attendees had troublewith their microphones, so they had to type in the chat window instead of talking. One student came in late; twoparticipants had to leave early to go to other meetings. The students introduced themselves and discussed howeach of their studios was dealing with various types of design feedback – from studio peers, professional mentors,ICLS 2016 Proceedings39© ISLSand target users. Studio leaders shared exemplary practices (e.g. “a workshop on presenting your work” or “wedo a weekly pin-up session with professionals”), others surfaced concerns (“are we losing sight of users?”). TheDFA staff member facilitated the conversation, took notes in a Google Doc, and tried to acknowledge and respondto the contributions from students typing in the chat while others spoke out loud. With less than 10 minutes left,the facilitator asked each person to name their takeaways and reflect on how the call went. Participants weresurprised by the diversity of practices across campuses and wished to know more about each studio’s differentprojects. Then the facilitator said “let’s take a screenshot!”, counted “1-2-3” and pressed a several keys to capturea still of her computer screen. As the call ended, the DFA leader sighed, “I’m always so tired after these!” andthen immediately, “I have to tweet this now.”The example above captures only some of the tools DFA members currently use to orchestratedistributed, student-led studio-based learning. One of the most prominently used tools in this community isFacebook Groups: there is a Facebook Group for each DFA studio, one just for studio leads, one for the entirenetwork, one for alumni, and a group for DFA-ers interested in traveling together. Facebook was also mentionedas the most widely used tool in the DFA member survey. The group messaging app GroupMe is used by localteam members to manage their collaboration and by studio leads to keep in touch after annual and regionalmeetups. A few studios have recently adopted the platform Slack as a way to manage communication betweenteams and mentors within a studio. This combination of ICTs is tactical–an ad-hoc assemblage of available andfamiliar resources to achieve emerging goals (De Certeau, 1984). While DFA network uses ICTs in ways that arecreative, adaptive and practical, our study also helps to highlight the limitations of these tools, as they have notbeen designed explicitly or strategically to support distributed studio-based learning. For example, DFA memberscomplained that the Facebook feed doesn’t allow easy searching, archiving or re-organizing of information thatcould be potentially useful to future studio leaders or network members. Similarly, Google Docs lack standardsfor organization and archiving. As one of our informants said, “My personal hell is being lost in someone else’sGoogleDoc.” Despite its capacity to facilitate virtual face-to-face meetings, much of the time duringteleconferences on Adobe Connect may be spent managing internet connections or software issues. In the table2 below, we summarize the features and qualities of ICTs most commonly used by DFA members that wereaddressed as salient in our interviews and observations.Table 2: Features and Affordances of ICTs for supporting distributed SBLFeatures and affordances of ICTsEase ofonboardingFacebook Group Google Google Adobe Email Loft SlackGroupsMeDocs Hangout ConnectFamiliar to participants✓✓Mobile App✓✓Intra-team Collaborative Authoring / ProductioncollaborationProject-Management Tools✓✓✓✓✓✓✓NetworkMany-to-many conversationwideresource sharing User- and category- tagging, sharing✓✓✓✓✓✓✓Alerts, notifications✓AffectiveEmojis, reactions, photo postingInfrastructureVirtual Face2Face (video/audio)✓✓✓✓✓✓Organizational “More Professional”StrategyAnalytics✓40✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓Feedback, voting, polling, annotationICLS 2016 Proceedings✓✓Shared/cloud storage of documents“Less Formal”✓✓✓✓✓© ISLSStandardized archiving✓We organized ICT features into 5 major categories: (1) ease of onboarding, (2) intra-team collaboration features,(3) inter-team/network-wide information routing and resource sharing, (4) affective infrastructure, and (5)functions that support organizational strategy rather than solve an immediate problem. As this analysisdemonstrates, there is no one perfect platform that meets all of the needs of this community. While Facebookemerges as extremely versatile with regard to several variables (familiarity, collaborative features, affectiveexpression and so on), it lacks project management tools to facilitate teamwork or archiving tools to organizeuseful information developed in discussions for future use. In addition, because DFA is both extra-curricular andproto-professional–students volunteer to join DFA and lead studios, but often view it as a stepping stone topotential design jobs–it must balance being fun and social, while also supporting professional skill development.Part of our research project is to articulate design principles for developing and assembling ICTs to supportinnovation learning. Intentionally designed cyberlearning tools can help to capitalize on affordances of existingtechnologies while enabling more productive collaboration and resource sharing among SIN members. Next, wehighlight two key principles for designing cyberlearning tools to support SBL at the distributed network level:affective infrastructure and information routing.Design principles for socio-technical systems to support SINsAffective infrastructureAcross the different preferred modes of collaboration and communication, network members placed highimportance on affective modes of expression (e.g. emojis, pictures, reactions, and video calls). Posting silly photosand videos and using emojis in their conversations helped them build more sociability and trust with their peers,which facilitated other kinds of knowledge building and design resource sharing. The affective infrastructure isthus a critical feature of the SBL environment. As designers, we must attend to the ways the learning environment(or technology) is affectively experienced–as fun or formal, as exciting or boring, institutional or personal–andspecific infrastructural features that promote trust and sociability, which in turn foster resource sharing and helpseeking.Information routingIn a distributed SBL community, or SIN, it is impossible for any member of the network to attend to all theinformation exchanged between various parts of the network and consider its usefulness for his/her own purposes.Information routing (Resnick, 2001) is a form of socially-distributed filtering to manage this problem. Forexample, when resources or opportunities were posted on the DFA Facebook page, members used the Facebookuser tagging feature to alert other network members and bring them into the conversation. DFA staff intentionallyorganized group calls to facilitate information routing between more and less experienced studio leaders. Asdesigners, we must consider features and routines for information routing, such as the ability to tag other users toalert them of a relevant discussion, or automatic targeted notifications based on user-specified interests or roles.DiscussionLearning Sciences has a long tradition of designing cyberlearning tools to support project- and inquiry-basedlearning (Edelson, Gordin, Pea, 1999). Our case study of a distributed studio-based learning community extendsthis tradition by focusing on a new disciplinary domain (design learning), articulating a new genre of a learninginfrastructure (social innovation network), and proposing two design principles for building socio-technicalsystems that enhance SINs. Specifically, we have argued that attending to affective infrastructure and informationrouting will facilitate the creation of communication channels and resource sharing across a distributed network ofstudios, thus supporting innovation learning and design. These considerations are likely missing from previousethnographies of SBL because the small scale and face-to-face interaction of typical studio classes allow affectiveinfrastructure and information routing to be taken for granted (Colyvas & Powell, 2006).ReferencesBlumenfeld, P. C., Soloway, E., Marx, R. W., Krajcik, J. S., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar, A. (1991). Motivatingproject-based learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning. Educational Psychologist, 26(34), 369-398.ICLS 2016 Proceedings41© ISLSBruckman, A. (2004). Co-evolution of technological design and pedagogy in an online learning community.Designing for Virtual Communities in the Service of Learning, 239-255Bruckman, A. (2006). Learning in online communities. In Cambridge handbook of learning sciences.Cennamo, K., Brandt, C., Scott, B., Douglas, S., McGrath, M., Reimer, Y., & Vernon, M. (2011). Managing thecomplexity of design problems through studio-based learning. Interdisciplinary Journal of Problembased Learning, 5(2), 5.Charmaz, K. (2014). Constructing Grounded Theory. Sage.Colyvas, J. A., & Powell, W. W. (2006). Roads to institutionalization: The remaking of boundariesbetween public and private science. Research in organizational behavior, 27, 305-353.De Certeau, M. (1984). The practice of everyday life. Berkeley: University of California Press.Easterday, M., Lewis, D. R., & Gerber, E. (2013). Formative feedback in Digital Lofts: Learning environmentsfor real world innovation. In AIED Workshops.Easterday, M. W., Rees Lewis, D., & Gerber, E. M. (2015). Crowdsourcing critique. In CSCL crowd 2015, aworkshop at the 2015 International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, June7, Gothenburg, Sweden.Edelson, D. C., Gordin, D. N., & Pea, R. D. (1999). Addressing the challenges of inquiry-based learning throughtechnology and curriculum design. Journal of the learning sciences, 8(3-4), 391-450.Fischer, G. (2007). Designing socio-technical environments in support of meta-design and social creativity. InProceedings of the 8th international conference on computer supported collaborative learning.Geels, F. W. (2004). From sectoral systems of innovation to socio-technical systems: Insights about dynamics andchange from sociology and institutional theory. Research Policy, 33(6), 897-920.Gerber, E., & Easterday, M. (2015). Social innovation networks: Models, outcomes, and challenges. InProceedings of the MDW IX.Gundry, L. K., Kickul, J. R., Griffiths, M. D., & Bacq, S. C. (2011). Entrepreneurial Bricolage and InnovationEcology: Precursors to Social Innovation? Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, 31(19), 3.Hatano, G., & Oura, Y. (2003). Commentary: Reconceptualizing school learning using insight from expertiseresearch. Educational Researcher, 32(8), 26-29.Hutchins, E. (1995). How a cockpit remembers its speeds. Cognitive science, 19(3), 265-288.Ito, M., Antin, J., Finn, M., Law, A., Manion, A., Mitnick, S., ... & Horst, H. A. (2009). Hanging out, messingaround, and geeking out: Kids living and learning with new media. MIT press.Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldaña, J. (2013). Qualitative data analysis: A methods sourcebook. SAGEPublications, Incorporated.Rees Lewis, D., Easterday, M., Gerber, E. M., (2015). Supporting Project Scoping: The Scoping Wheel. InProceedings of the Harvey Mudd Design Workshop IX . May 28-30, Claremont, CA, US.Resnick, P. (2001). Beyond bowling together: Sociotechnical capital. HCI in the New Millennium, 77, 247-272.Snow, D. A., Morrill, C., & Anderson, L. (2003). Elaborating analytic ethnography: Linking fieldwork and theory.Ethnography, 4(2), 181-200.Stake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study research. Sage.Star, S. L. (1999). The ethnography of infrastructure. American Behavioral Scientist, 43(3), 377-391.Trilling, B. & Fadel, C. (2009). 21st century skills: learning for life in our times. Jossey-Bass: San Francisco.Trist, E. (1981). The evolution of socio-technical systems. Occasional paper, 2, 1981.Wulf, W. A. (1993). The collaboratory opportunity. Science, 261(5123), 854-855.Yin, R. K. (2013). Case study research: Design and methods. Sage publicationsAcknowledgmentsThe authors thank DFA leaders and members who participated in interviews and surveys analyzed for this study.Thanks to Daniel Rees Lewis, Rob Calvey and Stacy Klingbeil for help with data collection, Alex Sher and AndreMohring for help on data transcription and analysis, and members of Northwestern Delta Lab for ongoingfeedback, moral support and inspiration. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation grants IIS1320693/1217225 and Venture Well.ICLS 2016 Proceedings42© ISLS