Supporting Teachers in Navigating Change TowardsScience Practices Focus in the Classroom:Investigating Current Teacher Support for Science PracticesNicole D. Martin, University of Wisconsin – Madison, ndmartin@wisc.eduSadhana Puntambekar, University of Wisconsin – Madison, puntambekar@education.wisc.eduAbstract: A growing emphasis on teaching science as practice calls for a significant changefrom traditional science education. We must provide teachers with the appropriate support tonavigate this change. The first step in supporting teachers to help students learn science practicesis understanding current approaches for teaching science practices. We investigated thequestion: How do teachers support science practices in their classrooms? We analyzed how twoteachers supported students by engaging and guiding students to participate in science practices;we focused on two key science practices: constructing and defending scientific explanations andanalyzing and interpreting data. We found that teachers most frequently engaged students inpractices but did not necessarily provide guidance for how to participate, explain why sciencepractices are important, or describe how all the practices are connected. Teachers may needadditional guidance to develop concrete teaching strategies to support science practices.Keywords: science teaching, science practices, teachers as learnersIntroductionScience as practice: Teaching and conceptualizing science as practice has recently emerged as a prominentperspective in science education. This perspective views science as progressing beyond a reasoning process toencompassing how we understand, make sense of, evaluate, and represent the world around us (Lehrer &Schauble, 2015). While previous views of science as a reasoning process have focused on the logical constructionof experiments, manipulation of variables, and interpretation of data (Lehrer & Schauble, 2015), the view ofscience as practice emphasizes a broader focus on the holistic process by which knowledge is constructed in thescientific community. This view of science is central to the new emphasis on science practices in education.Science practices span the entire process of science, from being able to generate and write a hypothesis, collectdata, analyze data, understand how the data supports the hypothesis, and draw conclusions from the data andinterpret the findings. The importance of these practices has been placed at the forefront of science education, asseen by their inclusion in the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). These new standards restructureprevious attempts to shift science education towards inquiry-based, hands-on-science by “elaborate[ing] how toengage in the work of inquiry, and how this work is part of building knowledge” (Reiser, 2013, p. 5). Morespecifically, the NGSS break down the practice of science into eight components: asking questions; developingand using models; planning and carrying out investigations; analyzing and interpreting data; using mathematicsand computational thinking; constructing explanations; engaging in argument from evidence; and obtaining,evaluating, and communicating information (NGSS Lead States, 2013).While these practices are often presented as a list, they should not be conceptualized as step-wise,sequential skills. Rather, all the science practices are interdependent components of a single system of makingsense about the world, and they must be viewed as such in order to fully understand the practice of science (Reiser,2013; Lehrer & Schauble, 2015). This goal necessitates an integrated and holistic view of the science practicesthat build on one another, describing the process and reasoning of science. Teaching these practices in isolationwould remove them from the context of the whole process by which the scientific community constructsknowledge; students cannot fully understand science as practice without a holistic approach to integrating sciencepractices in the classroom. Students must learn to: ask scientific questions that drive the development of theirinvestigations; analyze and interpret data from their investigations; and use this data to construct models andexplanations about the phenomenon they are investigating. Ultimately, students must be able to developconvincing, well-supported arguments that use their data and explanations to answer their research questions andcommunicate their findings to the scientific community.The science practices should not be conceptualized as a sequential list; however, it may be useful to thinkof them as hierarchically organized. Lehrer and Schauble (2015) advocate for such a hierarchical approach andplace modeling as an over-arching, governing practice that is most central to the practice of science and supportedby the rest of the practices. Others emphasize that engaging in argument from evidence is a central practice ofscience by which scientific knowledge is generated and learned (Berland & Reiser, 2009; Reiser, Berland,ICLS 2016 Proceedings298© ISLSKenyon, 2012; Driver, Newton, & Osborne, 2000). We follow this lead and view engaging in argument fromevidence as a culminating practice that unifies all of the science practices. Most highly interrelated in thehierarchical structure, engaging in argument from evidence is contingent on students’ ability to analyze andinterpret data and to construct explanations.Changing teacher practice to support science practices: The growing emphasis on the importance ofteaching science practices in the classroom calls for a change from traditional science education. The sciencepractices we are now asking teachers to incorporate in their classrooms require significant changes in teacherpractice, for which we must provide teachers with the appropriate guidance and support (Reiser, 2013, Windschitl,Thompson, Braaten, & Stroupe, 2012). The teacher in the classroom plays a hugely important role in how thecurriculum is enacted (Remillard, 2005). Remillard (2005) emphasizes the importance of the relationship betweenthe teacher and curriculum; she highlights that the curriculum that is actually enacted in a classroom is a complexcombination of the formal curricular materials and the intended curricular aims of the teacher. Acknowledgingthe active roles teachers play in the enacted curriculum focuses attention on ensuring that teachers are wellprepared and properly supported to create effective learning environments when they implement new curricula.We cannot expect a new way of conceptualizing science as practice to be successfully enacted in the classroomwithout actively supporting teachers in implementing science practices. We can design curricula to supportstudents’ learning of science practices, but this is not enough—we must understand how to help teachers supporttheir students’ learning of science practicesTabak and Radinsky (2015) acknowledge that research on teaching is typically absent in the field oflearning sciences and call for exploration in this domain as “a unique target for research on learning” (p. 345). Weagree and seek to answer this call. In this paper, we begin to explore this question of how to best help teacherssupport students’ learning of science practices in the classroom by first exploring how teachers currently supporttheir students. In order to effectively help teachers navigate the shift to centering science education on science asa practice, we must first understand their current teaching approaches related to science practices. In the presentstudy, we investigated how teachers supported science practices in the classroom. We focused on the central,overarching, and high-leverage (Reiser, 2013) practice of engaging in argument from evidence and the next mostessentially related practices of analyzing and interpreting data and constructing explanations. We further focusedon the holistic view of the science practices, which sees all of the science practices as interrelated andinterdependent, emphasizing the relationship between practices. We aimed to answer the research question: Howdo teachers support science practices in their classrooms?Particularly, we focused on the following mechanisms of support: opportunities to engage in practices(e.g. Driver, Newton, & Osborne, 2000; Cavagentto, 2010); guidance for how to participate in practices (e.g.McNeill, Lizotte, Krajcik, & Marx, 2006; Sandoval & Reiser, 2004); guidance for why science practices areimportant (Sandoval & Millwood, 2005); and guidance for how the practices are connected to one another(Erduran, 2014). Previous research has found these ways of supporting science practices to be beneficial forstudents; however, the large majority of these supports and forms of guidance have been material-based tools andinterventions. There is much less empirical research on guidance coming from teachers to support sciencepractices and even less research on how to help improve teachers’ support for these practices in their classrooms.To address this gap in the literature and our research question, we used classroom observations of two teachers toinvestigate whether teachers simply had students engage in these practices as activities or if they actually providedguidance and supported students so they could learn how to approach analyzing and interpreting data, constructingexplanations, and engaging in argument from evidence. We further investigated whether teachers discussed withstudents why these are important practices- why it is important as participants of science to analyze data, constructexplanations, and use data to support explanations to create strong arguments. We finally examined whetherteachers expressed the holistic nature of the practices to their students and made connections between the practicesin the classroom to help students see how the practices are interdependent.MethodsParticipants and contextThe participants in this study were two sixth grade science teachers, Mrs. Lloyd and Mr. Gordon. Both teacherstaught at the same public middle school in a mid-sized, US Midwestern city. Mrs. Lloyd and Mr. Gordon had 13and 23 years of teaching experience respectively, and they had both been working with the design-based, inquiryCoMPASS physics curriculum (Puntambekar, Stylianou, & Goldstein, 2007) used in this study for seven years.Their previous work with this curriculum is important because their experience entails that the teachers werefamiliar with ideas of having students justify claims, use data, and write explanations since these practices areembedded and emphasized throughout the curriculum. We chose two teachers in order to conduct a detailed, in-ICLS 2016 Proceedings299© ISLSdepth analysis of the teachers’ actions in the classroom over time. We chose to analyze two teachers instead ofconducting an individual case study so we could compare differences between teachers. This was a ground-upstudy through which we wanted to create a good baseline for understanding teachers’ support for science practices,as little is know about this question.The curriculum was a 4-week design-based curriculum in which students learned the physics conceptsof force, mechanical advantage, work, and energy by investigating how two different simple machines could helpthem accomplish challenges with ease. The students investigated how pulleys could help them solve the challengeof lifting a statue of their school mascot up to its pedestal and how incline planes could help them solve thechallenge of getting a pool table into the back of a truck. Students worked together in small groups of three orfour to conduct experiments using virtual computer simulations and to research the physics of simple machinesusing the CoMPASS eTextbook. The student-centered and inquiry-based nature of this curriculum positioned theteacher as a facilitator for student learning instead of as an authoritative source of information. The intended roleof the teacher was to help facilitate discussion among students, monitor and assess students’ conceptualunderstanding, and (most importantly for the context of this study) guide students to think like scientists andengage in the practice of science.Data sourcesWe used classroom observations of the teachers implementing the physics curriculum to investigate how teacherssupported science practices through pedagogy in their classrooms. All classes were video- and audio-recorded toanalyze how teachers supported and discussed science practices involved in arguing from evidence in theirclassrooms. We followed Mrs. Lloyd and Mr. Gordon through the entirety of the 4-week unit in one of theirscience classes to capture how each teacher supported students’ learning of science practices throughout theprocess of generating scientific questions, writing hypotheses, conducting experiments, analyzing and interpretingdata, and constructing and defending explanations for final decisions to solve students’ challenge. This resultedin seven videos (363 minutes) for Mrs. Lloyd and eight videos (358 minutes) for Mr. Gordon.AnalysisWe used a two-dimensional coding scheme to capture how the teachers supported students to learn sciencepractices in the classroom. We focused on the central, overarching, and high-leverage practice of engaging inargument from evidence and two other essentially related practices: analyzing and interpreting data, andconstructing explanations. Given the practical difficulty of distinguishing the practice of constructing scientificexplanations and engaging in argument from evidence (Berland & Reiser, 2009), we discuss these two practicestogether as constructing and defending scientific explanations. This resulted in two science practice codes: 1)analyzing and interpreting data and 2) constructing and defending scientific explanations. We first coded theclassroom videos for instances of these two science practices.We then coded each of these instances for the type of support the teacher provided in order to betterunderstand the quality of how teachers supported their students. We used four types of teacher support: a) engagingstudents in practice, b) guiding students in practice, c) discussing epistemic importance of practice, and d)connecting practices to present science as a holistic process. These support types distinguish whether the teacherswere simply having students engage in the practice or if they were actively providing support to help teach studentshow to participate in these practices. These types of support also illustrate whether the teachers were talking withstudents about why these practices are important in science and whether the teachers were presenting science asa holistic process by making explicit connections between science practices. These support types are not to beconsidered in a rank order. While simply having students engage in a practice (a) does not provide the guidedparticipation that students may need for learning how to participate in science as a practice, the remaining threetypes of support (b, c, d) are not necessarily increasing in quality or value. Table 1 illustrates what each of thefour types of support codes would look like for the two science practices codes.We segmented the videos into two-minute intervals for consistency of coding and provision of enoughtime for development of distinct instructional moves. We coded for the presence or absence of the types of supportthe teachers provided for the two science practices of focus within each segment. A second researcher helped uscode 10% of the videos for each teacher and achieved 88% agreement overall and “substantial” or “almost perfect”kappa values (Stemler, 2001) for all but two of the individual codes. All disagreements were resolved throughdiscussion and the first author coded the remaining videos.We first quantitatively analyzed the overall patterns of support each teacher provided throughout the unit,considering both science practices under investigation together. To do this, we divided the total frequency of eachtype of support code by the total number of two-minute segments for each teacher to standardize frequenciesacross unequal video lengths. It is important to note that each two-minute segment could contain multiple codesICLS 2016 Proceedings300© ISLSif multiple types of support or science practices occurred. We then compared the frequencies of support providedby the two teachers for the practices independent of each other. For this analysis, we conducted a Chi-squared testof homogeneity of proportions to compare the total proportion of each type of support for each science practice.We looked at the practice of analyzing and interpreting data and the practice of constructing and defendingscientific explanations as independent practices in order to investigate differences in the support of sciencepractices.Table 1. Description of types of teacher support codes for both scientific practices investigatedAnalyze and interpret dataType of teacher support codesGuiding students inDiscussing epistemicpracticeimportance of practice- Giving studentsopportunities ortelling to look forpatterns orrelationships- Asking whatpatterns orrelationshipsstudents see in theirdata or how onevariable affectsanother- Pointing to parts ofdata table or directingattention to specificparts of data table tohighlight patternsand/or relationshipsbetween variables- Directing studentson how to look atdata tables to findpatterns- Discussing howscientists look forpatterns andrelationships in data tounderstand and makeclaims about howconcepts are related- Discussing purpose ofusing data to supportclaims and answerresearch questionsConstruct and defend scientificexplanationsScientific practice codesEngaging studentsin practice- Giving studentsopportunities ortelling to provide(write or say) anexplanation orargument- Promotingstudents to explain"why”- Asking openended questions thatrequire students togive explanation- Showing studentshow to useappropriate data tosupport claims- Helping/promptingstudents to look atdata to constructexplanation/argument- Giving hints aboutwhat students shouldinclude in anexplanation orargument- Discussing thatscientists must justify orprove their statements(explanations) withdata/evidence- Discussing the need toconvince or persuadeothers (who may not befamiliar with the data)of explanations by usingevidence to back upclaimsConnecting practices to presentscience as holistic processMaking explicit connectionsbetween analyzing andinterpreting data and:- Previous hypothesis; deciding ifhypothesis is supported or not- Research question or hypothesis;deciding where to look in datachart based on question orhypothesis- Understanding data allows youto construct arguments based onthat dataMaking explicit connectionsbetween an explanation orargument and:- Research question or designchallenge you are trying toanswer/solve- Previous hypothesis- Understanding data allows youto construct arguments based onthat dataResultsOverall patterns of teacher supportFrequencyTo examine the types of support teachers most frequently provided for both science practices, we analyzed thetotal proportion of each type of support, looking at both of the practices together. Both teachers showed the samepattern in the type of support they provided students to learn science practices in the classroom.0.60.50.40.30.20.10Mrs. LloydMr. GordonEngage in practiceGuide practiceConnect practicesType of teacher supportDiscuss importance ofpracticeFigure 1. Frequency of different types of support teachers provided overall for both science practices.ICLS 2016 Proceedings301© ISLSBoth Mrs. Lloyd and Mr. Gordon’s most frequent type of support was engaging students in the practice (0.50 and0.44 respectively). Their second most frequent type of support was guiding how to engage in the practice (Mrs.Lloyd = 0.45, Mr. Gordon = 0.26), followed by connecting practices to present science as a holistic process (Mrs.Lloyd = 0.27, Mr. Gordon = 0.17). Both teachers least frequently discussed the epistemic importance of thepractice (Mrs. Lloyd = 0.15, Mr. Gordon = 0.03). This common pattern of the type of support provided for studentsto learn science practices in the classroom can easily be seen in Figure 1. This figure clearly shows how bothteachers (from most frequently to least frequently) engaged, guided, connected, and discussed importance ofpractices.Comparisons between teachersTo better understand how the two teachers supported the science practices in their classrooms, we compared howoften the teachers provided each type of support to see if there were any differences in their teaching practices.We analyzed the practices independently to further tease apart differences in support for the individual practices(see Table 2). We have organized the following comparisons by the type of teacher support code for clarity andincluded excerpts of teachers’ discourse to help illustrate the support teachers provided.Table 2. Proportions (and frequencies) of teacher support across the unit and between teacher comparisonsScience PracticeAnalyzing andinterpreting dataConstructing anddefending scientificexplanations* p < .05Type of teacher supportEngaging students in practiceGuiding students in practiceDiscussing epistemic importance of practiceConnecting practicesEngaging students in practiceGuiding students in practiceDiscussing epistemic importance of practiceConnecting practicesMrs. Lloyd0.20 (37)0.18 (34)0.06 (12)0.14 (26)0.30 (56)0.26 (49)0.08 (15)0.13 (24)Mr. Gordon0.16 (30)0.09 (17)0.03 (5)0.08 (14)0.28 (51)0.17 (31)0.01 (1)0.09 (17)Z score0.902.55 *1.731.99 *0.512.24 *3.64 *1.13Engaging students in practiceMrs. Lloyd and Mr. Gordon spent the same proportion of time engaging students in the practices of analyzing andinterpreting data (z = 0.90, p = .37) and constructing and defending scientific explanations (z = 0.51, p = .61).Engaging students in these practices involved giving the opportunity to and prompting students to analyze andinterpret their data or construct and defend a scientific explanation based on their experiments in class. Mrs. Lloydoften engaged students in analyzing and interpreting data by asking students to talk to a neighbor about anypatterns or relationships they saw in their data and then having students share their ideas with the class. Mr.Gordon similarly engaged students in analyzing and interpreting data by frequently asking students what patternsthey saw in their data or telling them to look for these patterns. For example, he said: “What are you guys seeingso far? What kinds of patterns?” and “You should be looking at your data and discussing the patterns that yousee.” In one example of engaging students in the practice of constructing and defending scientific explanations,Mrs. Lloyd gave students time to write their explanations on a designated page in their notebooks and said: “Ok,so I’m going to let you try this. It says, ‘We found that,’ well, what did we find…and then back it up here in thesecond part. So let’s work, see what you can do on your own.” All of these excerpts show examples of how bothteachers gave students opportunities to engage in science practices without necessarily providing any additionalinstruction or guidance. These instances simply involved students “doing” each practice.Guiding students in practiceMrs. Lloyd spent significantly more time than Mr. Gordon guiding the practice of analyzing and interpreting data(z = 2.55, p < .05) and guiding the practice of constructing and defending scientific explanations (z = 2.24, p <.05). The following excerpts exemplify how Mrs. Lloyd guided students on how to participate in both of thesepractices. The first excerpt illustrates how Mrs. Lloyd guided students to analyze and interpret data. She had askedstudents to discuss patterns in their data, and in this excerpt, she provided explicit guidance on how they couldlook at their data charts:See if you notice, because you guys tested out, 1, 2, 5 different kinds of pulleys. And as we wentdown this row [of the data chart], we added more, like, wheels to the pulleys – they became morecomplex. So do you notice anything as you sort of work your way down the chart? [Mrs. Lloydpoints to a data chart projected on the classroom white board and moves her hand down eachcolumn] Do you see any patterns of things as we added more pulleys to our system?ICLS 2016 Proceedings302© ISLSInstead of only telling students to find patterns in their data, she directed students to consider looking downspecific columns in their data chart in order to help them find a meaningful relationship. The second excerptillustrates how Mrs. Lloyd guided students on constructing and defending scientific explanations. In this example,students practiced constructing an explanation in their notebooks about the relationship between height andpotential energy and defending their explanation with data from their experiment:We are looking at number two that compares height to potential energy. So for the first partwhere it says 'We found that,' you should explain what we found, that more height, whathappened to potential energy? [Students: ‘Increased’]. It increased. So you talk about that. Thenyou give data, at least two pieces of data. ‘Cause we lifted our mascot to two different heights.So show an example at .1 meters and an example at .2 meters so you have data to back up whatyou are saying.Mrs. Lloyd helped students see that they needed to state the relationship they found between height and potentialenergy, and she explicitly guided them on how to include multiple pieces of data to defend their ideas.Connecting practices to present science as holistic processMrs. Lloyd spent significantly more time than Mr. Gordon connecting the practice of analyzing and interpretingdata to other science practices (z = 1.99, p < .05), but both teachers provided similar amounts of support forconnecting the practice of constructing and defending scientific explanations, (z = 1.13, p = 0.26). The followingexcerpt is representative of how Mrs. Lloyd made connections between analyzing and interpreting data instudents’ data charts to the overarching challenge and research question students were trying to solve: “Or alsothink about our challenge. Remember we wanted to increase our mechanical advantage and decrease our force.So what do you notice about mechanical advantage and maybe force. Take a look at those columns as well.” Mrs.Lloyd helped students understand how their research question influenced where they should look in their datachart in order to analyze the data with a purpose; Mr. Gordon rarely made such connections. The next excerptexemplifies the support both teachers provided for making connections to constructing and defending scientificexplanations. As students constructed explanations about an experiment, Mr. Gordon had them return to thehypotheses they wrote before the experiment and said: “Look at what you wrote [for the hypothesis], and then goback and look at your data, and then go to your report out and circle whether you were confirmed or not. Then,we found out what? What did we find out about height and PE?” Mr. Gordon explicitly made the connectionbetween the initial hypothesis about a research question, data analysis, and constructing and defending anexplanation to help students see that these components were all related and in service to the scientific explanation.Discussing epistemic importance of practiceMrs. Lloyd and Mr. Gordon spent similar amounts of time discussing the epistemic importance of analyzing andinterpreting data (z = 1.73, p = .08), but Mrs. Lloyd spent significantly more time than Mr. Gordon discussing theepistemic importance of constructing and defending scientific explanations (z = 3.64, p < .05). Mrs. Lloyd helpedstudents understand the purpose of interpreting data to understand relationships and emphasized the importanceof using data to support claims they present to other people; Mr. Gordon offered similar support by discussing thepurpose and importance of interpreting data to support students’ explanations: “Just having numbers [data] isn’tenough. Explaining it means how does one thing affect the other…Did you put enough data to explain why?...Isthe data you wrote enough to demonstrate fully your understanding?” Mr. Gordon tried to help students understandthe purpose of interpreting data to show how science concepts were related and that including data in theirexplanation was important to demonstrate their understanding. For constructing and defending scientificexplanations, Mrs. Lloyd most often discussed with her students how scientists must convince others of their ideasby constructing strong arguments using data:"Now the next question says, 'We know this because.' How do we know this? Notice it says,'Refer back to your data chart.' So this is one thing as a scientist you have to do. If you tellsomebody something, they are gonna say, "So what? Prove it! Prove it to me!" Now do wehave data that can prove this? [Students: ‘Yes.’] Yeah, we have a lot of data that can prove this.So when you are reporting out, you have to make sure that you include some data to show thatwhat you are saying really, really is indeed true. It really is indeed true."In this example, Mrs. Lloyd talked with students about the purpose for why they needed to use data to justify anddefend their claims and emphasizes how important this practice was in science in order to prove their statementsto other people. Mr. Gordon, on the other hand, rarely discussed this purpose with his students.ICLS 2016 Proceedings303© ISLSDiscussion and implicationsGiven the increasing focus on science as practice in education, it is essential to understand how to help teachersnavigate this shift and implement this focus in their classrooms. A first step in this process is assessing the currentstate of teachers’ approaches regarding science practices. The goal of this paper was to investigate how teacherscurrently support students to learn the high-leverage and most central science practices in the classroom on a dailybasis. We first review and discuss the findings from this study with respect to this goal. We then offer implicationsfor supporting teachers as they continue to shift their classes to center on science practices and offer avenues offuture research to address yet answered questions.Overall, both teachers showed the same pattern of supporting students to learn how to analyze andinterpret data and how to construct and defend scientific explanations. In order of greatest to least frequency, theteachers engaged students in practices, guided their participation in practices, connected practices, and discussedthe importance of practices. While both teachers spent a similar amount of time engaging students in the practicesof analyzing and interpreting data and constructing and defending scientific explanations, one teacher spent moretime providing students with guidance on how to participate in these science practices, making connectionsbetween science practices that conveyed the holistic process of science, and discussing why these practices areimportant in science. The fact that both teachers in this study most often engaged students in the practices isconsistent with previous ideas that teachers are not well prepared to support students to learn science practices inthe classroom (Reiser, 2013). While one teacher appeared to use additional support strategies while engagingstudents, the other teacher most often engaged students with no additional support. These findings suggest thatteachers do not necessarily use strategies beyond giving students opportunities to engage in science practices inorder to help them learn. Giving students opportunities to participate in practices is an important part of helpingstudents became active participants in the practice of science (Lave & Wenger, 1991), but other researcherssuggest that having opportunities and being exposed to these practices is not sufficient for learning how to actuallyparticipate in science (Simon, Erduran, Osborne, 2006). Students likely need additional, explicit guidance on howto participate in these practices. While the teachers in the study did provide some guidance for how to analyzedata and to construct and defend explanations using that data, the fact that Mrs. Lloyd provided guidancesignificantly more often than Mr. Gordon suggests that there are important differences, and likely some deficits,in how teachers approach helping their students to learn science practices. These differences suggest that whileteachers are capable of providing the types of more explicit support students may need, some teachers, similar toMr. Gordon, may not know how additional guidance can help students learn how to analyze and interpret data andthen to use that data to construct a well-supported explanation.Some teachers might currently guide students on how to participate in the critical data analysis andexplanatory practices of science, but they may not be supporting students to truly understand science as a practiceof building and refining knowledge about the world. The teachers in this study did not frequently makeconnections between science practices that explicitly showed students how the practices work together in serviceof constructing well-supported arguments to answer a question or solve a problem. Teachers’ minimal time spentmaking connections between science practices in the classroom does not entail that they do not understand theseconnections themselves; not making connections could reflect a lack of intention to discuss these connections.Additionally, the teachers did not spend much time discussing why the practices are important in the field ofscience. Sandoval and Millwood (2005) suggest that students may need to understand the purpose behind thesescience practices in order to truly learn the practice. If students do not understand that the purpose of using datain an argument is to help convince an audience of their claims, they may struggle to construct well-supportedarguments and fail to see how this practice is part of the practice of science as a whole. Thus, teachers’ supportmay be inadequate for students to truly learn and understand the practice of science.The lack of additional support in the classroom provides some insights into where teachers may struggleas they navigate implementing a focus on science practices in their classrooms. It appears that some teachers maynot have readily available support strategies for helping students learn science practices. It may also be the casethat teachers believe that doing inquiry-based science in the classroom will inherently teach students the practiceof science, and they are not aware of the need for additional support strategies. Further, if teachers do haveknowledge about strategies to teach science practices, they may be struggling to actually enact these in theclassroom. Remillard (2005) emphasizes the complex relationship between what teachers want to implement inthe classroom and what they actually implement in practice. From this lens, teachers implementing a new focuson science practices are in the middle of a complex relationship between their own understanding of sciencepractices and strategies to teach these practices, as well as a wealth of additional curricular and environmentalfactors. Even if teachers’ knowledge of science practices and teaching strategies were well-formed, there may beimportant factors associated with departing from traditional, teacher-centered classroom environments that mighthinder the enactment of necessary support for students to learn the practice of science.ICLS 2016 Proceedings304© ISLSIn offering implications for this study, it is important to reiterate the teaching experience and context ofthe two teachers. As mentioned previously, the teachers in this study were experienced science teachers who werefamiliar with having students justify claims, use data, and write explanations. They were not new to the idea ofengaging students in the practice of science and thinking about what the practice of science looks like in the realworld. Therefore, even teachers who have had several years of experience implementing innovative, design-basedcurricula that thoughtfully aimed to teach science practices showed need for further support in their ownunderstanding and teaching of science practices. We should not assume that the process of teaching a curriculumdesigned to help students learn science practices will necessarily help teachers learn how to better support sciencepractices. The idea that “learning by doing” may not be sufficient applies to teaching when we conceptualizeteachers as learners. If students may need explicit guidance to learn science practices, why should not teachersalso need explicit guidance to learn how to support their students’ learning of science practices?The goal of this paper was to assess the current state of teacher support for science practices in theclassroom. The findings from this study suggest that teachers may need additional support and guidance to exploreand develop concrete teaching strategies that support their students’ learning of science practices. In future work,we aim to investigate what this support for teachers should be and interventions to support teachers as they helpstudents learn the practice of science. In this future research, we will use interviews to investigate how teachersconceptualize science practices since their own understanding may influence how they help their students learnthese practices. There is still much work to be done to achieve the goal of centering science education on helpingstudents learn science as a practice, but this study provides important understanding of target areas where we canbegin helping teachers to better support science practices education in the classroom.ReferencesBerland, L. K., & Reiser, B. J. (2009). Making sense of argumentation and explanation. Science Education, 93(1), 26–55.Cavagnetto, A. R. (2010). Argument to foster scientific literacy: A review of argument interventions in K-12 science contexts.Review of Educational Research, 80(3), 336–371.Driver, R., Newton, P., & Osborne, J. (2000). Establishing the norms of scientific argumentation in classrooms. ScienceEducation, 84, 287.Erduran, S. (2014). Revisiting the nature of science in science education : Towards a holistic account of science in scienceteaching and learning. In Proceedings of the Frontiers in Mathematics and Science Education Research Conference(pp. 14–25). Famagusta, North Cyprus.Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2015). The development of scientific thinking. In L. S. Liben, U. Muller, & R. M. Lerner (Eds.),Handbook of Child Psychology and Developmental Science (Seventh., pp. 671–714). Wiley.McNeill, K. L., Lizotte, D. J., Krajcik, J., & Marx, R. W. (2006). Supporting students’ construction of scientific explanationsby fading scaffolds in instructional materials. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(2), 153–191.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For states, by states. Washington, DC: The NationalAcademies Press.Puntambekar, S., Stylianou, A., & Goldstein, J. (2007).Comparing classroom enactments of an inquiry curriculum: Lessonslearned from two teachers. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16, 81–130.Reiser, B. J. (2013). What professional development strategies are needed for successful implementation of the NextGeneration Science Standards?, (September). Paper prepared for K12 center at ETS invitational symposium onscience assessment. Washington, DC. http://www.k12center.org/rsc/pdf/reiser.pdfReiser, B. J., Berland, L. K., & Kenyon, L. (2012). Engaging students in the scientific practices of explanation andargumentation. The Science Teacher, 79(4), 34–39.Remillard, J. T. (2005). Examining key concepts in research on teachers’ use of mathematics curricula. Review of EducationalResearch, 75(2), 211–246.Sandoval, W. A., & Millwood, K. A. (2005). The quality of students’ use of evidence in written scientific explanations.Cognition and Instruction, 23(1), 23–55.Sandoval, W. A., & Reiser, B. J. (2004). Explanation-driven inquiry: Integrating conceptual and epistemic scaffolds forscientific inquiry. Science Education, 88(3), 345–372.Simon, S., Erduran, S., & Osborne, J. (2006). Learning to teach argumentation: Research and development in the scienceclassroom. International Journal of Science Education, 28(2-3), 235–260.Stemler, S. (2001). An overview of content analysis. Practical Assessment, Research & Evaluation, 7(17).Tabak, I., & Radinsky, J. (2015). Educators’ coaches, peers, and practices: Revisiting how teachers learn. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 24(3), 343–346.Windschitl, M., Thompson, J., Braaten, M., & Stroupe, D. (2012). Proposing a core set of instructional practices and tools forteachers of science. Science Education, 96(5), 878-903.AcknowledgmentsWe thank both participating teachers and their students. This research has been supported by an ECR grant fromthe National Science Foundation to the second author (Grant # 1431904).ICLS 2016 Proceedings305© ISLS