Collaborative Scientizing in Pokémon GO Online CommunitiesJason C. Yip, Travis W. Windleharth, and Jin Ha Leejcyip@uw.edu, travisw@uw.edu, jinhalee@uw.eduUniversity of Washington, The Information School – GAMER LabAbstract: Finding and applying science practices in everyday contexts (scientizing) is apowerful way for people to engage in science learning. This paper examines how peoplecollaboratively scientize through a massively multiplayer mobile game called Pokémon GO.For three months, we conducted observations of online communities around Pokémon GO andexamined how crowdsourcing engagements in these communities can lead to science inquiry.We adhered to the standards of a comparative case study to examine three exploratory casesof scientizing in online discussion about Pokémon GO. These examples includecrowdsourcing collaborations to compare multiple data sets, countering misinformation, andcreating mapping sets. We demonstrate how aspects of these online engagements followauthentic and simple science inquiry. Furthermore, the implications of our research forinformal science learning are especially meaningful for understanding how Pokémon GO canbe used to motivate scientizing practices in families and children.IntroductionOne goal of science education for youth is to produce scientifically literate citizens that are able to activelyapply science in their everyday lives (Rutherford, & Ahlgren, 1990). Yet, for many learners, science learning isabstract and connecting science learning to everyday practice is challenging (e.g., Lee & Fradd, 1998).Researchers have attempted to understand how learners engage in everyday science practices, through interestdriven learning (Edelson & Joseph, 2004), connected learning (Ito et al., 2013), and the tailored practice ofhobbies (Azevedo, 2013). One concept we have adopted to understand how people engage in science learningand practices on their own terms is the notion of “scientizing.” Clegg and Kolodner (2014) define scientizing asthe ability to ask questions about how the world works, searching to understand knowledge in the world,recognizing the gaps in one’s own understanding to accomplish goals, and investigating personal scientificquestions. Today, we live in digital age of crowdsourcing of knowledge and information; people create complexprojects and can break it down to simpler tasks that many other individuals can contribute to. Within differentonline communities, people can connect and communicate with each other over distances and time usinginformation communication technologies (ICT). However, we do not yet have a deep understanding of howonline crowdsourcing can promote scientizing practices.In this study, we are exploring scientizing and online crowdsourcing in the context of Pokémon GO, amassively multiplayer online (MMO) augmented reality game (ARG). We are specifically examining PokémonGO because the location-based nature of the game encourages collaborative and participatory efforts for playersto collect data in the world. Additionally, because Pokémon GO has a wide mainstream appeal, we believe it hasa strong potential to motivate children and families in scientizing practices. For three months, we observed aseries of discussions in online communities in how players engaged in problem solving tasks around PokémonGO. The goal of Pokémon GO is for players to capture virtual creatures (Pokémon). Despite the simplicity ofthe game, the developers (Niantic) are often not forthcoming about the game mechanics. Because of the lack oftransparency, players have come together online to crowdsource and reverse engineer how the game works.Based on our online observations, these collaborative efforts present a compelling case for using ARGs toengage people in scientizing practices via their own interests.This case study addresses multiple gaps in knowledge in research. First, we lack a clear understandingof how scientizing takes place on an open massive online scale. Second, little is known about how scientizingtakes place as people reverse engineer a sociotechnical system of their own interest. In this study, we explorethe following research questions: RQ1: How do these massive, online, crowdsourced projects inform us abouthow people can engage and openly collaborate in everyday science practices?; and RQ2: What science inquirypractices exist as game players try to collaboratively investigate a sociotechnical system of their own interest?From our observations, we present three case studies of Pokémon GO and online crowdsourcing. We analyzeeach case study using a framework of scientizing and Chinn and Malhotra’s (2002) scientific inquiry practices.Finally, we conclude with a discussion on how online crowdsourcing for scientizing can be used to motivate forfamilies and youth in science learning.CSCL 2017 Proceedings167© ISLSBackgroundAugmented Reality Games and Pokémon GOPokémon GO is usually called an ARG, a term which has become intertwined with mixed reality (or hybrid)game (i.e., a game which has both digital and real-world components) and location-based mobile game (i.e.,LBMG: a digital game available on mobile platforms dependent on player location) (Rashid, Mullins, Coulton,& Edwards, 2006). Many ARGs are also labeled as pervasive games—taken from the field of pervasive (orubiquitous) computing—which are “digital games that move beyond the traditional computer interfaces and intothe physical world to occupy time and place on a human scale” (Falk & Davenport, 2004, p.127). Pokémon GOis also a MMO game, as all players are simultaneously online participating in one global game environment. InPokémon GO, players use the game software to locate and catch Pokémon that appear in real-world locations.Three player factions use captured Pokémon to battle for control of virtual Gyms, which are mapped onto realworld locations. Other locations, termed PokéStops, allow for the collection of game resources. While Gymsand PokéStops are permanent virtual features, “wild” virtual creatures are subject to game mechanics thatgovern the location and frequency of their availability. While commercial digital games have been availablesince the 1970s, ARGs take advantage of consumer devices and GPS satellites affording highly accuratepositioning information. Pokémon GO has achieved popularity unlike any of its predecessors (i.e., early ARGslike Ingress), and introduced millions of new players to the genre.Scientizing in online gaming communitiesScientizing in online gaming worlds can be a specific designed experience in virtual worlds. For instance,Asbell-Clarke et al. (2012) developed Martian Boneyards, a MMO game focused on using tools for scientificinquiry within the storyline. Educational multi-user virtual environments, such as Quest Atlantis (Barab,Thomas, Dodge, Carteaux, & Tuzun, 2005) and River City (Ketelhut, 2007) have demonstrated evidence thatlearners can engage in collaborative scientific practices and activities in online gaming environments. Agrowing body of research is also examining how scientific practices take place in commercial digital games andtheir related online communities. Similar to gaming, online communities around games are contexts in whichpeople work together in knowledge building communities (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994), engage and learntogether in affinity spaces (Gee & Hayes, 2011), and distribute information and knowledge throughout a largersociotechnical system (Hutchins, 1995). In online gaming communities, novice learners can come together toincrease their knowledge by working with other highly skilled players. Online gaming discussion forumsthemselves allow for knowledge generation of how to solve complex problems in virtual worlds, such as how toconquer an in-game boss battle, determine the most efficient equipment, and figure out solutions and strategiesfor optimum play. Online collaborations can serve to foster the zone of proximal development among noviceand expert players, that is the difference between what a learner can do on their own compared to what a learnercan do with guidance and support from others (Vygotsky, 1978).The most prominent example of scientific practice in discussion forums around gaming is Steinkuehlerand Duncan's (2008) study of scientific habits of mind and disposition in online discussions of the massivelymultiplayer online (MMO) game of World of Warcraft (WoW). Using Chinn and Malhotra’s (2002) theoreticalframework for evaluating inquiry tasks and Kuhn’s (1992) framework for epistemology, they noted that 86% ofrandom forum discussions (nearly 2,000 posts) focused on social knowledge construction and 65% of evaluativeepistemology in which knowledge is treated as open and evaluative. Practices such as peer-review,collaboration, data sharing, argument generation and counterargument, and the use of evidence to warrant one’sclaims took place in these forums. Many of these discussions took on similar activities to how professionalscientists share data, challenge each other’s interpretations of evidence, and confirm claims through their ownpeer review system. While Steinkuehler and Duncan’s (2008) evaluation of WoW demonstrates clear empiricalevidence of scientific practice in discussion forums, we need deeper dives into how players use and integratescientific practices to collaborate together. Steinkuehler and Duncan note that while some may believe thatthese gaming discussion environments allow a large number of posters to make one to two contributions, theWoW online communities solve problems together as large groups of thinkers. In the case of Pokémon GO,large collaborative efforts exist because the game (like many games) is not very transparent in its mechanics. Assuch, misinformation can occur due to “trolling” (when players intentionally post deceptive information) andspeculations mistakenly being conveyed as accurate information. Additionally, because of the location-basednature of game overlaying the virtual world over the real world, people are much more likely to collaborate invarious scientizing projects as data collection typically requires efforts beyond what a single or a few playerscan offer. We are interested in understanding how players collaborate together in scientific practice to developdeeper understanding of the game in organized distributed efforts. Finally, we are interested in understandingCSCL 2017 Proceedings168© ISLSthe shift from desktop gaming towards mobile gaming, and how learners also use their own locations andcontexts to solve specific needs and questions.Theoretical frameworksWe use the concept of scientizing (Clegg & Kolodner, 2014) to explain how and why people use science inquirypractices in their everyday live. Scientizing is often not the norm of science education in young people’s lives.However, it is an important concept to encourage people to pursue science learning. When young peoplescientize, they take on new roles in science learning and feel empowered to use science practices to improvetheir world. Scientizing focuses on the development of scientific dispositions. First, conceptual and proceduralunderstanding focuses on how people understand scientific concepts and principles. In other words, how peopleknow when to use science practices, why they use them, and how science is used in practice. Interest refers topeople’s desires and personal reasons to engage with science practices. Social interactions refer to people’sengagements in science practice together. Finally, personal connections emphasize connecting sciencedisciplinary practices to their own knowledge and value systems. We are using the scientizing frameworkbecause we are trying to understand the roles of scientific practices that come out of everyday practices ofplaying Pokémon GO and how these practices are driven by participants’ interest, curiosity, and socialrelationships, rather than in formalized academic settings.To understand the scientizing practices of Pokémon GO players in online discussion forums, we useChinn and Malhotra’s (2002) complex science inquiry framework. Authentic scientific inquiry refers to thecomplex activity and research that scientists carry out. Example processes include scientists generating theirown research questions, selecting and even inventing variables to investigate, creating complex procedures toaddress questions of interest, devising models to address research questions, employing multiple controls,incorporating multiple measures of different variables, judging against bias, constantly questioning whethertheir results are accurate and correct, employing multiple forms of argument, and constructing theories andresolving inconsistencies. In contrast, simple inquiry tasks attempt to capture the core process of scientificpractices, but are mostly basic processes. For instance, in a simple experiment, learners are usually looking at asingle independent variable and single dependent variable. In simple observations, learners carefully observe,measure, and describe objects and phenomenon. For simple illustrations, learners might follow step-by-step aspecified procedure and observe the outcome. Authentic and simple inquiry tasks are extreme ends of aspectrum. For this study, we are using Chinn and Malhotra’s authentic and simple scientific inquiry to examinehow players of Pokémon GO engage in these practices as they pursue their interests in online discussion forums.MethodsWe adhered to the standards of a comparative case study (Merriam, 2009) to examine three exploratory cases ofscientizing in online discussion about Pokémon GO. We used ethnographic research methods (Guba & Lincoln,2005) to conduct a content analysis of the online forums. We took an emic perspective for this research (Guba& Lincoln, 2005); to understand Pokémon GO players, we joined and participated in Pokémon GO onlinegroups and also actively played the game ourselves. In the third week of July 2016 of the release of PokémonGO, the second author of this paper joined 215 online social media groups, Facebook, and Reddit forums. At thetime of joining, each of these groups had between 500 and 15,000 members. To spread ourselves out evenlyacross the groups, we picked groups for each of the 25 most populous USA cities and focused on at least twocities per USA state. We also joined special focus Pokémon GO groups (e.g. New England, Disneyland). Oncewe joined and participated, we monitored the online feed in aggregate from July to October 2016. During thistime, we observed and recorded 1) general content and types (topics) of posts; 2) very active posts; 3) themes ofthe posts; 4) behaviors of the discussants; 5) special events; and 6) collaborative projects about the game. Tocapture the data, we took notes of these observations and screenshots of the types of topics and significantevents. We wrote up field notes that aggregated all the observations and screenshots around a set of usergenerated projects and activities (e.g., mapping, egg hatching, determining statistics).To build the exploratory case studies around the scientizing practices of the Pokémon GO onlinediscussants, we set up a criterion for selection. Based on Chinn and Malhotra’s (2002) scientific inquiryframework, we chose comparative cases that demonstrated varied scientizing practices, such as hypothesistesting, checking against anomalous data, and social construction of knowledge. We chose three onlinecollaborative projects as cases (July to September 2016) from The Silph Road, a large public grassroots networkof Pokémon GO players with an emphasis on researching various aspects of the gameplay, as they were oftencited in many of the Pokémon GO communities. The Sliph Road is a Reddit subgroup of Pokémon GO playersfocused on creating an in-person community network. There are at least nine core team members, withthousands of contributors. They engage the Pokémon GO player base to crowdsource large amounts of data toCSCL 2017 Proceedings169© ISLSanswer questions about game mechanics and other aspects of play. Typically, these projects result fromquestions or information gaps that developer Niantic has not commented on. Once we selected these three focalcases for review, the first and second author coded the observations and screenshots using Chinn and Malhotra’sframework. Example codes included cognitive processes (i.e., generating research questions, designing studies,selecting variables, planning procedures, controlling variables, planning measures, making observations,transforming observations, finding flaws, generalizations, types of reasoning, developing theories, coordinatingresults from multiple studies, and studying research reports) and dimensions of epistemology (i.e., purpose ofresearch, theory-data coordination, theory ladenness of methods, responses to anomalous data, nature ofreasoning, and social construction of knowledge). From these codes, we determined whether they wereexamples of authentic inquiry, simple inquiry, or mixed. After the coding process, we discussed and resolvedissues and created narratives that are reflective of the players and the online discussion around Pokémon GO.FindingsWe present three comparative case studies of players engaging in discussions around Pokémon GO. For eachcase study, we provide a description of the case and an analysis of the scientific inquiry practices.Case 1: Crowdsourcing to compare multiple data sets to find glitchesSome players in The Sliph Road suspected that there was a glitch present in the game for the first few monthsafter launch regarding the calculated metric unique to each individual Pokémon called the “Individual Value”.Individual Value (IV) is an aggregate score of statistics that pertain to unique Pokémon and is a ratio of the sumof three hidden attributes of each individual Pokémon to the maximum value possible for those attributes. Thethree hidden scores for each Pokémon are its “attack” score (ATT), “defense” score (DEF), and “stamina” score(STA)(1). The value for each of these three scores for any given Pokémon is an integer between 0 to 15. The sumof these scores, divided by the maximum possible aggregate score (45) is the ratio that is referred to as IVIndividual Value, and it is always expressed as a percentage. The IV can also be expressed with the followingequation: IV = (ATT + DEF + STA) / 45 * 100. For advanced Pokémon GO players, IV are an important“hidden” measure of Pokémon strength in battle.The Silph Road, along with players contributing data, organized and conducted their own research toconfirm the suspected glitch was indeed real. This glitch speculation emerged at first from anecdotes fromplayers, with many people complaining in online forums that some Pokémon rarely had a high attack value andothers almost always had a very high attack value. This seemed to be correlated, they claimed, with the“Pokédex Number” of each Pokémon(2). The Pokédex Number of a Pokémon is simply that creature’spermanent index number. For instance, the Pokédex Number for Bulbasaur is 1, for Ivysaur it is 2, and this goesup to 149 in the current version of Pokémon GO, as of November 18, 2016. Community contributors to TheSilph Road decided to collect data on the IV numbers for caught Pokémon, as well as the attack attribute, toengage in hypothesis testing to see if the anecdote held in the face of an empirical test. Nine main participantsled the design, management, and data analysis for the project. This group organized and collected data on July23 rd, 2016 from 4,120 “throws” (throwing a Pokéball is an attempt to capture the Pokémon).Analysis of scientizing practices. In this project, several aspects of scientizing and inquiry practicesexist. First, the group attempted to figure out how anomalous data could have occurred. The hypothesis test wasgenerated because The Silph Road could not get direct answers from the developers. The first null hypothesisgenerated from The Silph Road occurred from the initial suspicion of the glitches occurring in the IndividualValue of Pokémon monsters. The null stated that Pokédex Number is not related to IV. However, the groupcollected enough data and rejected the null hypothesis (Figure 1 – left). A second hypothesis test was done tocompare the results with the first test. The data after Sept 22 nd (Figure 1 – right) demonstrated no correlationbetween IV and Attack; the group here assumed the glitch was fixed in a new update. In both cases, two sets ofdata and interpretation provided very stark results. Chinn and Malhotra’s (2002) notes that simple inquiry tasksare too straightforward, and that responses to anomalous data are to change the hypothesis. However, inauthentic scientific research, there are different responses to anomalous data. In this case, The Silph Road groupdetermined that the anomalous data could explain that a glitch was involved on July 23, 2016, but not onSeptember 22, 2016. The group did not change their hypothesis, but rather assumed there was a more plausibleexplanation of a glitch in the game. Being able to compare data from two different dates shows an epistemologythat considers results as dynamic. Here, like scientists, the group had to coordinate results from multiple studies,particularly with data that conflicted with each other. However, this group only coordinated results on one levelof analysis (IV vs. Pokémon identification number). The group did construct their own theoretical explanations,starting with anecdotal observations that were confirmed by evidence between multiple studies.CSCL 2017 Proceedings170© ISLSA second form of scientizing practices that exists is transforming observations. In authentic scientificpractices, these observations are often repeatedly transformed into multiple data formats. In simple inquirytasks, observations are seldom transformed into other data formats, except perhaps straightforward graphs. Inthis case study, we observed simple XY graphs developed to compare the two hypotheses. Figure 1 are graphsof Individual Value of a Pokémon and their species identification number. While the figures are the samestraightforward XY graphs, the case study shows evidence of the group highlighting important aspects of thegraphs. The group used large samples of data (Figure 1, N = 250 left; N = 341 right) to reduce the amount ofsampling error in the data. As well, the shapes of the distribution (Figure 1, curvilinear distribution in left andrandomized distribution on right) demonstrate the use of visualization of the large amount of data gathered bythe players for interpretation.Figure 1. The left figure shows one set of results during the “High IV Glitch Phase”, from The Silph Road(3).The right figure shows “post-glitch” testing of Pokémon attack IV values(3).Case 2: Crowdsourcing to combat misinformationAnother major data collection activity coordinated by The Silph Road was the “Egg Hatching” research project.Shortly after the game launched, there was a tremendous amount of confusion and misinformation surroundingthe nature of a game feature called egg hatching. In Pokémon GO, players can find eggs by visiting PokéStops.The eggs found at PokéStops can be incubated and hatched if a player walks far enough in the real world, and aPokémon will emerge from the egg. A key point of confusion about the game centered on the type of Pokémonthat could be hatched from these eggs. Players were uncertain as to whether “regionally locked” Pokémon couldhatch from eggs, and intentional misinformation about the subject were rampant. There are four “regionallylocked” Pokémon that exist in the game, meaning they can each be caught only on one specific continent:Kangaskhan can only be caught in Australia or New Zealand, Mr. Mime in Europe, Tauros in North America,and Farfetch’d in Asia. The burning question that the Pokémon GO community had was “can regionally lockedPokémon hatch from eggs outside of the region in which they appear”? Until September 22, 2016 Niantic hadnot made a formal statement about this matter.This particular question became very contentious as “spoofer” accounts began to appear across theworld. In ARGs, a “spoofer” is a person that uses software tools to falsify their physical location in the game,and are thus able to make it appear as if they are in another location. Not long after the launch of the game,regionally locked Pokémon began appearing in Gyms and play areas associated with accounts suspected ofspoofing. In online communities, some people publicly admitted to spoofing to acquire regionally lockedPokémon from other continents without having to travel there. The area of uncertainty and contention thatcaused most of the controversy centered on the fact many players claimed they acquired regionally lockedPokémon from eggs that they hatched. In some cases, it appeared that players making the claims believed it waspossible, and simply used this belief to obfuscate their cheating. Other players seemed to be intentionallyspreading misinformation and “trolling” the Pokémon GO community. Between July 15th to September 30th,2016, our research team monitored over 200 Pokémon GO community Facebook pages, and claims of hatchingregionally locked Pokémon generated long and contentious arguments in at least half of them, with someplayers simply believing the poster and congratulating them for hatching the region-locked Pokémon outside ofthe specified region, and others accusing them of spoofing. The social conflict surrounding this issue was high,with many players feeling angry that members of their community were cheating to “get ahead”. This promptedThe Silph Road to conduct a large crowdsourced research project to determine whether or not Pokémon fromother regions could in fact be hatched from eggs(4). The effort was organized on The Silph Road Reddit and wasa contributory data collection project, where users provided their “total number of eggs hatched and totalCSCL 2017 Proceedings171© ISLSnumber of foreign region locked Pokémon”(4). The data were provided in a structured way in the forum thread.Thousands of contributors provided data on their egg hatches, and after data collection, players had hatched inaggregate 40,507 Pokémon eggs. Zero eggs produced a region locked Pokémon from a different continent.Thus, the project organizers declared the myth “busted”.Analysis of scientizing practices. This case study demonstrates many themes of scientizing practicesto counter against misinformation. Unlike WoW studies from Steinkuehler and Duncan (2008), we observedthat players needed to navigate complex misinformation. To find the answer to their question of region specificPokémon hatching from eggs, the group needed to guard against bias. Authentic science practices make anattempt to limit experimenter bias. To reduce errors and sampling problems, the group had to collect datacharacterized as 1) large in amount (40,507 Pokémon eggs); 2) varied from thousands of random players; and 3)varied in regions around the world (all playable continents). Here, the players worked together to make surethreats against validity were mitigated. Second, the players had to check data against misinformation andanomalous data. Because misinformation may have persisted from spoofers, the players in The Silph Roadneeded to constantly check their data against possible spurious claims. Here, the players’ epistemology focusedon theory-data coordination. Chinn and Malhotra (2002) note that in authentic inquiry, scientists coordinatetheoretical models with multiple sets of complex, partially conflicting data. In simple inquiry, people coordinateone set of observable results with conclusion about those observable results. In this case, we believe the theorydata coordination leans more toward authentic than simple. Because The Silph Road collected thousands of datapoints from all across the world, they were comparing multiple sets of data. In this case, the players wereseeking global consistency, rather than local consistency. Because the players were committed to seekingconfirmation of their theory, they had to respond to anomalous data by rationally discounting data. By having alarge global dataset, this helped to eliminate biased data and misinformation.Case 3: Crowdsourcing to create knowledge togetherThe largest class of crowdsourced and community sourced data collection that has occurred and continues tooccur among the Pokémon GO player base is the development of “nest maps”. In Pokémon GO, certainlocations in the world tend to produce a specific type of uncommon Pokémon at a relatively high frequency,referred to as nests(6). These nest areas are particularly useful for players because they produce a specificPokémon in relative abundance (approximately 3 to 15 Pokémon per hour), and players will travel to thatlocation for the certainty of acquiring the resident Pokémon. Mapping the locations of these nests and thePokémon that inhabit them, has become a large and persistent project for Pokémon GO players that want tocontribute data to the community. Adding to the complexity of the project and the need for continuouscommunity sourced data collection is the fact that nests change over time. Nests appear to persist forapproximately one month and then they change, in what the Pokémon GO player community has come to call“nest migration”. As such, player generated nest maps are in constant need of revision. The Silph Road managesthe largest nest mapping project, though an interesting phenomenon occurring is that many local communitiesare building regional projects to map and communicate nests in their own area. Typically, an organizer for acommunity will create a document or spreadsheet, and solicit suspected nest locations from the local players,who then update the list directly, or post reports into an online forum thread. Examples include the San Antonionest map(7), which is updated by the organizer monthly using the local Facebook group6, and the Las VegasPokémon Nest spreadsheet, which collects data on nest from community members, and distributes a link to aGoogle Docs™ spreadsheet reporting 293 nests in and near Las Vegas. The largest effort to map global nestsremains with The Silph Road, which has developed the contributor capacity to very quickly collect a lot of dataafter each migration(8). For instance, the third Pokémon migration occurred on September 26th, 2016. Within 24hours of the migration, The Silph Road reported 70,374 individual nest reports submitted by players worldwide,mapping 57,606 unique nest locations and corresponding Pokémon(9).Analysis of scientizing practices. This case study demonstrates aspects of the social construction ofknowledge epistemology. Chinn and Malhotra (2002) explain that scientists construct knowledge incollaborative groups, often building on prior research from other scientists. To do this, scientists needinstitutional norms, such as a peer-review process or models of research. In the simple inquiry perspective,students can construct knowledge together too, but they seldom build on prior research or have experience withinstitutional norms. In this case, The Silph Road created a way for the community to contribute towards buildingthis knowledge that is somewhere between authentic and simple. The creation of Google Docs, social media,and mapping tools provided a common way for everyone in The Silph Road to contribute. Here, there is agrounding of the methods which creates a guideline for the group to report the data for the nesting project.However, there are no institutional norms in the group for patterns of argument or a model for research in thiscase. For instance, the group does not (yet) have a way to review arguments about the nest migration.CSCL 2017 Proceedings172© ISLSDiscussion and implicationsSteinkuehler and Duncan (2008) provided clear empirical evidence to show that players engaged in WoWonline communities not only engaged in informal science literacy, but that an overwhelming majority of theconversation was dedicated to productive forms of scientific practice. Similarly, our findings demonstrate thatplayers engaging in Pokémon GO online communities are not only engaging in scientific practice, but aspects ofthese practices fall within aspects of authentic scientific practice. Our findings extend the work of Steinkuehlerand Duncan by showing specifically how these scientizing practices emerge to solve very complex problems.The nature of the problems in Pokémon GO require distributed collaboration across time and space through ICT(Hutchins, 1995). Determining “glitches”, filtering through misinformation, and creating a knowledge base forgeo-mapping is not an effort that only a small handful of experts could solve. Our findings show thatcrowdsourcing information and data together to solve problems not only encourages scientizing practices, butrequires those practices to be collaborative. Players had to collect large amounts of data in multiple forms,organize that data collection effort across multiple continents and locations, generate models from that data,create community practices around how that data is to be managed, create evidence-based arguments, anddetermine the unknowns within their arguments. We believe that even though Pokémon GO touts itself as asimple online location-based ARG, there are deeper scientizing practices that can occur within everydaygameplay. In addition to the mass appeal, abundant opportunities for participation in data collection and sharing,as well as the need for communicating and working together as a group make Pokémon GO an attractive venuefor engaging people in scientizing practices.Furthermore, we believe that the implications of our research for informal science learning aremeaningful for families and children — Pokémon GO can be used to motivate scientizing practices in familiesand children. Pokémon GO is a mainstream game meant for players of all ages, with very close youth andfamily connections. Sobel et al. (2017) found that many parents had a much more positive attitude towards thescreen time their children were having while playing a game like Pokémon GO than other video games (such asMinecraft) since they are playing outside and together as a family. With the added benefit of strong appeal toparents, we believe a game like Pokémon GO presents an ideal opportunity for engaging children to scientizetogether with their friends and family. Takeuchi and Stevens (2011) note that children’s engagement withparents about digital media has shown great potential for learning. As well, children scientizing together withother adults has shown great potential for engagement in science learning (e.g., Bell, Bricker, Reeve,Zimmerman, & Tzou, 2013). In our future work, we plan to look at how families and children may be engagingin scientizing practices in other online gaming communities, similar to Pokémon GO. Our findings are limited atthis point because we were unable to dig deeper at the ages and relationships of the players in these onlinevenues. Future work in this area needs to uncover more specifics about whether youth and families are currentlyengaging in these crowdsourcing scientizing efforts. We believe that if youth and families are not engaged inthese practices around their commercial games, online communities can potentially be developed for thispurpose. Online communities like Reddit and Facebook are not designed yet for family, teacher, and childrencrowdsourcing projects for scientizing. However, families, children, and other learning stakeholders could eitherparticipate or run these kinds of large-scale investigations themselves. We believe that bridging third spaces(Steinkuehler, 2008) by creating online communities for families, children, and teachers around Pokémon GOand other simple location-based games could potentially be useful in demonstrating how everyday practices andengagements can contribute towards authentic science inquiry practices.Endnotes(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9)https://pokeassistant.com/main/ivcalculatorhttp://www.pokemon.com/us/pokedex/https://thesilphroad.com/science/attack-iv-pokedex-number-correlationhttps://www.reddit.com/r/TheSilphRoad/comments/4w9d00/have_you_hatched_eggs_great_i_want_you_to_tell_me/http://heavy.com/games/2016/09/pokemon-go-can-you-hatch-region-specific-pokemon-from-egg-eggs-outside-oflocation-tauros-kangaskhan-mr-mime-farfetchd-north-america-europe-asia-australia-john-hanke/https://pokemongo.gamepress.gg/pokemon-nestshttps://docs.google.com/document/d/1a7kzD3ewFCS68yEEV55gUWtsE011lS3VtUZlBqBZokw/edithttps://www.reddit.com/r/TheSilphRoad/comments/54ndqm/megathread_the_3rd_great_migration_appears_to/https://thesilphroad.com/atlasReferencesAsbell-Clarke, J., Edwards, T., Rowe, E., Larsen, J., Sylvan, E., & Hewitt, J. (2012). Martian Boneyards:Scientific inquiry in an MMO game. International Journal of Game-Based Learning, 2(1), 52–76.CSCL 2017 Proceedings173© ISLSAzevedo, F. S. (2013). The tailored practice of hobbies and its implication for the design of interest-drivenlearning environments. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 22(3), 462–510.Barab, S., Thomas, M., Dodge, T., Carteaux, R., & Tuzun, H. (2005). Making learning fun: Quest Atlantis, agame without guns. Educational Technology Research and Development, 53(1), 86–107.Bell, P., Bricker, L.A., Reeve, S., Zimmerman, H.T., & Tzou, C. (2012). Discovering and supporting successfullearning pathways of youth in and out of school: Accounting for the development of everyday expertiseacross settings. In B. Bevan, P. Bell, R. Stevens, & A. Razfar (Eds.), LOST opportunities: Learning inout of school time (pp. 119–140). London: Springer.Chinn, C. A., & Malhotra, B. A. (2002). Epistemologically authentic inquiry in schools: A theoreticalframework for evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86(2), 175–218.Clegg, T. L., & Kolodner, J. (2014). Scientizing and cooking: Helping middle-school learners develop scientificdispositions. Science Education, 98(1), 36–63. https://doi.org/10.1002/sce.21083Edelson, D. C., & Joseph, D. M. (2004). The interest-driven learning design framework: motivating learningthrough usefulness. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp.166–173). International Society of the Learning Sciences.Falk, J., & Davenport, G. (2004). Live role-playing games: Implications for pervasive gaming. In InternationalConference on Entertainment Computing (pp. 127–138). Springer.Gee, J. P., & Hayes, E. (2011). Nurturing affinity spaces and game-based learning. In C. Steinkuehler, K.Squire, & S. Barab (Eds.), Games, learning, and society: Learning and meaning in the digital age (pp.129–153). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Guba, E. G., & Lincoln, Y. S. (2005). Paradigmatic controversies, contradictions, and emerging confluences. InThe SAGE handbook of qualitative research (3rd ed., pp. 191–215). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.Hutchins, E. (1995). How a cockpit remembers its speeds. Cognitive Science, 19(3), 265–288.Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., … Watkins, S. C. (2013). Connectedlearning: An agenda for research and design. Digital Media and Learning Research Hub.Ketelhut, D. J. (2007). The impact of student self-efficacy on scientific inquiry skills: An exploratoryinvestigation in River City, a multi-user virtual environment. Journal of Science Education andTechnology, 16(1), 99–111.Lee, O., & Fradd, S. H. (1998). Science for all, including students from non-English language backgrounds.Educational Researcher, 27(4), 12–21.Kuhn, D. (1992) Thinking as argument. Harvard Education Review, 62(2), 155–178Merriam, S. B. (2009). Qualitative research: A guide to design and implementation. San Francisco, CA: JohnWiley and Sons.Rashid, O., Mullins, I., Coulton, P., & Edwards, R. (2006). Extending cyberspace: Location based games usingcellular phones. Computers in Entertainment (CIE), 4(1), 4.Rutherford, F. J., & Ahlgren, A. (1990). Science for all Americans. Oxford University Press.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265–283.Sobel, K., Bhattacharya, A., Hiniker, A., Lee, J.H., Kientz, J., & Yip, J.C. (2017). “It wasn't really about thePokémon": Understanding families' experiences with a location-based mobile game. In Proceedings ofSIGCHI Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2017). New York, NY: ACM.Steinkuehler, C.A. (2008) Cognition and literacy in massively multiplayer online games. In J., Coiro, M.Knobel, C. Lankshear, D. Leu (eds.) Handbook of research on new literacies. (pp. 611-634). Erlbaum,Mahwah NJ.Steinkuehler, C., & Duncan, S. (2008). Scientific habits of mind in virtual worlds. Journal of Science Educationand Technology, 17(6), 530–543.Takeuchi, L., & Stevens, R. (2011). The new coviewing: Designing for learning through joint mediaengagement. New York: Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop. Retrieved fromhttp://www.joanganzcooneycenter.org/publication/the-new-coviewing-designing-for-learning-throughjoint-media-engagement/Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Interaction between learning and development. In Mind in society: The development ofhigher psychological processes (pp. 79–91). USA.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the numerous members of the various Pokémon GO online communities that allowed us to interactand inquire about their gameplay.CSCL 2017 Proceedings174© ISLS