Anchored Annotations to Support Collaborative KnowledgeConstructionJustin Plevinski, Jennifer Weible, and Michael DeSchryver,plevi1js@cmich.edu, j.weible@cmich.edu, desch2m@cmich.eduCentral Michigan UniversityAbstract: Online discussion forums have been shown to support collaborative reflection,critique, and construction of knowledge. However, when these discussions are readingcentered and hosted in traditional threaded discussion forums, it is often difficult to maintainfocus on the readings themselves, as well as navigating the difficulty of attributing ideas tojust one discussion post within a thread. This study demonstrates how an anchored annotationsystem was used in a first semester online, asynchronous doctoral course to support moreeffective reading-centered knowledge construction. We investigated the discussion activitiesof 12 online doctoral students as they explored seven articles during two non-consecutiveweeks. Through analysis of 591 student comments and replies, we examined how studentsused the anchoring system as a support to help make sense of the articles. We found that usinganchored annotation reduced coordination activities and supported knowledge construction,particularly interpretation and elaboration of ideas.IntroductionAsynchronous discussion is a common collaborative activity in both undergraduate and graduate online courses.These discussion forums are useful for reflection, communication, and knowledge construction (Gao, Zhang, &Franklin, 2013). They may also facilitate deeper understanding of concepts (Gilbert & Dabbagh, 2005).Concerns with the quality of interactions have been related to the design of typical threaded forums, leading todevelopment of innovative environments intended to support more effective discussions (van der Pol, Admiraal,& Simons, 2006). To better support online doctoral students’ construction of knowledge, we explored a tool,Framebench (Agarwal, 2015) that allowed for online, collaborative annotations to be anchored within the text ofassigned readings.In this paper, we synthesize contributions from previous work in computer supported collaborativelearning to frame our study. Then, we describe Framebench (Agarwal, 2015), an anchored system that we usedin the context of reading-centered academic discussion, and explore its affordances as compared to priorresearch on linked annotation systems. Thereafter, we present findings regarding the knowledge buildingpatterns of 12 online doctoral students over the course of first semester readings using this anchored system asthe underlying tool to support asynchronous discussion focused on the text. Finally, we discuss the implicationsof these findings for future research and practice.Conceptual frameworkReadings, and discussion about them, are a common activity in most graduate seminars. In its simplest form,such conversation involves teacher-asked questions, followed by student answers, followed by teacher feedbackor responses. However, this linear, teacher-directed model does not reflect the generative discourse patterns ineffective knowledge building communities (Scardamlia & Bereiter, 1994). In this way, knowledge buildingresults from collective understanding through interaction, often supported by technology within the learningenvironment. As such, students must articulate their ideas, questions, and responses to demonstrate insightsand understandings about the text in online discussions focused on course readings (Gao, Zhang, & Franklin,2013). In online classes, studies of this type of socially constructed knowledge have often focused on discussionforums, or threaded discussions (e.g., Hew & Cheung, 2010). The content of these discussion forums may centeron various intellectual artifacts such as topics, problems, or case studies drawn from the readings. However,because of the various affordances and constraints of systems designed to support these discussions, the actualdialogue within the forum is typically physically separated from the text of interest. For instance, a commonmethod utilized when engaging students in a browser-based threaded discussion is to open one browser windowfor the threaded discussion while a PDF of the reading is available in another window or tab. In this way, thereading itself is distal to the related discussion. Eryilmaz et al. (2013) found that this distance may increasecoordination efforts (cognitive expenditures needed to align the text and the discussion) and decrease energy andeffort available for knowledge construction as students navigate back and forth between the reading and theCSCL 2017 Proceedings111© ISLSforum discussion. This leads to lower numbers of references to the related readings and reduced understandingof the content. As such, many threaded forum discussion posts do not demonstrate a rich understanding ofcontent, nor do they fully integrate the key ideas from the related readings (Hewitt, 2001).For this study, we adopted a constructivist approach to learning in which the individual’s knowledgeconstruction is based on their individual and social practices (Pena-Shaf & Nicholls, 2004). In so doing, wemapped knowledge construction activities onto six cognitive processes including remembering, understanding,applying, analyzing, evaluating, and creating (Krathwohl, 2002). We were particularly interested in howremembering and understanding supported the comprehension of assigned readings. That is, rememberinginvolves retrieving and recalling what a learner knows, and understanding is the act of “[d]etermining themeaning of instructional messages” (Krathwohl, pp. 215). Included in the understanding category are cognitiveactions of interpreting, classifying, summarizing, inferring, comparing, and explaining (Krathwohl).We also situated this study in the computer supported collaborative learning environment (CSCL) ofanchored discussions, which emphasize social interaction (Gao, Zhang, & Franklin, 2013) and “offer creativeactivities of intellectual exploration” (Stahl, Koschman, and Suthers, 2006, p. 410). Using a collaborative,computer-based environment encourages students to make their thinking visible to others by articulating theirlearning socially (Chu & Kennedy, 2011). These visible demonstrations help students expose theirunderstanding to other students, explore different views, and contribute to shared understanding, which maydeepen learning processes (Stahl, Koschman, and Suthers).Previously Guzdial and Turns (2000) used an anchoring system called CaMILE as a way of improvingonline course discussions. They anchored specific notes onto web pages that were linked to the CaMILE system.By clicking on a note anchored within a web page, threaded discussion comments appeared on a different webpage. Although the notes and discussion comments were connected, they were linked on two separate webpages. Using the CaMILE system, Guzdial and Turns’ research focused on improved sustained on-topic forumdiscussions. Other authors have used more advanced features of the web for different types of anchoreddiscussions in order to reduce the cognitive load due to distance between the reading and the discussion. Oneway of reducing the distance between readings and discussion is the use of linked discussions; to integrate thediscussion forum and reading together in an environment and “link” them to each other (e.g., Eryilmaz et al.,2013; van der Pol et al., 2006). These previous studies of “anchored” discussion systems explore what aretermed “parallel linked systems” where the discussion forum and artifact are presented side-by-side on thescreen, and then linked visually via hyperlink. In these parallel linked systems, the distance between discussionand text is less than in traditional threaded discussion forums, but coordination activities that representextraneous cognitive load still exist. However, using document-mediated systems such as linked discussionsmay provide a stronger collaborative context and “direct users’ collaborative intentions towards the processingof that text” (van der Pol et al., p. 344), while reducing the need for coordination of the collaborative process.Building on linked discussions, other formats supporting collaborative discussion from the anchoredperspective also exist. These systems have been studied through the lenses of constrained environments,visualized environments, and anchored arguments (e.g., Gao, Zhang, & Franklin, 2013). The latter demonstratetruly anchored discussions through online annotation systems that allow for questions, comments, and replies tobe embedded directly on the text of readings, which may reduce cognitive load and related coordinative activity(e.g., Annotate, Hypothesis, Diigo). However, across the annotation systems currently available, many do notcleanly accommodate the discussion and interaction patterns desired for academic discussion of the text. Forinstance, some systems allow for anchored comments within the text, but multiple replies to that comment resultin a long window on the screen that extends on to the next page, rendering the anchoring more distal and lessuseful. Some other systems allow anchoring, but the notes cannot be collapsed. As such, students whoencounter the reading after other classmates have annotated the document find a document covered with notes,disrupting their ability to read the original text. All of these activities may have an “interaction cost” that iseither social or coordinative (van der Pol et al., 2006), and may reduce the effectiveness of a CSCL environmentif the costs are too high. Coordinative costs (mental capacity used to reference evidence) are particularlypersistent in traditional asynchronous text based online discussions (Eryilmaz et al., 2013). For instance, somesystems leave too much coordination and structuring to the students, particularly for maintaining a shared frameof reference (Häkkinen & Järvelä, 2006). This is often in the form of specific references to the learning artifactfrom within the discussion contributions (Herrmann & Kienle, 2008).Because of this problem, Eryilmaz et al. (2013) explored the coordination costs of establishing andmaintaining shared focus in proximal online readings using a linked artifact-centered discourse system, findingthat decreasing the need for coordination costs in an online discussion environment increased knowledgeconstruction potential. They utilized the Annotation Tool (Van der Pol et al, 2006), which presents bothdiscussion threads and the readings in the same window in two separate frames, using links between the imageCSCL 2017 Proceedings112© ISLSof a text page and the discussion threads for two-way reference between them. Previous research indicated thissort of “anchoring” may stimulate sustained on-topic conversations (Guzidal & Turns, 2000), encouragemessages on specific points in the reading (Häkkinen, et al. 2002), and help students better engage with complexideas (Suthers, et al., 2006). Eryilmaz et al. found participants demonstrated less coordination activities andincreased knowledge construction activities. However, although linked artifact systems like the Annotation Toolsignificantly reduce the navigational distance between discussion and artifact, they do still demonstrate spatialdistance across the screen and window.Framebench software (Agarwal, 2015) uses a more advanced anchoring system whereby the annotationsystem is integrated directly within pdf documents. The threaded discussions appear as a collapsible floatingwindow on the pdf document itself rather than being linked through a separate webpage. We focused on thestudents’ collaborative knowledge construction through threaded discussions anchored directly at the point ofreference within the pdf document text. As such, given that linking discussion and text across the screenreduced coordination activity, we explored whether proximally anchored annotations might reduce it even more,leaving greater energy and effort to expend in knowledge construction activities.MethodologyResearch questionsThe goal of this research was to examine the affordances of anchored annotations for both reducing coordinationactivities and supporting construction of knowledge. In this analysis, we answer the questions: (1) How doanchored annotations support student coordination activities?, and (2) How does using anchored annotations in alearning environment support student collaborative knowledge construction activities?Selection of the online systemWe evaluated options for anchored discussion that connect the discussion in even closer proximity or directly onthe text itself than linked systems. The tool used for this study was Framebench (Agarwal, 2015) that affordedtwo features integral to supporting the proximal anchoring. First, initial comments are embedded with only asmall icon so that the text is “clean” when readers return to it, but comments are readily available with a singleclick. Second, Framebench uniquely encapsulates comments and replies in a single window where readers canscroll through them, still anchored to the text, using very little screen real estate. In most other systems, the fourreplies demonstrated by the open comment window (See Figure 1) would extend on to the next page. Therefore,this environment provided several key affordances of anchored discussion to support reading-focusedknowledge construction that are not available in other currently available tools.Figure 1. Screenshot of a comment and responses encapsulated within Framebench’s anchored annotationformat.CSCL 2017 Proceedings113© ISLSParticipants and settingsFor this study, participants (n=12) were students enrolled in an entirely online doctoral program in educationaltechnology. Ten were from states within the United States, and two were international students. The setting forthis study was a first semester course intended to provide an overview of educational technology research andthe scope of the field. Students were assigned four sets of readings to be discussed in Framebench (Agarwal ,2015) during weeks two, six, ten, and 14 (other synchronous and asynchronous options were utilized in theremaining weeks of the course for weekly discussion), of which we selected week six and fourteen for analysis.Week six was chosen to ensure that all students were already familiar with the Framebench system and wereable to access it without difficulty, and week 14 was chosen to analyze for changes in interaction patterns acrossthe semester.Data, findings, and analysisData examined for this analysis were 591 anchored annotations (both initial posts and replies) written byparticipants across nine articles assigned during the two selected weeks. Each comment and all replies werelogged into a spreadsheet in their entirety, as well as word counts, number of comments and replies, and numberof highlights and other written annotations from within the documents. Each comment and reply weresegmented into activities (Erilmaz et al, 2013), which were coded based on a priori codes for coordination(Erlimaz et al.) and knowledge construction activities (Krathwohl, 2002; Pena-Shaff & Nicholls, 2004). Wealso allowed for emerging codes (see Table 1). These emergent codes were developed, identified, and definedby all researchers before being utilized within the coding scheme. In particular, we modified the framework ofPena-Shaff & Nicholls to include a more nuanced understanding of clarification, interpretation, and elaborationthat incorporated ideas from Krathwohl. Clarification was used to denote when ideas and thoughts wereidentified, while elaboration was added to differentiate between clarification and allow for coding of otheractivities (see Table 1 for definitions and examples). Interpretation was defined as “inferences, conclusions,summaries, generalizations, problem solution suggestions, or hypotheses” and elaboration was defined asexpanding the scope of the current discussion by adding additional information or examples (Pena-Schaff &Nichols, pp. 257). Aligning with Krathwohl, elaboration as a cognitive skill falls into both the remembering andunderstanding categories: elaboration relies on long-term knowledge (remembering) to provide relevant, relatedexamples that demonstrate understanding the content of the text. The cognitive actions in understanding,according to Krathwohl, are the same cognitive actions used to define interpretation. Descriptive statistics foreach code category as well as percentages of the coded activities were calculated. Two researchers coded allsegmented annotations separately and discussed differences to reach consensus to provide validity.Table 1: Conceptual Framework, Definitions, Examples, and PercentageCategoriesOperationalizationKnowledge Construction ActivitiesExample of the applied codePercentInterpretation“This supports the idea that active learning isbeneficial to students”21%Are there other content areas that may benefitalso, why science (other than the video wasavailable)?Couldn't there be an option to learn frombooks, videos, games, whatever best matchesthe student with perhaps formative assessmentsalong the way for students to see if they arelearning?“Perhaps I misread this first sentence, but I'mnot sure I agree with this statement”14%“I too believe that these assumptions are morevital than just to label them "assumptions."”6%QuestionConflictConsensusBuildingInferences, conclusions,summaries, generalizations,problem solution suggestions,hypothesesSeeking to find additionalinformation pertaining to thediscussion; prompt furtherdiscussion about the currenttopic; a question that reflectsupon the current discussionDisagreeing with anotherstudent; mentioning a differentpoint of view in direct replyDiscussion ofmisunderstandings; reaching anCSCL 2017 Proceedings1142.5%© ISLSagreement on an idea, fact, orinterpretation; negotiating thedefinition, interpretation, ortruthfulness of a claim or factSupportEmpathizing; statements ofacknowledgement; providingdirect feedbackClarification Listing main ideas, facts fromthe reading, assumptionsElaborationConnecting ideas withexamples, defining terms,causes or consequences, listingadvantages or disadvantages,using analogies to explore ideas,making connections, comparingand contrastingCoordination ActivitiesDistalReferences to informationoutside of the text.Proximal/FarProximalReferences to informationeither within the sameparagraph or within the text.Other Emerging Codes/categoriesSocialInteractionsTangentialDirectionsConfusingComments directed atparticipants but not at the task athand.Comments peripherally relatedto the topic.Directions or guidance from theinstructor.Comments that did not makesense within the context.Tammi, I also see a big problem here12.4%“aka - a student-teacher scenario.”1.8%“Gee's background in sociolinguistics isshining through here in this section. :)”“This happens with adult learners who tend tobe focused on learning just what is needed toachieve the task at hand”21%“I think it's in Steinkuelher's article that shequestions why relate gaming to TV or radio,etc.”“This paragraph rings a bell about studentempowerment & motivation that comes whenstudents can take control of their learningactively.”5.9%“Also, it's my 3 year old who watches Caillou.My daughter would be mortified if she knew Imixed that up :-)”“J---, I read a great article this week, also byGee, talking about games and libraries.”“This is the kind of annotation that is helpful toeveryone else, and demonstrates the kind ofreading I'd like to see you all practice. If youdon't know something, it can be easily exploredby our friend Google..”“My english-speaking peer mentoringpartnership based on the research findings,recommendation of need and lack of englishspeaking and transitioning support forDomestic students and recommendations.”2%1.43%3%.23%.3%Table 2: Data Grouped by CategoryActivities by CategoryWeek 6Week 14TotalPercentageCoordinating (focusing on shared topic ofdiscourse)4039796.7%Knowledge construction (interpretation andelaboration)221.5234.545638.6%Knowledge construction (other)284.5290.557548.6%CSCL 2017 Proceedings115© ISLSOther2626524.4%Total number5786041182100%DiscussionAnchored annotation reduces coordination activitiesWithin our study, coordination activities accounted for 6.7% of the overall activities (see Table 2). Consideringthat Erilmaz et al. (2013) found that between 17% and 26% of all activities were considered to be coordinationactivities in a parallel linked annotation system, our findings indicate that a within-text anchored annotationsystem (such as Framebench) may decrease coordination effort and allow more focus on construction ofknowledge. This may have resulted from the proximal nature of the anchored comment. That is, when acomment is embedded in the text of a reading, the content of the comment is clearly referencing the text near oron which the comment is connected. For instance, a student comments “Summative assessment (or summativeevaluation) refers to the assessment of participants where the focus is on the outcome of a program. Thiscontrasts with formative assessment...” (see Figure 2). Another student replies, “Sort of - the critical piece offormative assessment that makes it formative…” Due to the proximity of the user’s icon to this paragraph, andeven more precisely, aligning with the first two sentences of the paragraph, there is a seamless discussion of theauthors’ contentions about summative evaluations in a research context. As indicated, there is little need forspecific references to the text on the part of the initial commenter, and subsequent repliers need not search forintended references.Figure 2. Screenshot of anchored annotation of student discussion in Framebench in which they are developingcollaborative understanding of summative vs. formative evaluations.In Eryilmaz et al., participants used specific coordinative references such as “the author’s argument onpage 8” six percent of the time, and another 11% of comments were used to maintain that focus. We proposetwo possibilities for why the anchored system within Framebench (Agarwal, 2015) may reduce such referencesin comparison to the linked system. First, the anchored annotations are located immediately within the text,whereas in the linked system, the screen is covered in multiple threaded comments on the left side of thebrowser and the document itself can be covered in several colored highlights. Within the threaded systems,students may find that in spite of all of these cues connected across the document and browser, references to thetext are still necessary or useful.Second, instructions provided to the learners in each context may have primed them for thefunctionality of the system. That is, in this study, given that the students were doctoral students, the instructor,was transparent upon introducing Framebench about the apparent and intended affordances of the system.Students were told that they were using a discussion system that might help them closely explore the text ofassigned readings with embedded comments. Specific language in those instructions may have indicated,explicitly or implicitly, that the proximity of the comments reduced the need to make specific reference to therelated text. Eryilmaz et al. indicated that students were “briefed about the functionality of the utilizedCSCL 2017 Proceedings116© ISLSinteraction environment” (p. 125). But, it is unclear if this briefing may have underrepresented the connectiveaffordances of the systems, or if identical instructions were given to the treatment and control groups, whichwould not have highlighted the potential benefits of linked-parallel artifact systems.Anchoring annotation supports remembering and understanding of textIn our study, anchoring annotations within the text supported multiple types of knowledge constructionactivities, primarily elaboration and interpretation. The number of activities within our data set coded aselaboration and interpretation statements within the anchored annotations accounted for 42% of all comments orreplies (21% of comments coded elaboration and 21 % of comments coded interpretation). Finding that the useof anchored annotations may foster knowledge construction activities that align with remembering andunderstanding (Krathwohl, 2002) more than other types of knowledge construction activities, such as consensusbuilding and synthesis, may be due to the manner in which the tool handles instances of annotations. Eachannotation can be anchored immediately beside the text referenced, and each article contains numerousopportunities for threaded annotated discussions near the text that spurred the initial comment for the threadeddiscussion. In alignment with Gao, Zhang, and Franklin (2013) who found that anchoring annotations reducedthe localization effect (the given distance of text’s proximity to the location of the annotation is low, thusmoving from one space to another changes the qualitative nature of the annotation), our students changed focuswith every post. Within our study, students created multiple, shorter length comments and replies, often withinthe same paragraph, that focused on a small portion of the text instead of constructing a longer post thatsynthesized across several paragraphs or ideas. We posit that this ease of “targeted” annotations facilitatedstudents’ remembering and understanding of the content, but hindered synthesis across texts and consensusbuilding activities between the students.Furthermore, the way in which Framebench (Agarwal, 2015) was implemented within the course maysupport the knowledge construction activities of remembering and understanding moreso than other knowledgeconstruction activities because of the length and the number of readings. Each week there were four to fivescholarly readings of extended length (well over 100 pages per week), and students could annotate anywhere inthe documents. That is, in addition to the focused nature of the annotations within Framebench, the sheervolume of pages to read and annotate may have encouraged the knowledge construction activities ofunderstanding and remembering, key steps for comprehending the assigned readings, in place of synthesis orevaluation.Conclusion and implicationsThis study explored how first semester, online doctoral students utilized a text anchored annotation system tomake sense of and discuss their weekly readings. Just above, we outlined how our data indicated thatcoordination activities were relatively minimal and that this system supported knowledge construction activitiesclosely aligned with the cognitive processes of remembering and understanding. Some might interpret thesefindings to be disconcerting in the context of knowledge construction. That is, given remembering andunderstanding are often considered “lower-order” skills in the context of Krathwohl’s (2002) presentation ofcognitive processes, it would be easy to dismiss the value of in-text anchored annotation systems, since thecurrent study did not promote the more generative “higher-order” processes often associated with knowledgeconstruction. In practical terms, however, the online students used the affordances of Framebench’s in-text,anchored annotation system as a support while they processed broad, foundational readings needed to makesense of the field. As such, using anchored annotations in online learning environments may have positiveimplications for providing students with a social method to explore and understand complex readings.This being the case, it is also important to emphasize the specific goals of the course in which thisstudy was conducted. Situated in the first semester of an online doctoral program, the primary objective in thissurvey course was to ensure that students absorbed the key ideas in the assigned readings from across 14different genres of education and educational technology research. Absent the more traditional conversationalstyle of a face-to-face doctoral survey course that affords the instructor ample opportunities to assess the extentto which students are internalizing assigned readings, we specifically endeavored to find a system that wouldsupport such discussions and assessment in an asynchronous manner. Given the tendency of threaded discussionto stray away from the readings, we utilized Framebench as a way to focus students on the specific text elementswithin the readings through visible discussion anchored at that point.There are currently several styles of systems available to support discussion in online learning:embedded anchors, standard threaded discussion forums, and parallel linked anchors. We posit that in choosinga discussion system for online learning, it is important to consider (a) the goals of the online discussion (e.g.understanding vs. knowledge construction), and (b) the design affordances that undergird the system (e.g.CSCL 2017 Proceedings117© ISLSreducing coordination costs vs. creating connections). Future research may provide continued exploration of thetradeoffs between and among these considerations. Furthermore, this study may also inform design principlesfor the creation of additional systems that utilize anchored annotation within text.ReferencesAgarwal, R. (2015). Framebench.com [computer software]. India.Chu, S. K-W., & Kennedy, D. M. (2011). Using online collaborative tools for groups to co- constructknowledge. Online Information Review, 35(4), 581-597.Eryilmaz, E., van der Pol, J., Ryan, T., Clark, P. M., & Mary, J. (2013). Enhancing student knowledgeacquisition from online learning conversations. Journal of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning, 8, 113-144.Gao, F., Zhang, T., & Franklin, T. (2013). Designing asynchronous online discussion environments: Recentprogress and possible future directions. British Journal of Educational Technology, 44(3), 469-483.Gilbert, P. K. & Dabbagh, N. (2005). How to structure online discussions for meaningful discourse: A casestudy. British Journal of Educational Technology, 36(1), 5-18.Häkkinen, P., & Järvelä, S. (2006). Sharing and constructing perspectives in web-based conferencing.Computers & Education, 47(4), 433-447.Herrmann, T., & Kienle, A. (2008). Context-oriented communication and the design of computer-supporteddiscursive learning. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3(3), 273299.Hew, K.F., & Cheung, W.S. (2010). Fostering higher knowledge construction levels in online discussionforums: An exploratory case study. International Journal of Web-Based Learning and TeachingTechnologies, 5(4), 44-55.Hewitt, J. (2001). Beyond threaded discourse. International Journal of Educational Telecommunications, 7,207-221.Jonassen, D., Davidson, M., Collins, M., Campbell, J., & Haag, B. B. (1995). Constructivism and computermediated communication in distance education. The American Journal of Distance Education, 9(2), 726.Krathwohl, D. R. (2002). A revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy: An overview. Theory Into Practice, 41(4), 212218.McGinley, W. (1992). The role of reading and writing while composing from sources. Reading ResearchQuarterly, 27(3), 226-248.Pena-Shaff, J. B. & Nicholls, C. (2004). Analyzing student interactions and meaning construction in computerbulletin board discussions. Computers & Education, 42 (3), 243- 265.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In K. Sawyer(Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 97-118). New York: Cambridge Press.Stahl, G., Koschmann, T., & Suthers, D. D. (2006). Computer-supported collaborative learning. In K. Sawyer(Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 409-425). New York: Cambridge Press.van der Pol, J., Admiraal, W., & Simons, P. R. J. (2006). The affordance of anchored discussion for thecollaborative processing of academic texts. International Journal of Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning, 1(3), 339-357.CSCL 2017 Proceedings118© ISLS