Group and Individual Level Effects of Supporting Socio-CognitiveConflict Awareness and Its Resolution in Large SNS DiscussionGroups: A Social Network AnalysisDimitra Tsovaltzi, Nikita Dutta, Thomas Puhl, and Armin Weinbergerd.tsovaltzi@edutech.uni-saarland.de, ndutta.uds@gmail.com t.puhl, a.weinberger@edutech.uni-saarland.deSaarland University, GermanyAbstract: SNS (social networking sites) provide great opportunities for access to knowledgesources and equity in publicly expressing ideas, opinions and attitudes. They define a richcontext of socio-cognitive interactions in which conflict can arise. Supports for conflictawareness and argumentation processes to resolve the conflict can foster learning. This articlepresents a comparative 2×2 field study (N=98) of such supports in a university course thatincluded weekly SNS discussions. Group Awareness Tools (GATs) were used to increaseattitude conflict awareness, and argumentation scripts as a cognitive guidance to help learnerscapitalize on this awareness and resolve the conflict productively. We use Social NetworkAnalysis (SNA) to gain a group-level understanding of the effects of argumentation on attitudechange relative to peer interactions. We measure number of interactions, information flowcontrol, influence distribution, and attitude similarity. Both GATs and argumentation scriptinfluence group processes, but argumentation script shows more substantial influence.Keywords: computer-supported collaborative learning, social network analysis, groupawareness tools, argumentation script, social networking sitesAttitude change through argumentation in SNS using group awareness toolsand argumentation scriptsSocio-cognitive conflict and attitude change in SNSSNS provide a great possibility for equity and access to sources of knowledge, but also for public expression ofideas, opinions and attitudes that can lead to pluralistic exchange. They define a rich context of socio-cognitiveinteractions in which conflict can arise, but they do not necessarily promote productive interactions. Inparticular, discussions in public settings foster the externalization of attitudes and afford chances for learners toscrutinize their own attitudes and those of their peers (Nussbaum, 2008), thus facilitating interaction andelaboration that could lead to socio-cognitive conflict and attitude change. However, research has shown thatwhile on the one hand social media can instigate socio-cognitive conflict beyond the grasp of existing purposespecific collaborative learning tools by leveraging differences in attitude, on the other hand the public nature ofthe discussions may rather reinforce private beliefs and attitudes and prohibit change (Lampert, Rittenhouse, &Crumbaugh, 1996). Peers play an important part in shaping new opinions and perspectives during groupdiscussions in public settings. They, thus, influence group decisions by encouraging networked communicationand collective decision-making (Chaiken, Wood, & Eagly, 1996; Cialdini & Trost, 1998; Wood 2000). Moreresearch is needed to better understand the socio-cognitive processes involved in SNS peer interactions in theirown right, but also to identify supports that can enhance interactions and help learners to productively resolveconflicts in SNS and leverage attitude differences and socio-cognitive conflict for attitude change.Argumentative knowledge construction to promote communication attitude changeAttitudes influence our ability to learn and acquire new skills, and may often hinder learning (Erber, Hodges, &Wilson, 1995). Although, communication theory seminars are becoming increasingly common in teacher traineeuniversity courses to modify teachers’ attitudes and improve their communication skills, negative attitudestowards the need for good communication skills are pronounced among teacher trainees (Ihmeideh & Al-omari,2010). However, communication is a key skill for teachers and higher education professionals due to theireveryday involvement with students, parents, colleagues and school administrative staff, requiring skillfulintervention through communication. Additionally, individual attitudes are stable and long-term deep learningand conflict awareness are prerequisites for attitude change (Erber et al, 1995). Argumentative KnowledgeConstruction (AKC), which is the deliberate practice of elaborating learning material by constructing formallyand semantically sound arguments (Weinberger & Fischer, 2006) can aid such deep learning. ArgumentationCSCL 2017 Proceedings247© ISLScan not only induce increased self-reflection and conflict awareness, but can also help in attitude co-construction(Andriessen, 2006; Asterhan & Schwarz, 2009; Baker, 2003; Felton & Kuhn, 2001, Sassenberg & Boos, 2003,Tsovaltzi, Puhl, Judele, & Weinberger, 2014; Wenger, McDermott, & Snyder, 2002)).Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning supports for attitude change in SNSComputer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) environments have been systematically enhanced andutilized to induce attitude change and promote knowledge acquisition (Buder & Bodemer, 2008; Dillenbourg &Fischer, 2007; Puhl, Tsovaltzi, & Weinberger, 2015a; 2015b). SNS, like Facebook, provide a modifiableplatform through apps that can host argumentative CSCL learning scenarios in which learners can exchange andformulate their elaborate opinions and arguments during meaningful discussions (Greenhow, 2008; Greenhow,Menzer, & Gibbins, 2012; Puhl et al; 2015a; 2015b). Prominent CSLC supports like GAT and argumentationscripts can, thus, be augmented to implement AKC in SNS and make use of group level interactions for learningand attitude change. GATs provide learners with information regarding actual group processes. They can, forinstance, visualize group process information (Buder & Bodemer, 2008; Gutwin & Greenberg, 2002) tohighlight conflicting opinions in discussions and foster learning and collaboration through socio-emotional andmotivational processes. The increased awareness of ones' opinion and attitude afforded by GATs, especially incomparison to others in a group, can help in making differences salient, a prerequisite of dissonance and attitudechange (Festinger, 1957). Similarly, in SNS, GATs could foster socio-cognitive conflict and prompt moreindividuals to actively engage in meaningful dialogue regarding conflicts, especially when quantitativerepresentations are combined with qualitative ones (Erkens, Schlottbom & Bodemer, 2016). GATs can, thus,assist in forming new communication channels between learners and increase the number of interactions in anattempt to understand and resolve conflicts. Additionally, increasing the number of learners central todiscussions, GATs could also enhance individual control on information flow and the subsequent distribution ofinfluence in the network promoting increased idea exchange and knowledge co-construction. In effect, GATscan support constructive discussions and conflict resolution, through which learners may form similar attitudes.Scripts are socio-cognitive structures that can provide specific guidance and scaffold group discussions duringcollaborative learning scenarios (Fischer, Kollar, Stegmann & Wecker, 2013). Argumentation scripts aim toimprove argumentation quality. They may prompt learners to elaborate their arguments and clarify theiropinions, and thus foster AKC (Noroozi, Weinberger, Biemans, Mulder, & Chizari, 2012). They may guidelearners to analyze the lines of argumentation provided by both their peer group and themselves duringdiscussions, scrutinize their attitudes, and critically reflect on them. Argumentation scripts may also helpparticipants in providing rational epistemic counter-arguments, leading to mutual conflict resolution (Kollar,Fischer & Slotta, 2007) which forges similar knowledge (knowledge convergence; Weinberger, Stegmann, &Fischer, 2007). Argumentation scripts in SNS might also forge similar attitudes overtime. In previous studies,inferential statistics has indicated that over more time (semester long), SNS discussions with incorporated GATsand argumentation scripts, and their combination influence learners' attitude towards communication skills byintroducing socio-cognitive conflict and improving argumentation quality (Puhl et al, 2015a).The present work aims to inculcate learners' mutual attitude change and knowledge gain duringargumentative SNS discussions in distinctively designed and implemented Facebook apps. The apps provideGATs support to foster socio-cognitive conflict and promote interactivity towards its resolution. They alsoimplement argumentation scripts which intent to improve argumentation quality and resolve conflictproductively. We aim to capture and understand group dynamics in SNS discussions as part of a teachercommunication seminar. We define group dynamics as the unforeseeable patterns of communication flowamong learners, and the flow of resources: knowledge in the form of ideas and opinions of the peers that maylead to attitude change through discussions. We also want to observe how GATs vs. argumentation scriptsinfluence group dynamics in SNS, and whether they provide opportunities or form constraints for interactivity,learning and attitude change. We combine SNA and inferential statistics (Halatchliyski, 2011) to test the effectof these supports on group dynamics. We test if GATs and argumentation scripts enhance network measures,support learners and facilitate discussions in SNS. We aim at enhancing our understanding on how CSCLsupports may be used to leverage social influence and promote attitude change and learning in SNS.MethodWe conducted a 2x2 semester long field study (see Table 1) with German teacher trainees (N= 98) in tworounds (two consecutive semesters). The data for script conditions were collected in the second round.Facebook, a prominent SNS, was used to integrate online argumentative discussions with face-to-face teachertraining university seminars on communication theory over 9 weeks. The participants filled out a case-basedquestionnaire weekly based on every-day social interaction scenarios in the school, to capture theirCSCL 2017 Proceedings248© ISLScommunication attitudes. Each question comprised of two communication attitude dimensions: multiperspective / flexible attitudes vs. goal-oriented / structured attitudes, following Buder & Bodemer (2008) andJermann & Dillenbourg (1999, 2002), rated on four Likert-scale (0 to 6) answers on how they as teachers wouldassess the situation. The dimensions were balanced in the cases. Furthermore, the explorative factor analysis ofthe communication attitude questionnaire resulted in two independent factors similar to our theoreticalconstruct of multi-perspective/flexible for the first factor (Cronbach’s a = .87) and goal-oriented/structured forthe second factor (Cronbach’s a = .87) (see also, Puhl et al, 2015b). GAT and argumentation script, wereimplemented in closed Facebook groups, where participants engaged in argumentative discussions on theproblem cases and could reference communication theories to support their arguments.Table 1: 2x2 factorial designGATNo GATArgumentation ScriptN = 26N = 30No Argumentation ScriptN = 24N = 18The GAT provided a graphical visualization of participants' attitude questionnaire results (Figure 1).The Facebook application included the visualization in order to increase socio-cognitive conflict (Jermann &Dillenbourg, 1999) by making attitude differences salient. Students were asked to reflect on these. Browsing theGAT was obligatory, but reflection was not controlled. Participants in argumentation script conditions had to“like” the best argument made by peers. Additionally, they received weekly feedback in the form of argumentanalysis on the epistemic (theoretical concepts and relations) and the formal (reasoning and evidence)argumentation quality for the most “liked”, and for the instructors’ favorite argument. These analysedarguments should be used as models in subsequent sessions. The control group received no additional guidanceand was only required to hold discussions in their Facebook group. Discussion threads were organized basedon posting time (last one on the top) and not on the number of “likes”.Figure 1. Group Awareness Tool in Facebook.CSCL 2017 Proceedings249© ISLSSocial network analysis and hypothesesWe formed a network for the participants in each SNS discussion group using Prominence-based placement tovisualize the group as a social network, such that each node (participant) position is a reflection of its centralityinside the network and their interactions are represented using the edges. To measure interactions, the number ofoutgoing posts and the number of incoming replies to every post by each participant of the group was recorded.The communication attitude questionnaire was used to record attitude of each participant after each discussion.We use SNA techniques to model attitude change and mutual weight balancing in the communication networkformed by participants during discussions. Centrality measures obtained through the network are then used toassess intra group characteristics of participants affected by the use of experimental conditions in terms of theirprominence based placement regarding attitude change. Thus, centrality is indicative of the importance of aparticular participant in the discussion group. That is the participant is important for the proper propagation ofinformation in the whole group and is, thus, a key member during discussions. If a particular group has morekey members then that signifies an even distribution of influence, importance and information in the group,which helps in increased idea exchange and knowledge co-construction.Additionally, the similarity in attitude reached by participants in each group is assessed using density basedclustering (DBC) (Ester, Kriegel, Sander & Xu, 1996) instead of the more commonly used clustering coefficient,as the latter measures simply the tendency of a group's ability to cluster together. However, DBC measures thedensity of a group and thus, the information about how close the participants are regarding their attitudes afterthe discussions. We use measures of graph theory and network analysis (Freeman, 1978; Stephenson & Zelen,1989; Wasserman & Faust, 1994; Ester, Kriegel, Sander & Xu, 1996) to operationalize our dependent variablesin SNA (see Table 2), which are generated for each of the participating groups (experimental and control group)using programming and network analysis software (SocNetV1.9). The generated data was then empiricallyanalyzed in SPSS and a 2×2 factorial ANOVA with conditions GAT (GAT, no GAT) vs. argumentation script(ARG, no ARG) as between-subjects factors was conducted to analyze the effects, differences and interactionsintroduced by the GATs and the argumentation script conditions.Table 2: Operationalisation of SNA measuresDependent VariableNumber of interactionsInformation flow control(information centrality)Influence of individualattitudes on the group’sattitude(outdegree centrality)SNA OperationalizationThe sum of incoming and outgoing interactions for each member of a groupmeasured across time.The proportion of total information flow that is controlled by the participants ofthe network (each group member). It uses the distance between two nodes,traversing the attitude values (Euclidean distance over time) of all nodes thatmediate these two nodes.The effect of one member's interactions on the magnitude of attitude change ofother group members over the course of the seminar; where influence isquantified as the weighted outgoing interactions of the participants.*The effect of the group's interactions on the magnitude of attitude change ofeach individual participant throughout the seminar, where influence isquantified as the weighted incoming interactions on each individualparticipant.*The quantification of the closeness of group members to the center of theAttitude similaritycommunication network w.r.t. their attitudes, where attitude similarity within a(density based clustering)group is measured as their respective cluster density. *** For example, if there are three participants in a group discussion, A, B and C, and “A” posts a view on thescenario and both “B” and “C” read it but only “C” replies once, then each participant might display a smallchange in their attitude by reading the discussion post alone. Therefore, a small weight of 0.1 is assigned.However, “A” and “C” is expected to have a major effect on each other’s attitude due to the exchange of posts,so their weights would be represented as the relative attitude change between them, calculated as theEuclidean distance between them w.r.t the two dimension of the communication attitude questionnaire, anddistributed in the network using uniform probability distribution. Therefore, if the euclidean distance betweenthe attitude change of “A” and “C” is 4 and 6 in the two dimensions, then their relative weight would be 5.1and the total weight of “B” would be 0.2 .Influence of the group onindividual attitudes(indegree centrality)** Calculated using the density based clustering algorithm (Ester et al., 1996).CSCL 2017 Proceedings250© ISLSWe hypothesize that, the GAT, the argumentation script, and their combination will foster networkmeasures when compared to the control group due to increased awareness and externalization of attitudedifferences and thus increased engagement shown in higher number of interactions (H1). Additionally, theformation of new communication channels within the groups will lead to higher centralized control per personon the total information flow (H2); and also reflection on conflicts and attitude differences would thereofincrease the distribution of individual influence on the magnitude of attitude change of the group (H3); and leadto higher distribution of the group’s influence on the magnitude of attitude change of individuals (H4), due toan even distribution of people central to the network. Finally, the experimental groups will foster higher attitudesimilarity (H5), due to the above changes in group processes, which will lead to attitude co-construction.ResultsIn terms of control variables, we found no significant differences between participants of the differentconditions regarding computer use (hours per week; F(3, 93) = 1.48, p = .22, η p² = .05, Facebook use (hours perweek); F(3, 48.49) = 1.11, p =.35, η p² = .03, familiarity on computers and SNS ( F(3, 94) = 1.99, p = .12, η p ² =.06), knowledge on communication theories ( F(3, 94) = 1.57, p = .20, η p² = .05) and on either factor of attitudechange – multi-perspective/flexible: F(3, 94) = .30, p =.82, η p² = .01 or goal-oriented/structured: F(3, 94) = 1.45,p =.23, η p² = .04.To test our hypotheses, we run inferential statistics using the SNA measures. We found significantdifferences between the groups regarding total number of interactions, F(3, 94) = 199.45, p = .00, η p² = .86. Theargumentation script had strong effects on the number of interactions with, alone, F(1, 94) = 479.70, p = .00, η p ²= .84, and in combination with the GATs, F(1, 94) = 119.96, p = .00, η p² = .56 (interaction effect). However, theGAT alone did not significantly affect the number of interactions between participants, F(1, 94) = 0.52, p = .47,η p² = .01 (Figure 2). Also, there were significant differences between groups regarding information flow control,F(3, 94) = 395.85, p = .00, η p² = .93. We found a strong significant main effect of the argumentation script, F(1,94) = 301.93, p =.00, η p² = .76 and the GAT, F(1, 94) = 64.39, p = .00, η p² = .41, and a strong interaction effect,F(1, 94) = 934.27, p = .00, η p² = .91, indicating a higher distribution of information in the network andparticipants displayed more centralized control over information flow (Figure 2).Figure 2. Total number of interactions and Information flow controlled by a participant measured byinformation centrality.The analysis of the influence distribution in the network showed significant differences betweengroups regarding the effect of participant on group attitude change, F(3, 94) = 39.31, p = .00, η p² = .56.There was a strong main effect of the argumentation script, F(1, 94) = 106.18, p =.00, η p² = .53, and aninteraction effect, F(1, 94) = 15.49, p = .00, η p² = .14, that is there was an even distribution of individualinfluence in the network. However, there was no significant effect of GAT, F(1, 94) = 1.60, p = .21, η p² = .02(Figure 3). Additionally, there were significant differences between the groups regarding the centralizedeffect of group on participant's attitude change, F(3, 94) = 275.21, p = .00, η p² = .90. We found a strong maineffect of the argumentation script, F(1, 94) = 743.34, p =.00, η p² = .89 and the GAT, F(1, 94) = 11.22, p =.001, η p² = .11, and a strong interaction effect, F(1, 94) = 108.44, p = .00, η p² = .54, that is there was an evendistribution of group influence over the attitude change of individual participants in the network (Figure 3).CSCL 2017 Proceedings251© ISLSFigure 3. Effect of participant on group's attitude change and Effect of group on participant's attitude changemeasured by outdegree & indegree centrality respectively.There were significant differences between the groups regarding attitude similarity – measured astheir respective cluster density, F(3, 16.58) = 9.14, p = .001, η p² = .26. We found a significant main effect ofthe argumentation script, F(1, 32) = 4.54, p = .04, η p² = .12, and an interaction effect, F(1, 32) = 5.36, p =.03, η p² = .14, that is the intra-group attitude similarity was higher with the argumentation script fosteringhigher similarity among participants. On the contrary, the GAT, F(1, 32) = 1.62, p = .21, η p² = .05 did notshow significance regarding attitude similarity (Figure 4).Figure 4. Similarity in participants' attitude measured by DBC.Discussion and conclusionThe presented study uses SNA to provide a group-level analysis of SNS group interactions on learners' attitudechange. It is one of the few studies to our knowledge (Puhl et al, 2015a; 2015b) that considers attitude changenot as a byproduct of discussions but as a learning outcome in itself in monitored educational settings. The studyalso moves beyond individual-centric considerations of the knowledge co-construction process and provides agroup-centric perspective, to do justice to the theoretical origins of knowledge co-construction. We defined andanalyzed internal group dynamics during group discussions in SNS and their subsequent effects on the attitudechange and its relation to knowledge acquisition of the learners using a combination of SNA measures andinferential statistics.The results revealed that group level processes – number of interactions, information and influencedistribution, and similarity in peer attitude – were all influenced by the argumentation scripts and by itscombination with the GAT, and some were also influenced by the GAT alone. These supports cater for a moreequal distribution of information flow and influence distribution. Distributed and centralized control perparticipant was facilitated by the argumentation script. Together with the effects of the argumentation script onattitude change, this result suggests that increased centralized control of learners on group processes may haveled to a better representation of individual attitudes and may have thus facilitated information and opinionCSCL 2017 Proceedings252© ISLSexchange. We had hypothesized that facilitating centralized control for more learners in group discussionswould cater for more attitudes becoming transparent in the group, strengthening attitude co-construction, andthat it would lead to similarity in attitudes. Centralized control of information in the GAT groups facilitatedrepresentation and promotion of individual attitudes and increased the interactions compared to the unsupportedgroup. However, centralized control of information (H2) did not initiate meaningful resolution of conflicts andtherefore attitude similarity due to mutual change was to not observed in the GAT groups (H5).The results also suggest that the argumentation script either alone or combined with the GAT increasedinteractivity, despite the fact that GAT alone did not (H1). This is a possible indication that the GAT may haveinstead taken over the role of promoting attitude externalization otherwise promoted by argumentation scripts. Italso indicates that conflict awareness, does not necessarily lead to conflict resolution. Moreover, the resultssuggest that the cognitive guidance provided by the argumentation script might have prompted learners toresolve conflicts constructively and thus reach consensus regarding attitude dissimilarity. This cannot be a caseof group bias (Sassenberg & Boos, 2003) or quick consensus building (Weinberger et al, 2007), as it is unlikelythat these would have led to the observed increased interaction. The GAT alone, however, may have fosteredgroup bias without the additional argumentative processes promoted by the script that further allow reflection onattitudes. The results, thus, proclaim the necessity to combine the conflict awareness provided by GATsvisualizations with structuring interactions via argumentation scripts in order to enhance and encouragemeaningful exchange of opinions and arguments during SNS discussions and promote conflict resolution.In conclusion, the interaction network formed during group discussions identifies the potential ofGATs and argumentation scripts to utilize the rich context of socio-cognitive interactions provided by popularSNS during argumentative discussions, in order to support pluralistic exchange and attitude change. SNAmeasures can be helpful in understanding the interdependence of learning objectives on individual’s interactionsand group communication and, thus, also for understanding the relative effects of learning interventions.However, SNA measures are a combination of several mathematical computations and lack an intuitiveinterpretation, posing a fundamental dependency on the framework and interpretation of the research subjectedto the used measures. Nevertheless, the ability of SNA to incorporate multiple dependencies during analysis canbe crucial to the examination of learning supports in the wild in contrast to monitored course settings and can beessential in gaining meaningful insights into the long term societal influences that SNS discussions may trigger.ReferencesAndriessen, J. E. B. (2006). Arguing to learn. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), (Tran.), Handbook of the Learning Sciences,443-459. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Asterhan, C. S. C. & Schwarz, B. B. (2009). Argumentation and explanation in conceptual change: Indicationsfrom protocol analyses of peer-to-peer dialogue. Cognitive Science, 33, 374-400.Baker, M. (2003). Computer-mediated argumentative interactions for the co-elaboration of scientific notions. InArguing to learn, 47-78. Springer Netherlands.Buder, J.& Bodemer, D. (2008). Supporting controversial CSCL discussions with augmented group awarenesstools. International Journal of Computer- Supported Collaborative Learning, 3(2), 123–139.Chaiken, S., Wood, W., & Eagly, A. H. (1996b). Principles of persuasion. In E.T. Higgins and A. Kruglanski(Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic mechanisms and processes (Higgins & Kruglanski),702–42. Guilford Press, New York, US.Cialdini, R. B., Trost, M. R., (1998). Social influence:social norms, conformity, and compliance. In D.T. Gilbertand S.T. Fiske and G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology, Vols. 1-2 (pp. 151–92).McGraw-Hill, New York, US.Dillenbourg, P. & Fischer, F. (2007). Basics of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. Zeitschrift fürBerufs- und Wirtschaftspädagogik. 21, 111 – 130.Erber, M. W., Hodges, S. D., & Wilson, T. D. (1995). Attitude strength, attitude stability , and the effects ofanalyzing reasons. In Petty, R. E. & J. A. Krosnich (Eds.), Attitude Strength : Antecedents andconsequences (pp. 433–454).Erkens, M., Schlottbom, P., & Bodemer, D. (2016). Qualitative andquantitative information in cognitive group awareness tools: Impact on collaborative learning. In U.Cress (Ed.), Transforming learning, empowering learners: the international conference of the learningsciences (ICLS) 2016. International Society of the Learning Sciences: Singapore.Ester, M., Kriegel, H. P., Sander, J., Xu, X. (1996). A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in largespatial databases with noise.Proceedings of the Second International Conference on KnowledgeDiscovery and Data Mining (KDD-96). AAAI Press. 226–231.Felton, M.& Kuhn, D. (2001). The Development of Argumentive Discourse Skill. Discourse Processes, 32(2),135–153.CSCL 2017 Proceedings253© ISLSFestinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes. Human Relations, 7, 117–140.Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Stegmann, K. & Wecker, C. (2013). Toward a script theory of guidance in computersupported collaborative learning. Educational psychologist, 48(1), 56-66.Freeman, L. C. (1978). Centrality in social networks conceptual clarification. Social Networks, 1(3), 215-239.Greenhow, C. (2008). Connecting informal and formal learning experiences in the age of participatory media:Commentary on Bull et al. Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher Education, 8(3), 187–194.Greenhow, C., Menzer, M., & Gibbins, T. (2012). When friends debate science: Socioscientific argumentationin a Facebook application. Paper accepted for presentation at the annual meeting of the americanassociation of educational researchers. San Francisco, CA.Gutwin, C. & Greenberg, S. (2002). A descriptive framework of workspace awareness for real-time groupware.Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 11(3), 411–446.Halatchliyski, I. (2011). Social network analysis of collaborative knowledge creation in Wikipedia. In H. Spada,G. Stahl, N. Miyake, & N. Law (Eds.), Connecting Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning toPolicy and Practice: CSCL2011 Conference Proceedings, Vol. III (pp. 1254-1258). Hong Kong:International Society of the Learning Sciences.Ihmeideh, F. M. & Al-omari, A. A. (2010). Attitudes toward Communication Skills among Students’ -Teachers’in Jordanian Public Universities, 35(4).Janssen, J. & Bodemer, D. (2013). Coordinated Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning: Awareness andAwareness Tools. Educational Psychologist, 48(1), 40-55Jermann, P. & Dillenbourg, P. (1999). An analysis of learner arguments in a collective learning environment.Proceedings of the 1999 Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning - CSCL ’99, 33.Jermann, P. & Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Elaborating new arguments through a cscl script. In J. Andriessen, M.Baker & D. Suthers (Eds.), Arguing to Learn: Confronting Cognitions in Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning environments, 1–6. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.Lampert, M. L., Rittenhouse, P., & Crumbaugh, C. (1996). Agreeing to disagree: Developing sociablemathematical discourse. In D. R. Olson & N. Torrance (Eds.), Handbook of human development ineducation (pp. 731–764). Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.Noroozi, O., Weinberger, A., Biemans, H. J. A., Mulder, M., & Chizari, M. (2012). Argumentation-BasedComputer Supported Collaborative Learning (ABCSCL): A synthesis of 15 years of research.Educational Research Review, 7(2), 79-106.Nussbaum, E. M. (2008). Collaborative discourse, argumentation, and learning: Preface and literature review.Contemporary Educational Psychology, 33(3), 345–359.Puhl, T., Tsovaltzi, D., and Weinberger, A (2015a). A long-term view on learning to argue in Facebook: Theeffects of group awareness tools and argumentation scripts. Lindwall, O., Häkkinen, P., Koschman, T.Tchounikine, P. & Ludvigsen, S. (Eds.) (2015). Exploring the material conditions of learning: Thecomputer supported collaborative learning (CSCL) Conference 2015, Volume 1. Gothenburg, Sweden:The International Society of the Learning Sciences, ISBN: 978-0-9903550-6-9 (pp. 110-117).Puhl, T., Tsovaltzi, D., & Weinberger, A. (2015b). Blending Facebook into seminars for practicingargumentation. Computers in Human Behavior, 53, 605-616.Sassenberg, K., & Boos, M. (2003). Attitude Change in Computer-Mediated Communication: Effects ofAnonymity and Category Norms. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 6(4), 405–422.Stephenson, K. & Zelen, M. (1989). Rethinking centrality: Methods and examples. Social Networks, 11, 1-37.Tsovaltzi, D., Puhl, T., Judele, R. & Weinberger, A. (2014). Group awareness support and argumentation scriptsfor individual preparation of arguments in Facebook. Computers & Education, 76, 108-118.Wasserman, S., and Faust, K. (1994). Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications. Cambridge, ENGand New York: Cambridge University Press.Wecker, C. & Fischer , F. (2014). Where is the evidence? A meta-analysis on the role of argumentation for theacquisition of domain-specific knowledge in computer-supported collaborative learning.Computers &Education 75, 218-228.Weinberger, A. & Fischer, F. (2006). A framework to analyse argumentative knowledge construction incomputer-supported collaborative learning. Computers & Education, 46, 71-95.Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K., & Fischer, F. (2007). Knowledge convergence in collaborative learning:Concepts and assessment. Learning and Instruction, 17(4), 416-426Wood, W. (2000). Attitude change: Persuasion and social influence. Annual Review of Psychology, 51, 539570.CSCL 2017 Proceedings254© ISLS