Libraries as Emerging Spaces for Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning in Schools and CommunitiesVictor R. Lee (Chair), Utah State University, victor.lee@usu.eduCarrie Tzou, University of Washington, Bothell, ctzou@uwb.eduMegan Bang, University of Washington, Seattle, mbang3@uw.eduPhilip Bell, University of Washington, Seattle, pbell@u.washington.eduShelley Stromholt, University of Washington, Seattle, stromhos@uw.eduNancy Price, University of Washington, Seattle, pricenj@uw.eduMeixi Ng, University of Washington, Seattle, meixi@uw.eduYasmin Kafai, University of Pennsylvania, kafai@upenn.eduOrkan Telhan, University of Pennsylvania, otelhan@upenn.eduRichard Davis, Stanford University, rldavis@stanford.eduK-Fai Steele, National Writing Project, ksteele@nwp.orgBarrie Adleberg, Connected Sparks, barriemichelle@gmail.comJennifer Kahn, Vanderbilt University, jennifer.kahn@vanderbilt.eduRogers Hall, Vanderbilt University, rogers.hall@vanderbilt.eduAbigail Phillips, Utah State University, abigail.phillips@usu.eduJennifer Hansen, Utah State University, jenny.hansen@aggiemail.usu.eduMimi Recker, Utah State University, mimi.recker@usu.eduBrigid Barron (discussant), Stanford University, barronbj@stanford.eduAbstract: Libraries are undergoing a reconceptualization in their roles as lifelong learningcenters for local communities, with STEM content areas and Maker activities receiving specialemphasis. This represents a critical and unique research, design, and partnership opportunityfor learning scientists and computer-supported collaborative learning scholars. This symposiumbrings together project teams from four different locales in the United States that have partneredwith libraries to bring about new resources and activities that emphasize computer-supportedcollaborative learning. These projects represent major urban libraries, special collections,community branch libraries, and school libraries. By bringing together these different teams,this symposium aims to promote dialogue about the affordances and constraints associated withCSCL-oriented activity design in libraries, identify commonalities and differences across regionand library types, and ground-truth what specific challenges and solutions have been identifiedin researcher-library partnerships.IntroductionA national push has been made for libraries to reconceptualize their role as centers for lifelong learning, withSTEM content areas and Maker activities receiving special emphasis (Palfrey, 2015). In response, libraries arebeginning to offer new programs, spaces, technologies, and activities that emphasize patron authorship,expression, and exploration. One prominent model of this has been YouMedia at the Harold Washington Libraryin Chicago (Barron, Gomez, Pinkard, & Martin, 2014), which served as a youth-oriented digital media and CSCLspace where youth interests, technology-infused practices, and identities were actively explored and promoted.Such models have become aspirational examples that many other libraries now strive to emulate. The image ofthe library is transforming from a quiet repository of books to a noisy and active learning space.This represents a critical and unique opportunity for learning scientists, educational technologists, andcomputer-supported collaborative learning scholars. Libraries have long been one of the most democraticinstitutions in American society; they provide access to information and space for anyone regardless ofbackground, socioeconomic status, or prior experience. Those ideals are ones that communities would like to seemaintained as libraries also take on the role of technologically-enhanced lifelong STEM learning centers. Asmentioned above, some aspirational models exist, but learning scientists have long recognized that an aspirationis not enough. Partnerships, informed design processes, and critical reflection are also critical ingredients forenhancing the design of any learning space or experience. This awareness is deeply embedded into the history ofthe learning sciences and CSCL communities, who have pioneered design-based research as a means forsimultaneously understanding and improving existing learning spaces.In following with the 2017 CSCL conference theme of “Making a difference: Prioritizing equity andaccess in CSCL”, this symposium brings together design-based research teams from four different regions of theCSCL 2017 Proceedings735© ISLScountry who have all recognized that libraries are beginning to take on this new role and are welcoming newresearch and design-oriented partners to pave the way for new kinds STEM learning. Although the contributorsto this symposium represent a set of geographically dispersed scholars pursuing different projects, we are alldeeply committed to the idea that libraries should remain highly accessible and equity-promoting learninginstitutions. By coming together for this session, we hope to accomplish several goals. First, through describingour distinct projects, we seek to demonstrate how libraries represent important partners for new lines of computersupported collaborative learning research. Stated simply, we intend to greatly increase the list of exemplarylibrary-based computer-supported collaborative learning activities and experiences. Second, we seek to highlightcommonalities and differences that exist when conducting design-based research with libraries through thejuxtaposition of the different library-based projects. Libraries exist in many forms and in many locales, suggestingthat there may be some common points of leverage along with specific situation-based considerations that librarybased research-practice partnerships must consider. Our goal is to articulate unique affordances of libraries asCSCL spaces. Third, we intend to offer some ground-truth about what challenges exist for researchers and librarypersonnel who embark on design partnerships. While we believe libraries offer clear affordances that differ fromother researched learning spaces (such as schools, virtual environments, and museums), we also recognize thatlibraries have unique constraints such as personnel who may not be trained in STEM areas, limited contact timewith patrons, and other existing obligations as a community center. These three goals are discussed by each set ofpresenters.The symposium is organized such that the chair will first give some brief, introductory remarks aboutthe emerging opportunity to conduct learning sciences work with libraries in the United States. Then each of fourseparate but related talks will describe a specific library partnership and design-based research project. Includedin the talks will be explicit discussion of the three goals (illustrating the partnership potential for libraries as sitesfor CSCL, discussing commonalities and differences across library types and sites, and ground-truthing thespecific challenges and workarounds in researcher-library partnerships). The types of libraries represented vary,with two talks focusing on large urban libraries in major metropolitan areas (Tzou, et al.) and one of thoseemphasizing the Special Collections Division of their library (Kahn & Hall), one talk focusing on various branchoffices located in different neighborhoods of a large city (Kafai, et al.), and one talk focusing on middle schoollibraries (Phillips, et al.). To help synthesize across the talks and to help facilitate discussion, Brigid Barron ofStanford university will serve as a discussant and discussion moderator. Barron is especially suited to this task asher research with the Digital Youth Network (Barron, Gomez, Pinkard, & Martin, 2014) and in looking at learningacross contexts (Barron, 2006)) provides her with a valuable complementary perspective to some of the issuesthat we discuss.The four talks from the various research and design partnerships are detailed in the text below.Family-centered social arrangements for Making in library contextsCarrie Tzou, University of Washington, Bothell; Megan Bang, Philip Bell, Shelley Stromholt, Nancy Price andMeixi Ng, University of Washington, SeattleThe Backpacks for Family Learning PartnershipOur project is a cultural psychological design-based research study (Bang, 2015; Bell, 2004) that involves aresearch-practice partnership between a large university, a large urban library system, an Indigenous youthorganization, and a science center. In this project, we are exploring ways of engaging families from non-dominantcommunities in a STEAM workshop series focused on learning robotics and programming in the context of anarts/design project approach. We center robotics learning within the context of family histories and stories in anattempt to focus on families as “cultural, historical, and political actors” (Vossoughi et al., 2016).The Backpacks project invites parents to take on new roles as learners with their children while theylearn about programming, engineering design processes, and related science concepts. At the same time, familymembers are also invited to draw on their own areas of expertise—in traditional practices such as sewing orprofessional skills such as computer programming. Literature in the study of equity in education indicates theneed to tightly interconnect learning that occurs across settings (homes, community settings, and schools) and that“learning is facilitated when the cultural, socio-economic, and historical contexts of learners are recognized,respected, and responded to” (Banks, et al, 2007, p. 25; Bell et al., 2012). The use of the storytelling frame forcontextualizing the robotics development project was a deliberate design strategy to: tie into cultural practicesaround storytelling, connect to families’ personal and cultural histories, and leverage the unique professionalexpertise of librarians (especially youth and children’s librarians) in connecting people with stories. We leveragethe significant reading and storytelling expertise of librarians while we support them to learn about STEMknowledge and practices.CSCL 2017 Proceedings736© ISLSFamily-centered designs for consequential STEAM learning and identificationThe overarching design effort is focused on creating a sequence of designed experiences—including roboticsdevelopment and e-textiles projects—to support families in expansive STEAM learning across workshop eventsand settings. The project is currently exploring two major design strategies. First, how can family workshopspromote intergenerational STEAM learning? We developed and enacted family-centered program multiple timesin two locations—one community site facilitated by the library and an Indigenous cultural community sitefacilitated by their program facilitators. Second, how can a robotics backpack materially support learning acrosssettings between program sessions? This is a ‘material resourcing’ design strategy to support family learning andidentification between the formal program sessions. In the current workshops, families construct a robotic dioramathat animates and communicates a family story of their choosing.Unique affordances of Making in a library-centered contextOur analysis focused on: (a) different social and material configurations of families as they jointly accomplishedtheir robotic dioramas—along with their interactions with facilitators, (b) reflective practices of librarianslearning to facilitate these sessions. Data sources included ethnographic observations and video recordings ofsessions, session engagement surveys, pre/post workshop family interviews, and pre/post workshop surveys wereanalyzed for this paper. Several findings highlight unique affordances of the library-centered context. First, thestorytelling and art/design frames on robotics/STEAM learning opened up multiple, oftentimes parallel spaces forfamilies to purposefully explore and play with devices and programming to achieve desired effects—and thatfamily members can pursue their own interests and perceived areas of expertise within the project. It allowed forspecialization and collective creation—for example, one child programming a “twinkle” into an LED, one childconstructing a cloud, a parent using “fiber optic” plastic to combine all of these to make a “shooting star” effectin a night sky. To this end, librarians were able to leverage their formal grounding in storytelling and literacypractices to frame their teaching and family support in the design work—while learning about STEM, circuitdesign, programming, etc. Second, the reflective practice of librarians was coordinated with the pedagogicalreflection practice of the researchers. This developed into a standing practice for librarians to author full sessionreflections that went far beyond the facilitator reflection sessions instituted by the project. This led to tightercoordination across the partnership and more rapid cycles of pedagogical improvement across sessions thanpreviously documented.Challenges for Making in a library-centered contextExpert librarians have deep expertise in supporting the culturally diverse public with their information requests,but they do not consider themselves to be teachers—and they are, in general, adverse to being positioned as such.This introduces a deep enactment tension in the project in that facilitators need to interpret and shape learningprocesses of families using pedagogical principles and practices—as expert teachers do. A second challengerelates to the strong structuring of public librarians (e.g., fixed schedules and responsibilities; union contractstrictures) relative to the flexibility needed to schedule program experiences for youth from non-dominantcommunities. The tension can be managed, but it is an ongoing implementation tension that we discuss in ourpresentation.Connected messages: Mentor support of youth agency in designing interactivecommunity murals in local branches of public librariesYasmin Kafai and Orkan Telhan, University of Pennsylvania; Richard Davis, Stanford University; K-Fai Steele,National Writing Project; and Barrie Adleberg, Connected SparksAs public libraries are expanding their mission beyond books and computer access to include youth programmingand maker activities (Subramaniam, Ahn, Fleischmann, & Druin, 2012), they are facing additional challenges ofserving the specific needs, interests, and community involvements in their local branches. Most library makeractivities promote projects where youth work on individual designs while being in the library space. Few activitieshave been designed to leverage the existing network of multiple branch libraries to foster collaboration betweenmakers. We present the design and implementation of Connected Messages, an interactive community mural atbranches of The Free Library of Philadelphia, as an example of a computer-supported collaborative makerenvironment. We examined youth agency and mentor support in accessing, participating, and expressing theircommunity ideas and concerns by asking the following questions: (1) What impacts youth participation in andexpression of community themes at different library branches? And (2) How can mentors support youth voice,making, and technical learning in community-relevant designs?CSCL 2017 Proceedings737© ISLSThe Connected Messages projectIn the Connected Messages project we provided augmented community displays that were local to their branchesbut controllable via the Internet by others across the city. Each of the five participating library branches receiveda physical mural that was made out of a piece of foam core with a grid of copper tape (see Figure 1). This createda DIY circuit board, which allowed for the placement of 64 individual cardboard boxes. Each box had a transparenttop decorated by youth with messages relevant to them and their community. The youth also assembled the circuiton the bottom of the box that, once placed on the grid, allowed others via a web interface to turn on or off a LEDplaced in the middle. These boxes that each youth made individually were used to create the larger interactivecommunity mural (Figure 1). A total of 1,036 youth, between ages 6-19 years, participated in the project over atwo-month time period, their daily participation fluctuating from three to thirty participants, in five Free Librarylocations in underserved neighborhoods across North and West Philadelphia. The mural activities were led byfive Maker Mentors, a team that consisted of three men and two women, ages 21-31, with backgrounds as workingartists and undergraduate students. Field notes and photographs served as primary means of documenting artifactsand interactions.Figure 1. (1) Color pencils used for individual designs, (2) Single box prototype with LED light and decorativedrawing, (3) Boxes mounted on the foam board, (4) Electric imp, copper tape connections, and LED matrixcontroller, and (5) Five boards connected to a mural with some LEDs turned on each board.Findings and features of the library branch settingsWe found that youth participation, access, themes, and completion of the community mural designs for ConnectedMessages project differed substantially at neighborhood branches and illustrated some of the challenges inimplementing such collective projects across different locations of the public library, albeit located in the samecity. For example, the theme at one branch was “City of Brotherly Love and Sisterly Affection.” The themes ofmany boxes of these youth reflected daily conversations about crime, violence, and society that are prominent andnear-daily events in their neighborhoods: “I wrote this PEACE sign and I wrote we all are brothers and sisters andI wrote it because so we can stop violence and shootings” as well as the importance of self-acceptance “LOVEyourself”. This branch had 15-16 regular participants, ages 13-19, as part of an intervention program.In contrast, at another branch in North Philadelphia, youth aged 7-15 participated in making the messageboxes around themes of positive things in the community, and things that youth like to do during the summer intheir neighborhood. The board was completed within one week and displayed prominently on the library mainfloor to generate curiosity and interest by the library community and staff and would be “something that they canbe proud of and see and that will last.” At a different branch the board was locked in a conference room and youthages 6-16 were only able to populate it with message boxes when the mentor came around three times a week.Message themes focused on community, friends and family. With no repeat visits to this site, many message boxesended up not being connected to the board.In our presentation, we will discuss how working with different branches made salient how librarieswithin the same system differ in how they appropriate a project like Connected Messages. Local neighborhoodfeatures and how different branches manage access to resources for youth both represent important considerationsfor CSCL work even when a single library system has been established as an overarching project partner.Data wrangling and family storytelling at the city public libraryJennifer Kahn and Rogers Hall, Vanderbilt UniversityWe describe design-based research developed in partnership with the Special Collections Division of the CityPublic Library in Nashville. Special Collections’ mission is to record a public history that is both inclusive andrepresentative of the city’s increasingly diverse demographics. They regularly bring youth into library spaces toengage in critical, transdisciplinary inquiry projects (i.e., spatial analysis and modeling of historical phenomenaat multiple social scales). Our partnership with the Special Collections Division seeks to design and studyinnovative learning activities through which youth come to view themselves as participants and contributors toCSCL 2017 Proceedings738© ISLSthe city’s living public history. We report a cycle of design-based research in which youth build and tell “familydata storylines” at the library. Youth curated personal family history while exploring public, large-scalesocioeconomic datasets using online, data visualization tools. In our presentation, we report on how weinvestigated the ways in which integrating local and family history with aggregate data invited the telling ofpowerful stories about oneself and society, and how the library provided a unique space for transdisciplinary,computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL).Large-scale data sets in librariesLarge-scale datasets (LSDS), also known as “big data”, comprise a sociotechnical phenomenon that has advancedthe interdisciplinary fields of data science, analysis, and visualization (Busch, 2014). With the growth of open bigdata and digital tools, the cost of modeling with LSDS has decreased and consequently generated new practicesfor analyzing and tackling socioeconomic and scientific problems (Venturini, Jensen, & Latour, 2015). Ourcollaboration with the City Public Library has been committed to creating opportunities for youth to develop anddeepen relations to the city and relevant LSDS through storytelling, mapping, and modeling activities. The librarywas an important site because it serves as a place for family and community gathering. Libraries are also amenableto a “pop up” model, making many aspects of programs designed in one library replicable to other libraries andpublic community spaces.Our project approached modeling as storytelling about society (Becker, 2007), drawing on critical socialtheories of pedagogy (Friere, 1970) that view narrative as a medium for amplifying voices and leveraging thelived experiences of historically marginalized and underrepresented communities (Milner & Howard, 2013;Solórzano & Yosso, 2001). The library and Special Collections staff had been an important partnership becauseit similarly shared commitments to strengthening and providing public outlets for community voices—and, inparticular, the voices of historically underrepresented community members. This made for an opportunepartnership.Design and data collection activitiesOur design study asked: How does scaling personal experiences into aggregate data facilitate learning tocritically model and tell stories about oneself and society? Our focus on the relationship between local, personalexperiences, and aggregate trends draws from an earlier design study iteration (Kahn & Hall, 2016) that foundthat getting personal with the data in modeling activity—shifting across scales of time, space, and social life indiscourse and model animation—facilitates critical perspectives towards the social, economic, and historicalissues described by the big data.Figure 2. Two teens using SocialExplorer to lead their parents in exploring US Census Data at the City Library.In order to learn more about how getting personal could foster critical inquiry and youth learning tomodel and tell stories about society with big data, our design study of experimental teaching at the libraryexplicitly framed the activity around a relation between the individual and the aggregate. This past summer, weasked (N=17) diverse middle and high school youth (ages 10–16, with six sibling pairs) in a free workshop (2–4days, 5 hours each day) at the City Public Library over 3 weeks to assemble family data storylines to explorereasons for migration nationally and globally (i.e., “What moves families?”) and personally (i.e., “What movedmy family?”). Participants used one of two online, public modeling tools: Gapminder.org, a free, web-baseddynamic data visualization tool that uses public global socioeconomic data, or SocialExplorer.com, a historicalthematic mapping tool that accesses US demographic (US Census) data, authorized by the public library (Figure2). Participants assembled their family data storylines in Microsoft PowerPoint, which were then displayed in acommunity exhibit to their families. We video and audio recorded all workshop activities; all student work oncomputers was recorded with screen capture software. Participants also contributed oral histories about theirfamily mobility histories or geobiographies to the library’s archives.CSCL 2017 Proceedings739© ISLSCurrent analysis and findingsInteraction analyses (Jordan & Henderson, 1995) of video records and field notes indicate that participants vieweddata tools as useful for discovery. Participants performed a range of comparisons that involved scaling time, space,and social life. To do this, they engaged with data wrangling, practices that manage multiple datasets andmeasures in order to align the family story with the aggregate data. The broad accessibility of the library spacefor extended family members became an important resource for youth learning. As youth began to develop familydata storylines, they negotiated co-telling with siblings, many of whom were in the workshop, and parents––viaphone calls, parent visits during the workshop day, and at-home conversations over intervening nights and days.We also have found that scaling personal stories to the social aggregate is richly complex. While telling theirpersonal family histories, the teens’ contrasted their experiences with that of their parents or grandparents;however, that distance appears to collapse as the teens, their siblings, and their older family members become asingular unit for comparison with the social history described by the data. Ongoing analysis further examines howmodeling with census data affects one’s understanding of the family and how the teens’ accounts of their familyhistory and broader social history compare to those of their parents when youth and parents jointly gather at thelibrary.Librarians in transition: Investigating CSCL potentials within the school libraryAbigail Phillips, Victor R. Lee, Jennifer Hansen, and Mimi Recker, Utah State UniversityOf the nearly 120,000 libraries in the United States, the vast majority of them (over 98,000) are school libraries(American Library Association, 2015). As with other types of libraries discussed in this symposium, schoollibraries are reconceptualizing what kinds of learning activities should take place (e.g., Preddy, 2013), includingan emphasis on leveraging them as environments for open-ended STEM learning activities (Subramaniam, Ahn,Fleischmann, & Druin, 2012). Yet we know little about how school libraries will also be able to evolve into spacesthat support computer-supported collaborative learning. In contrast to other forms of brick-and-mortar libraries(e.g., public community libraries, academic libraries), those housed in schools focus exclusively on providingservices and resources for youth at their immediate site. That specificity provides a unique opportunity for focusedprogramming and learning experiences that cater to a common age group and align with ongoing classroom-basedinstruction. At the same time, school librarians work in uniquely challenging environments because they typicallyhave at most a single staff person managing all operations and are bound by a rigid class schedule that necessarilylimits contact time between the librarian and any visiting youth. Furthermore, a tension exists between the role oflibrarian as facilitator of student-led learning activities and the librarian as another adult instructor employed bythe school.Studying and supporting school librarians with MakingWith an overall goal of fostering library-based computer-supported collaborative learning activities associatedwith Making (Bequette et al, 2013)., we have embarked on a multi-year research-practice partnership (Coburn etal. 2013) that seeks to understand and engage with the challenges faced by library professionals when theyexperience an organizational push to support new forms of Maker-oriented learning in their spaces. Becauseschool libraries are an understudied facet of a complex formal educational system, our first task has been tounderstand the problems of practice faced by librarians and jointly envision new opportunities and practicestoward improvement. We report on analyses of written observation and audiorecorded interview data from all themiddle school librarians working in a single rural school district (N=4, district population approximately 16,000).Themes and tensions related to school libraries as spaces for MakingFrom examination and qualitative coding of our data, we have identified the following themes and tensions asthey relate to envisioning libraries as CSCL learning environments:• Tension 1: Where tool expertise resides with respect to a school library. We observed that somelibrarians viewed one aspect of their job as providing a space for youth who already patronize theirlibrary and know much more about new technologies and new software environments than they do. Theselibrarians find this advanced knowledge to be an enabler of youth-driven collaborative learning. Theirexpectation is for the youth to teach each other when new activities or resources are added. If existingyouth experts were not already accessible, then the librarians would charge student aides to becomeadvanced novices so that new technologies could still be used and appropriated by youth. As conceived,one librarian saw her primary job as publicizing the availability of new tools or software and then lettingthe youth shape how interaction norms will take place. On the other hand, some librarians felt they mustCSCL 2017 Proceedings740© ISLSbe accountable for knowing how any new tool works and did not want to introduce activities that usethese tools until they themselves are adequately proficient. New technologies that appeared complicatedor required significant overhead, even though they may be a rich enabler of computer-supportedcollaborative learning, were less preferred or otherwise faced resistance.•Tension 2: How the school library overlaps with what takes place in classrooms. In one interviewactivity, the librarians assessed the feasibility and imagined use of new Maker technologies by youth intheir spaces. A few librarians recognized some technologies (e.g., the Sphero programmable robot-ball)as being ones that other faculty and staff (e.g., computing education teacher) at their school alreadyowned. This raised concerns about how to avoid imposing on others’ “territory”. In some cases, thelibrarians envisioned partnerships with those subject matter teachers such that structured learningactivities would take place in the classroom under the instructional plans of that teacher and thenextended within the library. Additional duplicates of materials and learning resources would then resideat the school library. Youth would come in during lunch and afterschool to teach one another and ‘messaround’ (Ito, et al., 2010) beyond what their classroom teachers allowed. In other cases, while some novelactivities involving overlapping technologies could be imagined, the librarians expressed concern thatthey did not want to offend other school employees and preferred not to have such resources or activitiesin the library so as to not be perceived as usurping what instructional innovations another teacher wasintroducing.Figure 3. Some school libraries have opted to maintain orderly arrangements (left) while others are encouragingsmaller gathering spaces (center) and encouraging gaming and recreational device and computer use (right).Tension 3: How students should behave in the library. Libraries are traditionally conceived as quietspaces with books. We observed some spaces that were designed to be orderly and open (Figure 3), withample long tables and seats within clear view of the librarian to ensure that youth were quiet and refrainedfrom disrupting the experiences of other youth patrons. Other librarians seemed to design their librariesas a sort of “third place” for youth (Oldenburg, 1999). This involved having smaller enclaves, comfycouches, and providing access to secluded rooms so friends could gather, put their feet up, use mobiledevices, and “game”. One librarian of this disposition explicitly stated that in her view, her school libraryshould be “a noisy place”.These tensions represent just a sampling of how school librarians organize the spaces that they occupyand how they envision learning activities for the future. Given that school libraries are expected to transformthemselves as learning spaces and follow the lead of innovative public library CSCL media spaces, these tensionsbegin to establish regions in the design space for school libraries. We posit that school librarians that alreadyexpect that they will host distributed youth expertise, collaborations with teachers, and some inherent disorderwill have the easiest transition. However, that remains to be understood and clarified as our partnership withschool libraries continues to develop and moves into iterative implementation phases in the future.•ReferencesAmerican Library Association. (2015). Number of libraries in the United States. Retrieved fromhttp://www.ala.org/tools/libfactsheets/alalibraryfactsheet01.Bang, M., Faber, L., Gurneau, J., Marin, A., & Soto, C. (2015). Community-Based Design Research: LearningAcross Generations and Strategic Transformations of Institutional Relations Toward AxiologicalInnovations. Mind, Culture, and Activity. doi:10.1080/10749039.2015.1087572Banks, J. A., Au, K. H., Ball, A. F., Bell, P., Gordon, E. W., Gutierrez, K., Heath, S. B., Lee, C. D., Lee, Y.,Mahiri, J., Nasir, N. S., Valdes, G. & Zhou, M. (2007). Learning in and out of school in diverseenvironments: Life-Long, Life-Wide, Life-Deep. Seattle, WA: UW Center for Multicultural Education &The LIFE Center.CSCL 2017 Proceedings741© ISLSBarron, B. (2006). Interest and Self-Sustained Learning as Catalysts of Development: A Learning EcologyPerspective. Human Development, 49(4), 193-224.Barron, B., Gomez, K., Pinkard, N., & Martin, C. K. (2014). The digital youth network: Cultivating digital mediacitizenship in urban communities. MIT Press.Becker, H. S. (2007). Telling about society. University of Chicago Press.Bequette, M., Brah, L., Fields, D. A., Halverson, E., Kafai, Y., Litts, B., Owens, T., Peppler, K., Santo, R., &Sheridan, K. (2013, June). The MAKE movement and connections to the CSCL community. Panel at the10th International Conference of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL 2013). Madison,WI.Bell, P. (2004). On the theoretical breadth of design-based research in education. Educational Psychologist, 39(4),243-253.Bell, P., Tzou, C., Bricker, L. A., & Baines, A. D. (2012). Learning in diversities of structures of social practice:Accounting for how, why and where people learn science. Human Development, 55(5-6), 269-284.doi:10.1159/000345315Busch, L. (2014). A dozen ways to get lost in translation: Inherent challenges in large-scale data sets. InternationalJournal of Communication, 8, 18.Coburn, C.E., Penuel, W.R., & Geil, K.E. (2013). Research-practice partnerships: A strategy for leveragingresearch for educational improvement in school districts. William T. Grant Foundation, New York, NY.Retrieved from: http://learndbir.org/resources/Coburn-Penuel-Geil-2013.pdfFriere, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed. NY: Continuum Publishers.Itō, M. (Ed.). (20.10). Hanging out, messing around, and geeking out: kids living and learning with new media.Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39-103.Kahn, J., & Hall, R. (2016, April). Getting personal with big data: Stories with multivariable models about globalhealth and wealth . Paper presented at the American Education Research Association 2016 AnnualMeeting, Washington D.C.. Available in the AERA Online Paper Repository.Milner IV, H. R., & Howard, T. C. (2013). Counter-narrative as method: race, policy and research for teachereducation. Race, Ethnicity, and Education, 16(4), 536-561.Oldenburg, R. (1999). The great good place: Cafes, coffee shops, bookstores, bars, hair salons, and otherhangouts at the heart of a community. New York, NY: Marlowe & Company.Palfrey, J. (2015). BiblioTech: Why libraries matter more than ever in the age of Google. Basic Books.Preddy, L. (2013). School library makerspaces. Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited.Solórzano, D. G., & Yosso, T. J. (2002). Critical race methodology: Counter-storytelling as an analyticalframework for education research. Qualitative Inquiry, 8(1), 23-44.Subramaniam, M. M., Ahn, J., Fleischmann, K. R., & Druin, A. (2012). Reimagining the role of school librariesin STEM education: Creating hybrid spaces for exploration. The Library Quarterly, 82(2), 161-182.https://doi.org/10.1086/664578Venturini, T., Jensen, P., & Latour, B. (2015). Fill in the gap. A new alliance for social and naturalsciences. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 18(2), 11.Vossoughi, S., Hooper, P. K., & Escudé, M. (2016). Making Through the Lens of Culture and Power: TowardTransformative Visions for Educational Equity. Harvard Educational Review, 86(2), 206-232.AcknowledgmentsFunding for the projects described here come from various sources including the National Science Foundation(Grant Nos. DRL-1516562, IIS-1341882) and the Institute of Museum and Library Services (Grant No. RE-3116-0013-16). The opinions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of theassociated funding agencies.CSCL 2017 Proceedings742© ISLS