Revealing Interaction Patterns Among Youth in anOnline Social Learning Network Using Markov Chain PrinciplesSarah Bishara, Jennifer Baltes, Taha Hamid, Taihua Li, Denise C. Nacu, Caitlin K. Martin,Jonathan Gemmell, Chris MacArthur, Daniela Raicu, and Nichole Pinkardsbishara44@gmail.com, jenniferbaltes1@gmail.com, tahahamiid@gmail.com, taihua.ray.li@gmail.com,dnacu@depaul.edu, cmartin@digitalyouthnetwork.org, jgemmell@depaul.edu,chrismacarthur@mac.com, draicu@depaul.edu, npinkard@depaul.eduDePaul UniversityAbstract: The problem of the digital divide has shifted attention from access to inequities ofparticipation and opportunities to develop 21st century skills in online learning platforms. Inthis paper, we explore Markov chain principles in a time-based probabilistic graphical approachto analyze a multi-year data set of log data generated by students from one urban middle schooland coded using a framework aligned with 21st century learning activities. Results showed theefficacy of applying Markov chain principles in helping reveal similar and distinct usagepatterns of the learners in this community across different time spans. This work hasimplications for the design and analysis of online learning platforms and for creatingopportunities to help youth build 21st century skills using online learning platforms.IntroductionThe notion of a “digital divide” has shifted from a focus on inequities of access to equipment toward one ofinequities of access to opportunities. There is a recognized "opportunity gap" that characterizes differences inaccess to learning activities and networks, resulting in a "participation gap" between youth in underservedcommunities and their more affluent counterparts (Warschauer & Matuchniak, 2010; Watkins, 2011; Lenhart,2015). Computational and technological learning experiences have been linked to the development of skills anddispositions that are viewed as critical for participation in the 21st century, such as communication, creativeproduction, problem solving, and collaboration (Ito et al., 2009; Barron, Gomez, Pinkard & Martin, 2014). Aconcerning consequence of this existing gap, then, is that certain populations of youth have fewer opportunitiesto develop these skills necessary for productive life and citizenship in today's world (Levy & Murnane, 2012).Online social learning networks have affordances for supporting 21st century learning in ways that canpotentially bridge inequities by offering learning opportunities, resources, and social supports beyond the physicalboundaries that demarcate underserved populations (AITF, 2014; Hamid, Waycott, Kurnia, & Chang, 2015;Jenkins, Purushotma, Weigel, Clinton, & Robinson, 2009). As teachers in formal and informal learning settingsare increasingly willing to make use of such systems (MMS Education, 2012), and as schools and districtsincreasingly adopt and require the use of online platforms (Burch & Good, 2014), there is anticipation that thegap will be minimized. These systems generate massive use data, and there is excitement around the potential ofharnessing this data to reveal insights about learning and to design interventions that can level the playing field.Who is participating? What resources are being used? Who is supporting whom? To make progress onunderstanding learning patterns in user logs generated from online social learning networks, collaborative workis necessary to bring together learning theory, deep contextual understanding, and mathematical algorithms(Bienkowski, Feng, & Means, 2012; Pea, 2013; Siemens, 2012).This study joins learning sciences and data science methods to explore patterns in user trace log datafrom students in a public urban middle school using an online social learning network over multiple years. Weused a sequential pattern data mining technique, Markov chains, to explore student actions as opportunities forbuilding 21st century skills. We asked, how can Markov chain principles be used to reveal patterns of onlineactivity over time in the areas of creative production, social learning, and self-directed learning? In addressingthis question, we aim to inform research methodologies used to study online learning platforms and to identifyuse patterns that can be later explored for their potential to provide evidence of 21st century learning. Whileattention to 21st century skills is increasing, we don’t yet have practical ways to measure them and to understandhow experiences using online social learning networks may contribute to building those skills. To address the“participation gap,” developing ways to reveal how youth may be using these systems differently is needed.Markov chains work on the assumption that the probability of the next action taken is exclusivelydependent on the current action. For this study, a Markov chain model represents each action as a node in anetwork graph and any existent relationship between two actions as an edge connecting the nodes correspondingCSCL 2017 Proceedings311© ISLSto those actions. Probabilities are associated with each edge to encode the strength of the relationships based onthe temporal log data over a period of 28 months.Related workWe contextualize this work within ongoing efforts to design and study socio-technical systems that help youthdevelop skills and competencies by interacting with peers and adult educators around the creation, sharing, andcommunication of digital artifacts. We define these systems as online social learning networks, web-basedenvironments that use features of social network sites and learning management systems to support and developan online learning community and the individual participants within it (Martin, Nacu & Pinkard, 2016). Youthparticipation in online networks has been linked to fostering 21st century skills such as self-directed learning,creativity, and communication (Hamid, et al., 2015; Ito et al. 2009; Jenkins et al. 2009). A focus on these types ofskills is becoming increasingly emphasized in K-12 standards striving to prepare youth for future workforce needs(Common Core State Standards Initiative, 2010; NGSS, 2013; Pellegrino & Hilton, 2013).Inequities exist in terms of who has the opportunities to participate in programs and activities that canbuild technological competencies related to 21st century learning. While youth are increasingly participating insocial network sites (Blair, Millard, & Woolard, 2015; Lenhart, 2015; Watkins, 2011), studies have revealed thatcontributors of online content, in general, are a small subset of the population using technical systems (Rideout,2015), and that this subset is not representative of the larger population (Glott, Schmidt, & Ghosh, 2010). Youthfrom areas with fewer socioeconomic resources are especially underserved, demonstrating inequities in moresophisticated forms of participation such as interest-driven practices involving creating, sharing, communicating,and critiquing (Margolis, Estrella, Goode, Holme, & Nao, 2010; Warschauer & Matuchniak, 2010).In the last five years, a growing body of research studies have applied data mining techniques to examinelog data generated by online learning platforms. These data have been analyzed in the context of user-to-usersocial interaction (Cela, Sicilia, & Sánchez, 2015; Xu, 2011), user-to-platform interaction (Kardan, Roll, &Conati, 2014), and user-to-content learning behaviors (Jeong et al., 2008). Some of these studies focus theiranalysis on Markov model chains (Faucon, Kidzinski, Dillenbourg, 2016; Marques & Bello, 2011). Rodríguezand Boyer (2015) analyzed probabilistic chains to compare problem-solving approaches by individual versuscollaborative users. Within the educational domain, some prior studies have applied Markov chains to improveintelligent tutoring systems while others have used students' answers to multiplication problems to generateMarkov chains that informed a question recommendation system (Taragari, Saranti, Ebner, & Schön, 2014).Research contextThis work is part of a multi-year study examining interactions among youth and adults in online social learningnetworks. We used data from an urban middle school ELA (English Language Arts) teacher and his 54 students.The teacher remained their ELA teacher for three academic years. Students in this study were in 6th grade in thefirst year, and, by the third year, were 8th graders. The K-8 school draws the majority of students from apredominantly Latino community: 91% of students are Latino, 8% black, and 1% white. In the school, almost halfof students (43.3%) are classified as having limited English (English Language Learners) and 95% are classifiedas coming from low income households. The student sample in this work reflected the larger school demographics,with 47.2% girls, 52.8% boys, 89% self-reporting as Latino, 6% black, 2% white, and 2% Chinese. Over threequarters of students in our sample (83%) reported being part of Spanish-speaking households.The study involved iRemix, which has an interface and functionality similar to popular online socialnetworks (Barron et al., 2014; Martin, Nacu & Pinkard, 2016; Zywica, Richards & Gomez, 2011). Students andteachers can share digital artifacts such as blog posts, photos, and videos. They can respond to posts usingcomments and reactions, browse activity through a feed, edit profile pages, and link to peers. iRemix is intendedto support the development of 21st century skills through production, reflection, critique, and revision. While thesystem is meant to be youth-driven and reflects youth interests, teachers can post challenges to prompt activities.MethodLog dataLogs of student actions were pulled for the period from 1/1/2014 through 4/15/2016, spanning three academicyears. Each observation in the data generates a row with the student's user ID, the associated action code, thetimestamp, and other information not covered in this paper (Nacu, Martin, Schutzenhofer & Pinkard, 2016).The framework for coding student actions builds on prior work which conceptualizes the activities thesystem was designed to support as opportunities for 21st century online learning. Specifically, the learningCSCL 2017 Proceedings312© ISLSopportunities on iRemix were categorized into three themes that reflect the platform’s learning goals: creativeproduction, self-directed learning, and social learning (Martin, Nacu & Pinkard, 2016). Creative productioninvolves developing identity as a creator, creating media, and revising work. Self-directed learning involves usingonline resources, monitoring one's progress, and seeking support and learning opportunities. Social learninginvolves communicating with others and observing the work of peers. For example, sending a message to anotheruser, commenting, and posting a reaction on another user's work are considered communicate actions, and relateto the theme of social learning. Table 1 shows the action codes present in the dataset (with abbreviations), mappedonto the three focal themes of 21st century learning opportunities. After extensive data cleaning and preparation,there were 32,895 rows of coded data covering 10,193 sessions.Table 1: Student action codes logged from user trace activities on iRemixAbbreviationAction CodeCreative ProductionperpersonalizeDescriptionChange user profile information or avatar picturecrecreateSubmit original work (media artifact)shasharingShare a media artifactbwbegin workeowedit own workgbget badgerowreview own workcwcomplete workSelf-Directed Learningvrview resourcevpaview potential activitySocial Learningcomcommunicatecricritiquevpoview profile of othersvwoview work of othersjcjoin communityvcview communityinvinviteqcquit communityOtherlgiloginlgologoutStart a set of scaffolded learning activitiesEdit a submitted artifact created by selfComplete set of scaffolded learning activitiesView artifact created by selfSubmit a final draft of projectView a resource associated with a learning activityView a description of a potential learning activity or set of activitiesSend a message, leave a comment or reaction on work,or reply to forumProvide star-ratings for submitted workView a user profile of another userView work submitted by another userJoin an interest groupView content of interest groupInvite other users to an interest groupLeave an interest groupLogin to systemArtificial action indicating end of sessionConstructing Markov modelsWith sequential coded data, a transition matrix can be computed. Each entry, T(i,j), in the transition matrixrepresents the probability of the action Ai to the action Aj. For example, T(row|eow) =0.36 shows that thepercentage of times a student who has just completed a “review own work” (row) action will complete an editown work (eow) action next is 0.36. Likewise, T(per|per) =0.13 shows that a student who has just completed apersonalize (per) action is likely to complete another personalize action 13 percent of the time. Four transitionmatrices were created for this study: one for the full dataset spanning all three years, and one for each of the threeacademic years. The size of each matrix was (20x20), representing the twenty action codes.Building on transition matrices, we constructed Markov chain models. A Markov chain is a stochasticprocess where a future state prediction is dependent only on the present state and does not take into account anyinformation about the previous states. Conceptually, the Markov chain can be perceived as users moving fromone state to another, and it can be visualized by network graphs. Due to the abundance of action-to-action activitythat occurred in the logs, we only include edges representing a probability of 1% or more to increase readabilityof the network graphs. The thickness of the node’s outline corresponds to the frequency of the action, highlightingthe more frequent items. The thickness of the edges correlates to the probability of the action-to-action movement.CSCL 2017 Proceedings313© ISLSResultsHere, we first discuss how the Markov models can be interpreted and present insights from a network graphaggregating students’ online activities over the full 28 months. Then, a year-by-year analysis follows.Multi-year Markov modelThe nodes of this Markov model represent the action types (see Table 1). The connecting edges between the nodesindicate both the direction and magnitude of the relationship between actions. For example, at the bottom rightside of Figure 1, an edge exists from eow to row located near the left side of the graph, representing the 99%probability of students moving from editing their own work to reviewing their own work. In this case, the strongcorrelation is due to the internal workflow of iRemix, which automatically shows a user the work they have justedited. In comparison, row connects to eow with a thinner line, indicating a lower probability (36%) of a userreturning to edit their work after reviewing it. Though the model shows any probability greater than 1%, actionsoccurring with a probability 10% or greater are significant given the number of possible transitions.Figure 1: Multi-Year Network Graph.Nodes can connect to themselves. For example, row transitions to itself (shown in the circle overlappingwith the node) 14% of the time, indicating the likelihood of students reviewing their own work twice in a row.There are two unique states on the network graph: logging in (lgi) and logging out (lgo). Lgi is the beginning stateof every user sequence. Therefore, no other nodes point toward it. Lgo is the absorbing state for the model;ultimately all users will end by logging out, thus no edges originate from it.A key advantage of the Markov model is its capacity to describe the sum of actions taken over the entireprogram. Although there is an enormous amount of information captured by the graph, next we will focus onseveral of the larger patterns as they relate to our research questions.Opportunities for creative productionOne of the most notable transitions between nodes occurs between row and eow. In iRemix, editing actions includeboth altering the content of a previously submitted post as well as deleting the post. The row actions represent astudent looking over their own post or looking at the assignment description. The system automatically directsstudents who have submitted work to review it, thus creating an extremely strong edge, 99% from eow to row.The opposite pathway is not automatic and occurs 36% of the time, suggesting students may be editing their work,viewing it, and then returning to the editing options. While this cyclical pattern of editing and reviewing wouldnot be surprising to educators, this method helps to reveal that students are using the system in a way that is relatedto creative production of work, and reflects a type of desired activity. While not shown in the graph, this type ofanalysis can lead to further examination about which students are exhibiting this pattern and which are not. Froman equity perspective, it is important to discern if and how students are participating online as creative producers.Cre also frequently leads to vwo with a probability of 22%. This indicates a pattern of students postingtheir work then comparing their own to those posted by their peers. Qualitative studies have shown that lookingat the work of others is often associated with generating new ideas and pushing new possibilities for the qualityof submitted content (Ito et al., 2009; Barron et al., 2014).CSCL 2017 Proceedings314© ISLSOpportunities for social learningOne finding related to social learning is the connection between communicating and exploring the work of othersin the community. Figure 2 shows that, across the 28 months, 62% of com actions end with a student transitioningto vwo. In iRemix, viewing others' work includes looking at another user’s portfolio of work or individual postedartifact. Communicating can take many forms, including sending a message, responding to a user's work with areaction, or contributing to a forum. This suggests that after a communication-related move, a student is verylikely to keep exploring work submitted by others. This idea of an exploratory activity pattern is supported by thefinding that 23% of vwo actions result in another vwo action. This pattern is encouraging as it reveals a sociallearning pattern in which communication actions lead to potential for learning by viewing work submitted byothers. Vwo is also highly correlated to gb (33% probability) indicating that, after finishing a challenge, studentsare either looking for comparison pieces on the current challenge, or they are seeking inspiration for a new task.In contrast, vwo to com does not have as strong of a connection in our data, as this chain of actions isonly present for 3% of the pathways stemming from vwo. As a way to understand the potential for social learningobserved in the data, we may interpret this finding to suggest that even when the work of others is viewed, usersare not likely to provide feedback through comments or reactions, thereby missing learning opportunities for boththe viewer and creator of posted work. While communication happened during the exploratory activity patterns,as evidenced above, communication actions, in general, were much less frequent in this dataset than other, morepassive activity on the system. The Markov model easily revealed this disconnect in a way that has encouragedprogram educators and designers to think about ways to support youth to engage more in a communicativeinteraction around the work after viewing it.One of the most telling sequences is between actions and themselves. These are referred to as "stickystates," actions which frequently lead to another instance of the same action. Com, cri, inv, per, vc, vpo, and vwoare all social actions. These are also states which have a self-referential probability of greater than 10%. Thissuggests that once engaged in social activity, users are likely to continue their social action. Although theconnections between social actions are not substantial individually, edges originating from social actions arenumerous. For example, vpo has a greater than 1% probability of leading to one of five social actions (includingitself). These chains indicate that once social action has been initiated, it is likely to continue to another form.Opportunities for self-directed learningOne goal for iRemix is to foster a space in which students have the social support and access to resources thatallow students to take initiative in pursuing interests. In this dataset, we observed two actions aligned with this21st century learning theme of self-directed learning: vr and vpa. We found that vr led to cre, vpa or vwo 16.7%of the time for these actions, suggesting that after viewing a resource associated with a learning activity, studentssubmitted a work artifact, viewed a description of a potential learning activity or set of activities, or looked atothers' work. Encouragingly, this finding highlights connections among actions cutting across the three 21stcentury learning themes. These observed connections among using resources, creating artifacts, viewing the workof peers, and exploring what challenges to take on next would indicate a sophisticated form of participation in theonline system that is desired over other, more passive forms.Year-by-year Markov modelsThe Markov models in Figure 2 each represent a single year of sequential data and provide the opportunity toevaluate how activity on iRemix changed over time. For Year 1, the system was adopted in the winter of the firstyear and thus accounts for approximately 6 months of the school year. For Year 3, data was pulled at the end ofthe winter; thus, the third year has approximately 4 months’ worth of activity. However, as Markov models dealwith transition probabilities and not counts, the models can still be compared with one another.Many of the same observations from the multi-year Markov model (see Figure 1) are also evident in theyearly models. A strong connection is still observed between eow and row. Likewise, cre actions often transitionto vpo across all three years, as they do in the multi-year model.One apparent difference in use patterns of students over time is that by year three there were fewer actionspresent in the model. For example, per does not occur at all in the third year. An action is coded as personalizewhen a user updates information in his/her profile or posts a status to be shared with the community. This patterncan be explained by the notion that users would be inclined to spend more time personalizing their profile as acommunity is first developing. By the eighth grade in Year 3, it is likely that personas are more solidly establishedthrough face-to-face and online interactions, reducing the need for updating online profiles. From an educator’spoint of view, being able to discern changes in personalization may trigger intervention in which students may beencouraged to update their profiles to reflect their changing interests and identities within the learning community.CSCL 2017 Proceedings315© ISLSFigure 2. Network graphs by academic year: Year 1, Year 2, Year 3 (left to right).Activities reflective of social learning such as vwo, vpo, and vc played out similarly, whereas inv, anaction logged when a user invited another user to a community, appears in the Year 1 graph but not in thesubsequent year graphs. This may indicate the developmental change of the community; creating and participatingin interest groups may have had novelty and momentum in Year 1, but later dropped off as the community evolved.Again, this suggests an opportunity for the teacher to encourage students to engage in interest-based activities.The social trends visible in the network graph evolved over the course of the program. In Year 1, 97%of com actions led to vwo. In Year 2, students performed a wider variety of actions, including cre, row, vpo, andlgo. Vwo remained the most likely transition at 54%, while another com action occurred 17% of the time. By Year3, vwo was likely in 37.5% of transactions, while the self-referential probability increased to 25%. Cre, row, vpo,and lgo were also visible, with lgo having a probability of 27%. These findings add another dimension to thepatterns of social learning visible in the multi-year Markov model; although social actions frequently follow oneanother, the learning community used communicate actions differently across the three years.DiscussionThe purpose of this study was to explore how Markov chain principles could be used to reveal patterns of students’online activity over time in the areas of creative production, social learning, and self-directed learning. Using acoding framework and Markov chain principles to discern frequent sequences of actions, this approach was usefulfor visualizing students’ use of platform features with respect to goals to foster 21 st century learning activities.We explored this approach with the notion that being able to understand how youth are making use of onlinesocial learning platforms is needed in order to attend to equity in terms of the quality of participation. Indeed, byanalyzing at the level of a user session (rather than by single action, or by week, for example), the network graphsefficiently captured episodes of student online interaction in terms of types of desired activities.In the three-year Markov model, we observed cyclical movement between editing and viewing ownwork, indicating the theme of creative production. We also saw a connection between creative production andsocial learning through the relationship between creation actions and viewing work own work and the work ofothers. Social learning occurred frequently with creative production, suggesting an underlying feedback loopbetween these two types of activities. Taken as a whole, the findings revealed by the Markov graphs show thatstudents using iRemix were engaged in activity that was desired by the teacher: creative production characterizedby iteration and supported by social interactions among the community. While the results do not present definitiveevidence that learning actually occurred, they do demonstrate that the online learning platform providedopportunities to build 21st century learning skills for students (Reich, Murnane & Willett, 2012). Themethodology presented here suggests one way to reveal those opportunities.The network graphs produced for each year provided a concise way to examine how this particularlearning community changed over the three year period. In particular, the graphs helped to show the continuityof core activities that were prompted and encouraged by the teacher including the posting of work, revising, andcommunicating, as well as types of actions that tended to drop off over time. For designers, this type of analysiscan help generate insights that can inform how desired learning cycles can be strengthened by making theconnections between these activities more obvious to students. The probabilities generated by these models haverevealed existing patterns present in student work cycles, but providing personalized prompts to users couldincrease the likelihood of target behavior. Seeing how features are used or not over time may also suggest theneed for teacher prompting to use desired features or may point to potential usability or logging issues that needCSCL 2017 Proceedings316© ISLSto be further investigated. In terms of implications for developing theory, examining differences across time cangive researchers a developmental view of a changing learning community, and the evolution of how the teacherused iRemix as part of his class over the three academic years. More research analyzing longitudinal log datausing this type of approach is needed to compare high-level patterns which may provide a view on how acommunity of learners evolves and matures. While not addressed in this paper, our qualitative data (e.g., fieldobservations, interviews, and surveys) can aid interpretation of these long-term trends.The method explored here resulted in graphs that could be used by researchers to study patterns of use;however, such visualizations are likely not usable for educators. Additional research and design with educators isneeded to better communicate insights in a way that integrates with practice. Furthermore, although the networkgraph is useful for determining global, longitudinal patterns, it does not provide information about individualstudents’ use in a way that is helpful to the classroom teacher. The current visualizations, then, represent an initialstep to reveal patterns which can establish a baseline. Future applications will allow identification of groups thatare distinguished by their use patterns in order to provide the teacher with recommendations for action.One of the main limitations of log data analysis is accurately interpreting user intent. Although some ofthe interpretations may be accurate for a group of students, further investigation is required to more deeplyunderstand why students are exhibiting certain sequences of actions in the online platform. A key implication ofthis work is the need for diverse research collaborations to connect an understanding of intent with analyticmethods used. Educators, learning scientists, data analysts, and software designers are only a subset of the typesof researchers whose insights will provide a well-rounded interpretation of these types of data.ConclusionsIn this paper, we examined how Markov model principles could be applied to student action log data from theiRemix platform to visualize and better understand online behavior patterns with respect to 21st century learningopportunities. Network graphs generated based on the proposed Markov chain approach quantified the strengthsof any existent pair of actions over different time spans, revealing distinctions and similarities in online behaviordata. This approach is encouraging, as it shows potential for generating insights that can be useful for educators,designers, and researchers. Particularly for efforts aimed at addressing the “participation gap” characterized byinequities in terms of the development of 21 st century skills among youth, this method suggests an approach thatcan reveal the nature of online interactions in a holistic and concise manner. Future work will explore newvisualization techniques for predictive models of students’ online interactions using Markov principles.ReferencesAITF on Learning and the Internet. (2014). Learner at the center of a networked world. Washington, DC: TheAspen Institute.Barron, B., Gomez, K., Pinkard, N., & Martin, C. K. (2014). Digital Youth Network: Cultivating digital mediacitizenship in urban communities. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Bienkowski, M., Feng, M., & Means, B. (2012). Enhancing teaching and learning through educational data miningand learning analytics: An issue brief. US Dept. of Education, Office of Educational Technology, 1-57.Blair, R., Millard, D., & Woollard, J. (2015). Perceptions of school children of using social media for learning.International Journal on E-Learning.Burch, P., & Good, A. G. (2014). Equal scrutiny: Privatization and accountability in digital education. HarvardEducation Press.Cela, K. L., Sicilia, M. Á., & Sánchez, S. (2015). Social network analysis in e-learning environments: Apreliminary systematic review. Educational Psychology Review, 27(1), 219-246.Common Core State Standards Initiative. (2010). Common Core State Standards for Mathematics. Wash., DC:National Governors Association Center for Best Practices and the Council of Chief State School Officers.Faucon, L., Kidzinski, L., & Dillenbourg, P. (2016). Semi-Markov model for simulating MOOC students. InBarnes, T., Chi, M., & Feng, M. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on EducationalData Mining. Paper presented at the 9th International Conference on Educational Data Mining.Glott, R., Schmidt, P., & Ghosh, R. (2010). Wikipedia survey–overview of results. United Nations University:Collaborative Creativity Group.Hamid, S., Waycott, J., Kurnia, S., & Chang, S. (2015). Understanding students' perceptions of the benefits ofonline social networking use for teaching and learning. The Internet and Higher Education, 26, 1-9.Ito, M., Baumer, S., Bittanti, M., Cody, R., Stephenson, B. H., Horst, H. A., Perkel, D., et al. (2009). Hangingout, messing around, and geeking out: Kids living and learning with new media. MIT press.Jenkins, H., Purushotma, R., Weigel, M., Clinton, K., & Robison, A. J. (2009). Confronting the challenges ofparticipatory culture: Media education for the 21st century. MIT Press.CSCL 2017 Proceedings317© ISLSJeong, H., Gupta, A., Roscoe, R., Wagster, J., Biswas, G., & Schwartz, D. (2008, June). Using hidden Markovmodels to characterize student behaviors in learning-by-teaching environments. In InternationalConference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (pp. 614-625). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.Kardan, S., Roll, I., & Conati, C. (2014, June). The usefulness of log based clustering in a complex simulationenvironment. In Trausan-Matu, S., Boyer, K., Crosby, M., Panourgia, K. (Eds.), Intelligent TutoringSystems. Paper presented at the 12th International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (pp. 168177). Springer International Publishing.Lenhart, A. (2015). Teens, social media & technology overview 2015. Washington, DC.Levy, F., & Murnane, R. J. (2012). The new division of labor: How computers are creating the next job market.Princeton University Press.Margolis, J., Estrella, R., Goode, J., Holme, J. J., & Nao, K. (2010). Stuck in the shallow end: Education, race,and computing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Marques, A., & Belo, O. (2011). Discovering student web usage profiles using Markov chains. Electronic Journalof e-Learning, 9(1), 63-74.Martin, C.K., Nacu, D., & Pinkard, N. (2016). Revealing Opportunities for 21st Century Learning: An Approachto Interpreting User Trace Log Data. Journal of Learning Analytics, 3(2): 37-87.Mitchell, C. M., Boyer, K. E., & Lester, J. C. (2013, July). A Markov decision process model of tutorialintervention in task-oriented dialogue. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education(pp. 828-831). Springer Berlin Heidelberg..MMS Education. (2012). Survey of K-12 educators on social networking, online communities, and web 2.0 tools.Retrieved from http://www.edweb.net/fimages/op/reports/Nacu, D., Martin, C. K., Schutzenhofer, M., & Pinkard, N. (2016). Beyond traditional metrics: Using automatedlog coding to understand 21st century learning online. Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Conference onLearning@Scale, 197–200.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Pea, R. (2013, February). Learning sciences and learning analytics: Time for a marriage. EDUCAUSE LearningInitiative. Denver, CO.Pellegrino, J. W., & Hilton, M. L. (Eds.). (2013). Education for life and work: Developing transferable knowledgeand skills in the 21st century. National Academies Press.Reich, J., Murnane, R., & Willett, J. (2012). The state of wiki usage in US K-12 schools leveraging web 2.0 datawarehouses to assess quality and equity in online learning environments. Ed. Researcher, 41(1), 7–15.Rideout, V. (2015). The common sense census: Media use by tweens and teens. Common Sense Media. Retrievedfrom https://www. commonsensemedia.org/Rodríguez, F. J., & Boyer, K. E. (2015, June). Discovering individual and collaborative problem-solving modeswith hidden Markov models. In Conati, C., et al. (Eds.), Artificial Intelligence in Education. Paperpresented at the 17th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education (pp. 408-418).Springer International Publishing.Siemens, G. (2012, April). Learning analytics: envisioning a research discipline and a domain of practice. InShum, S., Gasevic, D., & Ferguson, R. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference onLearning Analytics and Knowledge . Paper presented at the 2nd International Conference on LearningAnalytics and Knowledge (pp. 4-8). ACM.Taraghi, B., Saranti, A., Ebner, M., & Schön, M. (2014, June). Markov chain and classification of difficulty levelsenhances the learning path in one-digit multiplication. In Zapharis, P., & Ioannou (Eds.), Learning andCollaboration Technologies: Designing and Developing Novel Learning Experiences. Paper presentedat 1 st Intl. Conference on Learning and Collaboration Technologies (pp. 322-333).Warschauer, M., & Matuchniak, T. (2010). New technology and digital worlds: Analyzing evidence of equity inaccess, use, and outcomes. Review of Research in Education, 34(1), 179-225.Watkins, C.S. (2011). Digital divide: Navigating the digital edge.Xu, B. (2011). Clustering educational digital library usage data: Comparisons of latent class analysis and KMeans algorithms.Zywica, J., Richards, K. A., & Gomez, K. (2011). Affordances of a scaffolded-social learning network. On theHorizon, 19(1), 33-42.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation Cyberlearning and Future ofLearning Technologies grant (DIP #1325004).CSCL 2017 Proceedings318© ISLS