Perceptions of Productive Failure in Design Projects:High School Students’ Challenges in Making Electronic TextilesBreanne K. Litts, Yasmin B. Kafai, Kristin A. Searle, and Emily Dieckmeyerbreanne.litts@usu.edu, kafai@upenn.edu, kristin.searle@usu.edu, e.dieckmeyer@gmail.comUniversity of PennsylvaniaAbstract. The concept of productive failure has emerged as one the key ideas for designing effectivelearning activities in well-defined problems. Here we report on moments of productive failure from aneight-week long workshop with 16 high school freshman (13-15 years) who engaged in an open-endeddesign problem, making an electronic textile. Using students’ self reports, we found that studentsencountered failure mostly in the design and crafting of circuits, and in these exploration phases studentsgenerated a multitude of successful and unsuccessful solutions. Our findings indicate that students’design artifacts function as a source of within-task feedback supporting their persistence through failures.Additionally, our findings highlight a need for further research examining what Kapur’s consolidationphase looks like in an open-ended design environment, particularly focusing on the development ofcanonical problems from design activities as a way to have students experience failure and success inconstrained design contexts.Keywords: electronic textiles, learning through making, productive failure, learning designsIntroductionOne of the current debates in the learning and educational sciences is the role of instructional supports in learningand problem solving. While one group argues for the “productive success” model by providing direct instructionand scaffolding (Kirshner, Sweller & Clark, 2006), others point to “productive failure” with delayed instructionas an equally promising direction for scaffolding student learning (Kapur, 2008; Kapur & Bielaczyc, 2012). Muchlike the proponents of productive success who see scaffolds and collaborations as essential in propelling students’learning forward, the supporters of productive failure focus on better understanding the role of multiplerepresentations and solutions, their role in activating prior knowledge, and the nature of peer support during thegeneration phase to identify which dimensions are most productive for which students and under which conditions(Kapur & Rummel, 2012). Most of these studies, however, have focused on getting students to solve well-definedcanonical problems, not examining the role that failure plays in solving open-ended design problems.In open-ended design activities, failure plays a constant and prominent role in the overall learningprocess. In projects that involve designing software (e.g., Kafai & Ching, 2004), building car ramps (e.g.,Kolodner, Camp, Crismond, Fasse, Gray, Holbrook, Puntambekar & Ryan, 2003), or engineering bridges (e.g.,Roth, 1998), students working in teams or alone constantly run into challenges as they imagine, then implementand iteratively cycle through the process on their way to product completion. For instance, in designing software,the process of debugging, or fixing the problems in the program code, is a constant part of programming and notjust located in the beginning (Soloway & Spohrer, 1988). In fixing bridge structures, students learn not only aboutthe qualities of materials but also about structural properties of different engineering designs (Roth, 1998).Identifying and addressing the small and big challenges in conceptualizing and implementing a design, whetherphysical or virtual, is what makes these design activities rich learning experiences. Could we consider thechallenges and resolutions encountered in such design activities a form of productive failure? The answer to thisquestion could provide the field of learning sciences with new insights and contexts in how to structureopportunities for productive failure for different kinds of learning activities.We report on a study conducted with 16 high school freshmen ages 13-15 years who chose to participatein an eight-week long workshop in which they learned to design and program their own electronic textile usingthe LilyPad Arduino microcontroller (Buechley, 2006), sensors and actuators. Electronic textiles (hereafter: etextiles) include microcontrollers, sensors for sound, touch and light and actuators such as LEDs and buzzers, thatcan be sewn into textiles to make interactive wearables and teach programming and engineering concepts(Buechley, Peppler, Eisenberg & Kafai, 2013). For our analysis, we focus on debriefing interviews conductedwith all the students where we asked them specifically about periods of troubleshooting and debugging duringtheir e-textile design processes. Our analysis was directed by two research questions: (1) What range of challengesdo youth report encountering when crafting e-textiles? and (2) How do youth respond to and resolve thesechallenges? In the discussion we address what our findings from examining challenges and resolutions contributeto the growing work on designing for productive failure in educational settings.ICLS 2016 Proceedings498© ISLSBackgroundThe idea that we can learn better through prior failure initially seems counterintuitive but has emerged as one ofthe new directions for designing effective learning activities. Productive failure defined by Kapur (2008) is first“engaging students in solving complex, ill-structured problems without the provision of support structures” (p.379). Then, students are provided with instruction and tasked with solving canonical problems. Students who firstsolved ill-structured mathematics problems were significantly more successful at later solving well-structuredmathematics problems compared to students who only solved well-structured mathematics problems (Kapur &Bielaczyc, 2012). The critical feature of productive failure—the use of ill-defined problems in an initial phase toachieve better problem solving performance of well-defined problems in a later phase (Kapur, 2008)—alsoprovides promising connections to open-ended design activities. Integrating a “failure” phase into instructionduring which students generate multiple representations and solution methods is instrumental in equipping thoselearners with more agile problem solving abilities and greater representation flexibility to later outperformstudents who only experienced direct instruction (Kapur 2012; Kapur & Bielaczyc, 2012). These research findingsalso highlight a central dimension of design learning where students turn an ill-defined into a well-defined problemby creating a solution in the form of a virtual or tangible artifact (Bielaczyc & Kapur, 2010; Kapur & Bielaczyc,2012).One of the key distinctions of learning in open-ended design activities, however, is that failure is not aninitial one-time generative phase followed by successful completion but rather a frequent occurrence possible atmultiple time points throughout the design process (e.g., Kafai & Ching, 2001; Kolodner et al., 2003; Roth, 1996;Litts & Ramirez, 2014). Learners addressing design problems not only experience but also resolve multiplefailures. Hybrid designs projects where students need to identify and solve problems in multiple, overlappingdomains provide a rich context for experiencing and addressing failure. For instance, in the context of roboticdesign, students not only have to build motor-driven models with active sensors but also have to code the programsthat operate motors and sensors independently in the field, without any human direction (Sullivan, 2009). In thecontext of designing e-textile wearables, students are learning about crafting, circuitry and coding. We found howthese overlapping domains, where materials behave in unexpected ways, are rich spaces for student learning(Kafai, Searle, Fields, Lee, Kaplan, & Lui, 2014). Students had to learn and coordinate multiple representations,i.e. blueprints for circuit design and program code for the microcontroller. We observed how students’ experienceswith failure occurred not only within each respective domain (and thus would make them more comparable to thetraditional productive failure studies), but also at the intersections between crafting and circuitry, coding andcircuitry (Kafai, Fields, & Searle, 2014).In this particular study, we were further interested in understanding how students themselves perceivemoments of failure and resolutions as they are designing e-textiles. Such retrospective accounts are rare in thecurrent research on productive failure, which has mainly focused on examining the impact of different conditionson students’ learning outcomes. Understanding what students consider moments of failure in the design process,how and where they deal with failure provides critical insights for designing supports in learning tools andinteractions. It is this particular dimension of design learning that potentially could inform not only the largerliterature on productive failure but also the work on design projects that has emphasized success, i.e., gettingstudents to complete a design project by providing scaffolds and tools. By looking at failure as a productive ratherthan counterproductive dimension of learning, we can shift pedagogical directions as well students’ perceptionsof such events that are inevitable in the design and learning process.Context, participants, and dataWorkshop participants and e-textile design activitiesWe conducted this study with 16 high school freshmen (7 boys, 9 girls, 13-15 years old) from a science magnetschool in a metropolitan city in a US northeastern state. Students identified as follows: 56% Black, 19% Asian,19% White, and 6% Multiracial. Participants selected our e-textiles workshop from a variety of workshop optionsas part of an immersion partnership between their school and a local science museum. The workshop spannedeight two-hour-long sessions at the museum and a ninth wrap-up session at the school. A researcher led theworkshop and was supported by two graduate students who assisted with student projects and data collection.Students engaged in a series of three e-textile projects: 1) an introductory activity crafting a simple circuit with anLED, coin cell battery, and conductive thread; 2) a starter wristband project with two LED lights, coin cell battery,conductive thread, and snaps that closed the circuit; and 3) a more advanced ‘human sensor project’ where studentsprogrammed a LilyPad Arduino to activate a lighting pattern with 2-3 LED lights by touching two conductivepatches that closed the circuit. While projects were scaffolded in that they built in complexity, students designedICLS 2016 Proceedings499© ISLStheir own circuitry and remixed existing code. We focus on the students’ design processes in the human sensorproject. We framed this project as a “Logo Remix” in which students remixed an existing logo (e.g., their favoritesports team or brand) by making it interactive with up to 3 LED lights, touch sensors, and a LilyPad Arduino.Each student created his or her own Logo Remix, but many worked collaboratively. As part of the design process,we instructed students to create a circuit design blueprint, which we approved before they began sewing. Allstudents uploaded their design blueprints and received feedback via an e-textile website (ecrafting.org) fromgraduate students who were more advanced in e-textiles.Data collection and analysisWe collected a range of data on students’ design processes focusing on challenges students encountered andresolution strategies they employed. In addition to photo documenting the progression of students’ artifacts andcode, we kept extensive field notes throughout the workshop and interviewed students after they completed theirprojects. Interviews were semi-structured and aimed at the challenges students encountered in their crafting,coding, and circuitry, and how they resolved each challenge they shared. Ten students were interviewed in pairsdue to time constraints. Our main analysis focused on students’ post-interviews, which we triangulated with fieldnotes and photos of students’ design processes. Two researchers coded all of the data and iteratively developed acoding scheme around challenges and resolutions. Researchers discussed and resolved disagreements orinconsistencies. Initially, researchers completed open line-by-line and in-vivo coding (Saldaña, 2009) to get anoverall sense of the data. Inspired by the productive failure literature, researchers then coded through a four-phaseprocess: (1) Identified points of iteration/challenge (95 total); (2) Generated and applied a coding scheme of thetypes of challenges (e.g., knots/tangles, polarity of LEDs, etc.) remaining open to adding new codes; (3)Determined whether and how the challenges were resolved: alone, with a peer, with a teacher, or not at all; (4)Clustered codes around larger themes. For instance, challenges like knots/tangles and stray ends are connected bythe underlying challenge of crafting with conductive thread. One researcher applied the coding schemes for“challenges” and “resolutions” to the field notes to triangulate with the findings from the self-report interview.No new codes were generated, but the fieldnotes shed more light on resolution strategies to remedy challenges.FindingsWe present the findings of this data analysis in two parts: 1) outline the two most prevalent themes of challenges:crafting with conductive thread and designing spatial circuitry, and 2) highlight the resolution strategies students’employed to overcome these two most challenging elements of the design process.Encountering challenges within e-textile designsAcross the interviews, students listed two overarching challenges—crafting with conductive thread, and spatialcircuitry—that accounted for 68 out of 95 (roughly 72%) of all statements. Every student reported encounteringboth of these challenges in making his or her e-textile project. Other observed challenges related to project timeconstraints and working in the programming environment, Arduino.Crafting with conductive threadLearning to craft with e-textiles is not just about crafting skills, which are challenging in their own right (Lee &Fields, 2013), but also about how these skills intersect with circuitry knowledge in a domain specific way (Peppler& Glosson, 2012). For novices who have not fully grasped the properties of conductive thread, however, it oftenappears that crafting and circuitry can be separated out as discrete entities, resulting in failure to complete afunctional circuit. In our analysis, crafting with conductive thread accounted for 28% of the total challenges facedby students. Asked to recount some of her sewing challenges, Kerry remarked:Oh! Let’s do all the problems I went through. Hey,...so when you wanna start [thread] the needle,it doesn’t want to go in. And then when you finally get it in, you have to make a knot. And theknot doesn’t wanna be formed. So then you finally make the knot and you’re sewing, andsometimes...either the knot and the entire thread comes through and the needle just disappearsand the the thread’s left there alone, or, you know what happens? Knots come out of nowherewhen you don’t need them! It’s like, hey, where were you when I was trying to knot you? (Int.,6/19/15, pp. 4-5).In this reflection, Kerry highlights several of the ways in which she experienced failure in the process of craftingher e-textile project, including difficulty threading the needle, difficulty tying knots in appropriate places, and theICLS 2016 Proceedings500© ISLSpropensity of the thread to tangle easily. Rhett, a novice sewer, experienced a different but related problem whenhe tried to connect components with one giant stitch rather than many small ones. He explained, “[o]ften times Iforgot to do a running stitch and I would just put it straight there and that was frustrating because I had to cut itand try again” (Int., 5/11/2015, p.2). These large stitches were easily pulled loose and failed to hold thecomponents in place. They could also move around and touch other lines of conductive thread, creatingunanticipated circuitry problems. As Kerry and Rhett illustrate, these basic sewing challenges were especiallyfrustrating and became even more frustrating for students when they realized that, because of the uninsulated,conductive nature of the thread, sewing mistakes and circuitry mistakes were often intertwined.All students had short circuiting issues in which their positive and negative threads tangled together orwere connected by stray ends of thread and many students discussed having to repeatedly cut out and resew linesof thread because of incorrect or crossing circuitry. Taraji was an experienced sewer who liked the thicker feelingof the conductive thread and often mended her own clothing outside of school but even she admitted that, “gettingto understand, like, sewing without making the thread in the back like touch, or going over other [threads]” wasdifficult (Int., 5/08/15, p.3). Similarly, Sabrina observed that “another challenge was connecting it to the wrongLilyPad circuit. I messed that up, like, I know when I first did it I didn’t connect it to the negative and that messedup my whole project” (Int., 5/08/15, p.2). In these ways, students experienced multiple failures related to craftingwith conductive thread in the context of their e-textiles projects. Though we did not measure their learning gains,anecdotally we can say that students developed a more robust knowledge of the properties of conductive threadand of key circuitry concepts (e.g short circuits) through their failures.Designing spatial circuitryIn addition to experiencing failure related to an incomplete understanding of the properties of conductive threadas connected to circuit design, students also experienced failure related to spatial circuitry, the design and physicalconstruction of the circuit. Spatial circuitry accounted for 43% of all challenges (41 out of 95). Spatial circuitry isnot just about making sure that lines of conductive thread do not cross or that the whole project fits on a sheet offelt, but also takes into account making sure that the correct circuit components are connected to the correct portson the LilyPad, since not all ports, for example, can read input from a sensor. Although we required students tofirst draw a paper and pencil representation of their design (including tracing the LilyPad and its ports and labelingthe components) and to consult with one of the instructors before moving onto constructing their design,translating the design blueprint into a physical artifact proved challenging in terms of both functional and aestheticconsiderations.As Kerry recounted in her reflective interview, the placement of various design components often evolved througha degree of failure in the construction process (see Figure 1):When I did [my project], I had to switch [the patches] like four different times and I also had toswitch my LEDs because the way that my design worked is...there wasn’t a lot of space overhere or through here [pointing to top of her project] so it was like, you had to try to cut throughthings and...hide some things but not a lot. And I was like trying to make everything be therebut not touch and it was really confusing...LEDs had to switch and ideas had to switch” (Int.,5/08/15, p.11).In this reflection, Kerry highlights several common aspects of spatial circuitry that challenged students, includingthe size, shape, and placement of their conductive patches and also an aesthetic desire to hide some of the circuitrywhile still having a functional project. Similarly, Taraji explained, “I didn’t really estimate all the amount of spaceI would have on the felt [as opposed to the piece of paper]. So when I actually started sewing on the felt I had tolike think, like before I got to put my conductive patches on I had to think like how big they could be, or whereexactly they could fit” (Int., 5/08/15, p.4). Across projects, students experienced failure related to realizing theirdesign goals within the constraints of their circuitry and coding knowledge.Overcoming challenges within e-textile designsWorking with conductive thread and designing spatial circuitry were the two most common challenges studentsdiscussed in their reflections of design processes. In post-interviews, 6 out of 16 students reported that they didnot successfully complete their project (e.g., they had not finished sewing or did not upload their code to theirLilypad). Interestingly, though, all of the students employed various resolution strategies to overcome these twochallenges. In this section, we outline the range of those resolution strategies according to who students reportedICLS 2016 Proceedings501© ISLSthey relied on to resolve the challenges: alone (55%, 52/95), teacher support (26%, 25/95), peer support (4%,4/95), and unresolved (15%, 14/95).Figure 1. Kerry’s circuitry blueprint and partially completed project, front (l) and back (r).Crafting with conductive threadA large part of resolving challenges of crafting with conductive thread is having the foresight to see how craftingcauses short-circuiting. Students must understand that because the thread is conductive (and not insulated) itcannot cross and their stitches must be tight to ensure strong connections. Students largely worked by themselves(55.6%) to troubleshoot challenges of crafting with conductive thread, but some required teacher (29.6%) support,and a few solicited peer support (7.4%) or were not able to resolve their challenges (7.4%).Working on his own, Mack realized the importance of solid connections, but struggled to sewaccordingly, so he generated a creative resolution. He expounded, “The hardest part was connecting the LEDs tothe thread, because if I would stick it in, I only did it single [thread] so it would pop [break] and then I had torestart” (Int., 5/08/15, p.2) In response, he sewed plastic beads behind the LEDs to guide his sewing on the backof his project and secure his components (see Figure 1). Other students resolved this particular challenge by takingmore traditional approaches like trimming their stray ends to prevent short-circuiting with thread crossing in theback.Figure 2. Mack’s project partially complete, front with LEDs (left) and back with beads (right).Likewise, Kerry described how she resolved the issue of short-circuiting caused by stray ends, “I did thaton my own after I was given tape. Because I saw and I was like, oh, you know, this part is so long and then [theteachers] just placed tape down on the table and so I was like, ok and decided to tape things” (Int., 5/08/15, p.7).While Kerry believed that she resolved this challenge on her own, she also illustrates how minimal, implicitteacher support (placing the tape down on the table) structured her ability to do so. In contrast, Jonathan, neededdirect teacher support to tackle a short circuiting issue he was having with stray ends. He recounted, “I had to trimdown a bunch of stuff in the back so that they didn’t cross over...I had to be told that’s what I had to do” (Int.,5/08/15, p. 3).In other cases, students solicited help from their peers. For instance, Kendra described how her friendshelped her make a proper running stitch, “Well previously my threads were really far apart, and then myICLS 2016 Proceedings502© ISLSfriends,...noticed that it could like really be easy to get loose...So they told me to make my threads tighter, so it’llbe like difficult to [get] loose and they wouldn’t be tangling. That was a helpful suggestion, so I just sewed tinier”(Int., 5/11/15, p. 6) Unlike traditional sewing where typically only one side of the project is important, both sidesof e-textiles project are equally important for aesthetics and circuitry.While we instructed students to secure their components by sewing the connection at least three times,several students still faced challenges with this technique. Kendra explained, “This [LED] is pretty loose. I didn’tsew it tight enough, and it’s pretty dull, too. So I don’t know, those could be contributing factors [of] why…itdoesn’t really light up that much” (Int., 5/11/15, p. 2) Kendra struggled to understand why securing hercomponents was important until she made the mistake herself, and though she left this problem unresolved, shearticulated the most likely cause of her dim LED light in her reflective interview.Designing spatial circuitryIn spite of the challenges students faced in translating their paper and pencil design blueprints into a physicalreality, many referenced their original design blueprints or created multiple versions of their design blueprints inorder to resolve challenges related to spatial circuitry. More than half of the students (58.5%) relied mostly onthemselves to solve challenges related to spatial circuitry, but nearly one third (31.7%) requested teacherassistance to troubleshoot their circuitry. Only one student reported soliciting peer support (2.5%) and a few wereunable to resolve their spatial circuitry issues (7.3%).Students who worked alone to resolve their spatial circuitry problems often reported generating multipledesign blueprints along the way. Taraji, for example, reported a careful planning process, “Before I would actuallysew, I’d draw the pattern out and make sure none of them like crossed each other, and once I had that I’d just copyit off the paper and to the actual [felt]” (Int., 5/08/15, p. 3). Each time Taraji made changes to her design plan shemodified her blueprint to match. Taraji’s proficiency in using her design blueprint streamlined her overall designprocess, as she described, “I just followed each step that was listed on here and it was pretty simple” (Int., 5/08/15,p. 4). In contrast, Kerry attempted to work through spatial circuitry challenges in her design (see Figure 1) bymaking in-the-moment changes. In her reflective interview, she recalled:The touch sensors, they were supposed to be…I have this right here, I have the basic idea(showing design blueprint). My design never changed, it’s just the way I did it, I switched it.Like I had these were gonna be the conductive touch sensors (showing cheek on designblueprint), because these were gonna be touch sensors and they were supposed to go right hereon the edge (pointing under the eyes), but you see how close they are to the eyes and everythingit made everything a lot harder to navigate so things got weird” (Int., 5/08/15, p. 11).Since Kerry did not reflect the changes to her spatial circuitry on her design blueprint, she failed to realize thather design iterations would result in crossing negative and positive threads, which caused a lot of frustration,because she “had to do redo everything” (Int., 5/08/15, p. 12). Both Taraji and Kerry resolved their spatial circuitrychallenges on their own, however they used different strategies and this resulted in different outcomes.Students also requested teacher assistance to troubleshoot their spatial circuitry challenges. Eagan, forexample, described her biggest mistake, “Well the circuiting obviously. Cuz I just kept messing on up, but yeah Ihad great teachers help me out” (Int., 5/08/15, p. 8). She further explained that with teacher support she triedrotating her Lilypad and that helped resolve a lot of of her issues connecting her LEDs and touch sensors to theLilypad without crossing positive and negative lines. Another student, Jess, reported assisting her friend withconnecting her LEDs to the Lilypad, “I was helping Lauren with stuff, because she didn’t know where to connectit” (Int., 5/11/15, p. 5). Even though Jess struggled herself with the concept, she understood the challenge ofthinking through, “how [the] design will fit into the circuitry… [and]... not to get the thread all tangled up in eachother” (Int., 5/11/15, p. 6). A few students, like Mel, didn’t reach out at all: “Since we don’t know anything aboutthis part, this Lilypad, I don’t know where to put which…I don’t know, where to put things and stuff. So, or howit works, cuz I don’t know how this thing works… it’s just really confusing” (Int., 5/11/15, p. 5). Even at the endof the project Mel still struggled to understand the importance of her design blueprint and the function of theLilypad, but did not report asking for help to resolve her confusion with these concepts. While we might readstudents’ spatial circuitry challenges and resolutions as just a lot of frustration, we argue that students learnedvaluable lessons about design processes and how to use resources to solve ill-defined problems.DiscussionICLS 2016 Proceedings503© ISLSWe examined students’ perspectives on challenges and resolutions with the goal of better understanding how theidea of productive failure can apply within an open-ended design task. All students reported moments of failurewith sometimes successful, and at other times unsuccessful responses. The majority of students reported workingon their own to troubleshoot and debug their projects without direct instruction. While it is likely that studentsreceived more external help than they reported, what is important is that they persisted to overcome challengeseven if they did not produce fully functioning and finished products. In the following sections, we discuss whetheror not our findings of productive failure resonate with those observed in previous research and outline potentialinstructional applications.Understanding the productivity of failure in open-ended design tasksThe productive failure literature introduces the “solution generation effect” meaning the more solutions studentsgenerate, the more they learn (Kapur, 2015) and illustrates that this occurs in two phases: exploration andconsolidation. However, the bulk of this research has been conducted using math tasks where there exists a clearcanonical solution to which students can compare and contrast their self-generated solutions. In this study, weidentified two ill-structured exploration phases that exist in e-textile design: (1) crafting with conductive threadand (2) designing spatial circuitry. In these exploration phases, students generated multiple solutions, many ofwhich were non-traditional. For instance, Mack’s creative solution of using beads to guide his LEDs and securehis components illustrates the productive nature of repetitively making the same mistake. But in open-endeddesigns, there is not a parallel canonical solution to which students can compare their self-generated solutions.Instead, there are a range of design styles and techniques students can leverage to suit their project. Hence, it isdifficult to model well-structured tasks like the ones used in productive failure studies. Though open-endeddesigns have multiple successful trajectories and a vague definition of failure, e-textiles designs require integrationof knowledge from multiple domains (crafting, circuitry, and coding). In the next phase of examining productivefailure in open-ended designs, we must more intentionally explore what a well-structured consolidation phaselooks like.In this study we collected students’ perspectives rather than examining their learning outcomes. Students’reflections shed light on the role of feedback that physical artifacts can provide when persisting through iterativefailure. A productive failure learning design builds from unguided (exploratory) to guided (consolidation)problem-solving conditions and wraps up with direct instruction (Kapur, 2015). In these studies the role of theteacher is to provide the scaffolding that guides learning. Our study suggests that the physical artifacts studentsmake can guide their problem solving without teacher intervention by providing enough within-task feedback tosupport them to persist beyond their failures. With tangible, three-dimensional artifacts as a learning support,students were able to rapidly cycle through many failures before finding a solution that worked for their projectand process. Unlike a math problem, e-textile designs can provide live feedback to a student through their function.For instance, when debugging a short circuit a student can check knots, stray ends, etc. and debug the project untilthe LED turns on. The feedback from physical artifacts perhaps introduces an additional form of guidance toconsider in future productive failure learning designs.Engineering productive failure in open-ended tasksThe findings from our research illustrate that students encounter many moments of failure among the process ofcompletion, two of which we presented and discussed in more detail. Our argument is that failure is embedded inthe design process rather than a separate pre-planned activity that sets the stage for later successful problemsolving. Observing and hearing about the multiple difficulties that students experience along the way suggest thatwe should consider the design of supports. In previous design studies such supports that have taken the form ofreflections or design diaries (e.g., Kafai, 1995; Roth, 1998) to help novice designers with completion of theirartifacts, alone or together. Perhaps the presentation of supports could also come in form of challenges or problemsthat mirror features of productive failure. For instance, we might present students with artifacts that haveintentional problems built-in that they will be asked to fix. In the context of e-textiles this could actually meanthat teachers or researchers design and make an e-textile that has faulty crafting, circuits, or code by design (SeeFigure 2). Based on what we know from observing students’ challenges, we could incorporate intentionalproblems in an e-textile that we ask students to fix or debug (Fields, Searle, Kafai, & Min 2012).Furthermore, we could think carefully about the time point in the design process when we would askstudents to fix the problem. The later beginning phase when students have already some experience with craftingand circuit design seems like a reasonable time point. Indeed, this idea of providing students with faulty or buggyprograms is not a new one and has been used in teaching novice programmers. For instance, the “Debug-meStudio” in Scratch presents students with a set of programs that have strategically planted bugs to help them betterICLS 2016 Proceedings504© ISLSunderstand programming in playful way (Griffin, Kaplan & Burke, 2012). We see no reason why we cannot adoptthe same approach for tangible artifacts such as e-textiles that often feature a larger and interconnected array ofchallenges cutting across the disciplinary boundaries of crafting, circuitry, and code.We conclude our paper with a quote from a student, Eagan, who perhaps best highlights the benefits ofworking through multiple challenges, “Even though I never got one to light up (laughing)... I learned from mymistakes. I did just, ‘oh I made a mistake, ugh, give up,’ but I learned from my mistakes” (Int., 5/08/15, p. 8).Whether or not failure occurs and promotes learning in well-defined or open-ended problem settings, it is clearthat mistakes which are often perceived as roadblocks can become stepping stones to success.ReferencesBuechley, L. (2006). A construction kit for electronic textiles. In Proceedings of IEEE International Symposiumon Wearable Computers (ISWC) (pp. 83-92). Montreux, Switzerland.Buechley, L., Peppler, K., Eisenberg, M., & Kafai, Y. (2013). Textile Messages: Dispatches from the World fore-Textiles and Education. New York, NY: Peter Lang.Fields, D. A., Searle, K., Kafai, Y. B. & Min, H. (2012). Debuggems to assess student learning in e-textiles. InSIGCSE '12 Proceedings of the 43rd ACM technical symposium on Computer Science Education (pp.699-699). New York, NY: ACMGriffin, J., Kaplan, E., & Burke, W. Q. (2012). Debug’ems or other Deconstruction Kit for STEM Learning. InProceedings of Integrated STEM Education Conference (ISEC) (pp. 1-4). IEEE.Kafai, Y. B. (1995). Minds in Play. Mahaw, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Publishers.Kafai, Y. B., and C. C. Ching. Affordances of Collaborative Software Design Planning for Elementary Students’Science Talk. Journal of the Learning Sciences 10, no. 3 (2001): 323-63.Kafai, Y. B., Searle, K. A., Fields, D. A., Lee, E., Kaplan, E. & Lui, D. (2014). A Crafts-Oriented Approach toComputing in High School: Introducing Computational Concepts, Practices and Perspectives with ETextiles. Transactions on Computing Education. 14(1), 1-20.Kapur, M. (2008). Productive Failure. Cognition and Instruction, 26(3), 379-424.Kapur, M. (2012). Productive failure in learning the concept of variance. Instructional Science, 40 (4), 651-672.Kapur, M. (2015). Learning from productive failure. Learning: Research and Practice, 1(1), 51-65.Kapur, M., & Bielaczyc, K. (2012). Designing for Productive Failure. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(1), 45-83.Kapur, M., & Rummel, N. (2012). Productive failure in learning and problem solving. Instructional Science, 40(4), 645-650.Kirschner, P. A., Sweller, J., & Clark, R. E. (2006). Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work.Educational Psychologist, 41(2), 75-86.Kolodner, J., Camp, P., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., Puntambekar, S., & Ryan, M. (2003).Problem-based learning meets case-based reasoning in the middle-school science classroom: PuttingLearning by Design™ into practice. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 495-457.Lee, V. R. & Fields, D. A. (2013). A clinical interview for assessing student learning in a university-level crafttechnology course. In the Proceedings of FabLearn 2013, Palo Alto, CA.Litts, B, & Ramirez, D. (2014). Making people fail: Failing to learning in games and making. In Proceedings ofthe tenth annual Games+Learning+Society Conference. ETC Press: Pittsburgh, PA.Roth, W. M. (1998). Designing communities. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Press.Saldana, J. (2009). The coding manual for qualitative researchers. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Soloway, E. & Spohrer, J.C. (Eds.). (1989). Studying the novice programmer. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Sullivan, F. R. (2009). Robotics and science literacy: Thinking skills, science process skills and systemsunderstanding. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 45(3), 373-394AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation (ITEST-1509245) to the secondauthor. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the NationalScience Foundation, Utah State University, or the University of Pennsylvania.ICLS 2016 Proceedings505© ISLS