Investigating Immersion in Relation to Students’ LearningDuring a Collaborative Location-Based Augmented Reality ActivityYiannis Georgiou and Eleni A. Kyzaioannis.georgiou@cut.ac.cy, Eleni.Kyza@cut.ac.cyMedia, Cognition and Learning Research Group, Cyprus University of TechnologyAbstract: Immersion has been argued to affect students’ learning in settings such as virtualworlds and digital games. However, a review of the literature indicates a lack of empiricalstudies investigating immersion in relation to the learning process. The present case studycharacterizes students’ immersive experiences during a location-based augmented realityscience activity. Two pairs of students were purposefully selected from a cohort of eighteen11th graders, due to their diametrically opposing views about their immersive experience. Theanalysis of students’ discourse during the activity, and of post-activity interviews, yielded acoherent indicator of immersion. To investigate whether each pair’s immersion affected thelearning process, we analyzed the pairs’ activity logs, discourse and learning outcomes.Findings show that immersion was related to the learning process, dramatically affectingstudents’ learning behaviors, such as collecting and interpreting the available data, as well asproblem-solving patterns.IntroductionImmersion is a widely-used construct in the literature on digital technologies, such as computer and videogames, virtual worlds or location-aware augmented reality (AR) apps. According to Dede (2009), immersion is“the participant’s suspension of disbelief that she or he is ‘inside’ a digitally enhanced setting” (p.66).Conceptualizing immersion as a gradated process of cognitive and emotional involvement, researchers haveargued that heightened levels of immersion can facilitate science learning (Cheng, She & Annetta, 2015). Basedon the review of the extant literature there is a lack of empirical studies investigating immersion in relation tothe learning process or to students’ collaboration; this gap is important to be addressed, given that immersionrepresents a psychological experience unfolding during the learning process (Jennett et al., 2008).Empirical studies on the topic, mostly using quantitative methodologies, have previously investigatedimmersion in relation to students’ learning gains in the context of game-based virtual worlds, and have oftenresulted in contradictory findings. Although some of these studies have provided empirical support for thepositive effect of immersion on students’ learning (e.g. Hickey et al., 2009; Ketelhut et al., 2010), other studiesfound weak or no relation between immersion and learning outcomes (e.g. Cheng et al., 2015; Hsu & Cheng,2014). Even though the latter studies have not identified a positive relation between learning outcomes andimmersion, they have indicated that immersion is highly related to students’ game scores, suggesting thatimmersion has a significant impact on students’ performance during the learning process. On a similar note, Hsuand Cheng (2014) found no relation between higher levels of immersion and 7th graders’ conceptualunderstanding, but identified relations between high levels of immersion and students’ problem-solving skills.These findings led them to assume that higher levels of immersion may affect students’ problem-based patternsduring the learning process, which may not be identified by simply looking at the learning outcomes.The present study investigates the claim that immersion relates to the learning process in the context ofa collaborative location-based AR activity. As in other studies of immersion, augmented reality is a contextwhere immersion is assumed to support learning, but this claim has not been empirically investigated (Cheng &Tsai, 2013; Dunleavy, Dede & Mitchel, 2009). Since there is scant research on investigating immersion and itsrelation to learning in location-based augmented reality settings, the first goal of this study was to characterizeimmersive experiences as experienced by the students in the field and as reported at the end of the activity. Asecond goal of this study was to investigate the relationship between students’ immersive experiences, theirlearning process and outcomes. Understanding immersion in location-based augmented reality settings and itsrelation to learning can help us build more engaging learning environments and support learning in informal andoutdoors settings.Theoretical frameworkLocation-based augmented reality (AR) settings for science education are assumed to increase students’immersion and impact learning outcomes, due to set of unique characteristics (Dunleavy et al., 2009). Inparticular, location-based AR settings differ from other digital immersive environments as they: (a) employCSCL 2017 Proceedings423© ISLSmobile and location-aware interfaces, (b) combine physical and digital spaces, thus creating blended spaces, (c)extend the activity outside the limits of traditional space (e.g. the screen) into the physical space, and (d) providestudents with rich interaction possibilities with the physical world, as well as with the virtual elementsaugmenting reality (De Souza E Silva & Delacruz, 2006). However, learning in location-based AR settings isoften considered as a highly challenging task. Based on existing literature, location-based AR settings forlearning in science should be structured around authentic but complex real-world problems; for their solutionstudents are often asked to work collaboratively to collect and synthesize relevant data, as they progress throughmultiple, virtual or real-world data sources (Dunleavy et al., 2009; O'Shea, Mitchell, Johnston, & Dede, 2009).In addition, collaborating students in location-based AR settings are required to apply a set of complex skills,such as collaborative problem-solving, inquiry-based skills, geo-spatial navigation skills and handheldmanipulation (Dunleavy et al., 2009).Immersion, as a multi-level process of cognitive and emotional involvement, can be crucial in terms ofdefining students’ performance, given the complex nature of collaborative location-based AR activities.Students, who are highly immersed in location-based AR settings, feel surrounded by a blended, yet realisticaugmented environment, as being in a unified world (Cheng & Tsai, 2013). When this occurs, “students quicklyenter a state of suspended disbelief, accept the blended real and digital environment, give their attention over toit, and engage in the variety of options available to them to access content related to the topic being addressed”(Cabiria, 2011, p. 240). Despite these assertions, Cheng and Tsai (2013) have argued that even thoughimmersion is expected to relate to students’ behaviors in AR-related learning, there is still a lack of studiesinvestigating how the learning process unfolds in such contexts. The present case study focused on two pairs ofhigh school students, who reported diametrically opposite views about their immersive experience during acollaborative AR location-based activity, to investigate: (a) How can we characterize immersion in locationbased AR activities, and (b) What is the relation between immersion and learning?MethodologyParticipantsEighteen 11th grade students, working in pairs, participated in the augmented reality activity using mobiledevices; their AR experience lasted for approximately 2 hours. Students were randomly assigned to pairs. Thiscase study purposefully focuses on two pairs: Janet and David (Pair 1) and Susan and Jack (Pair 2) [names arepseudonyms]. These two pairs were selected due to their diametrically opposing views regarding theirimmersive experience, as expressed by them in interviews, which took place after the activity. This focusprovides the opportunity to explore whether and how immersion is related to the learning process during thelocation-based AR activity.Learning interventionThe collaborative location-based AR activity took place at a lake near an environmental science center. Duringthe activity, which took the form of a narrative-driven, inquiry-based investigation, students worked in pairs toinvestigate the mysterious decline of mallard ducks inhabiting the lake; each pair was provided with a tabletequipped with the TraceReaders AR app (Georgiou & Kyza, 2013). The goal of the activity was to engagestudents in an evidence-based, explanation-building process, and to expand students’ understanding of scientificconcepts related to the lake ecosystem. As students moved around in the physical world, a map in the AR appdisplayed information corresponding to different hotspots. The hotspots were triggered once the students werewithin a radius of 20 meters; once triggered, the app displayed a variety of multi-modal information (e.g. videos,texts, photographs, and audio), which was relevant to the inquiry-based investigation.Data collectionTo characterize immersion and investigate its relation to learning, data were collected during and after the pairs’AR activity. The following data were collected during the students’ investigation: (a) Log files: Students’actions during the intervention were captured in a log file documenting the history of the students’ actions, suchas time spent on each activity in the app; (b) Audio-taped discussions: Each pair’s discussions were audiorecorded through an integrated recorder from within the AR location-aware app; (c) Pairs’ final videos: Theoverall performance of each pair was evaluated based on whether they had reached an evidence-basedconclusion at the end of their investigation. For this purpose, each pair was asked to prepare a 3-minute video atthe end of their investigation, in which they presented their final conclusions and arguments. Each student alsoparticipated in a group interview which took place after the learning activity and lasted for 90 minutes; twogroup interviews were held. The nominal group technique (McPhail, 2001) was used for the post-sessionCSCL 2017 Proceedings424© ISLSinterviews. According to this technique, students were initially asked to individually write down and justify theirviewpoints regarding the immersive nature of the location-based AR activity. As a second step, students wereasked to share their ideas with the group; the interviews concluded with a debriefing discussion. In this way, wereceived both the individual input from all group members and had access to richer discussion resulting fromgroup interaction on the topic.Data analysisThe data were analyzed using mixed methods to answer the questions about the process of immersion during theAR activity and the relation of immersion to student learning. To characterize students’ immersion the views ofthe four students expressed during the post-session interview were qualitatively analyzed to develop animmersion indicator, reflecting students’ immersion for each pair. For this purpose, we used a coding scheme byScoresby and Shelton (2011), which defined immersion as a linear process according to which interest for theactivity content, and emotion evoke motivation, which in turn results in engagement (see Table 1). Thus, thestatements of each pair were categorized per student and according to these four immersive states (content,emotion, motivation, and engagement). Statements per state were also classified as negative or positive, thusproviding a more nuanced indication of the ways students experienced each different state. Furthermore,students’ statements about each state were grouped using a thematic analysis approach (Attride-Stirling, 2001).The immersion indicators, derived from coding the views of the students in each pair, were supplemented withthe analysis of the pairs’ discourse during the learning process, which was also coded as positive or negativeusing the Scoresby and Shelton (2011) coding categories. This process provided a systematic way tocharacterize students’ immersion, addressing both the cognitive and emotional involvement with the locationbased AR activity. The inter-rater agreement between two independent researchers, who coded 25% of the datacorpus, was estimated using Cohen’s kappa and was satisfactory, at κ=.816, p<.001 for the pairs’ statements andκ=.741, p< .001 for students’ discourse.Table 1: Coding scheme for characterizing students’ immersion (based on Scoresby and Shelton, 2011)Immersive stateContentEmotionMotivationEngagementDefinitionStudents indicate their interest about the activity in terms of expressing their likes andtheir dislikes about the different aspects of the activity e.g. the actions performed duringthe activity, media design (e.g. graphics and sounds), level of difficulty.Students indicate their feelings about the activity, expressing an emotional connection ordisconnect with the activity.Students indicate their motivation expressing whether they were looking forward or not todiscovering what happens next and accomplishing the learning mission.Students indicate their engagement, or lack of, with the learning process and activities.In order to relate students’ immersion with each pair’s learning process, we analyzed data from: (a) logfiles, (b) audio-taped discussions and (c) each pair’s final videos. Quantitative data derived from the log files ofthe two selected pairs were analyzed descriptively, in order to outline each pair’s learning process. The two pairswere contrasted in terms of (a) the number of hotspots visited, (b) the time allocated at the different hotspots forexamining the data sources, and (c) the time allocated for examining the data sources, which includedinscriptions such as tables, graphs and diagrams. Students’ audio-taped discussions were analyzed according toa slightly modified coding scheme by Nilsson and Svingby (2009), in order to classify students’ discourseaccording to learning actions during the collaborative location-based AR activity (see Table 2). As part of theaudio-taped discussion analysis, an inter-rater process was employed during which two independent researcherscoded the 25% of the data corpus. Cohen's kappa was run to determine the agreement between the raters, withsatisfactory agreement (κ = .802, p < .001). Finally, each pair’s final video was qualitatively analyzed todetermine if each pair had reached an evidence-based conclusion by the end of the learning intervention.Table 2: Coding students’ discourseCategoryObtaining informationCapturing dataCSCL 2017 ProceedingsDescriptionIdentifying information from the learning environment through readingsources (text, tables, diagrams) or watching videosTaking photos from the field and keeping notes about them as data425© ISLSCategoryProblem solvingNavigatingInteracting with other pairsInteracting with teachersOff-task discussionsTechnical issuesDescriptionDiscussing the content and how to solve the problemDiscussing navigation issues related to the augmented reality app or to thehotspots augmenting the physical spaceDiscussing application-related issues with other pairsReceiving feedback from teachers during the learning processDiscussing issues irrelevant to the learning environmentDiscussing problems with the use of the tablet or the AR appFindingsHow is immersion experienced in location-based AR investigations?The examination of students’ immersion indicators showed that Pair 1 (Jack and Susan) achieved high levels ofimmersion (see Table 3 for a summary of the assessment of their immersion experience). As Jack reported, theactivity captured his interest due to the user-friendly app, its topic, diversity of data provided, its nature-basedlocation and its location-aware qualities. Even though he did not provide any indications regarding anyemotional connection with the activity, Jack also expressed his motivation by explaining how he felt challengedto analyze and reflect on the data collected. He also mentioned how he and Susan were engaged with thelearning process, explaining how they were actively involved with collecting and reflecting on their data. Not allof Jack’s statements were positive. Jack negatively evaluated the realism of the virtual characters, the lack ofcompetition and agency during the activity, as well as the balance between the natural and the virtual world.Susan provided fewer statements about her immersive experience, but also highlighted user-friendliness, andcommented that the topic of the investigation and the location-aware aspect of the activity captured her interest.She provided indications for her motivation since, as she reported that during the activity she felt anticipation tomove forward and to identify new data. Susan did discuss her emotional connection with the activity, as shereported that in some cases she was carried away or she felt that she was experiencing the activity as somethingreal. Based on these statements, both students could be characterized as of high immersion.On the other hand, Pair 2 (David and Janet) remained at the lowest level of immersion (see Table 3 fora summary of the assessment of their immersion experience), since the learning activity did not manage tocapture their interest. Even though David had positively evaluated the user-friendliness of the app, he negativelyevaluated several aspects relating to the interface of the app, such as the text-based information presented andthe fidelity of the graphics. He also negatively evaluated the narrative employed in terms of its topic, thenarrative plot and the lack of competition, as well as the locality, in terms of the arrangement of the hotspots andthe lack of balance between the natural and the virtual world. Since most of the activity did not capture hisinterest, he also reported a lack of emotional connection with the activity, stating that he could hardly identifywith the main character of the narrative-driven investigation. Hence, even though he had indicated that on someoccasions he felt motivated to reach a solution to the problem, he provided no indications about his engagementwith the learning process. Similarly, Janet reported that her attention and interest were hardly captured by theinterface, the narrative and the locality. Therefore, as she admitted, there were times that she felt bored toengage with the learning process (e.g. examine the data sources provided). Given that these students did notprovide indications of reaching the immersive states of emotion, motivation and engagement, while at the sametime they adopted a, mostly, negative stance towards the content of the activity, both students could becharacterized as of low immersion. Table 3 shows the percentage of statements devoted to different aspects ofimmersion by the students in each pair. The sub-categories under each state of immersion (content, emotion,motivation, and engagement) were reached using a thematic analysis approach.Table 3: Characterizing students’ immersion based on the analysis of the post-session interviewsImmersion State 1: ContentInterfaceUser-friendlinessAugmentation of realityRealism, animation and interactivity of graphicsRealism and fidelity of virtual charactersText-based informationCSCL 2017 Proceedings426High immersion pairJackSusan(+)(-)(+)(-)55.3 21.3 33.2 33.28.508.308.508.3004.30002.108.30000Low immersion pairDavidJanet(+)(-)(+)(-)1076.6 14.2 71.610000007.1000014.3010028.806.7014.3© ISLSTopic of investigationLevel of challengeDiversity and usefulness of the dataCompetitionAgency and first-person perspectiveNarrative plotLocalityNature-based locationMobility and location aware nature of theactivityBalance between the physical and virtual worldHotspots’ arrangementImmersion State 2: EmotionAuthenticityExperience the activity as something realExcitementCarried out by the activityImmersion State 3: MotivationContinuousTo discover something from your dataChallengeTo discover new dataAnticipationImmersion State 4: EngagementDataCollecting data and new informationcollectionAnalyzing, interpreting and combining your dataReflectingTOTALNarrative14.8012.80004.30008.58.5008.3000000008.308.30000000006.723.203.3013.300000007.1007.100006.4000004.34.3002.100000008.30025.38.3178.308.3008.30000000000006.76.706.706.76.706.70000000000007.1007.107.100019.14.314.80000000000000000007.107.1100100100100The above characterization of immersion was complimented through the analysis of the pairs’discourse during the learning process (see Figure 1). This analysis corroborated students’ post-activitystatements about their immersion.Figure 1. Indicators of immersion extracted from the analysis of students’ discourse during the AR activity.As shown in Figure 1, Pair 1 discourse (Jack and Susan) provided no indications of low motivationwhile Pair 2 discourse (David and Janet) offered several indications of low motivation during the activity. Inaddition, Pair 1 seem to be distracted and disengaged much less during the activity than Pair 2.Does immersion relate to students’ learning?A descriptive analysis of the students’ actions, as recorded in the log file of each pair, indicated that both pairsvisited all the hotspots. However, the high immersion pair (Pair 1, Susan and Jack) differed from the lowimmersion pair (Pair 2, David and Janet). Pair 1 allocated almost double the time at hotspots in examining allthe data sources provided, and triple the time in examining specifically the data sources with inscriptions, suchas tables, graphs and diagrams, which needed to be analyzed and interpreted (see Figure 2).CSCL 2017 Proceedings427© ISLSFigure 2. Time allocation per pair at hotspots.Figure 3. Time allocation per pair at hotspots.The analysis of each pair’s discourse during the learning process indicated that the learning activity ofthe two pairs also differed: Susan and Jack (high immersion pair) seemed to be more engaged with the activitythan Janet and David (low immersion pair). As shown in Figure 3, while for Jack and Susan (high immersionpair) the coded episodes relating to the categories of obtaining information and problem-solving covered 25%and 24% of the total discourse coded for the group respectively, in the case of David and Janet (low immersionpair) these percentages were much lower, covering 17% and 13% of the total number of coded episodes. Inaddition, the percentages of the coded episodes relating to off-task discussions for Janet and David were muchhigher (23%) as compared to the percentages of the high immersion pair (16%). According to students’discourse, the actions of obtaining background information and problem-solving were also much differentbetween the two pairs. Susan and Jack, who were highly immersed, payed more attention to the data; as shownin Excerpt 1, these students invested much effort in making sense of the information collected, by reading, forinstance, the text more than once.Excerpt 1Virtualcharacter:Jack:Susan:Jack:I have an analysis regarding the water quality for you. The analysis focuses on the detectionof aquatic invertebrates of the lake…Did you understand what he just said?What did he say about the aquatic invertebrates? Rewind the video for a moment…Ok… Let’s hear it once again from the previous point.In contrast, Janet and David seemed to pay less attention on making sense of the data sources when dealing withnew information, as shown in Excerpt 2.Excerpt 2Janet:David:Janet:Several chemical substances…There is no need to give much emphasis here. Please read it more quickly.Ok! Several chemical substances like DDT or lindane, blah, blah, blah…. This phenomenon iscalled bioaccumulation… blah, blah, blah. DDT is transferred to zooplankton… blah, blah,blah…Another difference was the extent to which students’ discussions focused on the problem-solving action, as thetwo pairs approached the activity very differently. Janet and David, who were not highly immersed, not onlyallocated less time on reasoning about the subject but, as presented in Excerpt 3, in most of the cases they didnot make an effort to interpret the information and relate it to how it could be employed as evidence to confirmor reject a hypothesis, or connect new information with data they had already seen.Excerpt 3Janet:So, now we have the lindane pesticide which is still employed during some occasions for theCSCL 2017 Proceedings428© ISLSDavid:Janet:agricultural crops.Yes, ok…Lindane…In contrast, Susan and Jack, who were highly immersed, were in continuous discussion about how the newinformation obtained could confirm a plausible explanation or not. As shown in Excerpt 4, students would oftendiscuss the different emerging hypotheses regarding the cause of the decline at the duck population, such as theuse of pesticides or the use of fertilizers resulting to eutrophication, trying to reach an evidence-based decision.Excerpt 4Susan:Jack:Susan:Jack:Susan:Jack:Susan:Yeah… But keep in mind that the cause for the problem is probably one… Now we are dividedbetween the nitrates and the phosphates and the eggshell thinning.Ok… Let me think… nitrates and the phosphates…To what reason did we attribute the eggshell thinning?To the lindane…To the lindane… You see? But lindane is a pesticide…Yes. They use it as a pesticide.So the problem could be attributed either to spraying or to fertilizers.To sum up, Susan and Jack, who were characterized as a pair of high immersion, were deeply engaged in theprocess of interpreting and combining the collected data. On the other hand, the analysis of the low immersionpair’s discourse and actions indicated that Janet and David defined the whole investigation process more as ascavenger hunt, and collected the same data as quickly as possible, without focusing on analyzing or interpretingthe collected data. Hence, while by the end of the investigation, Susan and Jack correctly concluded that thedecline of the duck population could be attributed to bioaccumulation, Janet and David did not manage to reachan evidence-based conclusion.Discussion and implicationsThe present study sought to investigate immersion in relation to science learning in a location-based ARactivity. In this context, we purposefully focused on two pairs of high school students, who expresseddiametrically opposite views regarding their immersion, attempting to: (a) characterize students’ immersiveexperiences, and (b) investigate the learning process of each pair, to examine the relation of immersion tostudents’ learning. The analysis of the two selected pairs’ learning process indicated several differences. Whileby the end of the investigation, the first pair correctly concluded that the decline of the duck population could beattributed to bioaccumulation, the second pair did not manage to reach an evidence-based conclusion. While theoutperforming pair was immersed in the process of analyzing and interpreting the collected data, the second pairdefined the whole investigation process as a scavenger hunt, by simply gathering data as quickly as possible, butwithout reflecting on the collected data. These extremes observed in the learning behaviors of the two pairs arealigned with reports of previous studies, which concluded that while in some cases some students employinglocation-aware AR apps could be deeply engaged with the true meaning of scientific inquiry, others couldpresent indications of disengagement by transforming the learning process into a meaningless “treasure hunt”activity (e.g. Dunleavy, Dede, & Mitchell, 2009; Squire & Jan, 2007; Squire & Klopfer, 2007).The observed differentiation between students’ performance could be attributed, in our case, tostudents’ immersion, as this was reflected in the immersion indicators emerging for each of the pairs.According to the immersion indicator of the outperforming pair, students were positively engaged in theimmersive levels that Scoresby and Shelton (2011) suggested: content, motivation, emotion and engagement. Incontrast, the students in the second pair did not find the activity content interesting and remained at the lowestlevel of immersion. These findings provide empirical support for Cheng and Tsai’s (2013) assumption thatimmersion is expected to relate to students’ behaviors in AR learning, while also extending previous researchefforts, from the field of game-based virtual worlds, supporting that immersion may influence students’performance, such as problem-based behaviors (Cheng et al., 2015; Hsu & Cheng, 2014). However, consideringthat findings from this case study are based on only two pairs of students, our future work will analyze the dataderived from the remaining student pairs who also engaged with the location-based AR activity. Future workwill also look at low and high immersion students, as characterized using the immersion indicators described inthis study, to examine the role of scaffolding in fostering students’ higher levels of immersion. The presentCSCL 2017 Proceedings429© ISLSstudy contributes to the literature by providing empirical evidence about the relation between immersion andlearning in location-based augmented reality settings, which is an area that has received little attention in theliterature. A better understanding of how learning occurs in informal learning contexts, such as outdoors,location-based augmented reality settings, can support the creation of hybrid spaces for learning in and out ofschool contexts, and the development of augmented reality learning environments.ReferencesAttride-Stirling, J. (2001). Thematic networks: An analytic tool for qualitative research. Qualitative Research,1(3), 385-405.Cabiria, J. (2012). Augmenting engagement: Augmented reality in education. In C. Wankel, & P. Blessinger(Eds.), Increasing student engagement and retention using immersive interfaces: Virtual worlds, gaming,and simulation (pp. 225-251). New York: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.Cheng, K.-H., & Tsai, C.-C. (2013). Affordances of augmented reality in science learning: Suggestions forfuture research. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 22(4), 449-462.Cheng, M.-T., She, H.-C., & Annetta, L. A. (2015). Game immersion experience: Its hierarchical structure andimpact on game-based science learning. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 31(3), 232-253.Dede, C. (2009). Immersive interfaces for engagement and learning. Science 2, 323(5910), 66-69.Dunleavy, M., Dede, C., & Mitchell, R. (2009). Affordances and limitations of immersive participatoryaugmented reality simulations for teaching and learning. Journal of Science Education and Technology,18(1), 7-22.Georgiou, Y., & Kyza, E. A. (2013). The TraceReaders. [Augmented reality application]. Limassol: CyprusUniversity of Technology.Hsu, M.-E., & Cheng, M.-T. (2014). Bio detective: Student science learning, immersion experience, andproblem-solving patterns. 22 nd International Conference on Computers in Education, 171-178.Hickey, D. T., Ingram-Goble, A. A., & Jameson, E. M. (2009). Designing assessments and assessing designs invirtual educational environments. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 18(2), 187-208.Jennett, C., Cox, A. L., Cairns, P., Dhoparee, S., Epps, A., Tijs, T., & Walton, A. (2008). Measuring anddefining the experience of immersion in games. International Journal of Human Computer Studies, 66(9),641-661.Ketelhut, D. J., B. C. Nelson, J. Clarke, and C. Dede. (2010). A multi-user virtual environment for building andassessing higher order inquiry skills in science. British Journal of Educational Technology 41 (1): 56-68.Klopfer, E. (2008). Augmented learning: Research and design of mobile educational games. Cambridge, MA:MIT Press.Macphail, A. (2001). Nominal group technique: A useful method for working with young people. BritishEducational Research Journal, 27(2), 161-170.Nilsson, E. M., & Svingby, G. (2009). Gaming as actions: Students playing a mobile educational computergame. Human IT, 10(1), 26-59.O'Shea, P., Mitchell, R., Johnston, C., & Dede, C. (2009). Lessons learned about designing augmented realities.International Journal of Gaming and Computer-Mediated Simulations, 1(1), 1-15.Scoresby, J., & Shelton, B. E. (2011). Visual perspectives within educational computer games: Effects onpresence and flow within virtual immersive learning environments. Instructional Science, 39(3), 227-254.Squire, K., & Klopfer, E. (2007). Augmented reality simulations on handheld computers. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 16(3), 371-413.Squire, K. D., & Jan, M. (2007). Mad city mystery: Developing scientific argumentation skills with a placebased augmented reality game on handheld computers. Journal of Science Education and Technology,16(1), 5-29.AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank all the students who participated in this implementation. We would also like toacknowledge the support of Dr. Andreas Ch. Hadjichambis, Dr. Demetra Hadjichambi, and of the personnel ofthe Cyprus Center for Environmental Research and Education (CY.C.E.R.E.) during the implementation of the“Mystery at the lake” investigation at the facilities of the center. Special thanks are also due to Andria Agesilaoufor her assistance in parts of the data coding process.CSCL 2017 Proceedings430© ISLS