Impacts on Student Understanding of Scientific Practicesand Crosscutting Themes through an NGSS–DesignedComputer-Supported Curriculum and Instruction ProjectSusan A. Yoon, University of Pennsylvania, yoonsa@gse.upenn.eduJessica Koehler-Yom, University of Pennsylvania, jkoehl@gse.upenn.eduEmma Anderson, University of Pennsylvania, emmaa@gse.upenn.eduMurat Oztok, Lancaster University, oztokm@gmail.comEric Klopfer, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, klopfer@mit.eduIlana Schoenfeld, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ilanasch@mit.eduDaniel Wendel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, djwendel@mit.eduJosh Sheldon, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, jsheldon@mit.eduHal Scheintaub, Governor's Academy, hscheintaub@govsacademy.orgAbstract: This paper presents a curriculum intervention intentionally designed to align withNext Generation Science Standards in the high-school biology classroom. The projectemphasizes learning about complex systems through an agent-based modeling tool calledStarLogo Nova. Five curricular units have been developed on the topics of enzymes, ecology,protein synthesis, gene regulation, and sugar transport. In this exploratory study we wereinterested in understanding the extent to which students demonstrated understanding and skillsin NGSS areas as they were designed. Evidence is gleaned from classroom observations andinterviews with 50 students selected from the larger population of 352 students who workedwith project resources during the 2013-2014 school year. Findings revealed that studentsdemonstrated understanding and skills in all NGSS scientific practices and crosscuttingthemes particularly in the areas of developing and using models, analyzing and interpretingdata, cause and effect, and systems and system models.Keywords: education, learning outcomes, science education, simulationsIntroductionThe release of the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) in the US has required a shift in understandingand doing science in the classroom. There is a greater focus than ever before on problem-solving, applyingknowledge, argumentation, systems thinking, and constructing models, to name a few differences from previousscience education standards. This new vision of science education is instantiated in scientific practices andcrosscutting themes that permeate domain-specific content and requires new pedagogical approaches, curricula,and resources. As we begin to translate the NGSS into classroom practice, we need to articulate and exploreactivities that adequately address the standards with fidelity to their original intent (Bybee, 2013; NRC, 2014a;NRC, 2014b). In this paper, we highlight a curriculum and instruction project that was constructed to tightlyalign with the NGSS. Through the central learning goal of developing complex systems understanding in highschool biology, the project team has developed five units in the content areas of enzymes, ecology, proteinsynthesis, gene regulation, and sugar transport. The project is anchored in activities delivered through computersimulations constructed in StarLogo Nova–an agent-based modeling program with a 3D game-like interface.The curriculum includes student packets and teacher guides that support teaching and learning about biologicalsystems through, among other things, modeling, argumentation, mathematical and computational thinking, andcollaboration.We have worked extensively with teachers in professional development (PD) activities and havepiloted project resources in classrooms over the last two years. Thus, we are aware that myriad variables canimpact the success of a new intervention. For example, Wilson (2013) states that helping teachers acquire thisnew set of pedagogical tools to teach using the NGSS is a challenging task. Through research on fidelity ofimplementation of science education interventions, we also know that criteria such as adherence to theintervention’s design, and quality of delivery can significantly impact student-learning outcomes (Lee et al.,2009). We have written about our experiences with teachers (Yoon et al., accepted) and implementationvariables (Yoon et al., 2013) elsewhere. Here our major goal was to conduct an exploratory study to determinethe extent to which students in our project demonstrated knowledge of and skills in the NGSS scientificpractices and crosscutting themes. A secondary goal was to identify those practices and themes that were mostfrequently shown by students thereby locating particular strengths of the project activities and resources. BelowCSCL 2015 Proceedings142© ISLSwe describe the curriculum and instruction framework that underpins all project activities and provide a sampleof the curriculum that highlights its alignment with NGSS standards.Research on the next generation science standardsDeveloping curricular materials and pedagogical tools for NGSS is an important next step in implementing thesereforms. Currently, two of the primary challenges facing implementation of NGSS are developing curriculummaterials and instructional strategies that successfully instantiate them (Bybee, 2013). Despite significantstandards reform, "much science and mathematics teaching still emphasizes rote skills and memorization"(NRC, 2014b, p. 136). While there are curricular developments intended to support NGSS learning, they aredeveloped at the state level and different standards are favored or deemphasized depending on local preferences(NRC, 2014a). None adequately address the entire range of new skills outlined in the NGSS (Penuel et al.,2014), though most promising among these are project-based curricula, such as the Project Based InquiryScience (PBIS) units funded by NSF, that combine scientific knowledge with constructing arguments and usingmodels (Harris et al., 2014; Penuel et al., 2014). Our project activities were designed around a curriculum andinstruction (C&I) Framework based on the NGSS that includes the same promising characteristics of PBIS.Curriculum and instruction framework (C&I)The C&I framework is divided into four categories that are aligned with NGSS in addition to the literature onneeds and best practices for STEM teaching and learning (Figure 1). The first category is Curricular Relevance,which focuses on developing 21st century competencies (NRC, 2012), ensuring standards alignment (Desimone,2009), and collaboration with teachers to promote teacher ownership (Ertmer et al., 2012, Mueller, 2008;Thompson et al., 2013). The second category, Cognitively-Rich Pedagogies, involves pedagogies that addresssituated needs in individual classrooms (Penuel et al., 2011), social construction of knowledge throughcollaboration and argumentation (Osborne, 2010), and constructionist learning by constructing models (Kafai,2006). The third category, Tools for Teaching and Learning, builds knowledge through computational modelingtools (Epstein, 2008), teacher guides and student packets that provide scaffolds for learning with technology(Quintana et al., 2004), and off-computer participatory simulations to support students’ understanding ofmodeling and complex systems (Colella et al., 2000). The fourth category, Content Expertise, builds deepercontent understanding in complex systems (Author, 2008), biology (Lewis & Wood-Robinson, 2000), andcomputational thinking (NRC, 2010).Figure 1. Teaching and learning about complex systems C&I frameworkTo better understand how the C&I framework informed the construction of the curricular units, we brieflydescribe an activity in the enzyme unit Chew on This! In this activity students are asked to explore the breakCSCL 2015 Proceedings143© ISLSdown of starch into sugar that begins in your mouth and is completed in the small intestine. The simulationenables students to compare and contrast the conversion of starch to sugar both with and without enzymes. Theaim is to help students understand the role of enzymes in digestion. Students conduct various experiments andare asked to plot the results and share their data with others in the class. Students can take as much or as littletime as they would like to observe the behavior of starch. Along the way students are asked to pick amongseveral claims and in groups come to consensus on the evidence and reasoning used to support the claim to helpthem understand various aspects of the science. Figure 2 shows an excerpt from the student activity packet. Herestudents are asked to observe and consider the random movement of enzymes in the system. Figure 3 shows asnapshot of the simulation with a sample student’s graph constructed with data collected while interacting withthe simulation, which is a representative task students complete in these units.Figure 2 Excerpt from student packet showing directions to use an argumentation processFigure 3. Simulation of Chew on this! and student graph of system variable change over timeMethodsContext and participantsTo address our research goals, we conducted observations and interviews with students in 2 participatingschools comprised of 5 classrooms in the greater Boston area, during the 2013-2014 school year. In school A, interms of selected demographic and academic variables, 59% of students were on free or reduced priced lunch,68% identified as non-white, and 61% scored at or above proficient on the state standardized science exam. Inschool B, 34% of students were on free or reduced price lunch, 38% identified as non-white, and 70% scored ator above proficient on the state standardized science exam. In the subsample of the larger study population, 56students in groups of two were randomly selected to be video taped interacting with the simulation and activityCSCL 2015 Proceedings144© ISLSpacket for the unit Chew on This!. We also conducted 3 focus group interviews with 13 randomly selectedstudents to understand in more detail the learning benefits accrued through interaction with project activities.Data sources and analysisA total of 14 hours of video footage was captured of students participating in this unit. Video cameras werespecifically focused on groups of students while they engaged with the simulation. The second data source camefrom student focus group interviews, which were conducted at the end of each classroom observation with 3 or 5students.Table 1: NGSS coding framework and examplesNGSSPrimaryCategoriesSubdomain DescriptionsExamples Within BioGraph ContextScience andEngineeringPracticesDeveloping and using models: using,synthesizing, and developing models to predictand show relationships among variables betweensystems and their components in the natural anddesigned worldsYeah, I didn’t know if they sought out all thetime or if they were just moving randomly mostof the time. So I tried I think it was like 20starches and then I added like 10 enzymes. Ithought because it was 10 and 20 that it wouldcome out like that, but it didn’t. It came out tototally different numbers and that just made meunderstand how no matter the number, you canalways have different outcomes. (ID 5, FocusGroup, 11/21/2013)I think since we had the control over how manystarches and how many enzymes we wanted toadd helped a lot because I think by five intervalsand everything like that, but you could change itmanually to whatever number you wanted. So Ithink having the control over it helped a lotbecause then if we were unclear on somethingwe could… Like if a greater number of starchesversus a smaller number of enzymes and viceversa, we could see how it interacted and how itchanged. (ID 5, Focus Group, 11/21/2013)And then even though this was with starchspecifically, it also taught me how enzymes arereally important in the human body andeverything like that because without them youwouldn’t be able to break down food. And ifyou couldn’t break down food you would have aserious problem and you’d get sick and youwould gain weight. So it helped me understandhow enzymes really have a big impact on thedigestive system and everything like that.(ID 5, Focus Group, 11/21/2013)Couldn’t it partially be complex systems becauseit shows how the enzymes decide what, ifthey’re going in any sort of pattern to find thestarch. Whether they’re following them or justbumping into them randomly. They’re justtraveling around. Kind of being like a randomcomplex system. (ID 3, Focus Group,10/17/2013)Planning and carrying out investigations:investigations that provide evidence for and testconceptual, mathematical, physical, and empiricalmodels.CrosscuttingConceptsCause and effect: empirical evidence is requiredto differentiate between cause and correlation andto make claims about specific causes and effects.They suggest cause and effect relationships toexplain and predict behaviors in complex naturaland designed systems. They also propose causalrelationships by examining what is known aboutsmaller scale mechanisms within the system.They recognize changes in systems may havevarious causes that may not have equal effects.Systems and system models: investigate oranalyze a system by defining its boundaries andinitial conditions, as well as its inputs and outputs.They can use models (e.g., physical,mathematical, computer models) to simulate theflow of energy, matter, and interactions withinand between systems at different scales. They canalso use models and simulations to predict thebehavior of a system, and recognize that thesepredictions have limited precision and reliabilitydue to the assumptions and approximationsinherent in the models. They can also designsystems to do specific tasks.CSCL 2015 Proceedings145© ISLSThe interview protocol was comprised of 5 semi-structured questions that explored students’perceptions of the pedagogy, what they learned in terms of biology and complex systems, and what they thoughtabout the use of computational tools to support their learning. The interviews lasted for 25 minutes on average.Both data sources were coded according to a framework directly adapted from the NGSS to assessstudent learning. A categorization manual was constructed using descriptions of the 8 scientific practices and the7 cross cutting themes (NRC Framework, 2012, p. 30). The videos were coded using the method of InteractionalAnalysis (IA) which involves collaborative analysis of video and/or audio clips by a group of researchers toexamine the details of social interaction (Jordan & Henderson, 1995). The basic goal of IA methodology is touse video and/or audio data to understand what people are doing during their social and discourse interactionsand if, how, and what people are learning. The collaborative investigation avoids the preconceived notions of asingle researcher. The IA constituted of over 30 hours of collective coding between three project researchers.Transcripts of focus group interviews were coded for the frequency of utterances indicating learning of eachspecified NGSS category. The first 20% of data was coded independently by four project researches untilinternal reliability was satisfactory (α = 0.78). An individual researcher then coded the remainder of the focusgroup interviews. A full version of the categorization manual cannot be accommodated in this paper formathowever Table 1 shows a selection of several scientific practices and crosscutting themes with codes andexamples from the student data.ResultsResults from the video data and focus group analysis indicate that students demonstrated understanding andskills in nearly every NGSS category. As expected, some topics were more prominent than others. We discusssalient findings below.Video data observationsFigure 4 shows the distribution of video observation data. Out of 390 coded utterances, 76 referred to analyzingand interpreting data. The second most frequent Science and Engineering Practice observed in the video datawas developing and using models with 70 utterances. From the Cross Cutting Concepts, cause and effect had thegreatest number of utterances with 43.Science and Engineering practicesStability and ChangeStructure and FucntionEngergy and MatterSystems and System ModelsScale, Proportion, andQuantityCause and EffectPatternsObtaining, Evaulating, andCommunicating InformationEngaging in Argument fromEvidenceConstructing Explanationsand Designing SolutionsUsing Mathematics andComputational ThinkingAnalyzing and InterpretingDataDeveloping and UsingModelsAsking Questions andDefining ProblemsPlanning and Carrying outInvestigationsChew on This! Video Data Frequency Distribution80706050403020100Cross Cutting ConceptsFigure 4. Video observations of Chew on This! frequency distribution of NGSS codesAs evidence of student learning, the following example includes the discourse between a group ofstudents answering a multiple-choice question in the student packet after running several experiments andcollecting data on how much sugar formed over time. The question states: “Based on the experiments just runwithout enzymes, the graph of the amount of sugar produced vs. starting amount of starch looks most like?”CSCL 2015 Proceedings146© ISLSFigure 5 below provides an illustration of the four answer choices followed by the corresponding studentdiscourse.In this example, there is evidence that students were learning a number of NGSS skills. Here thestudents were analyzing and interpreting their data (numbers of sugar and starch molecules over time) obtainedfrom using the model to determine which graph best represented the rate of change from starch to sugar. Sincetheir data was numerical and the question involved understanding graphical representations, this is also evidencethey were using mathematics and computational thinking. Initially S1 described her data (line 1) and otherscorroborated the results (lines 2-3). They then began analyzing the data to link their numbers to the appropriategraph (line 4). The answer was not immediately apparent and they continued this discussion and analysis oftheir numbers (lines 5-8). The entire discussion is also evidence that the students were communicating theirfindings and engaging in argument using their data to support their answer choice.Figure 5. Graphs from student packetsExcerpt from ID 2, Video Data, 11/21/2013, 20:10-20:501. S1: Mine there was a point where it was increasing and then decreasing and thenincreasing again.2. S2: Yeah, me too.3. S3: Me too.4. S4: So that’s not C, that’s D.5. S2: Yeah between 25 and 40 mine went up down up down6. S1: So it’s B. Mine was weird because it was like 0, 5, 7, 2, 13, 147. S2: So I think it would be B because it goes up and then…8. S4: Yeah there’s like a point where it kind of slows down.Focus group interviewsFigure 6 shows the distribution of focus group interview data. Of the 122 coded utterances, in reference toScience and Engineering Practices, 66 were coded as developing and using models. For Cross Cutting Concepts,the greatest frequency of utterances, 56, were coded as having to do with systems and system models. Forexample, in response to the question What is the main biology idea represented in the unit?, one studentresponded:We learned how over time starch turns into sugar because we had to click that 5 starch, 10starch, 15 starch thing and then like each had 30 seconds. And then as many starch comes, andjust for the same amount of time, it’s different. Different answers come out.” (ID 1, FocusGroup, 11/22/2013)In this excerpt, the student recognizes the relationship that sugar and starch develop over time throughscaffolded interactions with the model. In understanding cause and effect another student remarked:We were discussing [the argumentation question] once and I ran [the simulation] like fivedifferent times just to see the different answers. (ID 3, Focus Group,10/17/2013).CSCL 2015 Proceedings147© ISLSHere, he and his partner debated how to answer the argumentation question, which required students toprovide evidence for their reasoning. In order to be able to provide evidence, the student went back to thesimulation and ran it multiple times to find the empirical evidence that they needed to understand therelationships being shown in the simulation. The students interpreted evidence to respond to the question promptin order to understand cause and effect.Chew on This! Focus Group Frequency DistributionScience and Engineering practicesStability and ChangeStructure and FucntionEngergy and MatterScale, Proportion, andQuantitySystems and SystemModelsCause and EffectAsking Questions andDefining ProblemsDeveloping and UsingModelsPlanning and Carrying outInvestigationsAnalyzing andInterpreting DataUsing Mathematics andComputational ThinkingConstructing Explanationsand Designing SolutionsEngaging in Argumentfrom EvidenceObtaining, Evaulating,and CommunicatingInformationPatterns80706050403020100Cross Cutting ConceptsFigure 6. Focus group interview frequency of utterances of NGSS codesDiscussionThe recently developed Next Generation Science Standards have expanded the goals of K12 science educationto emphasize problem-solving, applying knowledge, argumentation, using computers, systems thinking,constructing models, and making connections across scientific domains. Implementing these standards requiresnew and appropriate curricula and pedagogical tools–two components critical to success but remain a challengefor researchers and educators. In order to address the need for curricular materials and pedagogical approachesthat instantiate the recent NGSS, our project has developed a five-unit biology curriculum using simulations,argumentation, computational thinking, and systems understanding in conjunction with traditional Biologycontent. In this study, we present findings from one unit of our project on enzymes, to investigate whetherstudents interacting with project materials demonstrate the science and engineering practices, and crosscuttingconcepts outlined in the NGSS. Based on the results, we have concluded that students can demonstrateknowledge and skills in all but one of the science and engineering practices and cross cutting concepts as isevident in classroom observations of students engaging with the simulation and in their self-reported learningduring focus group interviews. To answer the second research goal of identifying those practices and conceptsthat were most frequently shown by students thereby locating particular strengths of the project activities andresources our findings show that using models, analyzing and interpreting data, understanding cause and effect,and systems understanding were the most prominent. Overall, we have shown evidence of students learning thescience and engineering practice and the cross cutting concepts. Students are grappling with data, and using andmanipulating models to understand systems.In the future, an experimental study would validate these findings, since a limitation of the currentstudy is the lack of a control group. As such, we do not know how much of the NGSS is incorporated intostudent learning outside of our project intervention, so this warrants further exploration. Our findings do provideinsight into curriculum development for the NGSS, in that we have shown how science and engineeringpractices, and crosscutting concepts can be incorporated into curriculum content.ReferencesBybee, R. W. (2013). Translating the NGSS for classroom instruction. Arlington, VA: NSTA Press.CSCL 2015 Proceedings148© ISLSColella, V. (2000). Participatory simulations: Building collaborative understanding through immersive dynamicmodeling. The journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 471-500.Desimone, L. (2009). Improving impact studies of teachers’ professional development: Toward betterconceptualizations and measures. Educational Researcher, 38(3), 181-199.Epstein, J. (2008). 'Why Model?'. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 11(4)12<http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/11/4/12.html>Ertmer, P.A., Ottenbreit-Leftwich, A.T., Sendurur, E., & Sendurur, P. (2012). Teacher beliefs and technologyintegration practices: A critical relationship. Computers & Education, 59, 423-435.Harris, C. J., Penuel, W. R., DeBarger, A., D’Angelo, C., & Gallagher, L. P. (2014). Curriculum Materials Makea Difference for Next Generation Science Learning: Results from Year 1 of a Randomized ControlTrial. Menlo Park, CA: SRI International.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39 – 103.Kafai, Y. B. (2006). Playing and making games for learning instructionist and constructionist perspectives forgame studies. Games and culture, 1(1), 36-40.Lee, O., Penfield, R., Maerten–Rivera, J. (2009). Effects of fidelity of implementation on science achievementgains among English Language Learners. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(7), 836-859.Lewis, J., & Wood-Robinson, C. (2000). Genes, chromosomes, cell division and inheritance-do students see anyrelationship?. International Journal of Science Education, 22(2), 177-195.Mueller, J., Wood, E., Willoughby, T., Ross, C., & Specht, J. (2008). Identifying discriminating variablesbetween teachers who fully integrate computers and teachers with limited integration. Computers &Education, 51, 1523-1537.National Research Council. (2010). Report of a Workshop on the Scope and Nature of Computational Thinking.Committee for the Workshops on Computational Thinking; Computer Science andTelecommunications Board; Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences. Washington, DC:National Academies Press.National Research Council. (2012). Education for Life and Work: Developing TransferableKnowledge and Skills in the 21st Century. Committee on Defining Deeper Learning and 21st CenturySkills, James W. Pellegrino and Margaret L. Hilton, Editors. Washington, DC: The NationalAcademies Press.National Research Council. (2014a). Developing Assessments for Next Generation Science Standards.Committee on Developing Assessments of Science Proficiency in K-12; Board on Testing andAssessment; Board on Science Education; Division on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education;James W. Pellegrino, Mark R. Wilson, Judith A. Koenig, and Alexandra S. Beatty, Editors.Washington, DC: National Academies Press.National Research Council. (2014b). STEM Integration in K-12 Education: Status, Prospects, and an Agenda forResearch. Committee on Integrated STEM Education; National Academy of Engineering. MargaretHoney, Greg Pearson, and Heidi Schweingruber, Editors. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Osborne, J. (2010). Arguing to learn in science: The role of collaborative, critical discourse. Science, 328(5977),463-466.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J. Haugan Cheng, B., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development atthe intersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331-337.Quintana, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R. G., ... & Soloway, E. (2004). Ascaffolding design framework for software to support science inquiry. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 13(3), 337-386.Thompson, J, Windschitl, M., & Braaten, M. (2013). Developing a theory of ambitious early-career teacherpractice. American Educational Research Journal, 50(3), 574-615.Wilson, S. M. (2013). Professional development for science teachers. Science, 340, 310-313.Yoon, S., Koehler-Yom, J., Anderson, E., Lin, J., & Klopfer, E. (accepted). Using an adaptive expertiselens to understand the quality of teachers’ classroom implementation of computer-supportedcomplex systems curricula in high school science. Research in Science and TechnologyEducation.Yoon, S., Klopfer, E., Wang, J., Sheldon, J., Wendel, D., Schoenfeld, I., Scheintaub, H., & Reider, D. (2013).Designing to improve biology understanding through complex systems in high school classrooms: Nosimple matter! In the proceedings of the Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, Madison,Wisconsin.CSCL 2015 Proceedings149© ISLS