Exploring Middle School Students’ Science Learning andDiscourse in Physical and Virtual LabsDana Gnesdilow, Nafsaniath Fathema, Feng Lin, Seokmin Kang, Catherine Dornfeld, and SadhanaPuntambekargnesdilow@wisc.edu, fathema@wisc.edu, feng.lin@wisc.edu, skang79@wisc.edu, cldornfeld@wisc.edu,puntambekar@education.wisc.eduUniversity of Wisconsin—MadisonAbstract: This study compared middle school students’ science learning and discourse patternsin physical and virtual labs. Students in virtual labs had significantly higher learning gains thanstudents in the physical labs on a pre and post-test content knowledge test. To understand thedifference in learning gains, we analyzed the discourse of the students and teacher as theyworked in groups during the labs. We found three main categories of discourse: conceptual talk,task-based talk, and teacher scaffolding. Our analysis of discourse showed that students in thevirtual group engaged in more conceptual talk than the physical group, while the physical grouphad more task-based talk. We also found the teacher provided more conceptual scaffoldingduring virtual labs than physical labs.IntroductionDespite the increased interest in researching the differential benefits and limitations of physical and virtual labs,there have been conflicting results about which mode of experimentation better supports students’ sciencelearning. Some studies have found that virtual labs better supported students’ learning (e.g., Pyatt & Sims, 2012;Zacharia, Olympiou, & Papaevripidou, 2008), while others have found that physical labs helped students to learnmore (e.g., Marshall & Young, 2006; Smith & Puntambekar, 2010). Other studies have indicated that there wereno significant differences in students’ learning from physical versus virtual labs (e.g., Pyatt & Sims, 2012;Zacharia & Olympiou, 2011). In this study, we explored how physical and virtual labs might influence students’science learning and students’ and teacher’s discourse in middle school science classes.There is evidence that physical and virtual labs support students’ learning in different ways. For example,virtual labs can combine multiple representations, possibly facilitating a deeper understanding of underlyingconcepts and providing visualizations of processes that cannot be seen during a physical experiment (Ainsworth,2006). Virtual labs may support learning by offloading error-prone calculations and eliminating measurementerror, leading to “cleaner” data, allowing students to explore conditions, such as zero friction or gravity (Zacharia& Anderson, 2003) and to run multiple trials under different conditions and explore variety of ideas in a shorterperiod of time. Alternatively, even though setting up and conducting physical labs can be time consuming, manyresearchers assert that manipulating real materials and receiving haptic feedback is essential for learning.According to theories of embodied cognition, conceptual processing is influenced by our movements, bodilystates, and use of physical manipulatives cognition (e.g., Glenberg, Brown, & Levin, 2007). Yet, there are manyunanswered questions about the learning benefits of physical and virtual experimentation in fostering deeplearning of science concepts. To date, most studies have compared students’ science conceptual learning via preand post-tests, and only a few studies have examined classroom discourse to understand how students and teachersinteracted when engaging in physical or virtual experiments (e.g, Zacharia & de Jong, 2014; Marshall & Young,2006). We propose that a full examination of discourse patterns generated by students and teachers during physicaland virtual labs will help us better understand the unique affordance of each type of lab. Our research questionsfor the study were: 1) Does participation in physical versus virtual experimentation result in different learninggains for middle school science students? and 2) Does engagement in physical versus virtual experimentationpromote different kinds of discourse? If so, what are the differences?MethodsParticipants and instructional contextForty-one 6th graders from two science classes, taught by the same teacher, at a Mid-Western middle school in2015 participated in this study. Students in both classes were engaged in a design-based science curriculum tolearn about inclined planes and pulleys (Puntambekar, Stylianou, & Goldstein, 2007). Each class was randomlyassigned into one of two conditions: 1) Physical Labs (PL) (N = 19), 2) Virtual Labs (VL) (N = 22).ICLS 2016 Proceedings950© ISLSSequence of the learningIn both the PL and VL conditions, students: 1) took the pre-test, 2) engaged in research and experiments aboutpulley, 3) engaged in research and experiments about the inclined plane, and then 4) took a post-test. The pulleyand inclined plane units were taught back-to-back. Both units focused on how simple machines can help reducethe force needed to lift an object by increasing mechanical advantage. Students also learned about other concepts,such as potential energy and friction. In PLs students learned about simple machines by setting up and using realpulleys and inclined planes. Students also needed to do calculations to determine values of their dependentvariables such as potential energy, ideal mechanical advantage, and actual mechanical advantage. In the VLsstudents did the same experiments virtually. VL students also explored additional pulley configurations, such asmovable and quadruple compound pulleys and carried out idealized experiments with no friction.Data sources and analysisPre and post test measuresThe pre test and post test were identical. The test was composed of 21 multiple choice questions and assessedstudents’ knowledge of physics concepts related to pulleys and inclined planes. Student earned one point for eachcorrect answer. The maximum score was 21 points.Analysis of group discourseTo answer if there were differences between the students’ talk while performing physical versus virtual labs, weanalyzed the discourse of a subset of five student groups: three from PL conditions and two from VL conditions.There were three to four students in each group. This subset was chosen because we had audio recordings for twopulley and one inclined plane experiment/s for all groups. We segmented the transcripts by turns of talk as theunit of analysis which was multiply coded. There were 2,819 total turns of talk when combining all transcripts.To see if engagement in the PL versus VL condition promoted different discourse patterns, we developed a codingscheme. We inductively identified four macro categories of discourse that the students and the teacher wereengaged in during the labs (see Table 1). Our code development was influenced also by Zacharia and de Jong’s(2014) work, who found that students doing physical labs often engaged in more procedural versus conceptualtalk. Two coders independently coded 25% of the transcripts. An inter-rater reliability of approximately 96% wasestablished after resolving disagreements through discussion. The remainder of the transcripts were codedseparately by the same coders.Table 1: Discourse codes and examplesMacro CategoryConceptualTask-BasedNot ApplicableTeacherScaffolding TalkMicro Code and DefinitionScience Questions: questions about science relationships or connections to the real worldScience Explanation: explaining science concepts and relationships or evaluating / making senseof dataScience Predictions / Patterns: predicting how changing variables affects others / seeing patternsin dataReporting and Calculating: talk about calculating or writing data into chartsSetting up experiments: talk about manipulating tools, running trials, and the progress of the labFact Based Questions: questions about how to proceed with labNot Applicable: Off task or inaudibleConceptual Scaffolding: encouraging students to think about the science concepts andrelationshipsTask-Based Scaffolding: helping student to complete tasks, not the scienceFindingsComparison of students’ learning gains in physical and virtual conditionsTo answer our first research question, we conducted a Mann-Whitney U test to see if there were differences in thelearning gains of students in the PL and VL conditions. To calculate learning gains, we divided the actual gaineach student made by the total possible gain he or she could have made from pre to post-test. We found that therewas a statistically significant difference in the learning gains made by the students in the PL versus VL conditions;Students in the VL condition made significantly greater learning gains than in the PL condition, z = -2.395, p <0.05, VL mean rank = 25.82 (55% average learning gain), PL mean rank = 16.84 (36% average learning gain).ICLS 2016 Proceedings951© ISLSExamination of the differences in discourse between physical and virtual conditionsTo better understand what may have influenced VL students' significantly higher learning gains, we comparedthe discourse that occurred in groups by condition. Out of the total 2,819 total turns of talk in all transcripts, weremoved 1,164 turns of talk that had been coded as ‘not applicable’. Of the remaining 1,655 turns of talk, 901were students’ and 57 were the teacher’s. We then calculated the proportion of students’ talk in each macro andmicro coding category. To do so, we divided the frequency of each type of talk students were engaged in by thetotal number of students’ turns of talk by condition. For the analysis of teacher’s scaffolding, we divided thefrequency of the teacher’s turns of talk in each category by the total number of teacher’s turn of talk during eachcondition. Due to the number of statistical comparisons conducted, we used a Bonferroni correction for multiplecomparisons to minimize Type I error. This means that all significant results (*) were based on a p < .0005significance level.Results from the chi-squared test on our macro codes showed that students in the VL condition had asignificantly higher proportion of conceptual talk (0.12) than the students in PL conditions (0.04) (z = 5.0847*).In terms of task-based talk, we found that students in the PL conditions had a significantly higher proportion oftask-based talk (0.96) than those in the VL condition (0.88) (z = -5.0659*). These results indicated that eventhough students in both conditions were engaged in more task-based talk, the students in the VL condition wereengaged in significantly more conceptual talk than the students in the PL condition.For our chi-squared analysis of the conceptual talk micro codes, we found that students in VL conditionhad a significantly higher proportion of science explanation talk (0.06) and science predictions and patterns talk(0.05) than the students in PL condition (0.03 (z = 2.8226*) and 0.01 (z = 3.9527*), respectively). No statisticallysignificant difference was found between the proportions of science questions asked. For the task-based microcodes, we found statistically significant differences between the proportions of talk by condition. Students in thePL condition had a significantly higher proportion of talk related to reporting and calculating (0.41) than studentsin the VL condition (0.20) (z = -9.1231*). On the other hand, we found that students in the VL condition had asignificantly higher proportion of talk related to setting-up experiments (0.41) as compared to those in the PLcondition (0.34) (z = 2.9384*). No significant difference in the proportion of fact-based questions asked wasfound between conditions. These results indicated that students in the VL condition had a significantly higherproportion of talk discussing science ideas, making predictions and looking at patterns in data, and discussingsetting up experiments than the PL students. Alternatively, the students in the PL condition spent a greaterproportion of their talk on reporting and calculating.Finally, we ran a chi-squared test of homogeneity of proportions to analyze the teachers’ scaffolding talkand found the teacher was engaged in a greater proportion of conceptual scaffolding when working with the VLstudents (0.33) than PL students (0.04) (z = 4.6458*). In terms of task-based scaffolding, the teacher was engagedin a greater proportion of task-based scaffolding talk with the PL students (0.96) than with VL students (0.67) (z= -4.6458*).Conclusions and implicationsThe goals of our study were: 1) to examine and compare the effects of virtual and physical labs on students’learning gains and 2) to examine students’ and teacher’s discourse to shed light on how the context of learning inthe different conditions may have influenced science learning. In term of our first question, we found that studentsin the VL condition had significantly higher learning gains than the students in the PL condition. This finding isin line with prior studies showing that students who participated in virtual labs did better than those whoparticipated in physical ones (such as, Pyatt & Sims, 2012; Zacharia, et.al., 2008). For our second researchquestion, we identified two major categories of talk: conceptual and task-based talk. Our discourse analysisshowed that VL students had a greater proportion of conceptual talk than those in PLs. Students in the PL conditionhad a significantly higher proportion of task-based talk. These findings align with Zacharia and de Jong’s (2014)analysis that found that students in physical conditions talked more about procedural aspects of labs, rather thanbuilding conceptual understanding. It is possible that the process-oriented problems in physical labs restrictedstudents from developing better conceptual understanding. These findings helped us understand how discoursefactors may have caused different learning gains of students in the two conditions.To further tease out the differences between the types of talk students in each condition were engagedin, we created micro-coding categories. For conceptual talk, students in the VLs had a significantly higherproportion of science explanations and talk about science predictions and patterns, than PL students. In terms oftask-based talk, we found that students in the VL group had a significantly higher proportion of discourse relatedto setting up experiments, while students in PLs had a significantly higher proportion of talk about reporting andcalculating. Even though VL students were engaged in more talk about setting up experiments, the simulationprovided outputs for dependent variables and students did not need to take so much time for doing calculations.ICLS 2016 Proceedings952© ISLSThus, they had more time to engage in science talk such as making sense of data, identifying patterns, explaining,and making predictions.In terms of the teacher's talk, we identified that the teacher’s scaffolding discourse differed between thetwo conditions. The teacher had a significantly higher proportion of conceptual scaffolding during the VLcondition. It may be the case that in the VL condition the teacher could address students’ conceptual learningneeds as he did not need to help students set up physical materials. This may also be why the students in the virtuallabs had a higher proportion of conceptual talk than the students in the physical labs. Thus, not only were thestudents in the PLs less able to explore conceptual ideas due to setting up materials and doing calculations, whencompared to VL students, they also received almost no conceptual scaffolding to help them to think about thescience concepts and relationships. So in addition to all of the benefits of using virtual labs, students in the VLcondition also had more time to process and think about the data they were collecting, and received moreconceptual scaffolding from the teacher. These findings are in contrast with Marshall and Young’s (2006) study,which reported that undergraduate students had difficulty processing information from a simulation. However,these differences might be explained by the fact that undergraduate students may have an easier time negotiatingand setting up physical materials than sixth graders.Our study contributes to the literature by identifying and elaborating on students’ learning processes anddiscourse patterns. We developed codes to characterize students’ and the teacher's discourse and systematicallyexamined classroom discourse with a mixed-methods approach, which provided a richer understanding of thelearning process. Our results indicated that teacher’s scaffolding seems to be influenced by the context of learningand the needs of the students. Our findings suggest that teachers should be reflective about their practice to ensurethat conceptual scaffolding is always provided to students, no matter the type of lab. Since our results are basedon a small sample of students from only two classes and one teacher, replication of this study in a larger settingwith more teachers would help improve the power and strengthen the validity of our claims. We suggest thatstudies in this area should move beyond only examining students’ learning on content-based tests. A more detailedaccount of how different forms of experimentation influence students’ learning and discourse is necessary toextract commonalities across different studies.ReferencesAinsworth, S. (2006). DeFT: A conceptual framework for considering learning with multiple representations.Learning and Instruction, 16(3), 183-198.Glenberg, A. M., Brown, M., & Levin, J. R. (2007). Enhancing comprehension in small reading groups using amanipulation strategy. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 32(3), 389-399.Marshall, J. A., & Young, E. S. (2006). Preservice teachers' theory development in physical and simulatedenvironments. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 43(9), 907-937.Pyatt, K., & Sims, R. (2012). Virtual and physical experimentation in inquiry-based science labs: Attitudes,performance and access. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 21(1), 133-147.Puntambekar, S., Stylianou, A., & Goldstein, J. (2007). Comparing classroom enactments of an inquirycurriculum: Lessons learned from two teachers. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(1), 81-130.Smith, G. W., & Puntambekar, S. (2010). Examining the combination of physical and virtual experiments in aninquiry science classroom. In Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Based Learning in Science,Warsaw, Poland.Zacharia, Z., & Anderson, O. R. (2003). The effects of an interactive computer-based simulation prior toperforming a laboratory inquiry-based experiment on students’ conceptual understanding of physics.American Journal of Physics, 71(6), 618-629.Zacharia, Z. C., & de Jong, T. (2014). The Effects on Students’ Conceptual Understanding of Electric Circuits ofIntroducing Virtual Manipulatives Within a Physical Manipulatives-Oriented Curriculum. Cognition andinstruction, 32(2), 101-158.Zacharia, Z. C., & Olympiou, G. (2011). Physical versus virtual manipulative experimentation in physics learning.Learning and Instruction, 21(3), 317-331.Zacharia, Z. C., Olympiou, G., & Papaevripidou, M. (2008). Effects of experimenting with physical and virtualmanipulatives on students' conceptual understanding in heat and temperature. Journal of Research inScience Teaching, 45(9), 1021-1035.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the participating students and the teacher. This research has been supported by an ECR grant from theNational Science Foundation (Grant # 1431904).ICLS 2016 Proceedings953© ISLS