The Mediating Role of Interactive Learning Activities in CSCL:An INPUT-PROCESS-OUTCOME ModelAnne Deiglmayr, Research on Learning and Instruction, ETH Zurich, anne.deiglmayr@ifv.gess.ethz.chNikol Rummel, Institute of Educational Research, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, nikol.rummel@rub.deKatharina Loibl, Institute of Mathematics Education, University of Education Freiburg,katharina.loibl@ph-freiburg.deAbstract: Computer-support for collaborative learning has been shown to be most effective ifit is designed to foster productive social interactions. In this conceptual paper, we propose anINPUT-PROCESS-OUTCOME model to guide research on the defining features, and on theconditions and effects of such productive interactions in CSCL. The model builds upon therecently proposed interactive-constructive-active-passive-framework of overt learningactivities (ICAP; Chi, 2009). We propose that the interactive mode of learning is a fruitfulconcept for specifying what constitutes productive social interaction in CSCL, given severalconceptual and methodological clarifications. The mediating role of interactive learningactivities in CSCL is highlighted by the proposed INPUT-PROCESS-OUTCOME model, andsupported by recent empirical findings. Building on a brief review of exemplary findings, wediscuss challenges and opportunities for future research in CSCL.Keywords: input-process-output model, interactive learning activities, process analysis, mediationIntroductionComputer-support for collaborative learning has been shown to be most effective if it is designed to fosterproductive social interactions, such as mutual explanation, shared regulation, or argumentation (Dillenbourg,Järvelä, & Fischer, 2009). In order to identify such productive interactions, CSCL researchers typically analyzeprocess data, for instance from automatically generated log files or from audio-video-recordings (Rummel,Deiglmayr, Spada, Karimanis, & Avouris, 2011). However, it still remains unclear what exactly constitutesproductive social interaction in CSCL. This is true even when restricting this question to the socio-cognitiveperspective of learning, as adopted by the authors of this paper. The socio-cognitive perspective viewsindividual knowledge and skill acquisition as the most relevant outcomes of CSCL, and productive interactionas a means of fostering individual learning. In this paper, we propose an INPUT-PROCESS-OUTCOME modeldesigned to guide research on three questions that are at the heart of CSCL research (cf. Dillenbourg et al.,2009): What constitutes productive social interactions in CSCL? Under what conditions do such productivesocial interactions occur? What effects do they have on learning?To address the first question, we build on the recently proposed interactive-constructive-active-passiveframework (ICAP; Chi, 2009). We propose that the interactive mode of learning is a fruitful concept forspecifying what constitutes productive social interaction in CSCL. We briefly introduce the framework and addnecessary conceptual and methodological clarifications. To address the second and third question, we introducean INPUT-PROCESS-OUTCOME model and provide some exemplary empirical evidence which demonstrates themediating role of interactive learning activities in CSCL. Note that we do not claim to be answering the secondand third question yet. The model is designed to guide research efforts targeting these questions.Productive interactions in CSCLThe ICAP frameworkAccording to the ICAP-framework educators achieve the highest learning gains in their students if they succeedin facilitating so-called interactive learning activities. In line with previous research on productive socialinteractions in CSCL, being interactive in ICAP entails the co-construction of novel ideas in dialogue in which“both partners [are] taking turns mutually creating” (Chi & Wylie, 2014, p. 228). For instance, both studentsmight give and incorporate feedback, compare and integrate alternative perspectives, or challenge one another’sideas. Such interactive learning activities are differentiated from three lower levels of overt learning activities:Constructive learning activities comprise processes of inferring new information and integrating newinformation with existing prior knowledge, through learning activities such as self-explaining, constructingconcept maps or otherwise making sense of learning materials. Active learning activities include activities suchas selecting and summarizing new information, without going beyond the information presented in the learningCSCL 2015 Proceedings518© ISLSmaterials. Passive learning activities denote attending to information, without actively engaging with thelearning materials. Higher levels of learning activities subsume all lower levels. In consequence, beinginteractive (e.g. replying to a peer`s argument with a counterargument) requires also being constructive (e.g.constructing one`s argument), active (e.g., selecting which aspect of the peer`s argument to address), andpassive (e.g. reading the peer`s argument). In terms of their effectiveness for learning, the frameworkhypothesizes the following sequence: interactive > constructive > active > passive learning activities.In summary, the specification of productive learning activities, in particular interactive ones, within theICAP-framework is in line with existing research on productive social interaction in CSCL (Dillenbourg et al.,2009). However, ICAP adds the benefits of a systematic taxonomy, and yields fruitful hypotheses for thedifferential effectiveness of different kinds of observable activities (e.g., interactive versus constructive). Recentresearch has yielded coding schemes for classifying observable learning activities (e.g. from log files, discourse,collaboratively and individually produced texts) according to the levels of the ICAP taxonomy (Deiglmayr &Schalk, 2013, submitted; Olsen, Rummel, & Aleven, 2015; Vogel, Kollar, Reichersdorfer, Ufer, Reiss, &Fischer, 2013, submitted). This line of research also proposes to further differentiate interactive learningactivities, for example according to the level of symmetry of the collaborative relationship (instructive vs. jointdialogues; Chi, 2009), according to the function of the interactive activity (argumentation vs. co-construction;Vogel et al, submitted), or according to the relevance with regard to domain principles (principle-basedinteractive turns; Deiglmayr & Schalk, submitted).Limitations of the ICAP frameworkThe ICAP framework has received initial support from empirical studies (for an overview, see Chi & Wylie,2014), and we will provide further data supporting it in this paper. Nevertheless, important conceptual andempirical questions remain yet to be answered.As we know from a rich base of studies in CSCL, a collaborative learning setting does notautomatically entail productive social interactions, that is, interactive learning activities (Dillenbourg et al.,2009). For example, a student might merely read messages, explanations, and arguments posted in a chat-basedlearning environment, thus demonstrating only passive learning activities. Other students might work towardsquick consensus building by copying solutions from a worked example and signaling agreement, thus engagingin only active learning activities. Other students might construct elaborated arguments in a form of “individualdialogue” (Chi, 2009), that is, without taking up a partner`s feedback or contributions, thus being constructive,but not interactive. Only once students build upon each other’s contributions they would be said to engage ininteractive learning activities. Similarly, Chi and Wylie (2014) state that it is the enacted learning activities thatcount (i.e., the activities actually shown by the learners) and not the intended learning activities (i.e., the onesthe instruction was designed to trigger). Yet, the exemplary studies cited by the authors of ICAP in favor of thehypothesized benefit of interactive over constructive learning activities (Chi, 2009; Chi & Wylie, 2014)operationalize this contrast as a comparison between an individual learning condition (e.g., individual conceptmapping or individual note taking) and a collaborative learning condition (e.g., collaborative concept mappingor collaborative note taking). While these conditions were designed to trigger either constructive or interactivelearning activities, Chi and Wylie (2014) do not present data on how the learners actually engaged with thelearning materials. Therefore, additional research is needed, which addresses the effectiveness of interactivelearning activities by looking at process data (i.e., actually enacted learning activities), and which also comparesthe effectiveness of different kinds of enacted learning activities within collaborative settings. The studiesemploying coding schemes for assessing interactive learning activities, as summarized above (Deiglmayr &Schalk, submitted; Olsen et al., 2015; Vogel et al., submitted), are among the first to test the validity of theICAP framework based on actual process data. These studies show that a collaborative setting – even ifdesigned to facilitate interactive learning activities – does not guarantee that all students engage in interactivelearning activities. The extent to which students do participate in interactive learning activities at criticalmoments of the collaborative process, however, appears to be positively correlated with their learning outcomes(see below for details).Conditions and effects of interactive learning activities in CSCLTo guide further research efforts, we propose an INPUT-PROCESS-OUTCOME model highlighting the mediatingeffect of interactive learning activities in CSCL (Figure 1). Learning activities, and in particular interactivelearning activities, are deemed to be the most important PROCESSES that mediate between design decisions andoutcomes in CSCL. The occurrence of productive social interactions, that is, interactive learning activities, aredependent on the INPUT conditions, such as specific features of CSCL environments (e.g., the presence of acollaboration script), or individual learner characteristics (e.g., prior knowledge). Further, context features suchCSCL 2015 Proceedings519© ISLSas the learning setting, teacher variables, or characteristics of the learner group, play important roles. OUTCOMEScan be described on different levels and dimensions (e.g. group vs. individual; cognitive, metacognitive,affective, motivational); it is important to note that we focus on individual, cognitive learning outcomes here(i.e., individual knowledge and skill acquisition).Introducing a formal taxonomy of learning activities, such as ICAP, allows for testable predictionsabout the causal mechanism by which given INPUTS (e.g., the presence of a collaboration script or the feedbackfrom an adaptive CSCL system) have effects on selected OUTCOMES (e.g., individual acquisition of contentknowledge and/or collaboration skills). The model is adapted from models of statistical mediation (e.g., Hayes,2013), and allows the specification of both direct effects (INPUT-OUTCOME LINK) and indirect, that is, mediated,effects (INPUT-PROCESS-OUTCOME link). INPUT-PROCESS-OUTCOME models are also popular in the literature onteamwork (e.g., vanKnippenberg, de Dreu, & Homan, 2004). However, in that literature, the OUTCOME ofinterest is typically some measure of team performance (e.g., quality of group products; team creativity).Individual learning and transfer is of interest only as far as it contributes to team performance; that is, individuallearning is a PROCESS feature rather than an OUTCOME in models of effective teamwork (e.g., Ilgen, Hollenbeck,Johnson, & Jundt, 2005). Further, PROCESSES such as specialization and division of labor, are often conducive toteam performance, but may actually hinder individual learning (Deiglmayr & Schalk, 2013, submitted).Therefore, it is important that CSCL research continues to develop its own theories of what constitutes effectiveinteraction. We propose that integrating the ICAP framework in an INPUT-PROCESS-OUTCOME model is oneuseful starting point. In the following we will provide examples of recent studies that yielded first evidence forthe presumed causal links in the model.Evidence for the direct INPUT-OUTCOME linkAs already mentioned, Chi and Wylie (2014) cite several studies which demonstrate that collaborative learningsettings designed to facilitate interactive learning activities (INPUT) led to higher individual learning OUTCOMES,compared to structurally similar individual learning settings designed to facilitate constructive learningactivities. While we can take these studies as support for the direct INPUT-OUTCOME link, process data areneeded to show that the benefits really are mediated by higher levels of enacted interactive learning activities.Figure 1. The mediating role of interactive learning activities in CSCLEvidence for the INPUT-PROCESS linkEvidence for the INPUT-PROCESS link is provided by studies which show that specific features of a CSCLenvironment (INPUT) actually lead to higher (or lower) levels of constructive or interactive learning activities(PROCESS).CSCL 2015 Proceedings520© ISLSVogel et al.(2013, submitted) assessed students’ argumentation and knowledge co-construction inmathematical proof tasks. They differentiated between constructive learning activities and two types ofinteractive learning activities: interactive argumentation and interactive co-construction (PROCESS). In line withthe authors’ hypothesis, introducing a collaboration script (INPUT) led to higher levels of interactiveargumentation and of constructive learning activities, but did not influence interactive co-construction.Olsen et al. (2015) assessed the proportion of interactive dialogue, as compared to other types of talk(PROCESS), which resulted from three design features implemented in their CSCL environment. These INPUTfeatures were the presence/absence of a role script, of cognitive group awareness features, and of the distributionof information across partners. The results show that the three design features led to different proportions ofinteractive dialogue vs. other talk. The highest proportion was obtained for distribution of information, while thetwo other INPUT features yielded smaller amounts of interactive dialogue.Evidence for the PROCESS-OUTCOME linkEvidence for the PROCESS-OUTCOME link is provided by studies which show that higher levels of interactivelearning activities in students` dialogues (PROCESS) lead to higher levels of individual learning (OUTCOMES). Thefindings obtained by Vogel et al. (submitted) show that students` participation in interactive argumentation withtheir partner (but neither interactive co-construction nor constructive activities) was a significant predictor fortheir acquisition of argumentation knowledge, thus yielding evidence of the PROCESS-OUTCOME link in additionto their evidence for the INPUT-PROCESS link (see above). However, evidence for the INPUT-PROCESS link doesnot automatically entail evidence for the PROCESS-OUTCOME link. For example, Olsen et al. (2015) did not find apositive correlation between the amount of interactive dialogue (PROCESS) and indicators of individual learning(OUTCOME).Evidence for the indirect INPUT-PROCESS-OUTCOME linkTo demonstrate the indirect INPUT-PROCESS-OUTCOME link, evidence for the two partial links is not sufficient.Rather, evidence for the mediating role of PROCESS features needs to be established, for example employing thestatistical techniques of path analysis, regression-based mediation, or structural equation modelling (Hayes,2013). One example of evidence for the indirect link is a recent study by Deiglmayr and Schalk (2013,submitted). These authors showed that two different ways of distributing learning resources among learners in ajigsaw-type collaboration script (INPUT) led to different levels of interactive and constructive learning activitiesduring a subsequent collaborative problem solving phase (PROCESS). In particular, learners with low priorknowledge participated much more frequently in interactive learning activities (operationalized as the coconstruction of principle-based explanations) if the distribution of learning materials created weak rather thanstrong knowledge interdependence between learners. Further, higher engagement in interactive (but notconstructive) learning activities (PROCESS) was positively related to individual learning (OUTCOME). A series ofregression analyses showed that the effect of experimental condition (INPUT) on individual learning (OUTCOME)was partially mediated by the level of participation in interactive knowledge construction (PROCESS), yieldingevidence for the indirect INPUT-PROCESS-OUTCOME link.Challenges and opportunities for future researchAs demonstrated by the cited studies, varying the INPUT does not automatically lead to the intended PROCESSESor OUTCOMES. There are several explanations for a lacking effect, which each yield hypotheses for futureresearch, conceptual refinements of the proposed model, and the development of improved methods:1. Interactive learning in CSCL needs to be defined and analysed more carefully. The study by Vogel etal. (submitted) indicates that not all interactive learning activities may be equally affected by INPUTvariables (such as a collaboration script) and, more importantly, that these different interactive learningactivities do not seem to be equally effective for learning. Thus, CSCL research needs to carefullydifferentiate between different kinds of interactive learning activities.2. Methods for measuring the degrees to which learning is passive, active, constructive, or interactiveneed to be refined. The studies summarized in this paper all used different, study-specific coding andrating schemes for assessing the degree to which learners` contribution in CSCL were constructive orinteractive. Conceptual clarifications of what constitute effective interactive learning activities in CSCL(see bullet point above) will also allow for more refined methods of analysing process data, and forgreater comparability across studies.3. There might be an optimal degree of interactivity, beyond which no increase (or even a decrease) inintended outcomes might be observed. Rather than the total amount of interactive learning activities,CSCL 2015 Proceedings521© ISLStheir proportion in relation to other activities, their timing, or possibly their number in comparison tosome threshold might be most relevant measure for predicting OUTCOMES.4. INPUT features affect OUTCOME through other PROCESSES than interactive learning activities. Whileinteractive learning activities, such as the co-construction of knowledge, are the main goal of manyCSCL designers and educators, they are not the only processes that may lead to learning. Thus, evenwithin a collaborative setting, CSCL research needs to also pay attention to other productive activities,such as constructive or active learning activities that occur at an individual level rather than in learners`interaction.5. Third variables moderate the effects. As the findings by Olsen et al. (2015) demonstrate, some INPUTvariables may affect PROCESSES in the intended way, but without affecting the intended OUTCOMES.Potential explanations include third variables, such as learner characteristics (cf. Deiglmayr & Schalk,submitted), the specified learning goals, or the type of assessment. For example, third factors, such asprior knowledge, may lead to higher learning gains as well as higher engagement in interactive learningactivities. Thus, CSCL research should carefully consider possible moderators (cf. Hayes, 2013).To conclude, the proposed INPUT-PROCESS-OUTCOME model which incorporates the ICAP-framework asPROCESS component can guide future research efforts. While the model has already been supported by somefindings, future work is needed to address the open questions highlighted above.ReferencesChi, M. (2009). Active-constructive-interactive: a conceptual framework for differentiating learning activities.Topics in Cognitive Science, 1(1), 73-105.Chi., M., & Wylie, R. (2014). The ICAP framework: Linking cognitive engagement to active learning outcomes.Educational Psychologist, 49(9), 219-243.Deiglmayr, A., & Schalk., L. (submitted). Interactive and constructive generation of principle-basedexplanations. Paper submitted to the EARLI 2015 conference.Deiglmayr, A. & Schalk, L. (2013). Superficial, rather than true, knowledge interdependence in collaborativelearning fosters individual knowledge transfer. Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of theCognitive Science Society (pp. 382 - 387). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science SocietyDillenbourg, P., Järvelä, S., & Fischer, F. (2009). The evolution of research on computer-supportedcollaborative learning: from design to orchestration. In N. Balacheff, S. Ludvigsen, T. de Jong, T., A.Lazonder, & S. Barnes (Eds.), Technology-Enhanced Learning (pp. 3-19). Dordrecht: Springer.Hayes, A. (2013). Introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process analysis: a regression-basedapproach. New York: Guilford Press.Ilgen, D., Hollenbeck, J., Johnson, M., & Jundt, D. (2005). Teams in organizations: From Input-Process-Outputmodels to IMOI models. Annual Review of Psychology, 56, 517–543.Olsen, J. K., Rummel, N., & Aleven, V. (2015). Finding productive talk around errors in Intelligent TutoringSystems. To appear in: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Computer SupportedCollaborative Learning. International Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc.Rummel, N., Deiglmayr, A., Spada, H., Karimanis, G., & Avouris, N. (2011). Analyzing collaborativeinteractions across domains and settings: An adaptable rating scheme. In S. Puntambekar, C. HmeloSilver & G. Erkens (Eds.), Analyzing interactions in CSCL: Methods, approaches and issues (pp. 367390). Berlin: Springer.van Knippenberg, D., de Dreu, C.K.W. & Homan, A. C. (2004). Work group diversity and group performance:An integrative model and research agenda. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89 (6), 1008-1022.Vogel, F., Kollar, I., Reichersdorfer , E., Ufer, S., Reiss, K., & Fischer, F. (submitted). The relevance ofinteractive and constructive learning activities in mathematical argumentation. Paper submitted to theEARLI 2015 conference.Vogel, F., Reichersdorfer, E., Kollar, I., Ufer, S., Reiss, K., & Fischer, F., (2013). Learning to argue inmathematics: effects of heuristic worked examples and collaborations scripts on transactiveargumentation. In N. Rummel, M. Kapur, M. Nathan, & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), CSCL 2013Conference Proceedings Volume 1 (pp. 526-533). International Society of the Learning Sciences.CSCL 2015 Proceedings522© ISLS