Analyzing Students’ Collaborative Regulation Behaviors in aClassroom-Integrated Open Ended Learning EnvironmentMona Emara, Michael Tscholl, Yi Dong, and Gautam Biswasmemara@isis.vanderbilt.edu, mtscholl@cs.ucl.ac.uk, yi.dong@vanderbilt.edu, Gautam.Biswas@vanderbilt.eduInstitute for Software Integrated Systems, Vanderbilt UniversityAbstract: Identifying the effects of students’ collaborative regulation behavior when workingon a task is an important step towards a better understanding of how collaboration supportslearning. We discuss a study where we combined analysis of students’ dialogues with anautomated analysis of their action patterns as they constructed science models in an openended learning environment. Our results show that students use different types ofcollaborative regulation behaviors, and that these behaviors affect their performance on thesystem as well as their pre-post learning gains. We also showed that groups, which adopt moreshared regulation used different learning strategies than groups that did not.IntroductionResearch on collaborative learning has established that metacognitive processes are critical for groupperformance and individual learning (Volet, Vauras & Salonen, 2009; Saab, 2012). Computer-supportedcollaborative learning systems derived from open-ended learning environments (OELEs) (Land, 2000; Segedy,Kinnebrew, & Biswas, 2015) provide effective pedagogical contexts to support these processes, which, in turnallows researchers to examine and analyze these processes in greater detail. By providing students with toolsand other resources to construct science models, combined with data logging capabilities we can identifybehavioral patterns and make inferences on learners’ cognitive and metacognitive processes.The research presented in this paper assumes learners’ action patterns (i.e. frequent action subsequences) interpreted in the context of the learning tasks facilitated by the OELE, are indicative of theirlearning behaviors and strategies Thus, a contextual analysis of these action patterns may allow us makinginferences on students’ metacognitive processes (Kinnebrew, Segedy, & Biswas, 2014). There is growingconsensus that metacognitive processes evolve as a series of events that can be derived from students’ learningbehaviors (Winne, 2010; Hadwin, et al. 2007).In the study reported in this paper, 6th grade students worked in pairs using an OELE called Betty’sBrain (Leelawong & Biswas, 2008) to construct a causal map of a complex science topic (climate change). Thepair worked on a laptop, with shared input devices (mouse and keyboard) to build their models. The classroomteacher asked students to work together to build their models, and take turns in controlling the input devices.Betty’s Brain adopts an open-ended approach to learning by modeling, and this prompts students to developlearning and problem solving strategies, along with metacognitive processes that help them monitor theirlearning and model building tasks. The system collects rich log data of students’ action sequences and theirperformance on the system, thus allowing more detailed analyses of their behavior and performance.Also, we leverage analytics and data mining techniques (Kinnebrew, Loretz & Biswas, 2013) to detectbehavioral patterns, and combine them with an analysis of the dialogue between the students to study threeforms of regulation: (1) self-, (2) shared, and (3) other-regulation. We hypothesize that groups that exhibit moreshared regulation show greater awareness and better understanding of the task. As a result, they learn more andperform better. We perform a case study to determine if the data supports our claims.BackgroundMetacognition and collaborative learningIn collaborative situations, one’s metacognitive awareness and understanding may be extrapolated and projectedfor the active regulation of shared problem solving processes, such as contributing to goal setting, planning,progress monitoring, and reflection (Brown & Palinscar, 1989; Kinnebrew, Segedy, & Biswas, 2014).Collaborative work brings out the reciprocal nature of metacognitive activity and processes that is governed bydialogue structures that may include self-disclosure, feedback requests, and other-monitoring. A few studieshave examined socially shared regulation or how a social setting affects individual metacognition. Goos et al.(2002), for example, argue that the social setting mediates metacognition by prompting an individual’smetacognitive awareness, a process where transactive reasoning (i.e., reasoning on the reasoning of others) iscritical. Other authors (e.g., Volet, Summar & Thurman, 2009; Iiskala, Vauras, Lehtinen & Salonen, 2011)CSCL 2017 Proceedings319© ISLSdefine socially shared metacognition as inter-individual metacognition. Similar to an individual controlling hercognitive activity, socially shared metacognition “is consensual monitoring and regulation of joint cognitiveprocesses” (Iiskala et al., 2011, pg. 379). Primers for metacognitive processes becoming shared areverbalizations of metacognitive experiences that prompt other group members to contribute to the regulation ofthe task. That individuals often profit from external regulation of their problem solving task is well established(e.g., Azevedo, Cromley & Seibert, 2004), and the assumption is that in collaboration, such regulation ispartially accomplished by the collaborators. In consideration of the additional tasks related to coordinatingcollaborative activity, the question is how socially shared regulation affects group performance and individuallearning. Like the study presented in this paper, recent work used mixed methods, combining the analysis ofverbal interaction with trace methodologies to measure collaborative metacognitive regulation. Winters &Alexander (2011) found a significant positive relationship between students’ regulatory behaviors and theirlearning gains. Schoor & Bannert (2012), in contrast, found no difference in the frequency of regulatoryactivities between high and low performing dyads. Järvelä, Malmberg & Koivuniemi, (2016) differentiatedbetween self- and shared-regulatory activities related to task understanding, planning, strategy use, andmotivation (cf. Winne and Hadwin, 1998), finding positive relations among socially shared regulation processes(planning and motivation) and performance. Importantly, Järvelä et al (2016) applied a temporal processanalysis of student actions, and identified correlations between process patterns and high-performance groups:socially shared regulation of tasks is a critical factor for performance, but it needs to be supported by priorpractice of individual regulation. The study also showed that students’ sharing regulation of learning accruedmore learning gains, especially if regulation was shared during the solution construction phase.Analyzing students’ actionsAs learners’ cognitive and metacognitive processes are not directly visible, a common approach is to infer theseprocesses from patterns of learners’ actions and the context in which they invoke these actions (Winne, 2010,Kinnebrew, Segedy, & Biswas, 2016). In OELEs, such as Betty’s Brain (see Figure 1), actions occur onexplicitly designed interface features that enable the analysis of their activities in more specific task-relatedcontexts. For example, students may access a Science Book by clicking on a tab of the main interface, an actionthat is an indicator of acquiring information to learn about the science topic; accessing the Quiz tab is linked tothe more general task of solution assessment and monitoring; by working in the Causal Map page, studentsconstruct their solution (Leelawong & Biswas, 2008; Segedy, Kinnebrew, & Biswas, 2015).Figure 1. The Betty’s Brain system. The page shown in the figure is the Quiz page.Analyzing students’ action sequences in learning researchIncreasingly, researchers are utilizing trace methods to analyze learners’ actions in an effort to make inferenceson their metacognitive processes. The underlying rationale is that metacognitive processes are best studied byexamining the effects of metacognitive control. Other methods, such as questionnaires, typically provide posthoc accounts of metacognitive experiences and processes, and are less suited to capture the dynamic nature ofregulation processes.A new development in this respect is using sequence mining techniques to detect patterns of recurringactions. These techniques are especially applicable to examine differential use of actions and action patterns inCSCL 2017 Proceedings320© ISLSvarying groupings of learners. For example, high-performing students are much more likely to read informationand use that information to make progress in a problem solving task than are their lower-performing peers whomay find it difficult to connect their reading to their problem solving task requirements (Kinnebrew, Segedy, &Biswas, 2014).Sequential characteristics describe the learning activities a student typically uses and they inform theactual process of self-regulated learning (Johnson, Azevedo, & D'Mello, 2011). To examine the links betweenactions produced by shared or individual regulation, action sequences have to be examined in context and theirrelation to each other. Weak or no relations between actions that make up a pattern suggests that learners’cognition is broadly un-regulated. This may imply the learners are applying a trial and error approach without aspecific focus or direction. In contrast, regularity and coherence relations among actions and frequent use ofaction patterns suggests that the learner(s) are exerting control, derived from strategies (Kinnebrew, Segedy, &Biswas, 2016). Thus, a first important analysis concerns whether regularly occurring action sequences can bedetected; subsequently we examine whether action patterns resulting from shared, other-, or self-regulationdiffer.Actions in Betty’s BrainIn Betty’s Brain, students’ information acquisition, map building, and map checking actions are recorded in logfiles. In addition, students can also add and view notes (NOTESVIEW; a ‘note’ is a text box in which to collector summarize information from the science book deemed to be relevant); and ask Betty to explain her answersto quiz questions (EXPL). The most common actions and their labels are listed in Table 1.Table 1: Actions in Betty’s Brain and their log labelsAction descriptionReading the resources to learnabout the domain of studyAdding or Viewing a NoteAdding a conceptAdding a causal linkRemoving a conceptRemoving a linkIndicating that a link is believedto be ‘correct’;Have Betty take a quiz aboutthe mapHighlight the part of the causalmap that Betty used to answer aquiz questionAsk Betty to explain her answerAction loglabelREADNOTESVIEWCONCADDLINKADDCONCREMLINKREMCLMARKCORRQUIZTAKENQUIZVIEWEXPLSome logged actions are further characterized by attributes. Relevant for this study are 2 attributes. Ifthe period between a READ action and an immediately following action is below 3 seconds, the READ action islogged as READ-SHRT (for ‘short reading’). Short reads are interpreted as shallow skimming over the learningmaterial. Actions on links (adding or removing) are associated with the change in map score that these actionsentail. A link action increasing the map score is logged with the suffix –EFF (for ‘effective’), an actiondecreasing it with the suffix –INEFF (for ‘ineffective’).All actions are classified in higher-level categories corresponding to cognitive process that, whencombined, constitute metacognitive strategies. Building on prior work (Kinnebrew, Segedy, & Biswas, 2016),actions are classified as the cognitive processes of Information Acquisition (READ, NOTESVIEW), SolutionConstruction (all actions on the causal map, e.g. LINKADD) and Solution Assessment (QUIZ actions). Theactions listed in table 1 constitute the elements of action sequences; in the Results section we will present theaction sequences in the terms they are recorded by the system.The studyThe focus of the study conducted in this paper revolves around two primary research questions:RQ1: Do the extent of groups’ self-, other and shared regulatory activities correlate with theirCSCL 2017 Proceedings321© ISLSperformance? (RQ1.1); and do students’ self-, other and shared regulatory activities correlate withtheir pre-posttest learning gains? (RQ1.2)RQ2: Do students’ action patterns differ when they adopt socially shared regulation strategies asopposed to working more on their own?We discuss our methods to answer these questions below.MethodParticipants14 middle school students (6th grade) from an academic magnet school in Southern USA participated in thestudy. To enroll in this school, students need an average grade of B+ during the previous academic year. Allparticipating students were in a self-contained class taught by the same teacher. Overall, the study lasted 7 days.On day 1, students were introduced to the science topic (climate change), provided an overview of the idea ofconcept maps, and given hands-on training with the system. On day 2, students were tested on their knowledgeof climate change, of reading comprehension and introduced to causal maps, and reasoning with causal maps.These tests constituted the pre-test. Then students of equal academic capability who were deemed compatiblefollowing the teacher’s suggestions were paired to work together. The grouping yielded 3 single-sex dyads (allmale-male dyads), and 4 mixed-sex dyads. On days 3 to 6, the dyads then worked on the system constructing thecausal map. We call these days study days. They lasted on average 50 minutes per day. Students were instructedto collaborate, i.e. to discuss and take decisions jointly. These instructions were occasionally repeated during thestudy sessions. On day 7, students took a post-test consisting of the same items as the pre- test.Data collectionGroups worked at a single computer with one student controlling the mouse. The teacher explained that onestudent in the group should have control of the mouse, the primary input device, for half a study day, and thenlet the second student take over control of the mouse. Talk and behavior (e.g., attention to the other student) wasrecorded using Camtasia as audio-video data from web-cams synced to a screen capture video. Student-systeminteractions were automatically logged by the system. The log files recorded the action (e.g. adding a causal link,accessing a specific page in the Science Book) with the group ID with corresponding time stamps on a centralserver.Transcript analysisStudents’ talk was transcribed with the turn-of-talk as the smallest unit of analysis. The time stamp of each turnwas recorded manually to allow synchronization with action logs. When a student-system interaction wascarried out immediately after or during talk, talk and action were transcribed as a single turn-of-talk.Transcription yielded a total of 5774 turns-of-talk (mean: 825, SD: 157).A small set of transcribed talk was first coded by two authors of this article. Verbal data were theprimary source for coding, although visual gaze, nodding or other non-verbal behavior was occasionally alsoexamined for coding. Differences in coding were discussed until a consensus on the definition of the codingcategories was reached. Then, one author coded all remaining transcripts, while the other coded 20% oftranscripts selected from different groups and study days. Inter-rater agreement (Cohen’s kappa) was .87. Bymost accounts (e.g., Bakeman, Quera, McArthur, & Robinson, 1997), a kappa value above .81 is considered“excellent agreement.”Coding proceeded by first identifying initiative-response relationships between turns of talk (Kneser,Pilkington & Treasure-Jones, 2001). We argue that this lens is helpful to capture whether a discussion isreciprocal (i.e. both students initiate ideas and contribute constructively to the discussion) or not (when onestudent is dominant, the other is silent or may carrying out the instruction).We relied to prior analysis schemes as a guide to develop our coding categories (Volet, Summer, &Thurman, 2009; Hadwin et al. 2011):Socially Shared Regulation (SSR, figure 3): turns-of-talk were coded as SSR when the students question orelaborate on their partner’s initiative or with an alternative. This is the case, for example, when proposals are notpassively accepted, but negotiated and may lead to more protracted discussions. Discussions include varioustopics, such as what to do next, how a proposed action fits into an overall plan, how to proceed after anassessment, and so on. In these discussion, students are likely to verbalize their strategies (e.g. “how do we linkincorrect quiz answers to incorrect links in our map?”) and demonstrate metacognitive awareness and processesCSCL 2017 Proceedings322© ISLS(“Have we read about sea level rise?”, “Should we check our map now?”). Goals, plans, and strategies are coconstructed, and regulation is distributed and shared with multiple ideas being weighed and negotiated (Millerand Hadwin, 2015).Other-Regulation (OR, figure 2): in this form of regulation, a student is temporarily dominant and instructs theother. This form of regulation occurs frequently when the less dominant student is in control of the mouse.When this student just performs suggested actions without discussion, we code it as OR. Importantly,instructions are almost never accompanied by verbalizations of rationales, plans or strategies, or metacognitiveexperiences.Self-Regulation (SR): Self-Regulation occurs when a student is temporarily in full control of problem solving,with no contribution from the other student. The Self-Regulation code can only be applied to a student in controlof the mouse. The partner may be absent, may not be contributing or interested in contributing, or the studentcontrolling the mouse may disregard the partner’s attempted contributions and suggestions.S Talk and ActionsAdam: "We should add a link"CodeORJohn: [Activates link button]ORAdam: "No, go back to the science book"ORJohn: [Opens science book]"What shouldwe read?”Adam: [Reads from the page and tells John]ORORS Talk and ActionsHana: "We got 4 right and 2 wrong" (students areviewing quiz results)Sam: "Let’s edit it” [marks the causal link between 'iceand ocean level' as ‘maybe wrong’]Hana: "So, we should fix all of these links?" (points tothe links)Sam: "Yes, we need to do more work" “Let’s go to thescience book”Hana: [Opens science book to search for ‘oceanlevels’]CodeSSRSSRSSRSSRSSRFigures 2 and 3. Transcript extracts illustrating other-regulation (figure 2, left figure) and socially sharedregulation (figure 3, right figure). Interface actions were noted in the transcript in square brackets (e.g. [OpensScience Book]). These actions are automatically recorded in the log files as well and are the data on which thesequence mining algorithm is applied.ResultsWe report briefly the quantitative profiles of all groups. In two groups, students jointly carried out the task –groups 1 and 7; mean percentages: 68% SSR (SD = 4.2%), 23% SR (SD = 2.1%), 9% OR (SD = 3.5%); in twoothers it was often only one student – groups 5 and 6; mean percentages: 21% SSR (SD = 2.8%), 73% SR (SD =9.1%), 6% OR (SD = 6.3%). In the three remaining groups, joint and individual regulation is balanced – groups2, 3 and 4; mean percentages: 40% SSR (SD = 9%), 48% SR (SD = 6.8%), 12% OR (SD = 4.5%). OR occursinfrequently in all groups.RQ1.1: Do groups’ self-, other and shared regulatory activities correlate with their performance?To address this question, the Pearson correlation coefficient between self-, other- and socially shared regulationof learning per group (sum of all days) was calculated. A significant positive relationship between the frequencyof SSR and the map scores (r = 0.75, p < .05, SE = 0.31) was found.RQ1.2: Do students’ self-, other and shared regulatory activities correlate with their learning gains?To answer this question, the Pearson correlation coefficient was calculated between the frequency of SSR andSR of a group, and the students’ learning gains. There was a significant positive relationship between individuallearning gains and frequency of socially shared regulation (r = 0.59, p <.05, SE = 0.32), and a significantnegative relationship between individual learning gains and the frequency of self-regulated actions (r = - 0.54, p< .05, SE = 0.31). These results lend some support to the claim that individual students learn more when theyjointly regulate the task.RQ2: Do action patterns differ when a group jointly regulates the task compared to when in a group individualstudents often work on their own?To answer this question, we employed a differential sequence mining technique (Kinnebrew, Loretz & Biswas,2013) that detects recurrent action patterns in a set of action sequences. We selected two groups (1, 7) whichconsistently demonstrated high frequencies of shared regulation (the bothStudents profile) and two groups (5, 6)CSCL 2017 Proceedings323© ISLSwhere one student worked often by themself (self-regulation), or instructed the other (other-regulation). This setis called the oneStudent profile. We justify aggregating instances of Self- and Other-Regulation by pointing outthat in Other-Regulation students rarely verbalize their metacognitive experiences or provide rationales for theirinstruction.The sequences of logged actions of all groupings (oneStudent and bothStudents) were analyzed with agap size constraint of 1, yielding a very large set of action patterns (~ 60,000). A gap size constraint of 1 meansthat between each consecutive pair of actions in a frequent pattern, the mining algorithm allows up to 1 ofadditional actions. A sequential pattern with such an optional (small) gap (e.g., the pattern A → B → C) meansthat each subsequent action in the pattern is performed shortly after the previous action even if there wereintervening actions that are not part of the pattern. For example, a student performs A, followed by B, then D,then C; i.e. the actions A, B and C are followed in close, but not necessarily direct, succession, and the singleaction D is treated to be irrelevant.Associated with each pattern are the following values: for each pattern, a value representing in howmany groups was the pattern detected regardless of frequency (S-frequency), and a value of how frequently apattern occurred by an ‘average’ group (I-frequency). The ‘average’ group is calculated using the actual dataused in this study. Patterns are ordered by I-Frequency of the oneStudent grouping and assigned an indexstarting from 1 and increasing as that I-frequency decreases. Patterns with low indices occur very frequently inthe oneStudent condition; patterns with a very high index (40k-60k) occur with high frequency in thebothStudent condition. We computed the difference in I-frequencies and their ratio to identify 1) frequentlyoccurring action patterns and 2) action patterns occurring with high I-frequency differences or ratio differencesrelative to the two groupings.We first report the most and least frequent action patters in both groupings. The most frequent patternsfor the oneStudent grouping are short or longer map edits (e.g. ADDCONC; ADDCONC; ADDLINK;ADDCONC) (1). and explanations (e.g. pattern 96, table 2). Sequences of only explanation actions and onlymap edits (up to 7 consecutive actions) occur at much higher frequencies in the oneStudent grouping than in thebothStudents grouping. The I-frequency ratios (oneStudent:bothStudents) averaged over all action patterns withonly map edit or only explanation actions, regardless of length, are 5.1:1 and 5:1, respectively. The mostfrequent action patterns in the bothStudent grouping involve READ actions. Action patterns with only READactions (up to 7 consecutive actions) occur on average 2.6 times more often in the bothStudent grouping. Forthis grouping we also identify distinct action patterns that involve taking and viewing notes (VIEWNOTES),and marking a causal link as ‘correct’ or ‘incorrect’ on the causal map (CLMARKCORR). This latter action isan expression of the belief that a link is correct (or not), and thus can be interpreted as a progress marker (ifmarked ‘correct’) or as an organizer of future activity (if marked ‘incorrect). Action patterns involving theVIEWNOTES action occur 5 times more often in the bothStudents groups; those involving marking actionsoccur almost never in the oneStudent grouping.We then examined the sequence mining results to identify action patterns that span distinct high-levelprocess elements, such as patterns that involve reading after taking a quiz, or taking a quiz after adding elementson the map. With regard to strategies involving information acquisition and subsequent actions, we found thatstudents’ in the bothStudents grouping identify important information and then work only briefly on the mapmore often those in the oneStudent grouping. More in general, in the bothStudents grouping, the students readthe Science Book or their notes, and then add one or very few concepts or links (e.g. pattern 51919). Students inthe oneStudent grouping, in contrast, read in the Science Book, then work on the map adding several concepts orlinks without returning to the Science Book (pattern 635). This finding generalizes to several action patternsinvolving READ followed by MAPEDIT actions.Of particular importance are strategies carried out after a progress assessment. For strategies involvingthe QUIZ as the first action we find that in the bothStudents grouping, the students return to the Science Bookafter a QUIZ much more frequently than students in the oneStudent grouping (e.g. pattern 51581). This strategyindicates that the students in the bothStudent grouping were better able to interpret the results of a quiz in termsof missing understanding, which they seek to address by reading. Students in the oneStudent grouping, incontrast, either immediately work on the map (including by removing concept, see pattern 76) or by askingBetty for an explanation (pattern 71). Working on the map after a quiz results is very likely indicative of a trialand-error strategy.Students’ application of information and actions after assessment generalizes to strategies involving allmultiple different high-level process elements. Students in the bothStudents grouping are more likely to carryout an IA, SC, SA strategy (e.g. pattern 52028 and 49062); students in the oneStudent grouping demonstrate astrategy that involves multiple quiz views and map actions (pattern 1376), a validation of our earlier suggestionthat these students are more likely to solve the task through trial-and-error.CSCL 2017 Proceedings324© ISLSTable 2: Action patterns with high differences in I-frequency (reported as ratio) relative to the twogroupings. Patterns are listed by ascending indexIndexPattern49062LINKADD-INEFF; READ;QUIZTAKEN;READ;51581QUIZTAKEN;QUIZVIEW;REA;READ;READ;LINKADD;51897LINKADD-EFF;QUIZTAKEN;QUIZVIEW;REA D;5191952028READ-SHRT;READ;LINKADD;READ;LINKADD;QUIZTA KEN;QUIZVIEW;1S:2SratioIndexPattern1S:2Sratio71QUIZTAKEN;QUIZVIEW;EXPL;EXPL;1:2.476QUIZTAKEN;QUIZVIEW;CONCREM; CONCREM;7.6:11:2.196EXPL;EXPL; EXPL4.3:11:1.91:1.96351:2.61376READ;CONCADD;CONCADD; LINKADD;LINKADD;LINKADD;QUIZVIEW;CONCA DD; LINKADD;QUIZTAKEN;QUIZVIEW;5:15.3:12.2:1DiscussionThis study set out with the aim of analyzing students’ collaborative regulation behaviors in an OELE and linkingthe behaviors to students’ metacognitive strategies. Our quantitative analyses show that students who adoptedmore shared-regulation strategies demonstrated better task performance and learning gains than those that do not.We thus confirm other’s findings on the importance of collaborative metacognitive regulation (Winters andAlexander, 2011) and socially shared regulation (Järvelä et al., 2016).By detecting frequent action patterns and how they occur with differential frequency in the twogroupings, our study contributes to the question of how socially shared regulation affects performance andlearning gains. Our results indicate that sharing regulation affects students’ strategies with importantimplications on when and how they acquire knowledge, apply acquired knowledge, assess progress and react tothat assessment. Evaluating differential frequencies of strategies based on Winne & Hadwin’s (1998) model, wefind that students sharing regulation adopt a) improved information acquisition and application strategies(reading followed by working on a single or only a few element of the map, then returning to the Science Book)b) better monitoring strategies (when to check the correctness of the current causal map), and c) improvedstrategies on how to react to assessments (reading followed by working on the map, instead of immediatelyaltering the map).We also identify action patterns that are distinct for each grouping, which further the question on theconstruct of socially shared regulation. As note taking and marking are much more frequent in the bothStudentgroups, these actions can be interpreted as organizing collaborative activity. These groups seek external markersto summarize what they have read together, to mark what they have accomplished and to organize future jointactivity. With regards to the identification of potential benefits of sharing metacognitive processes, the effect ofsuch markers will need to be taken into account. Benefits may result from activities intended to organizecollaboration – rather than strictly organizing problem solving. Iiskala, Vauras & Lehtinen (2004) argue thatsocially shared metacognition is a distinct process that cannot be reduced to the contribution of individuals tojoint activity. Our study allows to qualify this assumption. Activities aimed at regulating and coordinating groupactivity prompt sharing of metacognitive awareness. Whether sharing metacognitive processes emerges fromsuch coordination activities, from transactive processes (Goos et al., 2002) or from the projection of individualmetacognitive awareness onto the group activity (Iiskala et al., 2011) is a question that warrants furtherexamination.Endnotes(1) ADDCONC: added a concept to the causal map; ADDLINK: added a link to the causal mapReferencesAzevedo, R., Cromley, J.G. & Seibert, D. (2004). Does adaptive scaffolding facilitate students’ ability toregulate their learning with hypermedia? Contemporary Educational Psychology, 29, 344-370Bakeman, R., Quera, V., McArthur, D., & Robinson, B. F. (1997). Detecting sequential patterns anddetermining their reliability with fallible observers. Psychological Methods, 2 (4), 357-370.Brown, A., & Palinscar, A. (1989). Guided, cooperative learning and individualized knowledge acquisition. InResnick, L. (Ed.), Knowing, learning, an instruction, Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.CSCL 2017 Proceedings325© ISLSGoos, M., Galbraith, P., & Renshaw, P. (2002). Socially mediated metacognition: Creating collaborative zonesof proximal development in small group problem solving. Ed. studies in Mathematics, 49(2).Hadwin, A. F., Järvelä, S., & Miller, M. (2011). Self-regulated, co-regulated, and socially shared regulation oflearning. In B. J. Zimmerman, & D. H. Schunk (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation of learning andperformance (pp. 65-84). New York: Routledge.Hadwin, A., Nesbit, J., Jamieson-Noel, D., Code, J., & Winne, P. (2007). Examining trace data to explore selfregulated learning. Metacognition and Learning, 2(2), 107–124.Iiskala, T., Vauras, M., & Lehtinen, E. (2004). Socially-shared metacognition in peer learning? Hellenic Journalof Psychology, 1, 147–178.Iiskala, T., Vauras, M., Lehtinen, E., & Salonen, P. (2011). Socially Shared metacognition within primaryschool pupil dyads’ collaborative processes. Learning and Instruction, 21, 379–393.Järvelä, S., Malmberg, J., & Koivuniemi, M. (2016). Recognizing socially shared regulation by using thetemporal sequences of online chat and logs in CSCL. Learning and Instruction, 1-11Johnson, A. M., Azevedo, R., & D'Mello, S. K. (2011). The temporal and dynamic nature of self-regulatoryprocesses during independent and externally assisted hypermedia learning. Cognition and Instruction,29(4), 471-504.Kinnebrew, J., Loretz, K., & Biswas, G. (2013). A contextualized, differential sequence mining method toderive students’ learning behavior patterns. Journal of Educational Data Mining, 4 (1), 190-219.Kinnebrew, J., Segedy, J.R., & Biswas, G.(2016). IntegratingModel-Driven and Data-DrivenTechniques for Analyzing Learning Behaviors in Open-Ended Learning Environments. IEEE Trans. LT.Kinnebrew, J.S., Segedy, J.R., & Biswas, G. (2014). Analyzing the Temporal Evolution of Students' Behaviorsin Open-Ended Learning Environments. Metacognition and Learning, 9(2), 187-215.Kneser, C., Pilkington, R., & Treasure-Jones, T. (2001). The tutor's role: an investigation of the power ofexchange structure analysis to identify different roles in CMC seminars. International Journal ofArtificial Intelligence in Education, 12, 63-84.Land, S. (2000). Cognitive requirements for learning with open-ended learning environments. EducationalTechnology Research and Development, 48(3), 61–78.Leelawong, K., & Biswas, G. (2008). Designing learning by teaching agents: The betty’s brain system.International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 18(3),181–208.Miller, M., & Hadwin, A. (2015). Scripting and awareness tools for regulating collaborative learning: Changingthe landscape of support in CSCL. Computers in Human Behavior, 52, 573-588Saab, N. (2012). Team regulation, regulation of social activities or co-regulation: different labels for effectiveregulation of learning in CSCL. Metacognition and Learning, 7(1), 1-6.Schoor, C., & Bannert, M. (2012). Exploring regulatory processes during a computer supported collaborativelearning task using process mining. Computers in Human Behavior, 28(4).Segedy, J.R., Kinnebrew, J.S., & Biswas, G. (2015). Using Coherence Analysis to Characterize Self-RegulatedLearning Behaviours in Open-Ended Learning Environments. Journal of Learning Analytics, 2(1), 1348.Volet, S. E., Summers, M., & Thurman, J. (2009). High-level co-regulation in collaborative learning: How doesit emerge and how is it sustained? Learning and Instruction, 19(2), 128-143.Volet, S. E., Vauras, M., & Salonen, P. (2009). Self- and social regulation in learning contexts: an integrativeperspective. Educational Psychologist, 44(4), 215-226.Winne, P. H. (2010). Improving measurements of self-regulated learning. Educational Psychologist, 45, 267–276.Winne, P. H., & Hadwin, A. F. (1998). Studying as self-regulated engagement in learning. In D. Hacker, J.Dunlosky, & A. Graesser (Eds.), Metacognition in educational theory and practice (pp. 277-304).Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Winters, F. I., & Alexander, P. (2011). Peer collaboration: the relation of regulatory behaviors to learning withhypermedia. Instructional Science, 39, 407-427.CSCL 2017 Proceedings326© ISLS