The Epistemology of Scienceand the Epistemology of Science TeachingCarl Bereiter, University of Toronto, carl.bereiter@utoronto.caAbstract: Paul Kirschner has criticized constructivist science educators for confusing epistemology withpedagogy. He has also criticized them for a retrograde conception of science. This paper starts byagreeing with his second point and elaborates it into a fuller critique of naïve scientific epistemology,arriving at the conclusion that a better epistemology points to a better pedagogy. The key is aprogrammatic view of science, which sees the scientific enterprise as working continually towardstronger explanations of natural phenomena. This is a program that can be joined by people at all levelsof sophistication, including young children, the goal always being to make today’s ideas superior insome demonstrable way to yesterday’s. Engaging students in explanation improvement has numerousadvantages over atheoretical inquiry and project-based activities. Knowledge Building is highlighted asan approach that gives idea improvement a central place in its pedagogy.Keywords: epistemology, nature of science, scientific method, Knowledge BuildingIntroductionIn a series of papers Paul A. Kirschner (1992, 2009; Kirschner, Sweller, & Clark, 2006) has argued that theepistemology of disciplines is a poor basis for the design of education in those disciplines. Although presented asa general criticism of constructivist, inquiry, and discovery educational approaches, Kirschner’s argument is adirect challenge to approaches that take disciplinary practice as a model for education in the disciplines.Kirschner’s position most obviously challenges Jerome Bruner’s proposal (1960) that the “structure of thedisciplines” should shape instruction—the pedagogical implication of which was that the way to learn a disciplineis to practice it: “The schoolboy learning physics is a physicist, and it is easier for him to learn physics behavinglike a physicist than doing something else” (Bruner, 1960, p. 14). A number of curriculum innovations in the1960s, mostly but not exclusively in science, followed this line of thought. Perhaps the most extreme version ofbringing disciplinary practice into the heart of educational practice, however, is Knowledge Building(Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006, 2014; Scardamalia, Bereiter, & Lamon, 1994) where “knowledge creation,” aspracticed in research laboratories and innovative companies, becomes the principal means of education in thedisciplines (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 2014). Thus Knowledge Building, at least in Scardamalia’s and myformulation of it, takes a diametrically opposite position to Kirschner’s. Despite this, I agree with almosteverything Kirschner says in advancing his argument. How, then, do I arrive at an opposite conclusion?In accord with many contemporary cognitive scientists and philosophers, Kirschner uses the termepistemology broadly to refer not only to how knowledge claims are justified but also to how they are produced.He draws the following distinction between epistemology and pedagogy:Modern curriculum developers and instructional designers confuse the epistemological natureof a domain with the psychological bases of learning and the pedagogic bases for teaching.Epistemology refers to how knowledge is acquired and the accepted validation procedures ofthat knowledge; pedagogy refers to how something is taught. (Kirschner, 2009, p.151)Kirschner criticizes constructivists not only for failing to honor this distinction but also for promotingan inductivist epistemology that he calls “basically flawed” (1992, p. 275), citing a number of authorities whomake this point: e.g., “Gardner (1975) calls the notion that ‘scientists patiently gather piles of evidence whichthey can put together inductively to form a law is absurd . . . inductive reasoning may be involved in the checkingstage of a law, but not at the formulation stage’ (p. 17).” In his 2009 paper, Kirschner makes the same point morebriefly, but calls it a digression from his main point about the difference between epistemology and pedagogy.This is where we part company. I see the “flawed epistemology” on which much of constructivist pedagogy isbased as a critical factor in what is wrong with it, and this leaves open the possibility that pedagogy based on abetter epistemology could perform better and might be preferable to an “instuctivist” pedagogy. The purpose ofthe present paper is to explore this possibility and what it entails for educational design.ICLS 2016 Proceedings578© ISLSCan students carry out disciplinary knowledge production?Kirschner does not object in principle to education based on the epistemology of disciplines. His objection is apractical one: It’s too hard; students aren’t equipped for it. Although he draws on theoretical backing from Piagetand Vygotsky in his 2009 paper and on cognitive load theory in Kirschner, Sweller, and Clark (2006), the questionof whether young students can actually practice disciplinary knowledge creation is an empirical, not a theoreticalquestion. Claims that they cannot do so stand to be refuted by empirical demonstration. I believe the accumulatedresearch on Knowledge Building provides such refutation (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 2010; Scardamalia &Bereiter, 2014; Scardamalia, Bereiter, & Lamon, 1994). Some of the research involves experimental comparisons,usually of a before-and-after nature, but for the present purpose even anecdotal data can carry weight. It is beyondthe scope of this paper to present evidence supporting this claim; the following example may, however, at leastserve to clarify what is being claimed. The example comes from a grade one (age approximately six years) classreported in Scardamalia (2002) and based on a teacher’s report:After a fall outing, the children came up with the question: Why do leaves change color in the fall? Thestudents contributed notes proposing explanations. The teacher or an aide provided help with spelling asneeded. Some examples of student contributions:“Because the sap cant get to the leaf because of a plug. Then the chlorophyll dies and the leaf changescolour.” (Illustrated with drawing of sap running through the branches.)“fall – i think the chlorophyll goes into the tree to keep warm for the winter.”“i think leaves change colour because when the leaf falls down I think that the chlorophyll goes to theoutside of the leaf so it leaks off the leaf.”“Because it’s too cold for the chlorophyll to make food for the tree.”Notice that although the theories are faulty they do hypothesize physical processes and they arepotentially testable. To test whether cold alone was sufficient to explain leaves changing color, the first-gradersput green leaves into a freezer. More remarkable is something that occurred months later during a field trip to amaple-tree farm to see how maple syrup is made. One child, watching the sap flow from the tree, remarked thather theory regarding chlorophyll must be wrong, because the sap she saw was not green. Others raised many otherissues about what they saw, and how the flow of sap gave them new ideas about the internal structure of a tree,and the relation of its internal structure to their theories. A new theory emerged to the effect that there are twopaths for sap to flow, one near the outside of the tree trunk for colorless sap and one deeper inside for thechlorophyll-bearing sap. In rudimentary form, all the essential elements of scientific theory-building are evidentamong these six-year-olds.Some common limitations of children’s scientific thinking are evident in this example: a lack of system(Vygotsky, 1934/1962, p. 116), a penchant for single-cause explanations, and a susceptibility to animism (thechlorophyll trying to keep warm). Except for the animism, these limitations may be found in abundance in thecomments by adults on internet news sites. But on the positive side, the children demonstrated the fundamentalsof authentic scientific thinking: the creation of explanatory hypotheses and the testing and revision of these onthe basis of evidence. It has seemed, on the basis of numerous examples of young children’s explanation-building,that their implicit epistemology is more advanced than the “scientific method” they will be taught in later years.It seems these six-year-olds intuitively understood that the job of theories is to explain facts, not to achieve thestatus of facts. I have seen evidence of this in even younger children. They display a level of scientific thinkingthat apparently gets dragged down by later instruction.Kirschner agrees that students need a better epistemology—a better understanding of disciplinarypractice—but says they should not be left to discover this for themselves or to develop it intuitively through theusual constructivist diet of “guided discovery” exercises and hands-on projects. Teaching scientific epistemologyto school students is not a walk in the park, however. Carey and Smith (1993) identified three levels of studentunderstanding of the nature of science and scientific knowledge. At the lowest level, as noted previously, studentssee science as the unproblematic accumulation of facts. At level 2 the uncertainties of knowledge claims and theimportance of evidence are recognized. At level 3 the role of theories in both the formulation and interpretationof scientific research is recognized. Through Carey and Smith’s own research and through much subsequentresearch, it has been found that moving students from level 1 to level 2 is achievable, but that movement to level3 is rare (Chuy, Scardamalia, Bereiter, et al., 2010). The bulk of research on student epistemologies, starting withthat of Robert Perry and continuing through a steady flow of descriptive and occasionally experimental studies,has for the most part not recognized level 3 at all but has instead concerned itself with level 1 and variationswithin level 2—generally variations between solipsistic relativism and recognizing that some beliefs can be betterjustified than others. According to Chinn and Malhotra (2002), theory plays virtually no role in forms of inquiryICLS 2016 Proceedings579© ISLScommon in school science education. Level 3 is evidently rare among teachers as well. Windschitl (2004) foundthat teachers’ own beliefs about the nature of science overlooked its creative, theory-focused character.The reduction of science to atheoretical fact gathering and hypothesis testing coupled with an emphasison the uncertainties of scientific knowledge make for a pedagogical brew that provides students little motivationto seek scientific careers and leaves “it’s just a theory” as a reason to reject climate change, the descent of homosapiens from earlier life forms, or any other unwelcome truth. Students may still find things of interest in science,sometimes because of inherent interestingness of topics such as dinosaurs and space travel, sometimes becausethe hands-on activities are intriguing. But this is a far cry from the central motivation of science, which is tounderstand how the world works.The importance of understanding the nature of science (“NOS”) is by now well recognized in curriculumplanning. However, failure to understand the nature and role of theory is failure to understand NOS—and on thatbasis failure can be said to be endemic. Failure to understand the nature of theory does not only affect those whomight pursue careers in science but has social, political, and personal consequences. Political controversies ofteninvolve theories and theoretical models, current examples being controversies about climate change and economicpolicy. Public support of basic research requires some appreciation of the value of theory, of the theoretical valueof research on organisms and phenomena of little obvious practical significance, and the often crucial importanceof understanding a problem before plunging ahead with possible solutions. All of these real-life functions ofscientific knowledge require understanding science as an effort to construct a coherent and testable understandingof the world—in short, as theory building. This implies an epistemology that goes well beyond the shallowconstructivism of contemporary school science.The crucial importance of progressivity in knowledgeIf it is agreed that students should be gaining a better understanding of the nature of science, then the next questionis what is the nature of science? Any perusal of contemporary philosophy of science will make it clear that this isby no means a settled issue. There are a number of opinions, which may be roughly categorized as no-difference,methodological, and programmatic. Arguments for these positions are all plausible enough that I do not see anyvirtue in educationists trying to decide which is right. A pragmatic approach holds more promise (cf. Resnik,2000)—in this case an approach based on consideration of what position is best for the design of school scienceeducation.The no-difference position does not hold that there is no discernible difference between scientific andother practices, only that there is no clear line of demarcation. Whatever is singled out as distinctive in scientificpractice can also be found in some form in everyday thought or in pseudo-sciences such as astrology and dianetics.As applied in school, however, the no-difference position would seem to legitimate low-level relativism: whateverbelief feels right to you is okay. Methodological views of the nature of science hold that there are certain practicesfor arriving at conclusions that are different from other ways and that these practices are what make conclusions“scientific.” From a pedagogical pragmatic viewpoint, the question is not whether methodological criteria forwhat constitutes science are correct or adequate but whether they represent a good basis for educational design. Ihave already signaled my main objection: Education based on a conception of science as method represents it asa joyless, pedestrian occupation with its whole bold, creative, frontier-advancing character bled out of it.The programmatic view of the nature of science is probably the least recognized in education, althoughit has strong philosophical backing. It requires viewing science over time spans and at a systemic level, whichgoes against the educational tradition of treating science as first and foremost a matter of individual knowledgeand the testing of isolated hypotheses. Although beginnings of a programmatic view may be found among logicalpositivists, it was Imre Lakatos (1970) who explicitly argued that the proper object of scientific evaluation is notparticular theories or knowledge claims but rather research programs. At the root of Lakatos’s argument was theobservation that scientists rarely abandon a theory because of disconfirming evidence (as schooling in the“scientific method” would have us believe). Instead they try to improve the theory or modify the knowledge claimin order to accommodate the troublesome evidence. What he called “progressive” research programs deal withanomalous data in ways that lead to stronger and stronger theories, whereas non-progressive programs deal withit in a variety of other ways, as documented by Chinn and Brewer (1998). Evolutionary theory has had to dealwith numerous discoveries that challenge existing theory and has grown progressively stronger as a result, so thatinexplicable findings become increasingly rare. By contrast, Intelligent Design, as a research program, keepsgetting weaker as its knowledge claims in the form “Evolution cannot explain…” succumb to evidence thatevolutionary theory can in fact account for the phenomenon at issue. Intelligent Design researchers have to keeplooking for new things they believe evolutionary theory cannot explain, and in recent times have shifted theirground from the evolution of species and structures to the origin of the life and the universe—which are mattersthat evolutionary theory does not claim to deal with.ICLS 2016 Proceedings580© ISLSAs a basis for educational design this programmatic conception of science has significant advantagesover both no-difference and methodological conceptions:• It allows the curriculum to start with whatever students currently (rightly or wrongly) understand andmove on from there in a progressive fashion.• It solves the teacher’s problem of how to respond to students’ inventive but wrong ideas. By activelypromoting the working assumption that all ideas are improvable, the teacher is free to respond with“That’s a wonderful idea. How could we make it even better?”• It allows ample room for the creative aspect of science, which tends to be suppressed in methodologicalconceptions (i.e., the traditional “scientific method”), but also avoids the “anything goes” implication ofno-difference conceptions.• It sets out a realizable goal for students—idea improvement—rather than a discouragingly lofty one.• It invites students to work collaboratively at idea improvement and to take mutual responsibility for it.• It allows students to work progressively within their developmental and information processing capacitylimits. Students can do productive work with ideas even though they lack “conservation of substance,”“control of variables,” and other elements of mature scientific thinking.• It supports a progression from self-centered to idea-centered. Alice’s idea and Jaime’s idea (which mayor may not be the same idea and which may be so vague that it is impossible to tell) are eventuallyabsorbed into a collectively produced theory or solution that becomes community rather than individualproperty.• Efforts to improve ideas so that they explain more facts or solve more problems tend to move beyondsingular ideas and combinations of ideas to integrated structures of ideas—that is, toward theories.• Although Lakatos was mainly concerned with theoretical programs, the idea of progressive programsapplies equally to ones that address practical problems or social issues—and to some educators these arethe most important objectives of science education for the masses.• It provides a basis for students’ seeing their work as part of a larger project of knowledge creation andbecoming enculturated into a society of knowledge creators, with its long history and high prospects.Students as practitioners of progressive scienceThe programmatic view of science has clear advantages for developing student understanding of the nature ofscience, but is it applicable to students’ own scientific inquiry, as carried out under normal school and laboratorycourse conditions? Its applicability is severely limited if inquiry is confined to brief and unconnected episodes.Continuity and progressive development of explanations are essential according to the programmatic view. Thismeans that, in order to be practitioners rather than only assimilators of progressive science, students need to beengaged not only in explaining but in building stronger explanations. Drawing mainly on Thagard’s theory ofexplanatory coherence (2000), but with echoes of work by others such as Karl Popper and David Deutsch, we canstipulate that an explanation is getting stronger to the extent that1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.it explains more factsit excludes more false statementsit connects to more other explanationsit explains things in more detailparts of the explanation interlock so that it becomes increasingly difficult to modify parts without alteringthe wholeit is able more clearly to identify what it fails to explainit generates better predictionsit explains how identified causal factors work, rather than only identifying and quantifying their effects.An explanation that satisfies all these criteria is not something student explanation building is likely toachieve very often. However, the criteria themselves are not difficult to understand and thus represent somethingstudents can work toward collaboratively. In doing so, they will be engaged in theory building (Bereiter, 2012).Theory development, theory testing, and theory improvement are what basic research in science is all about. Thisis not a high-flown notion beyond the grasp of young students. It is perfectly comprehensible to them. They takeICLS 2016 Proceedings581© ISLSnaturally to producing theoretical explanations of natural phenomena and judging and modifying them in the lightof evidence (Chuy, et al., 2010). It is schooling in the so-called “scientific method,” with its often pointless testingof predictions, that may be responsible for students later losing their grip on this understanding. However, ifNewton’s laws are taken as an exemplar, theory building is apt to seem forbiddingly difficult and definitely notfor everyone. Newton’s laws and most physical theory building in the physical sciences represent what Bruner(1986) defined as the “paradigmatic mode,” grounded in mathematics and logic and typically universal in scope.Young students can function in paradigmatic mode, as indicated by their ability to work out rules accounting fornumerical or geometric progressions (Moss & Beatty, 2006). But most of their theorizing about natural and socialphenomena is going to take place in what Bruner called the “narrative mode.” In this mode, a process orphenomenon is explained by a series of events, with one causing the next. Building on children’s narrativecompetence affords a way of getting students into scientific explanation without running up against the cognitivedemands of paradigmatic explanation.Of particular interest for science education at the school level is the “how-it-works” narrative. Theprogress of a plant from seed to fruition lends itself to an event sequence narrative, but often the narrative iscomplicated by the fact that things happen concurrently. A story about how an electric bell works must recognizethat the same movement of the striker that sounds the bell also breaks the circuit that drew it to the bell, thusresulting in its springing back from the bell in readiness for a new cycle. Nutrition, respiration, and circulationare all processes that can be given explanations in narrative form, with the stories gaining complexity andundergoing correction as students’ knowledge advances. Evolutionary explanations of the emergence of wings,legs, sexual reproduction, and so on, all have a story-like structure that students can grasp, elaborate, and criticize.Oeijord (2003, p. 145) has set out criteria that a causal narrative must meet in order to be of scientificvalue. These are similar to the criteria of strong explanations set out above. Causal narratives that fall short onthese criteria are often called “just so” narratives. I would argue that “just so” stories have value in education asimprovable ideas—ideas that acquire more explanatory strength as they encompass more facts and as problemswith them are solved. Constructing causal narratives is something children and novices can do that engages themwith important scientific concepts and problems and that gives them realistic practice in a mode of thinking(abduction) that is a vital mechanism of creative work with ideas (Paavola & Hakkarainen, 2005b). The pointmost relevant to the issue of epistemology’s relation to pedagogy is that, while the epistemology of scienceprojects a landscape that contains heights beyond normal student capabilities, it also contains relatively gentleslopes that ordinary students can negotiate..The knowledge creation/ knowledge building alternativeProject-based science is aimed at engaging learners more directly in the kinds of practices that characterize “doingscience” in the real world (Marx, Blumenfeld, Krajcik, & Soloway, 1997). However, project-based learningcovers a wide range of approaches. At one extreme we have the traditional school project, in which studentsproduce documents on selected topics that resemble encyclopedia articles in content and often in structure as well.Despite use of Web resources and computer-based representation tools, the basic pedagogy has not changedsignificantly in a hundred years. Then there are projects organized around some fictitious or real-life theme (e.g.,planning a trip to Mars or analyzing pollution in a nearby stream). Although these can have genuine merit, theyfall short of engaging students in the core enterprise of theory building—working to make systematic sense of thephysical, biological, and social world. There is an alternative that engages students directly in this core sensemaking enterprise. It is Knowledge Building (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2003, 2006, 2014), defined as theproduction and continual improvement of ideas of value to a community. (I capitalize the term when referring tothe cited program but use lower case when discussing concepts and processes.) Paavola and Hakkarainen (2005a)have shown that there is a close affinity between knowledge building as carried out in schools and knowledgecreation as carried out in research laboratories and innovative companies. Scardamalia and I have argued (Bereiter& Scardamalia, 2014) that they are indeed the same concept, with differences in application due to context. Oneof these differences, of course, is that in an education context knowledge building/knowledge creation is expectedto produce learning—and its success is ultimately judged by learning outcomes rather than by the quality of theideas collectively produced.Knowledge Building is not limited to any particular subject. It may include artistic and engineering typesof knowledge creation. The creation of literary works, invention of mechanical and electrical things that work,and various sorts of creative computer program development may all constitute knowledge creation in so far assomething new is added to the cognitive resources available to the knowledge-building community. However, themost distinctive and challenging kind of knowledge building in educational contexts is the creation andimprovement of explanatory theories or theory-like “conceptual artifacts” (Bereiter, 2002). New educationICLS 2016 Proceedings582© ISLSstandards are calling for teaching “big ideas,” and most modern programs honor this call in some fashion; butKnowledge Building makes the ideas themselves objects of inquiry.The driver of students’ idea-centered work is knowledge-building dialogue, which may involveargumentation but only as part of a collaborative effort to solve problems of explanation (Scardamalia & Bereiter,2006). Students do experiments and other kinds of empirical work, often self-initiated, but always with thepurpose of advancing the knowledge-building dialogue. The vast information resources of the Worldwide Webbecome an integral part of the process, which makes Knowledge Building a distinctly 21st-century approach. Itis not expected that students will invent or discover through experiments big ideas like universal gravitation,natural selection, and photosynthesis, but neither is it left to the teacher to convey these ideas through didacticinstruction. Instead, it is expected that students will encounter and assimilate them through their use of Webresources in efforts to improve their own explanations of natural phenomena. Whereas guided discovery,argumentation, and project-based learning may engage students in some of the elements of scientific practice,Knowledge Building incorporates all of these into the fundamental scientific effort to build coherent theoreticalexplanations of the phenomenal world.ConclusionSeparating pedagogy from the epistemology of disciplines makes sense in many practical respects, but only up toa point. Creative instructional designers will do more than schedule topics according to logical or empiricaldependencies. They will try to identify learnable concepts that are legitimate simplifications or reduced versionsof target concepts (White, 1993). But doing this requires getting deeply into the structure and essence of theconcepts, a sort of thing philosophers of science do. Kid-level concepts need to lead in the right direction, towardeventual grasp of the target concepts and not toward roadblocks and misconceptions.In this paper I have elaborated on other ways in which the epistemologies of the sciences and scienceeducation intersect. With regard to students understanding the nature of science, Kirschner and I and many scienceeducators agree that the conventional version of “the scientific method” is fundamentally flawed. But its basicflaw is epistemological, with its pedagogical drawbacks following as a consequence. I reviewed severalcompeting conceptions of what distinguishes science from non-science, an epistemological issue that I would notpresume to judge. But from a pedagogical point of view I think there is no doubt that a programmatic conceptionis preferable to a no-difference or a methodological conception, no matter how well-reasoned these may be. Thisis not epistemology directing pedagogy, but it is a pedagogical choice that could not have been formulated withoutthe work of Lakatos and other philosophers of science.Understanding what constitutes real science is one thing, but doing real science is another, and one thatarguably deserves priority. Naïve empiricism provides a simple answer to engaging students in real science: Getthem practicing “the scientific method” by generating hypotheses (guesses), turning them into predictions, andtesting the predictions. (For an indication of how ubiquitous this practice is, do an image search on “science fair.”)But if students are to do the kind of science that significantly advances understanding of how the world works,they need to build coherent explanations and work to make them better. Their theorizing should lead them toexperimentation, whereas hands-on experimentation leading to theorizing, although it does happen in real science,is more a pipe-dream of learning-by-doing enthusiasts than something that can be expected to motivate inquiryin the classroom. Building and improving explanations means working within a discipline, not just carrying outsome of the visible practices of researchers and applying received ideas to what one observes. Providing supportfor knowledge creation—what in educational contexts we call Knowledge Building (Bereiter & Scardamalia,2014)—requires attending seriously to and supporting the knowledge processes through which research programsadvance knowledge frontiers. In designing this kind of education, pedagogy cannot be separated fromepistemology, as Kirschner would seem to advocate. Instead, the epistemology of the disciplines needs to beextended to encompass the peculiar conditions of disciplinary knowledge production in educational settings.ReferencesBereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Bereiter, C. (2012). Theory building and education for understanding. In M. A. Peters, P. Ghiraldelli, B. Zarnic,and A. Gibbons (Eds.), Encyclopaedia of educational philosophy and theory. Web document:http://www.ffst.hr/ENCYCLOPAEDIA/doku.php?id=theory_building_and_education_for_understandingBereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (2010). Can children really create knowledge? Canadian Journal of Learningand Technology, 36(1). Web: http://www.cjlt.ca/index.php/cjlt/article/view/585.Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: One concept, two hills toICLS 2016 Proceedings583© ISLSclimb. In S. C. Tan, H. J. So, & J. Yeo (Eds.), Knowledge creation in education, pp. 35-52. Singapore:Springer Science + Business MediaBruner, J. (1960). The process of education. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Carey, S., & Smith, C. (1993). On understanding the nature of scientific knowledge. Educational Psychologist,28 (3), 235-251. 43.Chinn, C. A., & Brewer, W. F. (1998). An empirical test of a taxonomy of responses to anomalous data in science.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35, 623–654.Chinn, C. A., & Malhotra, B. A. (2002). Epistemologically authentic reasoning in schools: A theoreticalframework for evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86, 175-218.Chuy, M., Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., Prinsen, F., Resendes, M., Messina, R., Hunsburger, W., Teplovs, C., &Chow, A. (2010). Understanding the nature of science and scientific progress: A theory-buildingapproach. Canadian Journal of Learning and Technology, 36(1). Published online athttp://www.cjlt.ca/index.php/cjlt/article/view/580Gardner, P. L. (1975). Science and the structure of knowledge. In P. L. Gardner (ed.), The structure of scienceeducation. Hawthorn, Australia: Longman Australia.Kirschner, P. (1992). Epistemology, practical work and academic skills in science education. Science andEducation, 1, 273–299.Kirschner, P. A. (2009). Epistemology or pedagogy, that is the question. In S. Tobias & T. M. Duffy.Constructivist instruction: Success or failure? (pp. 144-157). New York: Routledge.Kirschner, P. A., Sweller, J., & Clark, R. E. (2006). Why minimally guided instruction does not work: An analysisof the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-based teaching.Lakatos, I. (1970). Criticism and the growth of knowledge. In I. Lakatos, & A. Musgrave (Eds.), Falsificationand the methodology of scientific research programmes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Marx, R. W., Blumenfeld, P. C., Krajcik, J. S., & Soloway, E. (1997). Enacting project-based science. ElementarySchool Journal, 97, 341-358.Moss, J. & Beatty, R. (2006). Knowledge building in mathematics: Supporting collaborative learning in patternproblems. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning 1 (4), 441-465.Oeijord, N. K. (2003). Why Gould was wrong. Bloomington, IN: iUniverse.Paavola, S. & Hakkarainen, K. (2005a). The knowledge creation metaphor – an emergent epistemologicalapproach to learning. Science & Education, 14(6), 535-557.Paavola, S. & Hakkarainen, K. (2005b). Three abductive solutions to the Meno paradox - with instinct, inference,and distributed cognition. Studies in Philosophy and Education 24(3-4), 235-253.Resnik, D. B. (2000). "A pragmatic approach to the demarcation problem". Studies In History and Philosophy ofScience Part A 31 (2): 249–267. doi:10.1016/S0039-3681(00)00004-2.Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.)Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge building. In J. W. Guthrie (Ed.), Encyclopedia of education(2nd Ed.) (pp. 1370-1373). New York: Macmillan Reference.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In K. Sawyer(Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97-118). New York: Cambridge UniversityPress.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, andtechnology. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (2nd ed.). New York:Cambridge University Press.Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., & Lamon, M. (1994). The CSILE project: Trying to bring the classroom into World3. In K. McGilley (Eds.), Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp.201-228). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Thagard, P. (2000). Coherence in thought and action. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Windschitl, M. (2004). Folk theories of ‘‘inquiry’’: How preservice teachers reproduce the discourse and practicesof an atheoretical scientific method. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(5), 481-512.White, B. (1993). Causal models and intermediate abstractions: A missing link for successful science education?In R. Glaser (Ed.), Advances in instructional psychology (vol. 4), pp. 177-252. Hillsdale, NJ: LawrenceErlbaum Associates.ICLS 2016 Proceedings584© ISLS