Toward a Multi-Level Knowledge Building Innovation NetworkMarlene Scardamalia (co-chair), Institute for Knowledge Innovation and Technology, IKIT, OISE/University ofToronto, marlene.scardamalia@utoronto.caCarl Bereiter (co-chair), Institute for Knowledge Innovation and Technology, IKIT, OISE/University ofToronto, carl.bereiter@gmail.comThérèse Laferrière (co-chair), Centre of Research and Intervention for Student and School Success (CRISAS/CRIRES), Université Laval, Therese.Laferriere@fse.ulaval.caKaterine Bielaczyc, Hiatt Center for Urban Education, Clark University, kateb369@gmail.comShaoming Chai, South China Normal University, charminghappy@163.comCarol K.K. Chan, Faculty of Education, Division of Learning, Development and Diversity, The University ofHong Kong, ckkchan@hku.hkBodong Chen, College of Education and Human Development, University of Minnesota, chenbd@umn.eduMei-Hwa Chen, Computer Science Department, University at Albany, State University of New York,mchen@albany.eduFrank de Jong, Aeres Applied University Wageningen, f.de.jong@stoasvilentum.nlFernando Diaz del Castillo, Gimnasio La Montaña, fernandodiazdelcastillo@glm.edu.coKai Hakkarainen, Institute of Behavioral Sciences, University of Helsinki, kai.hakkarainen@helsinki.fiYoshiaki Matsuzawa, School of Social Informatics, Aoyama Gakuin University, matsuzawa@si.aoyama.ac.jpAlexander McAuley, Faculty of Education, University of Prince Edward Island, amcauley@upei.caMireia Montané, International Education Programs, Col·legi de Doctors i Llicenciats in Catalonia,mireiamontane@me.comCesar Nunes, University of Campinas, cesaraanunes@gmail.comRichard Reeve, Faculty of Education, Queen’s University, reever@queensu.caPirita Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, Department of Applied Sciences of Education/Teacher Education, University ofHelsinki, pirita.seitamaa-hakkarainen@helsinki.fiJun Oshima, Faculty of Informatics, Shizuoka University, joshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jpHajime Shirouzu, National Institute for Educational Policy Research, shirouzu@coref.u-tokyo.ac.jpSeng Chee Tan, Centre for Research & Development in Learning, CRADLE@NTU, Nanyang TechnologicalUniversity, sengchee.tan@nie.edu.sgChew Lee Teo, Ministry of Education, Singapore, tchewlee@icloud.comJan van Aalst, Faculty of Education, Division of Information and Technology Studies, The University of HongKong, vanaalst@hku.hkTelma Vinha, Faculty of Education, University of Campinas –Unicamp-, telmavinha@uol.com.brJianwei Zhang, Department of Educational Theory and Practice, University at Albany, State University of NewYork, jzhang1@albany.eduAbstract: Knowledge building requires collaborative bootstrapping, with participants at alllevels of the education system part of a collective effort to go beyond information exchange toinnovation-producing networks that demonstrate that education can operate as a knowledgecreating enterprise. Organizational theories and research are increasingly focused on multilevelperspectives for creating actionable knowledge; the challenge is to take advantage of emergenceto self-organize around solutions and new means. By “innovation networks” we mean networksthat go beyond sharing and discussion to the actual creation of new knowledge and innovations.Self-organization and emergence surround us, all the time and at multiple levels, whether weare aware or not. However, self-organization around idea improvement is rare and requiresengaging innovative capacity at all levels, a research-intensive enterprise surroundinginnovations, and an open source engineering team committed to enabling new forms ofinteraction, media, and analytic tools. “Multi-level” envisions inclusion of students, teachers,administrators, researchers, engineers, and policy makers in a collaborative enterprise. Thissession takes the form of a design think tank to advance conceptual frameworks and means fornew and more powerful environments to support a multi-level knowledge building innovationnetwork.CSCL 2017 Proceedings703© ISLSIntroductionAccording to OECD, networked communities of practice must together add up to an intertwined interconnectedinfrastructure at the system level (OECD, 2013). There are many networks in which teachers and sometimesadministrators share experiences and practical ideas and discuss issues. However, they are not what Peter Gloorcalls “innovation networks”—networks of people who not only share ideas but generate and refine new ideasthrough the dynamics of networked social interaction. Instead, according to Bryk, Gomez, and Grunow (2011, p.135), education networks typically “function as free-floating idea bazaars, contexts for self-expression, and places‘to share.’”Gloor identifies three forms of network engagement: (1) Collaborative Innovation Network (COIN)— acore team of self-organized and intrinsically self-motivated people who have a collective vision; (2) CollaborativeLearning Network (CLN) - others who join the core community to discuss, learn, and apply innovations(DiMaggio, Gloor, & Passiante, 2009; Gloor, 2006); (3) Collaborative Interest Network (CIN)- those on theperiphery, often lurkers, who do not contribute content but seem to have shared interests. These different formsof engagement create an innovation network ecosystem with spread of innovation from the core to periphery(Gloor, 2006). Innovations must occur throughout the extended virtual network, with people at the periphery insome contexts becoming innovators in another, with inward and outward flow of ideas and network boundarycrossing—what in knowledge building we have referred to as symmetric knowledge advancement. Gloor, Fuehres,and Fischbach (2016) also identify repeat innovators across contexts as important for innovation networks.More than two decades ago the knowledge building community initiated the Knowledge SocietyNetwork (KSN). Four sub-network structures were identified by Hong, Scardamalia, and Zhang (2010): intensiveparticipant interaction, frequent idea interaction, emergent knowledge innovation, and sustained knowledgeinnovation. These have rough correspondence to Gloor’s sub-networks. However, instead of working throughnetworks, many knowledge building researchers have tended to work closely with teachers to co-design improvededucational practices in their particular context—a one-on-one or one to small-group approach that is necessarilylimited in scale. While the network helps to spread ideas, sustained innovation is limited due to insufficient timefor engagement and demands for technological innovations that exceed the capacity of a small design team. Inorder to support a global innovation network and enable schools to operate as effective knowledge creatingenterprises, an innovation network extensible to and adapted to the work patterns and the interests of allparticipants is needed.The proposed think tank session features researchers, teachers, engineers, and policy makers spanning10 nations, all committed to creating needed social and technological innovations. Toward this end the sessionwill begin with a 30-minute presentation of a collective design document—a best effort on the part of theorganizers to define social and technological innovations that will enable engagement in each country and beextensible to a much broader community. The immediate goal is to create infrastructure to enable forms ofengagement that will allow us to establish a network through which we can address issues presented below. In anadditional 30-minute session an overview of specific issues by various team members will be presented so thataudience members can direct issues and questions to those with most relevant experience. The final half hour willbe reserved for open audience participation.Issues to be discussedInclusivityThe typical education network, like many online networks, consists of a relatively small number of activecontributors plus a large number of “lurkers,” who follow discussions but do not take active part in them. Ininnovation networks, as Gloor’s research indicates, there is movement between innovation and lurker status. Atruly inclusive network will need to afford intermediate possibilities that encourage full active participationwithout undue anxiety or need for assertiveness. It will also need to support coherent discourse across media andinput, and opportunities for the most minimal of contributions to grow.SustainabilitySustainability is a major challenge and a critical feature in networks of all kinds (Sorensen, 2009). In some casesthe problem is how to sustain a network after start-up funding ends, but in the case of a Knowledge Buildinginnovation network, the more basic challenge is to sustain involvement and innovativeness. Achieving both ofCSCL 2017 Proceedings704© ISLSthese depends on developing in the network a dynamic process that yields sufficient intrinsic rewards toparticipants to keep the network thriving. An issue that bears on both inclusivity and sustainability is that offunding necessary to provide central functions of technological and administrative support. Fees sustain somewell-known initiatives, for example New Pedagogies for Deep Learning (http://npdl.global), but fees are not inthe spirit of opportunistic, inclusive, scalable knowledge-creating enterprises.Continual improvementGiven Knowledge Building’s heavy emphasis on “collective cognitive responsibility for idea improvement”(Scardamalia, 2002), a Knowledge Building network is necessarily an “improvement network,” as advocated bythe Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching (Bryk, Gomez, & Grunow, 2011). Ever since thepioneering work of Deming (1986) on continuous improvement, the importance of data and data-based goals hasbeen recognized. A Knowledge Building innovation network needs cross-site data that enables participants toevaluate “how we are doing” with respect to shared goals and that also serves as a repository of rich qualitativeinformation that can be mined for ideas and potential educational models. Such a database raises problems ofcomparability across sites and curricula, ethical approval, access rights, and language differences, besides thecomplex problem of anonymization. The potential of such a repository is enormous, however; it offers the prospectof doing for idea-centered education what the CHILDES Child Language Data Exchange System,(http://childes.psy.cmu.edu), has done for the study of language development. A fundamental issue that is moreserious in an education network than in networks more oriented toward a “bottom line” is the relation betweenindicators and criteria. There are many well-recognized indicators of how well an educational innovation is doing,but there is also a high risk (as appeared in the NCLB drive toward continual improvement in a few kinds of testscores) that the indicator becomes a criterion, so that increasing standing on the indicators becomes the goal,displacing the actual educational goals that gave rise to the indicators.Research-based innovationInnovations in educational practice can come about through disciplined design-based research and also throughteachers’ efforts to solve educational problems or find a better way. A number of people in the KnowledgeBuilding community are seeking a third approach that has researchers, practitioners, and engineers workingtogether to produce innovations that combine the top-down character of theory-into-practice with the bottom-upcharacter of innovations that originate in practice. A looked-for result is what Bereiter (2014) discussed as“principled practical knowledge”—knowledge that meets both criteria of practicality and criteria of explanatorycoherence. The basic iterative mechanism of design-based research characterizes this knowledge-buildingprocess, but there is in addition investment in coherent justification and making generalizable sense of theemerging innovation. Beyond shared stories and research reports, the innovation networks must produce shareddata to inform design iterations and test the effectiveness of Knowledge Building practices both in terms ofknowledge building principles and in terms of generally recognized objectives of literacy, numeracy and what arepopularly known as 21st century skills. Data should be helpful and convincing for the public and policy makers,as well as administrators and practitioners. Research-based advances must span elementary to tertiary sites, allsubject areas, a broad range of socio-economic levels and sectors and include great cultural and linguisticdiversity. Besides meeting these requirements, the data banks described previously should support graduatestudent research at all levels and enable match-making between practitioners and researchers to extendcollaborative opportunities. The data repository should be the world's most valuable resource for studyingknowledge creation in education, positioning the Knowledge Building design community to produce not onlyexportable "know-how" but to contribute significantly to knowledge of what students are capable of as juniormembers of a knowledge society. The data should provide a basis for models not only for education systemsconcerned about boosting basic skills but also for systems looking beyond test scores and '21st century skills' towhat could increase cultural capacity to innovate, advance knowledge, and solve societal problemsTechnology innovation, analytic tools and open source communityCollective goal: develop an educational software environment that mirrors conditions of the surrounding open,innovation-driven, knowledge society and that is maximally conducive to knowledge creation. The environmentshouldCSCL 2017 Proceedings705© ISLS•make it possible for all citizens to be productively engaged in a knowledge building community•incorporate analytic tools that provide support for sustained engagement leading to advances inknowledge and practice.•support quality of group life rather than focus exclusively on individual achievement•incorporate interface designs that make knowledge building activity transparent and adjustable as workproceeds.•support "on the fly" visualizations that allow users to view their discourse from multiple perspectives, aspart of the knowledge building process.•support sustained creative work with ideas•provide a scalable, cross-sector architecture to “rise above” idea fragments and clutter to powerful ideas•include assessment to enable instant individual and group feedback to boost knowledge building and helpusers advance in basics, 21st century competencies and new competencies in parallel•integrate face-to-face and online discourse into coherent knowledge-building/knowledge-creatingdialoguesOpen innovationIn “The Era of Open Innovation” Chesbrough (2003) states “the logic that supports an internally oriented,centralized approach to research and development (R&D) has become obsolete. Useful knowledge has becomewidespread and ideas must be used with alacrity. Such factors create a new logic of open innovation that embracesexternal ideas and knowledge in conjunction with internal R&D. This change offers novel ways to createvalue. …” As suggested in this quotation, successful enterprises are undergoing a fundamental shift from “closedinnovation” to “open innovation” that takes advantage of an abundant resource—ideas—and communities able tomove from promising ideas to useful innovations. Open innovation, as put into play by organizations ranging fromtechnology companies to the U.S. Office of Education, requires two things not normally found in innovationnetworks: (1) openness to input from anywhere in the world rather than input limited by network participants, and(2) a central authority that defines problems to be put out for open innovation and evaluates and coordinates inputsfrom that process. The multi-level challenge of networking for educational innovation is therefore to exploit thestrengths of three quite different forms of knowledge-creating interaction: local, small group collaboration inproblem solving and design development; larger scale innovation networks; and still larger scale open innovation,where there are no restriction on where productive ideas and problem solutions come from.Clearly not all these issues can be covered in the time available. The moderator will focus discussion onissues rising to prominence through ideas common to the presenters’ contributions and the audience response tothem.Significance of the symposium for the CSCL community and the CSCL 2017themeAn important part of CSCL 2017’s “equity and access” theme is work that seeks “ways to broaden the CSCLpipeline.” Including the voices of teachers and other practitioners is a first-order requirement of such broadening.Many, perhaps most CSCL design researchers already include practitioners as active agents in the design process.This has certainly been true of Knowledge Building researchers for decades. However, giving practitioners a voiceis not enough. Teachers and other practitioners represent a resource for innovation and invention that has proveddifficult to integrate fully into design and engineering processes. Because Knowledge Building is a principlesbased rather than a procedures-based approach (Hong & Sullivan, 2009), teachers’ creative input needs to extendbeyond devising activities and implementation strategies. It needs to advance ways of improving the overallfunctioning of a classroom or other group as a knowledge-creating community. In order to do this within the largeframework of Knowledge Building principles, practitioners themselves, along with researchers, engineers,administrators, and policymakers, need to function as a knowledge-creating community. Because the participantsin this “think tank” symposium have pursued this objective in various ways over a number of years, they have thepotential to produce design advances that will help the CSCL community as a whole in their pursuit of “equityand access.”CSCL 2017 Proceedings706© ISLSInternational panel and areas of expertiseBrazilCesar Nunes has implemented and evaluated large scale transformations on education including knowledgebuilding communities involving teachers, policy makers and researchers and on subjects as diverse as moraldevelopment, creativity, and science. He is a researcher of the Moral Development Group at the University ofCampinas, Brazil and consultant for OECD and Ayrton Senna Institute on programs for development andassessment of creativity and critical thinking.Telma Vinha is professor at the Faculty of Education, University of Campinas –Unicamp-, Brazil. She leads theMoral Development Studies and Research Group and has been coordinating programs involving public and privateschools around Brazil with the use of Knowledge Forum to connect Knowledge Building Principles and thedevelopment of student autonomy.CanadaMarlene Scardamalia invented CSILE, the first networked collaborative learning environment and is active inall aspects of research on Knowledge Building and Knowledge Building technology. As holder of the Presidents’Chair in Education and Knowledge Technology at the University of Toronto, she has led an international networkof researchers and innovators in education devoted to extending the limits of the possible in students’ functioningas knowledge-creating communities.Carl Bereiter is one of the originators of Knowledge Building as an educational approach and has been active inresearch related to it and to supportive technology design. His particular interest has been in the epistemologicalaspects of knowledge production (Bereiter, 2002, 2014, 2016).Thérèse Laferrière, Chair, Centre of Research and Intervention for Student and School Success (CRISAS/CRIRES), Université Laval, a multi-university research center on successful schooling, is conducting anumber of design research projects, including ones related to the Networked Remote School initiative, networkenabled communities of practice, and knowledge building communities. She is the lead researcher of a largenetwork on school attendance and academic achievement named PERISCOPE, and funded by the Quebec mainresearch funding agency (FRQ_SC).Alexander (Sandy) McAuley is an Associate Professor at the Faculty of Education at the University of PrinceEdward Island where he is the academic lead for the MEd cohort on 21st Century Teaching and Learning. He hasbeen working with Knowledge Building in cross-cultural contexts, specifically in northern Canadian contexts,since the early 1990s and is particularly interested in its role in redressing the imbalances of power betweenmarginalized and dominant groups in education.Richard Reeve has worked in various capacities (teacher, teacher/researcher & faculty member) alloriented toward developing, sustaining and researching knowledge building communities in schools. As theoriginal IKIT (Institute for Knowledge Innovation and Technology) teacher/researcher he becamedeeply interested in the role design plays in the implementation and development of innovative classroompractices. With his colleague Vanessa Svihla he has examined teacher discourse that supports this typeof designerly work.ChinaShaoming Chai is an Associate Professor and Vice-Dean of the International Business School, South ChinaNormal University, China. His research interests include computer-assisted language learning, online education,computer-supported collaborative learning, learning studies and technology, and international education.Carol K.K. Chan (University of Hong Kong) has conducted research on knowledge building and has expertise inassessment in collaborative learning settings. Her work was recognized with the outstanding paper award at CSCL2005. She is associate editor of the International Journal of Computer-supported Collaborative Learning.Jan van Aalst is Associate Dean (Research), and Associate Professor at the Faculty of Education, The UniversityCSCL 2017 Proceedings707© ISLSof Hong Kong. His areas of expertise include: Knowledge building, formative assessment, inquiry-based learning.He is Associate Editor for the Journal of the Learning Sciences.ColombiaFernando Díaz del Castillo is Director of Innovation and Development at Gimnasio La Montaña, in Bogotá,Colombia. He leads the implementation of educational technology to scaffold innovation, and improve the qualityof teaching, learning, assessment, as well as projects ranging from infrastructure renovations to internationalstudent exchanges and collaborations.FinlandKai Hakkarainen, Ph.D. (www.helsinki.academia.edu/KaiHakkarainen) is the professor of education at theInstitute of Behavioral Sciences, University of Helsinki. With his colleagues, Hakkarainen has, for 20 years,investigated personal and collaborative learning processes at all levels, from elementary to higher education. Froma strong theoretical basis he has addressed how learning and human intellectual resources can be expanded usingcollaborative technologies and personal and collective learning processes taking place in knowledge-intensiveorganizations, including innovative private corporations and academic research communities.Pirita Seitamaa-Hakkarainen is Professor of Craft Science at the University of Helsinki, Department of TeacherEducation. She has published studies in design and craft processes and practitioners’ expertise in these areas.Moreover, she has had lead research projects for studying learning through collaborative designing and developedassociated models and methods. Her investigations focus on creative processes involved in collaborative designactivities as well as expert and teacher scaffolding of the process.JapanYoshiaki Matsuzawa received his PhD in Media and Governance in 2008 from Keio University, Japan. He is anassociate professor in the School of Social Informatics at Aoyama Gakuin University. Research interests includeinformation systems design, computers as meta-media, and software development enabling change of learning.He is the initiating engineer for the current version of Knowledge Forum.Jun Oshima has been involved in knowledge building research for more than twenty years, working in classroomat various levels in Japanese and advancing research on representing the state of collective knowledgeadvancement. In collaboration with engineering researchers, he developed Knowledge Building DiscourseExplorer (KBDeX) for analyzing collaborative discourse in face-to-face and online communication.Hajime Shirouzu is a director of Consortium for Renovating Education of the Future (http://coref.utokyo.ac.jp/en), which late Naomi Miyake founded nine years ago. Hajime and Naomi have collaborated with2,000c teachers per year to introduce collaborative learning into ordinary classrooms in Japan.The NetherlandsFrank de Jong has implemented knowledge building pedagogy in university education, business professionaldevelopment, and currently in a two-year part-time MEd-program of Learning and Innovation of Aeres Universityof Applied sciences, Wageningen, the Netherlands. His current research is focused on responsive learning, thesemiotic character of knowledge building conversations, and the development of semantic learning analytics.SingaporeSeng Chee Tan is a deputy director of the Centre for Research and Development in Learning (CRADLE@NTU)at the Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He has been working on knowledge building communitiesin Singaporean schools since 2002 and has edited the book “Knowledge Creation in Education” published bySpringer in 2014.Chew Lee Teo, is the Lead Specialist, Singapore Ministry of Education, working closely with teachers, heads ofdepartments, and school leaders in principled adaptation of knowledge building. She connects teachers acrossSingapore in network knowledge building communities to establish idea-centered classrooms. She currently headsa group of specialists and teacher-researchers in exploring educational technology for active learning withtechnology in English Language, Chinese Language, Sciences, and the Humanities.CSCL 2017 Proceedings708© ISLSSpainMireia Montané is currently President of the World Federation of Associations for Teacher Education (WFATE)and director of the International Education Programs at the Col·legi de Doctors i Llicenciats in Catalonia, Spain.She is developing European Educational networks involving many European countries, and she is coordinator inEurope for the worldwide network KBIP (Knowledge Building International Network), using knowledge buildingtheories between students, teachers and researches.USAKaterine Bielaczyc is the Director of the Hiatt Center for Urban Education at Clark University. Dr. Bielaczyc'sresearch involves collaborating with students, teachers, and school communities to investigate new approaches toteaching and learning. Her work focuses on developing both technological and social infrastructures to supportparticipants in working together as a knowledge building community to create knowledge regarding personal,pedagogical, and systemic transformation.Bodong Chen is an Assistant Professor in learning technologies at the University of Minnesota. His primaryinterests include the design of new tools, analytics, and pedagogical supports to support higher-order competenciesin knowledge building.Mei-Hwa Chen, Mei-Hwa Chen is an Associate Professor at the Computer Science Department, University atAlbany, State University of New York, USA. Her research interests include software architecture, software testingand reliability engineering. Dr. Chen leads the software engineering team that develops and maintains large-scalesoftware applications in the education and the healthcare domainsJianwei Zhang is an associate professor at the University at Albany. His research explores a principle-based,emergent structuration approach to supporting sustained knowledge building practices across classrooms. Thisapproach is supported by the Idea Thread Mapper, a software tool designed to trace collective progress in extendedonline discourse, feedback on emergent structures, and connect idea threads across communities.ReferencesBereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Bereiter, C. (2014). Principled practical knowledge: Not a bridge but a ladder. Journal of the Learning Sciences,23(1), 4-17, DOI: 10.1080/10508406.2013.812533Bereiter, C. (2016). Theory building and education for understanding. In M. A. Peters (Ed.), Encyclopedia ofeducational philosophy and theory (Living Reference Work Entry). Singapore: SpringerScience+Business Media. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-287-532-7_370-1Bryk, A. S., Gomez, L. M., & Grunow, A. (2011). Getting ideas into action: Building networked improvementcommunities in education. In Hallinan, M. T. (Ed.), Frontiers in sociology of education (pp. 127-162).The Netherlands: Springer.Chesbrough, H.W. (2003). The era of open innovation. MIT Sloan Management Review, 44(3), 35-41.Deming, W.E. (1986). Out of the crisis. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology.DiMaggio, M., Gloor, P., & Passiante, G. (2009). Collaborative innovation networks, virtual communities, andgeographical clustering. International Journal of Innovation and Regional Development, 1(4), 387–404.Gloor, P. (2006). Swarm creativity: Competitive advantage through collaborative innovation networks. NY:Oxford University Press.Gloor, P. A., Fuehres, H., & Fischbach, K. (2016). “Only say something when you have something to say”:Identifying creatives through their communication patterns. In M. P. Zylka, H. Fuehres, A. FronzettiColladon, & P. Gloor (Eds.), Designing networks for innovation and improvisation: Proceedings of the6th International Collaborative Innovation Networks (COINs) Conference (pp. 65-75). Switzerland:Springer International. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-42697-6_7Hong, H. Y., Scardamalia, M., & Zhang, J. (2010). Knowledge Society Network: Toward a dynamic, sustainednetwork for building knowledge. Canadian Journal of Learning and Technology 36(1). Published onlineat http://www.cjlt.ca/index.php/cjlt/article/view/579Hong, H. Y., & Sullivan, F. (2009). Towards an idea-centered, principle-based design approach to supportlearning as knowledge creation. Educational Technology Research and Development, 57(5), 613-627.CSCL 2017 Proceedings709© ISLSOECD. (2013). Leadershipfor21stcenturylearning,OECDPublishing,Paris.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264205406-enScardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.)Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.Sorensen, S. (2009). The sustainable network: The accidental answer for a troubled planet. Sebastopol, CA:O’Reilly Media.CSCL 2017 Proceedings710© ISLS