How Did a Grade 5 Science Community Co-Construct CollectiveStructures of Inquiry?Dan Tao, University at Albany, State University of New York, dtao@albany.eduJianwei Zhang, University at Albany, State University of New York, jzhang1@albany.eduAbstract: This study investigates how a Grade 5 science community co-constructed collectivestructures of inquiry in the form of “research cycles” to support sustained inquiry in a wholeschool year. Qualitative analysis of field notes, classroom videos, and student notebooksdocumented the evolution of research cycles. Analysis of student interviews showed how thisstructure was used and adapted by individual student to position and monitor knowledgeprogress and plan for further inquiry. Content analyses of student online discourse inKnowledge Forum indicated that students made more purposeful contributions aligning withthe research cycle after formation.IntroductionOver the past two decades, learning scientists have made major advances to explore how authentic inquiry andknowledge-building processes may be enabled among students to achieve deep and productive outcomes.Extensive studies have examined the social and cognitive processes of inquiry-based learning and knowledgebuilding as well as teacher and technological scaffolding to support these processes (Bell et al., 2010; HmeloSilver, Duncan, & Chinn, 2007; Reiser, 2004; White & Frederiksen, 1998). Despite the conceptual insightsdeveloped, we, as a field, still face the challenge of how to bring sustained inquiry into classrooms to transformeducational practices. To address this challenge, researchers argued for the need of a social practice perspectiveto support this line of work (Hakkarainen, 2009; Stahl & Hesse, 2009), which will address idea-centeredknowledge building processes in conjunction with the cultivation of social practices that guide, channel, andsustain the participants’ personal and collaborative efforts in creative ways. Current classroom practices to carryout inquiry-based learning tend to enact inquiry as a set of procedures to address pre-defined tasks and challenges.This routine-based notion of practices tends to underestimate the role of participants’ agency and future-orientedimagination that drive dynamic changes of social practices. In real-world knowledge-building practices,participants continually build on and advance the knowledge assets of their community by generating andidentifying promising ideas and improving the them through sustained inquiry and discourse; by formulatingdeeper problems as solutions are developed; and by assuming leadership and responsibility at the highest levelsinstead of relying on the leader to tell them what to do (Amar, 2002; Dunbar, 1997; Sawyer, 2007). They do notsimply enact repeated procedures but also continually create and adapt their social practices as their knowledge isadvanced (Knorr Cetina, 2001, Zhang et al., 2009).This research explores a dynamic approach to inquiry-based knowledge practices drawing upon theKnowledge Building pedagogy (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006), a renowned inquiry-based program to cultivateauthentic knowledge-creating practices. Different from many other inquiry-based learning programs in whichstudents are required to work on predefined tasks/topics using step-by-step procedures and scripts, KnowledgeBuilding adopts an idea-centered and principle-based approach to classroom design. Students and their teachersco-construct and reconstruct the flow of inquiry as their work proceeds guided by a set of knowledge buildingprinciples (Scardamalia, 2002; Zhang et al., 2011). A challenge arises pertaining to how the idea-centered, openended actions/interactions are translated into coherent and supportive classroom practices without extensiveteacher pre-scripting. In light of social practice theories that highlight the interplay between human agency andsocial structures in sustained production and transformation of social practices (Giddens, 1984; Knorr Cetina,2001; Sewell, 1992), our empirical analysis of how productive knowledge building communities identified animportant socio-epistemic mechanism enabling sustained practices of knowledge building: reflective structurationby which students co-construct, adapt, and use collective structures to guide their collaborative work with ideas(Zhang, 2012). The collective structures serve as shared frames signifying structural properties of inquiry,including the epistemic objects/issues to be investigated as the focus of unfolding strands of practices (epistemicstructure) (Knorr Cetina, 2001), productive ways to conduct research (pragmatic structure), and who should workwhom in what roles (participatory structure) (Zhang, 2012). Students use such co-constructed structures to monitorand regulate their joint inquiry and position their roles and contributions. The purpose of this study is to investigatehow a Grade 5 science community co-constructed the collective structures of inquiry in the form of “researchcycles” to support an emergent trajectory of inquiry in a year-long initiative.CSCL 2017 Proceedings660© ISLSMethodClassroom contextsThe study was conducted in a Grade 5 classroom with 19 students (10-11 years old) from upstate New York in2014-2015. The students investigated human body systems with Knowledge Forum (Scardamalia & Bereiter,2006). Knowledge building practices in the classroom integrated individual and small group reading, whole classface-to-face conversations, individual and small group modeling and demonstrations, and student-directedpresentations. Major questions and findings generated through these activities were contributed to KF forcontinual discourse.Data sources and analysesTo understand the evolution of the “research cycles”, we conducted qualitative analysis with rich classroom data.Reviewing field notes which recorded classroom activities in the whole year yielded the discovery of key eventsto zoom into. Classroom videos capturing these moments were transcribed and analyzed using a narrativeapproach to video analysis (Derry et al., 2010). Meanwhile, pictures of students’ notebooks and classroom artifactsprovided additional information about the processes involved in the process. In order to understand how studentsused the pragmatic structure after formation, we interviewed the students who agreed to share their comments.The interviews were transcribed, analyzed with open coding (Charmaz, 2006) and interpreted using a descriptivemethod.To examine relationships between the actions in the research cycles and students’ contributions to thecollective discourse, we coded students’ online discourse in terms of their contribution types (Zhang et al., 2011).In line with the essential actions on the inquiry cycles, the level 1 categories include questioning, theorizing andexplaining, collective evidence and referencing sources as different ways of doing research, andconnecting/integrating as an outcome of knowledge sharing. Under the level 1 categories, a set of codes capturemore specific productive discourse patterns: factual question vs. explanatory question; idea initiating wondermentvs. idea deepening question; intuitive explanation, alternative explanation vs. refined explanation, and evidence.FindingsEvolution of the research cycles over the whole school yearAnalysis of field notes, classroom videos, pictures of students’ notebooks, and artifacts created by studentsrevealed the following main phases involved in the evolution of the research cycles (see Figure 1):(a)(b)(c)Figure 1. Evolution of Research Cycles.(d)Phase 1- Reflection on individual journey of inquiry: In early November, when the teacher noticedstudents actively commented and built upon each other’s ideas, he brought up the concept of research journey.With two questions provided by the teacher, each student reflected reflect on their own learning journey, in termsof where they were now and where to go next. Each student reflected on their previous inquiry and wrote downthe answers in their notebooks (see Fig. 1a). Students first shared and discussed their answers in small groups.Later the teacher they organized a whole class discussion to share the reflection.Phase 2- Co-generation and improvement of small group research cycles: Students worked in smallgroups and generated group-based research cycles according to their individual reflection on research journey andexperience in collaborative inquiry. Most of the research cycles generated by small groups included some similarcomponents (see Fig. 1b). Each small group used their own model to reflect on their knowledge building workand decided what they needed to do for deeper inquiry. After gaining deeper experiences with the inquiry processCSCL 2017 Proceedings661© ISLSin small groups, the five small groups revisited and updated their research cycles in mid-December, mostly torefine the sequences of the components and rephrase the components (see Fig. 1c).Phase 3- Synthesis of small group research cycles into the collective research cycle: In the January of2015, the teacher encouraged students to reflect on their previous research and develop a collective model ofresearch that everyone can use to guide new research in the Spring. Students first identified the first threecomponents: asking a question, initial research, and sharing online or in whole class meetings. After that theyproposed and included four more components: theorize, research deeper, revise theories, and share within theclass (then start over), leading to the finalized collective research cycle, which was hung on the wall for studentsto refer to (See Fig. 1d).Phase 4- Adaptive use of the collective cycle by individuals and small groups: After formation, studentsrevisit the collective structure from time to time in their subsequent inquiry. All the seven students interviewedthought the research cycle was helpful in guiding their knowledge building process. Analysis of their reflectivecomments on how they specifically used the research cycle yielded two categories: (a) following the cycle; and(b) adapting the cycle. A few of the students followed all the components in order when they investigated differenttopics. For example, some students mentioned: “I did everything on the cycle.” “All of the topics I did, I alwaysdid that order……” Other students used the structure in a more adaptive way, like: using part of the cycle (“I kindof using it... I did pretty much my own thing...”); using as baseline to develop personal cycle (“I would use thecycle to guide me...I would use just like baseline...I have my own research cycle…); and using flexibly whenneeded (“...my first question was schizo… the research cycle for me is kind of smaller. It can be larger if...”).Knowledge building achievements in Knowledge ForumWe analyzed how students made various types of knowledge-building contributions as reflected in their onlinediscourse before and after the emergence of the research cycles over the whole school year (see Table 1). Analysisindicated that before the discussion of the collective research cycle, the most visible online contributions wererelatively broad explanatory questions about the body systems and generated intuitive explanations. After thenegotiation of the research cycles that systematically highlighted a diverse range of specific knowledge buildingactions, students had a large number of posts raising idea-initiating questions and idea-deepening questions,elaborating ideas using referential sources of information, using evidence to support or challenge ideas, providingalternative explanations, and connecting and integrating ideas to develop coherent understandings.Table 1: Students’ knowledge building contributions in Knowledge ForumContribution Type1. QuestioningFactual questionExplanatory questionIdea initiating questionIdea-deepening question2. Theorizing/Intuitive explanationexplainingAlternative explanationRefined explanation3. Evidence4. Referencing sources5. Connecting & integratingBefore research cycles8451724110133118241After research cycles81848701143429881677DiscussionThis study examined how a Grade 5 knowledge building community worked together to co-generate a collectivestructure in the form of “research cycles “and used the structure adaptively to sustain productive knowledgebuilding over a school year. Focusing on their initial questions and interests about human body systems, studentsfirst conducted inquiry based on their intuitive sense of the process of research as it had been loosely practiced intheir prior schooling experience. As Table 1 suggests, their actions of inquiry typically involved asking broadquestions about human body systems, generating intuitive explanations, and finding refined ideas usinginformation sources. Reflecting on their initial journeys of research as individuals, small groups, and a wholecommunity provided a dynamic social context by which the pragmatic structure of the research process emergedand was reified as formal research cycles. The emergence of the research cycles underwent several iterative cyclesof reflective talks: students reflected on their journeys of research in small groups, and bootstrapping theirreflective discussions, they made efforts to “peek” into the practices of scientists to adopt essential componentsof research. The research cycles of the small groups were shared and discussed in a whole class discussion andused by the small groups for a period of time. Based on their trial of their research cycles, students then reconvenedCSCL 2017 Proceedings662© ISLSas a whole community to generate a collective model of research cycles, as a structure-bearing artifact. The teacherhung the research cycle model on the wall to ease its use. Through the intentional and adaptive use of the researchcycles as a local structure of inquiry, students conducted sophisticated knowledge building practices as acommunity. The profile of knowledge building contributions in the community’s online discourse was diversifiedin reflection of important components of the research cycles.Aligned with the findings from our other study (Tao et al., 2015), this analysis guided by the adaptivestructuration perspective contributes to understanding sustained knowledge practices driven by distributed studentinteractions without extensive pre-scripting. Clearly, deeper research on the teacher’s role in facilitating thestructuration process is needed to better understand such dynamics and shed light on specific designs to implementreflective structuration in classrooms.ReferencesAmar, A. D. (2002). Managing knowledge workers: Unleashing innovation and productivity. Westport, CT:Quorum books.Dunbar, K. (1997). How scientists think: Online creativity and conceptual change in science. In T. B. Ward, S.M. Smith & S. Vaid (Eds.), Conceptual structures and processes: Emergence, discovery and change (pp.461-493). Washington, DC: APA Press.Hakkarainen, K. (2009). A knowledge-practice perspective on technology-mediated learning. ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, 4, 213-231.Knorr Cetina, K. (2001). Objectual practice. In T. R. Schatzki, K. Knorr Cetina & E. Savigny (eds.), The practiceturn in contemporary theory (pp.175-188). London: Routledge.Bell, T., Urhahne, D., Schanze, S., & Ploetzner, R. (2010). Collaborative inquiry learning: Models, tools, andchallenges. International Journal of Science Education, 32(1), 349-377.Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative analysis. ThousandOaks, CA: SAGE Publications.Derry, S. J., Pea, R. D., Barron, B., Engle, R.A., Erickson, F. Goldman, R., et al. (2010). Conducting videoresearch in the learning sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19, 3–53.Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution of society. Cambridge, Oxford: Polity Press.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Duncan, R. G., & Chinn, C. A. (2006). Scaffolding and achievement in problem-based andinquiry learning: A response to Kirschner, Sweller, and Clark. Educational Psychologist, 42(2), 99-107.Reiser, B. J. (2004). Scaffolding complex learning: The mechanism of structuring and problematizing studentwork. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 273-304.Sawyer, R. K. (2007). Group genius: The creative power of collaboration. New York: Basic Books.Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.),Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago, IL: Open Court.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In R. K. Sawyer(Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97-115). New York: Cambridge UniversityPress.Sewell, W. H. Jr. (1992). A theory of structure: Duality, agency, and transformation. American Journal ofSociology, 98(1), 1-29.Stahl, G., & Hesse, F. (2009). Classical dialogs in CSCL. International Journal of Computer-Supported Learning,4(3), 233-237.Tao, D., Zhang, J., & Huang, Y. (2015). How did a grade 5 community formulate progressive, collective goals tosustain knowledge building over a whole school year? In O. Lindwall & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.),Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning(CSCL2015). International Society of the Learning Sciences.White, B. Y., & Frederiksen, J. R. (1998). Inquiry, modelling, and metacognition: Making science accessible toall students. Cognition and Instruction, 16, 3-118.Zhang, J. (2012). Designing adaptive collaboration structures for advancing the community’s knowledge. In D.Y. Dai (Ed.), Design research on learning and thinking in educational settings (pp.201-224). Routledge.Zhang, J., Hong, H., Scardamalia, M., Teo, C. L., & Morley, E. A. (2011). Sustaining knowledge building as aprinciple-based innovation at an elementary school. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20, 262-307.Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., & Messina, R. (2009). Designs for collective cognate responsibility inknowledge building communities. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18, 7-44.AcknowledgmentsThis research was sponsored by the National Science Foundation (IIS #1441479).CSCL 2017 Proceedings663© ISLS