Whose Culture Is It?Modeling the Designs of Authentic Learning Environments and theCultures They MediateYotam Hod and Ornit Sagyyhod@edu.haifa.ac.il, ornit.sagy@gmail.comUniversity of HaifaAbstract: A major theme of educational research has focused on cultural practices that arelearned within formal and informal settings. Many innovative approaches to classroom designcome with the intention that practices of the people who are experts in a domain areenculturated by classroom students. This idea, known as authenticity, has been carefullyconceptualized in a large variation of educational settings. Cognizant of the inherent gapbetween conceptualizations and their implementation, we used a constant-comparative methodto analyze different variations of authentic learning designs. With the aim of bridging thisresearch-practice gap, our analysis resulted in a model of cultural interaction within learningenvironments based on different configurations of participants and settings. The conceptualcontribution of our research is a refined framework of authenticity that foregrounds the role ofhuman interaction in cultural mediation. Practically, our model contributes new insights intothe design of authentic learning environments.Keywords: Authentic; CSCL; culture; enculturation; human interactionIntroductionThe modern history of education has been shaped by two revolutions – the industrial revolution, which marked atransition between learning by apprenticeship in the agrarian age to traditional schooling in the industrial age;and the digital revolution, currently underway, from traditional schooling to learning in a networked society(Collins & Halverson, 2009). One of the most significant differences between learning by apprenticeship andtraditional schooling has been a change in the interaction of the student with the practitioner. In theapprenticeship model, the student learned directly from the person who practiced a profession or skill. Intraditional schooling, a teacher was introduced so that students could learn about one or more professions. Thisseparation between the students and practitioner has been a long-standing criticism of traditional schooling asfundamentally inauthentic compared to the ‘real’ way society operates (Dewey, 1916; Sawyer, 2014).The rise of the networked society has opened new opportunities to re-establish ties between the studentand practitioner, addressing this year’s conference theme of prioritizing equity and access in CSCL. Suchrevelations were dominant forces in the establishment of the field, expressed in ideas such as cognitiveapprenticeship (Collins, 2006) and authentic learning (Edelson & Reiser, 2006). Socioculturally-mindedresearchers broadened this view beyond just the direct interaction of student and practitioner, but as givingstudents access to communities of practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991) or the culture and norms of a particularcommunity (Rogoff, 2003). In this way, authentic learning has been conceived of as enculturation of thepractices in a relevant domain (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989).The application of these ideas to the design of CSCL learning environments has been far reaching,particularly in classroom learning communities (Bielacyzc, Kapur, & Collins, 2013; Hod & Ben-Zvi, 2015).With an eye on contributing to these important advances, this research focuses on human interaction withinlearning environments designed for authenticity. Specifically, in this study we looked back at the past twodecades of research in the learning sciences and CSCL communities to analyze the way different variations ofstudent-teacher-practitioner interactions have been designed to mediate authentic cultural practices.Designing for authenticityThe term authenticity has been taken up in disciplines both outside and inside education (Radinsky, Bouillion,Lento, & Gomez, 2001). In this paper, we refer to authenticity in the context of a large theme of CSCL research,informed by sociocultural perspectives of learning. While specific conceptions of authenticity vary, themotivation as it relates to the design of classrooms articulated by Brown, Collins, and DuGuid (1989) in theirseminal paper, Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning, is widely accepted. According to them, “Toooften the practices of contemporary schooling deny students the chance to engage the relevant domain culture,CSCL 2017 Proceedings87© ISLSbecause that culture is not in evidence” (p. 34). Along these lines, CSCL environments have been designed toapproximate the culture of the people who actually practice the domain – the authentic practitioners (Edelson &Reiser, 2006).The constraints of human interaction in traditional educational settingsThe inability for students to have direct, continuous interaction with authentic practitioners over meaningfulperiods of time is a constraint of educational settings (Lim & Barnes, 2005; Timmis, 2014). For example, theratio of newcomers to old-timers found in classrooms contrasts sharply with learning in professionalcommunities, where cultural maintenance and evolution have a higher balance of old-timers versus newcomers(Roth, McGinn, Woszczyna, & Boutonne, 1999). These distinctions highlight how real-world professionalpractice comprises of a distinct ecology compared with educational programs (Table 1). As such, educationalprograms require different types of innovative designs to prepare students for life outside of school.Table 1: Comparison of professional communities and educational programsProfessional CommunitiesEducational ProgramsQuantity and ratioLarge membership, making the old-timerto-newcomer ratio high. For example, theratio of a newcomer to a disciplinarycommunity can be 1:1,000’s.Small membership, making the individual-toculture ratio low. For example, the newcomer(students) to old-timer (teacher) ratio in aclassroom can be 30:1.Continuity anddurationMembership changes rotationally. Members School membership changes rotationally.enter, often stay for a long period of time Members enter, often stay for several years,then leave; Classroom membership begins(e.g., career), then leave.and ends together, for a greater part of a year.Approaches to designing for authenticityGiven the constraints of educational settings, authentic learning environments have been designed andconceptualized as taking either a simulation or participation approach, with the crux of the distinction based onwhether or not students have direct interaction with the practitioner, as well as in what context or setting theinteractions take place (Cho, Caleon, & Kapur, 2015; Radinsky et al., 2001). Simulations refer to formaleducational programs that aim for their culture to more closely resemble, align with, or approximate theauthentic culture (Hay & Barab, 2001; Hung et al., 2008; Bereiter & Scardamalia, 2003). In this approach,cultural mediators such as tools, discourse, and artifacts “map to the activity of some professional community”(Radinsky et al., 2001, p. 406).In contrast to the simulation approach, the participation approach provides students with opportunitiesfor direct interaction with practitioners of the culture that the designer intends for their students to enculturate,typically in the context of out-of-school communities. In such approaches, the cultural mediation is embeddedwithin these interactions. Students learn cultural practices as an outcome of these apprenticeship-likeinteractions. Even though the term participation is useful to describe this approach, we emphasize that this isn’tfull participation. These interactions are designed within the frameworks of the school setting and are typicallyregulated by a school instructor, may be limited to working on developmentally appropriate tasks, and/or havetime restrictions. As such, we prefer to call them hybrids.While the distinction between the simulation and hybrid approaches appear straightforward, a closelook reveals its problematic nature. Hypothetically, if the teacher is a member of the intended authentic culture,then should the design be considered a simulation or hybrid? Alternatively, if a group of students learns in anauthentic setting but doesn’t have direct interaction with its actual practitioners, how should this categorized?This issue lays bare a fundamental problem with the way the design of authentic learning environments areconceptualized. Whose culture is really being enculturated? Stated differently, whose culture is it?Given the primacy of human interaction and setting in existing conceptions of authentic designs and theproblems they raise, we were interested to see if there was a way to refine these categorizations. Specifically, weasked: What are the different variations of simulation and hybrid approaches to authentic designs? How can arefined categorization help elucidate which culture is being enculturated?CSCL 2017 Proceedings88© ISLSMethodsTo answer our research questions, we conducted a review of research designs for authenticity from theperspective that we have previously elaborated upon. To find a representative data set of existing research, weturned to the two official journals of the International Society of the Learning Sciences: The Journal of theLearning Sciences (JLS) and the International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning(iJCSCL). The foundation of our data corpus was built upon an exhaustive search of the entire catalogues ofthese journals, from their inception through 2014. We limited our search to articles that explicitly includedderivatives of the word authenticity (e.g., authentic, authentically). We similarly broadened our search to includederivatives of the term enculturation (e.g., enculturative, enculturate, enculturating) to be inclusive of researchthat may not have been explicitly identified with the authentic concept, but maintained the related ideas.Following an initial review of the contents of the 39 articles that we found, we further limited ourcorpus for formal, systematic analysis to 21 articles that clearly articulated the components of a clearlyelaborated design where the purpose was for students to enculturate authentic practices (a list of these articlescan be found at https://goo.gl/4l9ycz). Due to the high yield of articles in our final corpus as well as theirdistribution over time, we concluded this was a sufficient and representative sample of articles for our analysis,consistent with other such reviews (e.g., Ellis & Goodyear, 2016).We began our review by carefully examining the designs of each study within our final corpus ofarticles using a constant-comparative method (Glaser & Strauss, 1967). This involved going through stages of(1) collaboratively negotiating the meaning of a concept and design, which often required interpretation andcontextual inference, until we reached a consensus view; (2) going back and forth between our emergingconception and subsequent articles to integrate categories; (3) defining our conceptualization until we developedthe tools necessary to model the design within each paper we considered; and (4) going through our entire datacorpus carefully to verify our findings.FindingsTo show the categories and variations of the authentic designs which we reviewed, we start this section byexplicating the refined conceptual framework and model that resulted from the analysis. Based on thisframework, we describe the authentic design variations that we found. We note that although we present therefined conceptualization first, our analysis was recursive in that we went back and forth between our model andour conceptualization of the designs. We present the conceptual framework first because this provides us thelanguage and symbolic tools necessary to communicate the model.Refined conceptual framework and modelOur analysis resulted in four dimensions necessary to distinguish between the designs from our data corpus,including the number of participants (individual, group, community); types of participants (learner, practitioner,teacher, designer, cultural representative); culture (actual, authentic, intended), and setting (classroom,practitioner). While most of these were unambiguous as they were described in the research we reviewed, thedifferent cultures described required us to clarify certain definitions that were based on the authors variedconceptions. Ultimately, we settled on these definitions:• An actual culture is a pattern of activities that is developed over time for a community to achieve itsvalued purposes (Nasir, Roseberry, Warren, & Lee, 2014). It can be found within and acrosseducational, professional, or practitioner settings.• An intended culture is a designer’s vision of one or more actual cultures that establishes the goals ofthe learning environment.• An authentic culture is the actual cultures upon which the intended culture is based.During our analysis we recognized the importance of applying the notion of intended culture for theanalysis of all our cases, even though it was seldom conceptualized as part of the designs we reviewed (e.g.,Bielaczyc & Ow, 2013; Hay & Barab, 2001; O’Neill, 2001). The intended culture is important because it acts asa conceptual bridge between actual classroom cultures and authentic cultures. The intended culture is basedupon the designer’s experiences, knowledge of learning, interpretation of authentic cultures, etc., that may noteven be clearly articulated (McKenney & Reeves, 2012; Sandoval, 2014). It is necessarily imagined,representing a combination of one or more authentic cultures that the designer(s) may be a part of. The teacher,who can be the designer or the enactor of others’ designs (Kali, McKenney, & Sagy, 2015), can vary betweenbeing a central member of an authentic culture or can just have knowledge of it without ever being aparticipating member. We are not saying that one situation is better than the other, as oftentimes practitionersCSCL 2017 Proceedings89© ISLSare bad teachers, or the best teachers are not authentic practitioners. But certainly, a defining characteristic ofauthentic learning environments is that the teacher represents the culture that the designers intend to foster.Based on this conceptualization of these cultures, and in addition to the other relevant dimensions described inour data corpus, we generated a model that shows their relationships (Figure 1).Figure 1. Refined model of authentic designs with simulation and hybrid prototypes.Modeling the designs of authentic learning environmentsTable 1 summarizes the two categories of authentic learning environments. Within each category, we havefound a prototypical version along with three variations. Prototypical versions represent the simplest case. Incases where there were multiple designs within one study, we labelled the Design# alphabetically in the orderthey appeared in their publication (e.g., 11a, 11b) as specified in the online list (https://goo.gl/4l9ycz).Table 2: Categories and variations of authentic designsCategorySimulationHybridVariationPrototypeDescriptionInteraction with authentic practitioners limited to teacherVariation 1Interaction with practitioners from a single actual culturewith a focus on classroom activitiesVariation 2Interaction with practitioners from several actual cultureswith a focus on classroom activities11aVariation 3Interaction with practitioners from the authentic culturewith a focus on classroom activities3PrototypeParticipation in an educational setting (e.g., classroom)reflexively related to interaction with practitioners from anactual culture with a focus on the practitioners’ culture14Variation 1Participation in an educational setting (e.g., classroom)reflexively related to interaction with authenticpractitioners outside of class with a focus on their culture10, 22bVariation 2Participation in an educational setting (e.g., classroom)reflexively related to interaction with authenticpractitioners in and outside of class with a focus on theirculture22aVariation 3Participation in an authentic setting with a focus on thepractitioners’ culture11bCSCL 2017 Proceedings90Design#2, 5, 12, 15, 18, 24, 25,26, 28, 30, 31, 33, 34,37, 381© ISLSSimulationsMost of the cases (18/23; 78%) that we found were simulations. This is expected, as the simulation categoryrequires the least dependency on and coordination with practitioners outside of the educational setting. Insimulation approaches, interactions are predominantly in or about what is happening in the educational setting,contributing to its actual culture. This is true even when outsiders are involved in the designed learningenvironment, such as can be found in the variations. Figure 2 models the prototype and three variations that wefound.Figure 2. Simulation approach with variations.The predominant case among all categories and variations that we found was the simulation prototype.While there are vast differences between these cases, all of them rely on one or more teachers being therepresentatives of an intended culture. For example, to get students to enculturate knowledge building practices,Zhang et al. (2009) adjusted the participatory structures within the classroom so that the students couldopportunistically collaborate. In some cases, there may be outside experts, such as in one of Gordin and Pea’s(1995) SciV models, where the teacher is also an expert member of the authentic culture. But this is in line withour view of the teacher as a representative of the intended culture and therefore can be modeled by thesimulation prototype.Variation 1 is a simulation where outside practitioners are involved in the classroom activities. Unlikein Gordin and Pea’s (1995) design, these outsiders do not have roles as teachers. Roseberry, Warren andConant’s (1992) collaborative inquiry approach is an example of variation 1. The main focus of the design wasfor students to enculturate scientific discourse by planning and carrying out investigations in their local andhome communities. As part of their investigations into the quality of water from their school fountains, studentsinteracted with their local community to collect data and share their findings. Therefore, the design is asimulation that included interactions with practitioners from an actual culture.Variation 2 is a simulation where outside practitioners are involved in the classroom activities. Thisvariation represents Hay and Barab (2001)’s FC97 summer camp, where three groups of students were workingclosely with a pair of practitioners who were not part of the authentic culture. While the intended culture wasthat of disciplinary-based virtual-world designers (e.g., solar system virtual reality), the practitioners includedone education and one technology-related graduate student. Therefore, the design was a simulation that includedinteractions with practitioners from two different actual cultures.In variation 3, students in a classroom has direct interaction with authentic practitioners. This variationis exemplified by Magnusson, Templin, and Boyle’s (1997) Dynamic Science Assessment. Specifically, thepractitioners are researchers who practice the relevant domain culture. They come to the classroom to participatein doing dynamic science assessment, which is the basis for the intended culture that tries to approximate thescientific practice of continuously advancing conceptualizations. Therefore, the design was a simulation thatincluded interactions with practitioners from the authentic culture.HybridsWe found four variations of hybrid designs that are modeled in Figure 3. Shared among all the cases was that inaddition to the simulation, students had direct interactions with actual or authentic practitioners. In comparisonto the simulation variations, the outside-of-classroom interactions in the hybrid models focused upon thepractitioners’ culture. This can be seen visually in figure 3 in the placement of the learners on the borderbetween the actual classroom culture and the actual or authentic practitioners’ cultures.CSCL 2017 Proceedings91© ISLSFigure 3. Hybrid approach with variations.The hybrid prototype is exemplified in Barab, Barnett and Squire’s (2002) community of teachers(CoT). In this case, the learners (who are teachers) not only participate in classroom activities (Universityseminars), but at the same time interact with the staff and students in an actual school where they have a chanceto implement their ideas. As the purpose of the CoT is based on an intended culture of “expert teaching” (p.491), the school is a setting that the teachers attempt to change. Therefore, the design has a simulation that isreflexively related to direct participation within an actual practitioner culture.Fisher et al. (2007) and O’Neill (2001) provide two cases from different disciplines, age groups, andsettings that both exemplify hybrid variation 1. In Fisher et al.’s study, students from the University of Seigenbalance between “learning about” and “learning to be” as part of their practice-oriented education in informationsystems. Specifically, students learn to be by participating in local IT companies. They learn about byparticipating in a University-based community system that involves academic supervisors, guest lectures, andother students. O’Neill’s (2001) design similarly involves a hybrid of simulation and participation approaches.High school students studying earth science develop self-directed research projects within the context of theirclassroom. Additionally, each student develops a long-term online relationship with a “telementor” who is anauthentic practitioners (graduate student or professionals in the discipline). The telementors role is to guide andprovide critical feedback to the student on their research. In both cases, there are two settings that are reflexivelyrelated. In comparison to the hybrid prototype where interactions in the outside-the-classroom settings are in anactual culture, in variation 1 the interactions are with authentic practitioners.Hybrid variation 2, exemplified in Fisher et al.’s (2007) University of Colorado Center for LifelongLearning and Design Research Apprenticeship Program, is similar to hybrid variation 1 with an additional typeof interaction. Each student works in a research team that includes doctoral students, post-doctoral researchers,and faculty. This ‘vertical integration’ provides interactions with authentic practitioners for the graduatestudents. At the same time, the graduate students enter into the ‘horizontal integration’, which is a course thatconsists of graduate students along with their colleagues from each research team. The goal of this hybrid is“crossing different knowledge spaces and nourishing a fertile middle ground between disciplines” (p. 19).Therefore, the learners (graduate students) are members of both a course (simulation) and authentic culture(participation) along with authentic practitioners.Hybrid variation 3 involves designing to provide direct interaction with practitioners without aneducational setting for the learners to convene as a group, such as in a classroom. In this design the focus is onthe practitioners’ culture. Because there is no classroom, there is no intended culture outside of where thestudent participates. This variation is exemplified in Hay and Barab (2001)’s SAC97 summer camp, where“apprenticeship was operationalized as simply putting students into a real laboratory with a practicing scientist”(p. 288). Their design consisted of small groups of students working directly with a mentor scientist (withguidance of a K-12 teacher) on authentic research problems in the settings where the research took place.Because there was no classroom, the teachers in this case were not representatives of an intended culture, buthelped students enculturate the practices of the authentic culture. Still, there was a role of a designer (the campdirector) who created this educational opportunity.Discussion and conclusionThis research examined the different ways that learning environments are designed to foster authentic learning.It is interesting to note that the most common design (65% of those we found) are the simulation prototypes,where the learners interact only amongst themselves and the teacher(s). This testifies to the creativity ofdesigners who find unique ways to provide students access to authentic discourse, practices, tools, and alikegiven the common limitations of educational settings and the large investment of resources required. To beclear, we are not making any judgments regarding the quality of the enculturation that is the outcome of anyCSCL 2017 Proceedings92© ISLSmodel or specific study. We even note others who purposefully stepped back from near complete participationby having teachers serve as intermediaries between experts and students, such as in Hay and Barab’s SAC97(2001).The project that we have taken upon ourselves to model these different designs is an attempt to riseabove a broad array of educational designs which we hope provides clarity on the similarities and differencesamong them. In particular, we have focused a great deal on developing a parsimonious set of symbolic tools(bottom of Figure 1) which takes into account the relevant dimensions underlying the interactions betweenparticipants, cultures, and settings. Beyond the theoretical contribution, this research can be beneficial fordesigners by giving them a framework to identify the constraints of their programs and the aspects of theirdesigns that can facilitate enculturation. Beyond this, using the tools we have identified can help designersimagine different variations that may not exist.While our research is based upon widely held notions of authentic learning (e.g., Cho, Caleon, &Kapur, 2015; Radinsky et al., 2001), it has a different emphasis and conceptualization, exemplified by thedefinitions we have articulated. We recognize that authentic learning can happen in simulated or hybrid designs,and that there is no hard barrier or restriction on anyone, in any setting, to engage in forms of authentic practice.Even when there is no direct interaction with authentic practitioners, students in classrooms can have access toan authentic culture through the use of developmentally appropriate tools, discourse, participatory structures, orother culture mediators within the classroom (Edelson & Reiser, 2006). Having direct human interaction withexperts or practitioners in the relevant domain is not a condition of authentic learning; it is just one potent wayto foster authentic learning through apprenticeship, such as modeling, coaching, and reflection (Collins, 2006).Where we conceptualize things differently is that we see simulation and hybrid approaches as twoforms of guided participation of school students into authentic cultures. Instead of there being a single authenticculture that students in learning environments can enculturate, educational constraints, where there is a hardbarrier between participation in schools and participation in actual cultures, require that designers provideinterpretations or visions of the authentic cultures. Consequently, notions like the intended culture become avital part of the conceptualization, as is the relationship between the role of the teacher and designer, actual andauthentic cultures, and school and professional settings. We are not saying anything that hasn’t been said before;our contribution is modeling these ideas within one integrated framework.ReferencesBarab, S. A, Barnett, M., & Squire, K. (2002). Developing an empirical account of a community of practice:Characterizing the essential tensions. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 11(4), 489-542.Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (2003). Learning to work creatively with knowledge. In E. De Corte, L.Verschaffel, N. Entwistle, & J. van Merrienboer (Eds.), Unravelling basic components and dimensionsof powerful learning environments (pp. 55–68). Chicago, IL: Open Court.Bielaczyc, K., Kapur, M., & Collins, A. (2013). Cultivating a community of learners in K-12 classrooms. In C.E. Hmelo-Silver, C. A. Zhang, C. K. Chan, & A. M. O’Donnell (Eds.), International Handbook ofCollaborative Learning (pp. 233–249), New York, NY: Routledge.Bielaczyc, K., & Ow, J. (2014). Multi-player epistemic games: Guiding the enactment of classroom knowledgebuilding communities. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 9(1), 3362.Brown, A. L. & Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.)Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 229-272). Cambridge,UK: The MIT Press.Brown, J. S., Collins, A., Duguid, P., & Brown, S. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning.Educational Researcher, 18(1), 32–42.Cho, Y. H., Caleon, I. S., & Kapur, M. (2015). Authentic Problem Solving and Learning in the 21st Century:Perspectives from Singapore and Beyond. Singapore: Springer.Collins, A. (2006). Cognitive apprenticeship. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learningsciences (pp. 47-60). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Collins, A., & Halverson, R. (2009). Rethinking education in the age of technology: The digital revolution andschooling in America. Teachers College Press.Dewey, J. (1916). Democracy and education: An introduction to the philosophy of education. In J. Boydston(Ed.), The middle works of John Dewey (Vol. 9). Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.Edelson, D., & Reiser, B. (2006). Making authentic practices accessible to learning: Design challenges andstrategies. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 335-354).New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.CSCL 2017 Proceedings93© ISLSEllis, R. A., & Goodyear, P. (2016). Models of learning space: Integrating research on space, place and learningin higher education. Review of Education.Fischer, G., Rohde, M., & Wulf, V. (2007). Community-based learning: The core competency of residential,research-based universities. International Journal of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning, 2(1), 9-40.Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research.Chicago: Aldine.Gordin, D. N., & Pea, R. D. (1995). Prospects for scientific visualization as an educational technology. TheJournal of the Learning Sciences, 4(3), 249-279.Hay, K. E., & Barab, S. A. (2001). Constructivism in practice: A comparison and contrast of apprenticeship andconstructionist learning environments. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10(3), 281-322.Hod, Y., & Ben-Zvi, D. (2015). Students negotiating and designing their collaborative learning norms: A groupdevelopmental perspective in learning communities. Interactive Learning Environments, 23(5), 578594.Hung, D., Lim, K. Y., Chen, D. T. V., & Koh, T. S. (2008). Leveraging online communities in fosteringadaptive schools. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3(4), 373-386.Kali, Y., McKenney, S., & Sagy, O. (2015). Teachers as designers of technology enhanced learning.Instructional Science, 43(2), 173-179.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.Lim, C. P., & Barnes, S. (2005). A collective case study of the use of ICT in economics courses: A socioculturalapproach. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(4), 489-526.Magnusson, S. J., Templin, M., & Boyle, R. A. (1997). Dynamic science assessment: A new approach forinvestigating conceptual change. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 6(1), 91-142.McKenney, S., & Reeves, T. C. (2012). Conducting educational research design. London: Routledge.Nasir, Roseberry, Warren, & Lee, (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, andtechnology. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences, Second Edition(pp. 687-706). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.O'Neill, D. K. (2001). Knowing when you've brought them in: Scientific genre knowledge and communities ofpractice. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10(3), 223-264.Radinsky, J., Bouillion, L., Lento, E. M., & Gomez, L. M. (2001). Mutual benefit partnership: A curriculardesign for authenticity. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 33(4), 405-430.Rogoff, B. (2003). The cultural nature of human development. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.Rosebery, A. S., Warren, B., & Conant, F. R. (1992). Appropriating scientific discourse: Findings fromlanguage minority classrooms. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(1), 61-94.Roth, W. M., McGinn, M. K., Woszczyna, C., & Boutonne, S. (1999). Differential participation during scienceconversations: The interaction of focal artifacts, social configurations, and physical arrangements.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8(3-4), 293-347.Sandoval, W. (2014). Conjecture mapping: An approach to systematic educational design research. Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 23(1), 18–36.Sawyer, R. K. (2014). Foundations of the learning sciences. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook ofthe learning sciences, 2nd Edition (pp. 1-20). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Timmis, S. (2014). The dialectical potential of Cultural Historical Activity Theory for researching sustainableCSCL practices. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 9(1), 7-32.Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R. & Messina, R. (2009). Designs for collective cognitive responsibility inknowledge-building communities, Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(1), 7-44.AcknowledgementsThis research was supported by the I-CORE Program of the Planning and Budget Committee and the IsraelScience Foundation (1716/12)CSCL 2017 Proceedings94© ISLS