No One Ever Steps in the Same Discussion Twice: TheRelationship Between Identities and MeaningMurat Öztok, Lancaster University, m.oztok@lancaster.ac.ukMaarit Arvaja, University of Jyväskylä, maarit.arvaja@jyu.fiAbstract: The concept of identification is a relational construct; that is, identities are not staticbut rather negotiated based on available material and symbolic resources. However, we knowrelatively little about how identities play a dual role when students collaborate. The aim of thispaper is to explore this process through multiple case studies: we aim to explore how identitiesare enacted and used in making personal sense and understand the content knowledge, while atthe same time we are interested in how this process can take a form of renewing process in thesense that the identities enacted are themselves changed, transformed or re-negotiated. Ourresults show that due to its dual role, identities mediate collaborative learning not only becauseknowledge is constructed in relation to identities but because online selves are articulated andconstructed in relation to knowledge construction.Keywords: identification, identity, I-position, online learningIntroductionLearning is simultaneously an individual and social process (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989; Cole, 1996). It isthe material, symbolic, and intellectual reconstruction of self; a process of discovering and articulating oneself inrelation to others. In other words, it is a process of knowing the self through mediation between self and others.What mediates between the self and the others – between the individual and social – is referred to as identification.Thus, the process of education is the process of constructing and shaping individuals' identification (Holland,Lachicotte Jr, Skinner, & Cain, 1998).The concept of identification (or identities-in-practice) is a relational construct; that is, identities are notstatic but rather negotiated based on available material and symbolic resources. It is through these negotiationsthat individuals identify themselves or are identified with various cultural categories within particular situations(Buckingham, 2008; Hall, 1996). In this sense, identification has both individual and social aspects by whichindividuals perceive, categorize, situate, and understand themselves and those around them. Such anunderstanding is particularly important since it “reconceptualizes learning from an in-the-head phenomenon to amatter of engagement, participation, and membership in a community” (Nasir & Cooks, 2009, p. 49). Indeed,much learning sciences research has long demonstrated that sense-making has profound impact on collaborativelearning practices (Holland et al., 1998; Stahl, 2006). Despite its significance for group work, however, we knowrelatively little about how identities play a dual role when students collaborate. In particular, we do not exactlyknow how identities are utilized for sense-making, and in return how the sense-making process leads to renegotiations of identities. The aim of this paper is to explore this process.Background and rationaleThis research is nestled at the intersection of three related theoretical frameworks: sociocultural learning theories,Dialogical Self theory, and the concept of identification. At the center of this intersection is the idea that eachindividual has a unique perspective through which they make sense of the world around them and create their ownnarrative (Cole, 1996; Ochs & Capps, 1996; Wortham, 2001). These narratives, then, constitute “boundarystructures” for learning since they influence the way people understand and act in the world. Similar accounts canbe found in more recent studies. For example, Rajala and Sannino (2015) use the notion of “personal sense” whichallows conceptualizing task interpretation within the wider perspective of the students’ life and interests.According to the research reported in their work, it is important that task resonates with the reality of the student’sown life; otherwise, it is likely that students interpret the task as uninteresting or irrelevant, which can creatediscrepancy between sense and meaning. Their study concludes that for a subject, meanings exist only in relationto personal sense. Such a relationship between meaning and sense also provides possibilities for the re-negotiationof one’s identities and “being, thinking and doing” (Akkerman, Admiraal, & Simons, 2012). Indeed, our previousworks have already illustrated that drawing on personal experience (i.e. professional background or personalinterests) to make sense of the subject-matter provides opportunities for individuals to advance personal andcollective understanding (Oztok, 2013, 2014; Arvaja, 2015).ICLS 2016 Proceedings234© ISLSDialogical Self theory (Hermans, 2003) is associated with Bakhtin’s (1984) concept of voice, especiallymultivoicedness. It provides a tool for understanding how different perspectives manifested in identities (or Ipositions) are embedded in the person’s self. An “I-position” of a person, according to this theory, “is a particularvoice that has been internalised in one’s self-presentation” (Akkerman et al., 2012, p. 230). Consequently, the selfis diverse in the sense of multiple I-positions that can be used in expressing oneself (e.g., I-position or identity ofa professional, student, mother or hard worker). The concept of multiplicity can help with understanding peoples’varying positions and identities. For example, in addition to a voice or identification of a student, students’ alsohave more personal voices, inner voices, containing personal and intimate experiences, such as an assertive voiceor passive voice that also shapes their sense making as a student (Wortham, 2001). Consequently, when peopleare talking or thinking, they often integrate, contrast, and move between different I-positions (Hermans, 2003).The concept of identities-in-practice implies an interrelationship with the broader collective or socialgroup (Buckingham, 2008; Holland et al., 1998). In particular, identity is something that is unique to eachindividual due to unique personal biography (Buckingham, 2008; Linell, 2009) while at the same time, it refersto a collective sense due to a sense of belonging (Hall, 1996; Wenger, 1998). Research has illustrated thatindividuals often speak the words of the groups or society to which they belong; therefore, the social world hasan important role in the construction of self: it mediates the voice of traditions, generalized others, institutions,groups, communities, colleagues, relatives and friends through the dialogical participants (Hermans & Kempen,1993; Linell, 2009). In this way the voices of others become woven into what one says and as part of one’sthinking, reasoning and acting, as part of one’s different identities or I-positions. According to Wortham (2001)“speaking with a certain voice means using words that index some social position(s) because these words arecharacteristically used by members of certain group(s)” (p. 38). Therefore, the self is not a pure intra-psychologicalprocess but a relational process that includes the social environment (Akkerman & Meijer, 2011).The concept of identities-in-practice also connotes discontinuity in its nature; that is, different identities,identifications, or I-positions changes according to the people and type of situations one encounters (Akkerman& Meijer, 2011; Hermans, 2003). This is what Goffman (1959, 1983) calls impression management: the ways inwhich people represent themselves and engage with others is a socially situated process. The concept ofimpression management suggests that particular situations evoke particular parts of the self and that identitiesenacted in the situation depend upon the presence of others in the context. Therefore, the content of what is saiddoes not only reflect person’s attitude towards the object at hand but also person’s attitude towards preceding andsucceeding actions and identities of others (Akkerman & Meijer, 2011). Even though, the presence of ‘real’ othersinfluence identities evoked in the situation, dialogical approach also stresses the importance of generalized others,“virtual” others, or different third parties evoked by a situation, and their influence on the identities enacted(Linell, 2009). In a Bakhtianian sense, the other is pervasive even though the person is alone (Hermans, 2003).Indeed, our previous work has demonstrated how contextual, symbolical and material aspects have an influenceon the identities represented and enacted (Oztok, 2014). For example, a text used as a learning material can beregarded as a third party, a voice, that evokes enacting different identities relating to one’s professional, personal,national or political self or identification (Arvaja, 2015). These identities, in turn, are used for making sense ofthe text or related discussion (Oztok, 2013) or the texts are used in making sense of one’s identities (Arvaja, 2015).Texts may invite different aspects of the self into dialogue within the self (internal dialogue) or with others(external dialogue).Our ultimate aim is to study a two-way process: we aim to explore how identities are enacted and usedin making personal sense and understand the content knowledge, while at the same time we are interested in howthis process can take a form of renewing process in the sense that the identities enacted are themselves changed,transformed or re-negotiated. In this two-way process not only knowledge is co-constructed through differentidentities but also identities are negotiated, and therefore, a change may also occur at the level of one’s perspectiveof the world and of the self.Current researchWe demonstrate our conceptual approach through multiple case studies (Creswell, 2006). Two purposefullyselected cases (named hereafter Case 1 and Case 2) comprise data from two different online courses that tookplace in different universities, and provide an in-depth exploration of a certain phenomenon in a given context.Each case focuses on the different aspects of the phenomenon at question while keeping the concept of identity atthe center of analysis; Case 1 probes how identities are enacted in making personal sense whereas the Case 2exemplifies how this process enables identities to be renegotiated. Next we describe the contexts, subjects, data,and analytical approaches used in the studies.Case 1 is based on a fully-online graduate level education course offered at a large Canadian researchuniversity. Typically, these graduate courses have students from diverse historical and cultural backgrounds, fromICLS 2016 Proceedings235© ISLSdifferent geographical locations, and of various ages and professions. The course comprised twelve modules, eachcorresponding to one week. Students were asked to introduce themselves (create their profile pages) and meetwith their peers (read and comment on others' profile pages) in the first week and submit their final paper in thelast week. In each module, one or two students acted as moderators: they facilitated discussion throughout theweek, kept discussions on track, and offered a summary of the week's issues; they provided opportunities forsustained discourse, increased interaction, and rich discussions. The online discussion occurred asynchronously;the environment does allow synchronous communication through instant messaging, but such activity was notmandatory (nor was it a major communication tool) in this course. 14 students enrolled in the course and workedtogether as a single group throughout.In order to illustrate the variety of identification traits individuals manifest, participants’ profile pages(personal pages in which students create their online existence by introducing themselves with their own wordsand a picture or avatar) were analyzed. An online persona is created for each participant to materialize the salientidentification traits in their profile pages. Considerable attention is paid to choosing individuals who use a varietyof identities and selected four individuals who maximize the exploration of the phenomenon. Then, the researchteam analyzed the notes in these threads semantically (Fairclough, 2001) with three different lenses: (1) the useof identification, (2) the process of knowledge construction, and (3) the relationship between the two. The use ofidentification is analyzed simply with probing “who says what” in language-in-use. The analysis of language-inuse reveals how identification traits are manifest in ways of saying, doing, and being: “to understand anythingfully, you need to know who is saying it and what the person saying it is trying to do” (Gee, 2011, p. 2). Since thelanguage-in-use is linked with the role that identification traits play in mediating experiences among individuals,“who says what” is critical for understanding the otherwise hidden intersections between identification, situatedmeaning-making, and knowledge construction in online learning environments.Case 2 is based on a three-month online science philosophy course for health science students andprofessionals at a university in Finland (see Arvaja, 2015). The course consisted of six learning tasks, all of whichdealt with historical approaches in the philosophy of science. Each task was a reasoning task where the studentswere first supposed to read a given text (or texts) dealing with a particular approach within the philosophy ofscience. In reasoning about the task, the students were asked to use their prior experiences or conceptions abouttheir own field of science or work as resources in interpreting the texts. Based on these tasks, each of the studentswas first supposed to write an individual reasoning text. In the next phase, the students posted their individualwritings onto a shared web-based (asynchronous) discussion forum, and their task was first to read each other’swritings and finally to have a shared discussion based on these.For the purposes of this study one student, Aino, was selected for the analysis to exemplify a change inher I-positioning. The analysis leaned on dialogical approach to narrative self-construction (Wortham, 2001).According to this view the self is constructed through relationships with others and emerges through constantinteractional positioning with respect to others in daily life. Hence, according to Wortham (2001), the self (anddifferent I-positions within) is narratively constructed through positioning different voices in the social world inrelation to each other, and by positioning oneself with respect to these voices. Data consisted of Aino’s individualwritings and asynchronous discussion postings. From Aino’s discourse, two layers of positioning, that is, voicingand evaluating (ventriloquation), were analyzed. The process of voicing (i.e. characterizing oneself and others)draws on positions and ideologies from the larger social world, as the others described come to speak likerecognizable types of people with their related characteristics, viewpoints or ideologies (Wortham, 2001). Inventriloquation (Bakhtin, 1984) one evaluates the other voices by differentiating or identifying and/or bydistancing or standing closer (e.g. taking a critical or supportive stance) with these voices.FindingsCase 1: Identifications enacted for making personal sense and co-constructingknowledgeThe thread being analyzed here is a slice from an online asynchronous discussion among a cohort of students.While each student in this cohort is included in the analysis, the excerpt below focuses on how four purposefullyselected individuals (as explained above) utilize their identities when they collaborate.Three students articulated their perspectives before Judith joined the discussion. The third note is worthquoting at large as it sparked an exchange of ideas around the issue of cultural diversity. Enacting her professionalidentity, a student wrote:… I read [the weekly reading] differently. Here is why. I have worked with students fromdifferent cultures, students who are first generation Canadians whose parents have migratedICLS 2016 Proceedings236© ISLShere; students whose parents are asylum seekers; students with a range of learning difficulties.I am convinced that teachers and educators have negative assumptions about these students –as if they know what's needed for them. I am not sure if diversity can ever lend itself to equalityin classrooms because teachers don't know what they are dealing with. Do you think studentsexpect that teachers will understand their cultural differences and requirements?The rhetorical question at the end of this note became a focal point from which others departed by articulatingtheir perspectives and experiences. Judith was the first to react; she acknowledged that teachers' beliefs aboutcultural differences are important:I agree, [anonymous student 1], that teachers have assumptions about students. … In myexperience, it is very difficult to change other teachers' beliefs about cultural differences. It isbecause the term 'cultural diversity' is often misused (especially by stakeholders) – as though itis more important that teachers, educators, school principals, the director of education, etc. saythat they have well thought out “cultural diversity” … than they actually understand it. … Thisis the reason why teachers have misconceptions about their students' cultural needs. In myexperience, teachers are just worried about ticking the boxes off in official reports when it comesto cultural diversity.Similar to the student in the previous note, Judith enacted her professional identity. However, while she agreedwith the issues identified in the previous note, she also provided an alternative perspective. As a teacher, Judithbelieved that cultural diversity means more than addressing teachers' negative assumptions. As she continuedarticulating her understanding, Judith started enacting her maternal identity, explaining that an authentic learningcontext requires active dialogue between parents and teachers:… I think that it is not only the responsibility of the teacher but also the parent to help establishan equal learning environment for all students. As stated in previous posts by others and you,as parents we want to make sure nobody is being left out, we want to make sure we are beinginclusive and doing our best to help teachers to better accommodate our kids' needs. How doesa teacher provide authenticity just by herself? How does a parent expect teachers to doeverything?Enacting both her professional and maternal identity, Judith identified a source of disagreement based on herexperience. It is through this type of identification that she was able to provide a counterargument; that is, thetension between diversity and equality is not only about teachers' attitudes but also requires parents' activeinvolvement. Manu responded to this message, also enacting her maternal identity along with her teacher identity.She built on Judith’s perspective by further elaborating her experience:I totally agree with you both – though you have different points on teachers. I appreciate theusefulness of taxonomies in general, but think human nature is too messy to be classified. …[F]or managers and principles inclusivity is about numbers, but teachers have nothing to do withthat. Diversity is not about numbers … As a teacher, when I think of diversity what comes tomy mind is students who not only have different learning needs but also [students] who comefrom diverse social backgrounds. Learning diversity encompasses diverse learners withdifferent academic needs, such as students with disabilities and English language learners – suchas my kids. But then, I see a big mismatch between the articles and my kids' schooling. I wonderif the authors of these articles have any kids or ever taught at schools. Judith is right in a way,how can a teacher do it all?Manu acknowledged both sides' perspectives on diversity and the capacity of teachers to recognize and appreciatediversity in the classroom. By so doing, she attempted to clarify differences between Judith and AnonymousStudent 1, and tried to link the points of disagreement between the two. She then incorporated her understandingof diversity based on her experience as a teacher and a mother. Manu continued:Maybe a different approach would be to clarify to what extent learning differs by calling itculture. Although we can call on a number of stock words – nationality, race, gender, ethnicgroup, social-class, sexual orientation, etc, etc, etc – how they impact on learning is notICLS 2016 Proceedings237© ISLSstraightforward. One thing is for certain; students differ in one way or another, but is it enoughto make claims on learning? Whether it be race, class, gender or language this thing we knowas culture helps give students identity. That's all. Let's agree on that.Tackling the relationship between culture and learning, Manu suggested a new lens for understanding thedisagreement and started to develop her own hypothesis in order to unite strands of consensus. Then, shecontinued:But [the weekly readings] argue that it has an impact on performance, learning styles andlearning rates, learning experience and expectations, attitudes and achievements. Isn't itdownright wrong? How could you categorize people so easily based on the ideals of culture?This is an open-ended question for you all; can you simply categorize people in your daily lifejust like that? Let me tell you; [the weekly readings] assume culture [to be] monolithic. Like theprinciples and managers you mentioned above, and the ones that I've been working with so far,I believe [the authors] try to ensure they 'deal with' the diversity. They just idealize it; it is farfrom real-life situations. Simple is that...Manu tested her own hypothesis by providing rhetorical answers to her own questions based on her experience asa teacher. She suggested that the weekly readings, perhaps, offer an idealized understanding of diversity and thusdo not reflect real-life situations.Two other students replied and agreed with Manu, enacting their professional identities. Ken was thethird replying back to Manu. He enacted his ethnic and professional identity, and picked up on Manu's newproposal of the lack of congruence between idealizations and real-life situations in learning and teaching. He triedto reconcile differences among them by suggesting that as a teacher, he believes readings are “just idealizedscenarios” and that there are “unavoidable power tensions between cultural groups”. Ken continued enacting hisprofessional identity:I'd agree, culture is difficult to quantify, in addition, students differ so much within theirrespective cultures so it is not unified. The whole aspect of the impact of culture on teachingand learning, how we accept, accommodate and celebrate student diversity is a fascinatingelement of our day-to-day job as teachers. This is what we all agree so far.Ken's cohesive view of disparate ideas led others to build on agreed facts, transitioning from debating toknowledge construction. Chun-Li was the second one to reply. She enacted her ethnic identity and furtherdiscussed “the idealized scenarios” by providing examples from her learning experience:I did my MA in UK and I felt more Chinese then[sic] ever. … But it doesn't mean that I wasquiet or shy. Idealized scenarios? Yes! But then you are also right Ken that all of my teachers,lecturers, instructors, professors – what ever you call them – accommodated differences. Buthow do they accommodate? I think we have to understand what we mean by difference.Difference or diversity is not about where we were born or what kind of skin color we have.Diversity or difference is not about geographical location. Where I was born, where I studied,and where I am right now are completely different locations. So, where do I fall into?Chun-Li built on Ken's summary and exemplified the current understanding based on her experience, testing theproposed synthesis. She continued:… again, how do teachers accommodate these differences? Maybe [reading 1] offers an answerfor dealing with different cultural groups: an ‘inclusive’ approach, which not only incorporatescultural perspectives from minority groups but also challenges the dominant model. I think thisexplains what I faced when I was in UK. I found that the lecturers were good at allowingindividuals to express themselves. In my experience this allowed inclusivity because culturalpractices are often shaped by individuals and their own dynamic. I look forward to futurediscussion.Chun-Li was able to draw from Ken's summary, and bring together her experience and the readings to constructknowledge. According to Chun-Li, “if diversity is thought of as a matter of individuality, then the issue of theICLS 2016 Proceedings238© ISLSinclusion or exclusion can be better understood”. Ken enacted his student identity in his response and noted theimportance of a learning community:As classmates we want to make sure nobody is being left out from the discussion, we want tomake sure we are being inclusive in all our discussions and activities and doing our best.Therefore effort also needs to be made on the students part, on our part. Perhaps, we can considertrying what [reading 1] suggests and help each other, especially those who are excluded. In sum,I think the key is being aware of any exclusiveness and making the effort to establish acommunity.This particular note from Ken received great attention from his peers (indeed, this is the most replied-to notethroughout the course according to the automated-log data) and constituted a point of agreement for the wholeclass.Summarizing the weekly discussion and affirming Ken, Manu synthesized that “educators should teachtheir students ways to foster diversity in all its forms (ethnic, sexual, gender, learning styles, etc.) and create asense of community to create inclusive educational contexts”. Judith built on this and summarized that “most ofus have the best of intentions as teachers and parents, but as all of you put it so well, life... happens!”.Case 2: Identities re-negotiated through the process of making personal senseThis case demonstrates another aspect on the role of identification and identities in learning. It demonstrates asituation when I-positioning itself is re-negotiated as a result of engaging in online discussions and reading ofcourse material. Examples analyzed here are drawn from one student, Aino, who is studying part-time in theonline course while also working full-time as a physiotherapist. Next example demonstrates how encountering adifferent voice or perspective in contrast to Aino’s own leads to internal dialogue (Linell, 2009):Aino: ”In this week I’ve been reading texts from web and on paper, and frankly speaking I feelthat my head is somewhat overloaded. One doesn’t really know anymore what to think of whatissue, and now one is questioning one’s own work and science and research and whatever it wasand I cannot make any sense of this, there are simply too many ideas. So I decided to look oncemore at this ’what is science’ issue, on the basis of Niiniluoto’s article, because it bears mostrelevance to me personally. I have always considered myself a type very much oriented toscience and especially to natural science, and being somehow schematic and mathematical. Forthis reason it feels somehow overwhelming to question everything now. Admittedly at the sametime really interesting, too. What’s hard for me is that one can keep elaborating the ideaendlessly and never reach a solution.”While voices are drawn from the complex social world, they get engaged in a dialogue that involves multipleperspectives and often conflicting positions (Wortham, 2001). A double-voiced discourse often involves “aconflict”. This is what happens in the example above. Aino’s inner tension and confusion she is facing whenreading the philosophical course material is explicitly expressed in her discourse: “I feel that my head is somewhatoverloaded. One doesn’t really know anymore what to think of what issue… it feels overwhelming to questioneverything now”. This results in “questioning one’s own work, science and research”. Aino voices andcharacterizes herself as “a type oriented to natural science”, and it seems that from that position she is facing achallenge when being introduced with fundamental questions of the essence of science. Encountering a differentview challenges Aino’s current way of seeing and understanding. It seems that her orientation to natural science(according to her constant characterizing and identification) represents a dominant voice adopted from authoritiesin her working and study environment. According to Linell (2009), an authoritarian voice is often like culturalassumptions that the individual does not question and once the ideas of this voice are internalized it often becomesa kind of self-discipline. However, it seems that when Aino is introduced with texts that offer differentperspectives or alternative conceptions (i.e., different ontological and epistemological voices of science) herbeliefs pertaining to her “natural science oriented” position becomes questioned. This becomes more explicit asthe course proceeds. Aino starts questioning the dominant authoritative voice behind her thinking in her discoursewith other students:Aino: Yes, indeed, this is precisely the way I see it in physiotherapy and for my own work. Theproblem just lies specifically in that, for example, at work people have too high regard for theviews of natural science. One has to measure mobility and muscular strength etc. and compareICLS 2016 Proceedings239© ISLSthe results and assess effectiveness in that way. […] Another issue I face at work is compilationof statistics. If I spend time at the ward discussing with a patient, talking about goals andmotivation, listening to the person and evaluating her emotional state, without performing actualphysiotherapy i.e. muscular or mobility or functional exercises, so can I then record the visit asa physiotherapeutic visit? As I didn’t actually perform any therapy, but as much time was spentand after the discussion the patient is likely to be more motivated to engage in rehabilitation andmore cooperative when we start actual training. […] There’s only the problem that I can’t reallymark on my daily nursing record sheet just that ‘discussed about therapy’. Then one will cheatand take say a stretching or a quick inspection in the end. That’s how it is; the emphasis is toomuch on natural science. :)”While in the beginning of the course Aino has voiced herself as “considered myself a type very much oriented toscience and especially to natural science, and being somehow schematic and mathematical” repeatedly, in thisexample from the end of the course we can see that she distances herself from that I-position. In her discourse sheplaces this natural-science oriented voice more to an external voice than as a voice of her own e.g., “at workpeople have too high regard for the views of natural science”. In this process of positioning (Wortham, 2001)Aino distances and differentiates her voice from the authoritative voice in the workplace and the values andideologies it represents. Aino argues against the dominance of the natural sciences and describe work practicesthat reflect and support this dominance. Her redefined I-position as a physiotherapist is in conflict with theprevailing practices such as compilation of statistics. Aino’s internal dialogue reveals a struggle between herprofessional/personal voice and the authoritative voice in her work community. In other words, Aino is engagedin a double-voiced discourse (Wortham, 2001) between her own I-position which makes personal sense (Rajala& Sannino, 2015) and the authoritative voice she recognizes in her work and related science practices. Herredefined professional I-position as a physiotherapist does not fit with the practices in the workplace andideologies behind these practices. Through her redefined professional position Aino interprets her experiences ina new light through a new frame of reference which acknowledges the patient as a whole: not only the body;anatomy and physiology but also the mind; feelings, motives, and values in inter-personal interactions.A change in Aino’s I-position is also explicitly stated in her last writing:Aino: ”At least for me this course has taught a quite different way of thinking for doing researchand broadened my approach to science in general. It seems that I started from Sharplypositivistic notions and ended up in a fairly broad and open view on the importance ofqualitative research and human sciences, for example. It’s good to stop and reflect on things andtheir meanings every now and then. At work one is often measuring just for the fun of it and itbears no significance, after all, to the patient let alone for science. Actually it may have beenthe most important lesson for me in this course; to consider what really significant science is. Itis by no means about angle degrees and gauges but consideration of causal relationships morebroadly and consideration of humans and interaction. Although it sometimes feels that thinkingwas really tangled, in the end one must say that this has been a good process.”Aino’s statement clearly demonstrates how the things discussed, read and written in the course had an impact onher changed I-position. Aino implicitly states that what I think now in relation to science is different of what Ithought before, therefore indicating also a re-negotiation of a scientific I-position. Scientific paradigms can beseen as collective voices which function as social positions in the self (Hermans, 2003). Such positions or voicesare expressions of historically situated selves that are constantly involved in dialogical relationships with othervoices. At the same time they are constantly subjected to differences in power as in this case where the dominantnatural science position in the workplace is in contrast with more holistic position (minor position). It seems thatexposure to the diversity and even opposed voices through the different approaches and perspectives in sciencechallenges and changes Aino’s scientific I-position. This change is further applied in seeing and thinking as aphysiotherapist i.e., change in Aino’s professional I-position.Discussion and conclusionThis paper aimed to demonstrate the dual role identities play in (collaborative) learning. The underlying argumentwas that individuals construct, position, and understand themselves and those around them in relation to theiridentifications or I-positionings (Hall, 1996; Wortham, 2001). When we foregrounded identities-in-practice foranalyzing and interpreting collaborative learning, the dual role of identities became clear: (1) identities are enactedand used in sense-making and understanding the content knowledge, and (2) this sense-making process can takeICLS 2016 Proceedings240© ISLSa form of renewing process since the identities enacted are themselves redefined and changed. Identities are ofparamount importance for collaboration when learning is regarded as both social and individual process; as amatter of engagement and participation in a community. Our results show that due to its dual role, identitiesmediate collaborative learning not only because knowledge is constructed in relation to identities but becauseonline selves are articulated and constructed in relation to knowledge construction.ReferencesAkkerman, S. F., Admiraal, W., & Simons, R. J. (2012). Unity and diversity in a collaborative research project.Culture & Psychology, 18(2), 227–252. http://doi.org/10.1177/1354067X11434835Akkerman, S. F., & Meijer, P. C. (2011). A dialogical approach to conceptualizing teacher identity. Teaching andTeacher Education, 27(2), 308–319. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2010.08.013Arvaja, M. (2015). Experiences in sense making: Health science students’ I-positioning in an online philosophyof science course. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 24(1), 137-175.Bakhtin, M. M. M. (1984). Problems of Dostoevsky’s poetics. (C. Emerson, Trans.). University of MinnesotaPress.Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. EducationalResearcher, 18(1), 32–42.Buckingham, D. (2008). Introducing Identity. In D. Buckingham (Ed.), Youth, Identity, and Digital Media (pp.1–22). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press Journals.Cole, M. (1996). Cultural Psychology: A once and Future Discipline. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Creswell, J. W. (2006). Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: Choosing among Five Approaches (2nd ed.).Thousands Oak, CA: SAGE Publications.Fairclough, N. (2001). Language and Power (2nd ed.). London, UK: Longman.Gee, J. P. (2011). An Introduction to Discourse Analysis: Theory and Method (3rd ed.). New York, NY:Routledge.Goffman, E. (1959). The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. New York: Anchor.Goffman, E. (1983). The Interaction Order: American Sociological Association, 1982 Presidential Address.American Sociological Review, 48(1), 1–17. http://doi.org/10.2307/2095141Hall, S. (1996). Who Needs “Identity”? In P. du Gay & S. Hall (Eds.), Questions of Cultural Identity (pp. 1–17).Thousands Oak, CA: SAGE Publications.Hermans, H. J. M. (2003). The Construction and Reconstruction of a Dialogical Self. Journal of ConstructivistPsychology, 16(2), 89–130. http://doi.org/10.1080/10720530390117902Hermans, H. J. M., & Kempen, H. J. G. (1993). The dialogical self: Meaning as movement. San Diego, CA, US:Academic Press.Holland, D., Lachicotte Jr, W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and Agency in Cultural Worlds.Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Linell, P. (2009). Rethinking language, mind, and world dialogically: Interactional and contextual theories ofhuman sense-making. Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.Merriam, S. B. (2009). Qualitative Research: A Guide to Design and Implementation (3rd ed.). San Francisco,CA: Jossey-Bass.Nasir, N. S., & Cooks, J. (2009). Becoming a Hurdler: How Learning Settings Afford Identities. Anthropology &Education Quarterly, 40(1), 41–61. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1548-1492.2009.01027.xOchs, E., & Capps, L. (1996). Narrating the Self. Annual Review of Anthropology, 25, 19–43.Oztok, M. (2013). Tacit knowledge in online learning: community, identity, and social capital. Technology,Pedagogy and Education, 22(1), 21–36. http://doi.org/10.1080/1475939X.2012.720414Oztok, M. (2014). Social presence and social absence: socio-cultural production of self in online learningenvironments. Presented at the The 15th Annual Meeting of the Association of Internet Researchers,Daegu, Korea.Rajala, A., & Sannino, A. (2015). Students’ deviations from a learning task: An activity-theoretical analysis.International Journal of Educational Research, 70, 31–46. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijer.2014.11.003Stahl, G. (2006). Group Cognition: Computer Support for Building Collaborative Knowledge. Cambridge, MA:The MIT Press.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge, UK: CambridgeUniversity Press.Wortham, S. E. F. (2001). Narratives in action: A strategy for research and analysis. New York, NY: TeachersCollege Press. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.ICLS 2016 Proceedings241© ISLS