Modelling Authenticity in Teaching and Learning Contexts:A Contribution to Theory Development and EmpiricalInvestigation of the ConstructAnica Betz, Sabrina Flake, Marcel Mierwald, and Marie Vanderbekeanica.betz@rub.de, sabrina.flake@rub.de, marcel.mierwald@rub.de, marie.vanderbeke@rub.deRuhr-Universität BochumAbstract: Authenticity as a concept is used in a multitude of settings and is linked to various −to some extent divergent − pedagogical ideas. This contribution proposes an interdisciplinary,literature-based conceptualisation of the term leading to the modelling of authenticity in teachingand learning contexts. The model can serve as a basis for designing further empirical surveysand educational interventions.Keywords: authenticity, modelling, learning settings, education, authentication, interdisciplinary“Authenticity is not brought into the classroom with the materials or the lesson plan, rather, it is a goal that theteacher and students have to work towards, consciously and constantly” (van Lier, 1996).Introduction‘Authenticity’ is a common term which is generally understandable in everyday life. However, with regard toacademic contexts a discrepancy can be found between the term’s use and its conceptual understanding in differentacademic disciplines. Furthermore, there is a research gap concerning theory development despite the fact thatauthenticity is frequently advocated in the design of learning settings as it is supposed to stimulate the learningprocess. Especially for learning outside the classroom the importance of an authentic educational setting is oftenemphasised (e.g. Engeln, 2004; Lave & Wenger, 1991). Therefore, the aim of this paper is to develop a model ofauthenticity based on a review of empirical and theoretical research literature. This permits a multidimensionalapproach to the concept thus allowing for an operationalisation appropriate to the general research discourse aswell as future studies. We begin by developing a literature-based, interdisciplinary concept of authenticity andwill then present our model as well as its importance for future research.Conceptualisation of the term authenticity in educational contextsWe conceptualise the term taking into account perspectives from humanities as well as science teaching, and, inparticular, the subject areas of geography education, history education and language teaching (first and foreignlanguage). Our research process focusses on the databases PsychInfo, FIS, JSTORE and ERIC using the keywords‘authentic’, ‘authenticity’, ‘authentic teaching’, ‘authentic learning’, ‘situated learning’ and ‘real learningcontexts’. It includes both empirical studies and theoretical papers written in English and German.As a first result it became clear that the term ‘authentic’ is used differently in everyday communicationcompared to educational scientific discourses: in everyday communication the term ‘authentic’ is often usedsynonymously with the words ‘real’ or ‘genuine’. In educational discourses, however, ‘authentic’ learning settingsare mostly simulations of everyday or professional contexts (cf. Billett, 2012). To resolve this paradox, the term‘authenticity’ has to be conceptualised differently. If one assumes a contrast between real-life and highlystructured learning arrangements, authenticity in subject learning can be seen as a continuum between these twopoles: the more successful the staging of a real-life context, the higher the level of authenticity. For instance, inauthentic learning settings everyday or professional-scientific contexts are simulated in order to give students aninsight into these areas and, moreover, to foster transferable knowledge and student competences (e.g. Brown,Collins & Duguid, 1989; Mandl, Gruber & Renkl, 2002). Nevertheless, one can only speak of a simulation becausein learning situations some kind of instructional implementation and thus dissociation from the contextualreference is always present.The way in which authenticity is orchestrated differs strongly between the various subject areas.Nonetheless, it is possible to identify specific trends they all have in common, e.g. an approximation of theemployed method and the material to everyday or professional actions (e.g. Gilmore, 2007; Monte-Sano &Reisman, 2015; Emden, 2011). Texts which are frequently seen as constituting authentic material are those which(a) are not specially written for classroom use, and (b) enable a scientific learning approach (for example originaltarget-language literature in foreign language teaching, sources in history education, or measurements ingeography education). Here, a close link to the subject-specific method is already discernible as a propaedeuticapproach towards research practices is often intended. Hence, the learning settings and methods share featuresICLS 2016 Proceedings815© ISLSwith the domains knowledge and competences should be imparted about (Roth, 1995). Moreover, in foreignlanguage teaching the premise is to integrate target cultures of native speaker communities in the classroom.However, critics refute the claim of authenticity regarding such learning settings and point out that an assimilationtowards target language-cultural contexts (a) can never achieve a truly convincing simulation of native speakerlanguage, and (b) the students’ subjective perception of authenticity would suffer strongly from the “makebelieve” (Decke-Cornill, 2004). Particularly in foreign language teaching it is recognised that the learner’sperception of authenticity plays a central role (Breen 1985), meaning that learners evaluate a learning settingbased on their beliefs, knowledge, interests, abilities and requirements (e.g. Widdowson, 1978; van Lier, 1996).This process is called ‘authentication’ and implies that learners engage in and appropriate (parts of a) learningsetting in an interactive process with their peers and their surroundings (cf. van Lier 1996).To summarise, authenticity in the sense of an educational construct can be defined as a characteristic ofteaching and learning contexts which consists of transferring certain features of real life and professional contextsto learning environments. This simulation is negotiated along a continuum through the interaction between thedesigned learning environment and the actors within it. The aim of authentic teaching is to increase variables thatare relevant to successful learning, such as motivation or interest, and to acquire transferable knowledge anddomain-specific competences. Following this concept of authenticity, we will now present a model condensingdifferent aspects of and showing the relevant cause-effect-relationships in authentic educational contexts.Describing and explaining the modelBased on the findings from empirical educational-psychological and subject-based research, authenticity inteaching and learning contexts can be modelled in the following way (Figure 1):Figure 1. Model of authenticity in teaching and learning contexts.The model consists of five components: (a) personal characteristics, (b) characteristics of the learning setting,(c) authentication through interaction, (d) an individual feeling of authenticity and (e) its effects. In terms ofdesign the model is based on general progression schemas from educational psychology (e.g. for the developmentof interest; Krapp, 1998). While the personal characteristics and characteristics of the learning setting presentedin the model are well-established in theoretical literature, empirical research on this domain is scarce. Alsoconcerning the effects of an individual feeling of authenticity only a few studies exist (e.g. Glowinski &Bayrhuber, 2011; Engeln 2004; Peacock 1997) and evidence for relationships between the single variables arenon-existent. Thus, the combination of all factors in one model constitutes an important step for theorydevelopment in authenticity and can serve as a basis for further empirical research. The model’s singlecomponents, their relationship and empirical evidence therefor will be described in detail below.a. The first two components in the model are the determining factors of authenticity in teaching and learningcontexts, i.e. (a) personal characteristics, and (b) characteristics of the learning setting. The personalcharacteristics comprise the learner’s individual dispositions, more precisely input factors such asindividual interest and prior knowledge, which the learner brings into a potentially authentic teachingICLS 2016 Proceedings816© ISLSb.c.d.e.and learning context. Such dispositions like, for example, individual interest, have proven to be importantprerequisites for learning (e.g. Pawek, 2009) and influence the learner’s susceptibility to the designedlearning environment.The characteristics of the learning setting describe the dimension of the model that can be manipulatedand varied in a learning setting by the instructor or teacher. The characteristics should then converge witheveryday and professional reality as closely as possible to create an authentic learning setting.Furthermore, central characteristics of authentic learning settings identified on the basis of literature inthe subject areas are: material, learning location, contents, methods, social settings, innovation andinstructor. Under ‘materials’ we subsume all media enabling a realistic content-based approach to theeveryday or professional world. The ‘learning location’, in the sense of situated learning, permits insightsinto the work of ‘communities of practitioners’ (Lave & Wenger, 1991). The selection of ‘contents’ canbe shaped in such a way, that themes from the respective ‘real’ reference context are brought to the fore.Problems and questions can be tackled with specific ‘methods’ and corresponding ‘social settings’ withinauthentic contexts. Examples in this regard include scientific methods (interpretation of historicalsources, evaluation of measurements in geography or literature analysis in language teaching etc.) whichcan be imparted through inquiry- and task-based learning (Willis & Willis, 2007; Chinn & Malhotra,2002) or the approach of ‘cognitive apprenticeship’ (Brown, Collins & Duguid, 1989). The characteristic‘innovation’ means open questions or problems which are currently central to research or the subject ofsocial controversies and to which the learners can contribute meaningfully. Finally, it is the ‘instructors’responsibility to make authentic learning possible or provides access to the reference context. Thearrangement of these characteristics takes place on a continuum according to their level of structuring.The process of authentication through interaction involves actions in which interplay of characteristicsof the person and the learning setting occurs including mediation between peers. Here, the interactionbetween determining factors and the learner’s subjective perception of the learning setting plays afundamental role (e.g. van Lier, 1996).A feeling of authenticity would then be a feasible result of the authentication process. This feeling issubjective and can be determined through inquiries in the learner’s perception of the learning setting andtheir attribution of relevance.The perception of a learning situation as authentic may have affective, cognitive and behavioural effects,e.g. motivation, situational interest, domain-specific competences etc. (cf. Newmann, King &Carmichael, 2007), which influence the personal characteristics. In this respect a whole series ofempirical studies in the area of Reach out Labs show that authentic, scientifically based learningenvironments have a positive temporal effect on students’ situational interest (e.g. Engeln, 2004; Pawek;Glowinski & Bayrhuber, 2011). Furthermore, other studies showed that tasks, perceived as authentic,have a learning-conducive effect (Chavez, 1998) and authentic materials bring about an increase inlearning motivation (Peacock, 1997; Chavez, 1998), reading and listening comprehension (cf. Young,1993; Weyers 1999) as well as in writing skills (Purcell-Gates, Duke & Martineau, 2007).Conclusion and implicationsThis contribution addresses two research gaps with respect to the authenticity of learning settings: (1) on the basisof a literature review it contributes to cross-discipline theory development connected with the concept ofauthenticity in educational contexts and names various characteristics which can have an impact on theauthenticity of a teaching and learning setting. (2) The presented authenticity model is suitable for purposes oforientation in the design of interventions and surveys as it contains determinants influencing an individual feelingof authenticity. Thus, it can be used in future research to investigate possible effects of authentic learning settings(e.g. ask for the learner’s perception of characteristics of a learning stetting via questionnaires in order to measurean individual feeling of authenticity; compare authentic conditions with non-authentic conditions to determineeffects) and augment construct validity. The multidimensional model lays claim to applicability both to studies inthe area of extracurricular learning and, with regard to educational questions, to desirable further research into therole of authenticity in teaching and learning contexts. The model already forms the basis for several researchstudies currently in progress at the Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany in the postgraduate programme“Communicating Sience in Reach out Labs”.ReferencesBillett, S. (2012). Authenticity in Learning Activities and Settings. In N. N. Seel (Ed.), Encyclopedia of theSciences of Learning (pp. 388–391). New York: Springer.Breen, M. (1985). Authenticity in the language classroom. Applied Linguistics, 6(1), 60–70.ICLS 2016 Proceedings817© ISLSBrown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning. EducationalResearcher, 18(1), 32–42.Chavez, M. M. T. (1998). Learner’s perspectives on authenticity. International Review of Applied Linguistics inLanguage Teaching, 36(4), 277–306.Chinn, C.A. & Malhotra, B. A. (2002). Epistemologically authentic inquiry in schools. A theoretical frameworkfor evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86(2), 175–218.Decke-Cornill, H. (2004). Die Kategorie der Authentizität im mediendidaktischen Diskurs derFremdsprachendidaktik (Authenticity in the media-didactic discourse of foreign-language teaching). InP. Bosenius & J. Donnerstag (Eds.), Interaktive Medien und Fremdsprachenlernen (Interactive mediaand foreign language learning) (pp. 17–27). Frankfurt a.M.: Peter Lang.Emden, M. (2011). Prozessorientierte Leistungsmessung des naturwissenschaftlich experimentellen Arbeitens:Eine vergleichende Studie zu Diagnoseinstrumenten zu Beginn der Sekundarstufe I. (Process-orientedassessment of experimental science work: a comperative study as diagnostic tool at the beginning ofsecondary education). Berlin: Logos.Engeln, K. (2004). Schülerlabors: Authentische, aktivierende Lernumgebungen als Möglichkeit, Interesse anNaturwissenschaften und Technik zu wecken (Reach out Labs: authentic and activating learning settingsin order to develop interest in science and techniques). Berlin: Logos.Gilmore, A. (2007). Authentic Materials and Authenticity in Foreign Language Learning. Language Teaching,40(2), 97–118.Glowinski, I., & Bayrhuber, H. (2011). Student labs on a university campus as a type of out-of-school learningenvironment: Assessing the potential to promote students’ interest in science. International Journal ofEnvironmental and Science Education, 6(4), 371–392.Krapp, A. (1998). Entwicklung und Förderung von Interessen im Unterricht. (Developing and Fostering interestin school). Psychologie in Erziehung und Unterricht (Psychology in education and school), 45, 186–203.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Periperal Participation. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Mandl, H., Gruber, H., & Renkl, A. (2002). Situiertes Lernen in multimedialen Lernumgebungen. (Situatedlearning in multimedia learning surroundings). In L. Issing & P. Klimsa (Eds.), Information und Lernenmit Multimedia und Internet (Information and Learning through the use of media and the internet) (pp.139–148). Weinheim: Beltz.Monte-Sano, C., & Reisman, A. (2015). Studying Historical Understanding. In L. Como & E. Anderman (Eds.),The Handbook of Educational Psychology (pp. 281–294). Washington, D.C.: American PsychologicalAssociation.Newmann, Fred M., King, Bruce M., & Carmichael, Dana L. (2007). Authentic Instruction and Assessment:Common Standards for Rigor and Relevance in Teaching Academic Subjects. Des Moines, IA: IowaDepartment of Education.Pawek, C. (2009). Schülerlabore als interessefördernde außerschulische Lernumgebung für Schülerinnen undSchüler aus der Mittel- und Oberstufe. (Reach out Labs as extracurricular learning setting promotinginterest for students from middle and upper school). Doctorate Thesis. University of Kiel, Germany.Peacock, M. (1997). The Effect of Authentic Materials on the Motivation of EFL Learners. ELT Journal, 51(2),144–156.Purcell-Gates, V., Duke, N. K., & Martineau, J. A. (2007). Learning to Read and Write Genre-Specific Text:Roles of Authentic Experience and Explicit Teaching. Reading Research Quarterly, 42(1), 8–45.Roth, W.-M. (1995). Authentic School Science. Knowing and Learning in Open-Inquiry Science Laboratories.Kluwer: Dodrecht.Van Lier, L. (1996). Interaction in the Language Curriculum: Awareness, Autonomy and Authenticity. London &New York: Longman.Widdowson, H. (1978). Teaching Language as Communication. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Willis, D., & Willis, J. (2007). Doing Task-Based Teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Weyers, J. (1999). The Effect of Authentic Video on Communicative Competence. The Modern Language Journal83(3), 339–349.Young, D. J. (1993). Processing Strategies of Foreign Language Readers: Authentic and Edited Input. ForeignLanguage Annals, 26(4), 451–468.AcknowledgementsWe thank the members of the postgraduate program ‘Communicating Science in Reach out Labs” of theProfessional School of Education, Ruhr-University Bochum.ICLS 2016 Proceedings818© ISLS