A Multimodal Approach to the Analysis of Complex CollaborativeLearning Environments: Using Complementary Methods ofAnalysis to Synthesize New Trends in Scaffolding ResearchKate Thompson (Co-organizer), The University of Sydney, Australia, kate.thompson@sydney.edu.auLucila Carvalho (Co-organizer), The University of Sydney, Australia, lucila.carvalho@sydney.edu.auMichael A. Evans, North Carolina State University, USA, michael.a.evans@ncsu.eduLixiao Huang, North Carolina State University, USA, lhuang11@ncsu.eduMaryam Khosronejad, The University of Sydney, Australia, mkho4965@uni.sydney.edu.auPeter Reimann, The University of Sydney, Australia, peter.reimann@sydney.edu.auAnindito Aditomo, The University of Sydney, Australia, and The University of Surabaya, Indonesia,aadi4954@uni.sydney.edu.auDewa Wardak, The University of Sydney, Australia, dwar9402@uni.sydney.edu.auPeter Goodyear, The University of Sydney, Australia, peter.goodear@sydney.edu.auYannis Dimitriadis, Universidad de Valladolid, Spain, yannis@tel.uva.esRoberto Martinez-Maldonado, The University of Sydney, Australia roberto@it.usyd.edu.auGregory Dyke, University of Lyon/CNRS, France, gregdyke@gmail.comAbstract: Synthesis research is a method utilized in the field of ecology, and involvesbringing together experts in different areas to address a research question that cannot beentirely answered by a single perspective. This symposium explores the application of thismodel to the learning sciences, specifically to scaffolding of computer supported collaborativelearning. The symposium brings together expert researchers (working on different, relatedperspectives of scaffolding) to discuss their analysis of processes of learning in relation todiscursive psychology and gesture analysis; conversation analysis; and multimodal interactionanalysis. Each presenter will analyze and discuss the same corpus of data. These streams ofdata analysis are then brought together in the fourth presentation, with a discussion ofvisualizing and synthesizing the findings, piecing together an elaborated understanding ofscaffolding. The final presentation includes the whole panel and addresses some of thechallenges of conducting research this way in the learning sciences.IntroductionAs CSCL interventions become more integrated, and the availability, and sharing, of ‘big data’ morecommonplace, the need for frameworks to make sense of the data from complex collaborative learningenvironments is evident. The overall focus of the symposium is to contribute to the discussion about the designof methods for analyzing and assessing collaborative learning. Synthesis research has been adopted in ecologyin response to similar circumstances to those facing the learning sciences: (1) a sudden increase in availabledata, (2) a search for coherence, (3) an interest in applying the data for management of resources, (4) thecomplexity of the challenges faced, and (5) the need to train new scientists to solve these problems (Kemp &Boynton, 2011). Used for almost twenty years, synthesis research has contributed to some of the most influentialstudies in areas such as climate change and river ecology and management (Kemp & Boynton, 2011). Synthesisresearch is inherently interdisciplinary, as experts from different fields come together, bringing their data andperspective, to develop a new explanatory model that accounts for how diverse observations work together(Kemp & Boynton, 2011). The synthesis approach is aligned with the multidisciplinary perspective of the CSCLparadigm (see Stahl, Koschmann & Suthers, 2013; Koschmann, 2008), as well as other studies adopting multiperspective data analysis (e.g. Stahl, 2014; Stahl, Jeong, Ludvigsen, Sawyer & Suthers, 2013). It is this focus ondeveloping a new model to explain observed patterns, developed from the analysis of multiple data sets, thatdistinguishes synthesis from other approaches that attempt to align findings. Synthesis can be seen as both achallenge and an opportunity to create new understandings of existing problems (Kemp & Boynton, 2011).Scaffolding was identified as an area in the CSCL community with a long history of work, and one inwhich many perspectives have been considered, but usually not coordinated. One issue with research on theprocesses of learning is the lack of a framework in which to place the results of the research (Goodyear, Jones &Thompson, 2013). This is particularly important given our focus on the application of the synthesis approach.Carvalho & Goodyear’s (2014) framework for the analysis of complex learning environments formed the basisCSCL 2015 Proceedings623© ISLSfor our study in two principal ways. First, the framework provides the structure for the design of the study,where different scaffolds are offered to three groups of learners, as they complete the same educational designtask. Second, the framework provides the basis for synthesizing the multiple streams of data collected andanalyses conducted. The framework suggests that in complex learning environments, there are elements that canbe designed (set, epistemic, social, discussed in more detail below) and some that cannot (the learners’ activity).Three groups of postgraduate students were brought together to discuss the design of an educationalresource about a socio-environmental issue. Learning by design has been used previously as an example of acomplex learning scenario in which multiple scaffolds would be needed (Tabak, 2004). Participants were askedto design an educational blog about a complex socio-environmental system in Australia. They were expected toaccess multiple websites (resources) to explore the given problem and design a potential solution (e.g. educationresources to address the large number of stakeholder groups). After 60 minutes participants were expected toproduce a short statement with ideas for their design concept, and after a further 30 minutes, they were expectedto produce a sketch or brief outline of their design solution, which they then presented to two of the researchers.A group of twelve researchers (from Australia, Spain, Indonesia, Germany, France and USA) haveadopted six different perspectives to analyse a complex dataset, which included video, audio, transcripts, and thephysical artifacts produced by participants. The group collaborated on the design of the project, and collectionand extraction of the data. Each sub-group analysed the data according to their methodological perspective(orchestration, multimodal interaction analysis, conversational turns, process mining, conversation analysis anddiscursive psychology and gesture), and then the synthesis step was performed as a group. Previous work,particularly in the field of multivocality (Suthers, et al., 2011) has been at the forefront of the application ofcombinations of methods of analysis. This symposium is the first to explicitly take the synthesis model, apply itto multiple streams of data collected specifically to examine the interplay of task, technology and socialinteractions, and use the tools developed for the field of multivocality, with experts in a variety of fields. In thissymposium, presenters will apply frameworks for Discursive Psychology and Gestures (Hepburn & Wiggins,2005), Conversation Analysis (Sacks, 1992) and Multimodal Interaction Analysis (Norris, 2004) to describe theco-configuration and co-creation behaviour of learners. The first presentation (Thompson & Carvalho) providesdetailed background to the theoretical and analytical underpinnings of the project. Presentations 2 (Evans), 3(Khoserhonejad, Reimann & Aditomo), and 4 (Wardak, Thompson, Carvalho & Goodyear) focus on individualperspectives. They discuss existing work that has led them to form particular assumptions about the role ofscaffolding in their area of expertise, as it relates to the behaviour of learners. Each then outlines the methodsused to analyse the dataset collected as part of this study. The fifth presentation (Thompson, Carvalho & Dyke)will include visualizations of the multiple streams of data using Tatiana, as well as a conceptual analysis of thecombination of three methods and perspectives of analysis. The final presentation will include the whole projectteam to discuss the implications of doing research using the synthesis approach. While these presentations areall related, this symposium is of interest beyond the immediate reporting of results. As datasets become morecomplex, and more easily shared, a framework with which to understand the results is necessary. A discussionof the practical realities of team science in relation to the demonstration of real, theoretical findings, should beof interest to the CSCL community.Background and frameworkKate Thompson and Lucila CarvalhoScaffolding is an issue that is of particular importance in computer supported collaborative learning, and onethat is in constant discussion in conferences and journals. Most current research agrees that students need to bescaffolded in their collaborative activities (Maloney & Simon, 2006; Hmelo-Silver, 2013; Nivala, Saljo,Rystedt, Knronqvist & Lehtinen, 2012). The concept of scaffolding involves providing support to learners invarious ways, as these learners undertake complex or difficult learning tasks (Wood, Burner & Ross, 1976).Many studies have focused on scaffolding, and these could be classified under one or more of the three areas ofCarvalho & Goodyear’s (2014) framework: set design, epistemic design or social design. Technologyscaffolding (set design) can include information about how to use a tool for the learning activity (see Davis &Linn, 2000). The context in which the learning experience occurs is of relevance when considering scaffolding.The Ecology of Resources Approach (Luckin, 2010) emerged in recent years as a learner-centred framework forthe use of technology to scaffold learning. Collaboration scripts have often been used to scaffold the socialprocesses of collaborative learning, such as Hogan & Pressley, 1997. Recent work on scaffolding has focused oncombining scaffolds, and identifying scaffolding synergy such as technology- and social-focused in languagelearning in Singapore (Chen, Looi, & Wen, 2011), or social- and epistemic-focused collaboration scripts (ElRifai, Kollar & Fischer, 2011). By using complementary scaffolds, multiple potential blocks to student learningCSCL 2015 Proceedings624© ISLSwere overcome. Tabak (2004) was the first to refer to ‘scaffolding synergy’ while exploring the notion thatmultiple scaffolds that address the same learning need, in different ways, produce a robust support for learners.What is lacking in the field of scaffolding is an examination of differences in the processes of learningas a result of specific scaffolds, and in the field of process analysis, a framework in which to place methods andanalysis. The synthesis approach to analyzing complex collaborative environments presented in this symposiumachieves these, and in doing so, will contribute to a deeper understanding of the processes of learning incomplex learning environments. Kemp & Boynton (2011) identify five steps in synthesis research: problemidentification; data assembly; data integration; explanatory model development; and testing model validity.The authors purposefully designed a study in order to explore the application of a synthesis model ofresearch to the topic of scaffolding in computer supported collaborative learning, underpinned by an analyticalframework proposed by Carvalho and Goodyear (2014). The framework is concerned with how the relationshipsbetween the different elements in what has been designed/set in place in a given learning environment, combineto support the activity that ensues, the focus here being on how structure supports function. The frameworkproposes the examination of complex learning environments under four analytical dimensions: set design, socialdesign, epistemic design and co-creation and co-configuration activities. Set design relates to the materialand/or digital elements - the tools, resources, artefacts and affordances of place - that compose the setting for theactivity of learners. Epistemic design relates to the proposed learning tasks, for example, their structuring,sequencing, pacing and the way tasks are planned to happen. The social design relates to social arrangementsand roles, divisions of labour or who is expected to do what. The fourth dimension, the co-creation and coconfiguration activities, relates the above components to learners’ activities, acknowledging that learners rearrange and reconfigure the designed learning space, proposed tasks and social roles.The data collection was carried out in the Design Studio at the University of Sydney. This dedicatedspace for researching the processes of design gives participants access to tools (digital and physical) to aid in theprocess of design. The space is also equipped with multiple video and digital cameras, audio recorders, and theability to capture log files of computer-based interaction. Three groups of three postgraduate students completedthe task: Group 1 (Tools) - scaffold tool use; Group 2 (Design Process) – scaffold the design process; and Group3 (Social) – scaffold (multidisciplinary design team (roles). We recorded the actions (physical and digital),conversation, and collected artefacts produced during the study. The data collected has been analysed from sixperspectives: orchestration; multimodal interaction analysis (MIA) of the role of inscriptions; analysis ofcollaborative design behavior through conversational turns; conversation analysis (CA) and the impact ofpositioning in social interactions; process mining – decision-making and the design process; and discursivepsychology and gesture. Three will be presented in the symposium: DP and gesture; CA and the impact ofpositioning in social interactions; and MIA of the role of inscriptions. These three were chosen because of thepotential overlaps that will be examined – both DP and MIA examine the role of gesture, and CA and MIAexamine key moments of negotiation, but with different focus and purpose to the analysis. In addition, thesethree approaches address the three designable elements – the tool use, epistemic and social interactions.Examining how they come together, and discovering what this tells us about the way we understand the role ofscaffolding of complex collaborative learning environments, will lead us to develop a new explanatory model.Analysis of scaffolding using a discursive psychology approachMichael A. Evans and Lixiao HuangIn this presentation, we describe and characterize scaffolding through interactions among participants, analyzingvideo data from collaborative learning efforts. We are interested not only in learning outcomes fromcollaborative activity, but also in how the approaches used by learners influenced the ways in whichcollaborators made meaning of the project and engaged in the design process. To understand the role that talkplays in guiding learning, we employ a discursive psychology (DP) approach (Hepburn & Wiggins, 2005). DP isdeemed a valuable framework as it assists us to understand how elicitation strategies of scaffolding influence theways participants discursively construct understandings guided by the design process.DP differs from other psychological analyses in that the focus is not centrally on psychologicalprocesses in a decontextualized form, but more on the ways that those processes are represented contextually insocial interactions. DP explores socially situated and embodied forms of talk to understand psychologicalconstructs like emotion (Hepburn, 2004) cognition (Molder & Potter, 2005) and beliefs (Barwell, 2005). As aprimary advocate, Potter (2004) defines four ways in which DP can be used: 1) it assists analysts to betterunderstand institutional practices; 2) it assists us to uncover the construction and meaning of “facts”; 3) it allowsfor the re-specification of cognitive constructs; and 4) it allows for the exploration of ideology and assumptions.DP frameworks identify discourse as “a type of action or work through which the social field of interaction itselfCSCL 2015 Proceedings625© ISLSis constituted” (Freisen, 2009, p.133). Discourse is action-oriented, socially constructed, and situated, such thatcognitive constructs are embedded in and expressed through talk and action (Potter, 2005). In using a DPperspective we see social interactions as a means of taking “discourse and its pragmatic realization for thepurpose at hand as topics rather than language and linguistic structure per se” (Roth, 2008, p 46.). That is,discourse is viewed as a form of social action, rather than simply a means of sharing or outputting information.While cognitive science has for many years recognized thinking as situated within a social environment(Lave, 1988), and as culturally mediated (Vygotsky, 1978), thinking and learning are still often described interms of extrapolating mental processes. Rather than “assuming an underlying explanation for why people sayor think as they do, DP assumes that mental states, motives, and thoughts are all features that are situated in andmade visible through interaction (e.g., verbal and nonverbal communication)” (Lester, 2011, p.4). We used DPas a lens for understanding how scaffolding influences talk and helps to construct ideas about design. Ourchallenge is to characterize indicators of engagement through the talk and actions of participants, and tounderstand how the prompts provided by tools, context, and social support influence that engagement. Hsu &Roth (2008) explore science conceptions and motivation through a DP framework. They analyze interviews tounderstand youth’s future career interests, but rather than analyzing what jobs are talked about, they focus onhow language is used in the interview. In doing so, they discern how participants make consensus, revise theirperspectives, and differentiate cognitive and affective processes. In a separate study, Roth (2007) outlines theways that scientific conceptions are formed through talk, rather than simply being expressed by talk. He notesthat the formulation of conceptions is filled with “mumbles, stumbles, malapropisms, pauses, stupidities, andsolecisms” (p 36), all of which are important components of the discourse that are often overlooked. In additionto the verbal interactions, we applied a scheme for describing gesture and physical position of objects to capturethe interactions among tools, scaffolds, and social support. Notation for physical interactions includes positionof learners (who is in physical contact with it and for what duration) position and movement. Gestures includedmovements that indicate a directive (e.g. pointing), or describing a concept (e.g. lifting hands to show air flow).Conversation analysis and the impact of position on social interactionsMaryam Khosronejad, Peter Reimann, and Anindito AditomoIn this presentation we apply conversation analysis (CA), informed by positioning theory, in order to take an indepth look at the interactional talk during the design session. Conversation analysis was developed by HarveySacks, Emanuel Schegloff, and Gail Jefferson (1974; Sacks, 1992) as a method for the study of conversation,focusing on understanding the regularities of talk-in-interaction applied by participants in conversations. Weapplied these ideas in the analysis of design group work, seeing such work as the interactional accomplishmentof collective action. In our analysis, we focus on solution development of a design process, as a communicativeactivity and as an ongoing joint interactional achievement of the participants involved (Heritage, 1984).Conversation analysis allows us to investigate how transitions between different phases of solution developmentare accomplished at the micro level of talk. Our analysis focuses on different phases of solution development,such as solution analysis, solution suggestion, elaboration, evaluation, confirmation/disagreement andimplementation (as suggested by the Decision Function Coding Scheme or DFCS, Poole & Holmes, 1995). Inaddition, we studied how alternative solutions were introduced and followed up through conversational patterns.Conducting CA through the lenses of positioning theory, we also investigated participants’ positioningof one another during conversation (Harré & Van Langenhove, 1999). Positioning theory looks at how peopleposition themselves and others in a conversation by analysing conversation as consisting of tri-polar storylines,speech acts, and positioning (Harré & Van Langenhove, 1999). We investigated if and how positioning practicesinfluenced patterns of conversation and transitions between stages of solution development, exploring whetherthese help to establish and preserve mutual agreement during design group work.Our analysis suggests that three main categories of positioning were practiced by participants, eachhaving consequences on the sequence of talk in conversation. These include positioning of oneself in relation tothe task as an outsider or insider, positioning of oneself in relation to the researchers of the study, andpositioning of oneself in relation to other group members. The first two categories of positioning happened atthe beginning of the collaboration and as the group moved towards different phases of solution development,positioning practices were limited to the third category. Our analysis shows how one type of positioning led torejecting, at least during the collaboration analysed, the scaffolds in the environment and as such contributes toan understanding of the difference between the collaboration environment as designed and as used.Multimodal interaction analysis (MIA) of the role of inscriptions in designDewa Wardak, Kate Thompson, Lucila Carvalho, and Peter GoodyearCSCL 2015 Proceedings626© ISLSEhrenstrasser and Spreicer (2012) state that “when designing technologies with tangible user interface, we needto enhance our understanding of modalities. We need to better scrutinize how space is used and organized, andfurthermore, how users interact with different types of objects” (p. 1), including inscriptions. In order to informthe design of scaffolds for collaborative learning, a rich description of the activities of the learners is necessary.The role of inscriptions and representations has been researched in other studies of learning (e.g. Zhang, 1997;Medina & Suthers, 2013) however, not with a focus on collaborative design, instead in specific subject areassuch as mathematics or science. Multimodal Interaction Analysis (MIA) takes the action rather than utterance asthe unit of analysis (Norris, 2004). Creating and attending to the way in which visual marks, images, sketchesand drawings embody a particular type of communicative practice requires a multimodal analytic framework.Spontaneously created visual representations can facilitate, bridge, or anchor communication. Visualcommunication plays a unique role providing opportunities for a person to employ certain modes ofcommunicative practices (Snyder, 2013). Snyder (2013) illustrates how multimodal interaction analysistechniques can enable the researcher to investigate the role of drawing in face-to-face conversation. Thetranscriptions of MIA move beyond the focus on discourse, and depend on the analytical categories defined bythe researcher. Based on these categories, the researcher defines the communicative modes to be included in thetranscription of specific events. In this study certain communicative modes were transcribed because they weredeemed important for describing the specific events and actions in the presence of inscriptions. The multimodalsystem of analysis in this study has at its centre the sketching and drawing practices of the participants. Theparticipants’ interaction is transcribed so that it illuminates the inscription-related interaction of the participants.Gestures are included when they are relevant to the analysis. That means, when gestures are produced in relationto the inscriptions and when the gesture is part of the meaning-making process of the participants.Participants’ use of both verbal and nonverbal interaction in relation to visual representations wasconsidered. Inscriptions drawn during the design sessions by the participants in order to communicate andexplain their ideas to their team members were analyzed in relation to the context in which they were used. Forexample, when a team was discussing an issue using indexical terms such as “this”, “that”, “here”, “there”, or“this one” and “that one”, the inscriptions provided the essential context to understand what was beingdiscussed. As such, the inscriptions serve as the background against which verbal and non-verbalcommunication can make sense (Roth & McGinn, 1998). The multimodal perspective will illuminate howparticipants were drawing and using the inscriptions they drew, as well as how they were interacting with eachother in the presence of inscriptions.SynthesisKate Thompson, Lucila Carvalho, Gregory Dyke, Michael A. Evans, Lixiao Huang, Maryam Khosronejad,Peter Reimann, Anindito Aditomo, Dewa Wardak, and Peter GoodyearIn this presentation we piece together the analytical contributions of each symposium participant, to composeour understanding of the scaffolding of learners and its influence on the learners’ behaviour. First, we discussthe structure of our study, which allowed our exploration of part-whole relationships; we then show ways ofvisualizing how these different elements come together to explain the unique insights the synthesis analysis addsto our understanding of scaffolding in CSCL. As previously stated, the structure of the study follows theanalytical dimensions in Carvalho and Goodyear’s (2014) framework. We will discuss the results of the threeanalytical presentations in the context of the framework.We used Tatiana (Trace Analysis Tool for Interaction ANAlysts) (Dyke et al., 2009) to provide a visualrepresentation of the data and analyses considered. Tatiana is an environment (and an underlying conceptualframework) designed for manipulating various kinds of analytic representations, in particular those that presenta view on event-based data, be it the original data or subsequent analyses thereof. We call these representationsreplayables, because they can be replayed in a similar fashion to a video. Tatiana replayables comprise asequence of events and benefit from Tatiana's four core functionalities: transformation, enrichment,visualization and synchronization. Replayables can be transformed to create new replayables whose eventsmight be a subset, an abstraction or a combination of events from other replayables. Adding annotations andcategories is called enrichment, and Tatiana also provides a graph enrichment allowing researchers to annotaterelationships between events. All replayables within Tatiana can be visualized in different viewers, such as atable with rows and columns, and several forms of graphical timelines, including a sliding window visualization(Dyke, Kumar, Ai, & Rosé, 2012), which affords the visualization of how indicators change over time and atdifferent granularities. Finally, all visualizations of replayables in Tatiana can be synchronized with each other.This functionality allows data to be examined simultaneously from different angles. Because of Tatiana’sCSCL 2015 Proceedings627© ISLSextensibility, and its ability to manipulate multiple analytic representations it is ideally suited both toaccommodating analyses from the multiple perspectives addressed in this symposium, and to allow new insightsto emerge when combining these multiple analytic perspectives. It has been successfully used in the past tohighlight the agreements and disagreements of analyses from different epistemological positions (interactionanalysis, content analysis, and cognitive analysis), not only allowing researchers to achieve common ground intheir analysis, but also highlighting how different analytic traditions can achieve productive multivocality.Recent research has focused on the interplay between social interactions, the design process, and theuse of tools in the Design Studio (Thompson, Ashe, Carvalho, Goodyear, Kelly & Parisio, 2013; Thompson,Ashe, Wardak, Yeoman, & Parisio, 2013). Multiple streams of data are collected, processed, and presented toresearchers to combine video, audio and image files. Initial studies have shown that the use of Carvalho &Goodyear’s framework to structure the analysis of complex data results in rich descriptions of the context aswell as the processes of learning. In these studies, we have also combined methods of analysis, such as video,conversation and sketch analysis, and process analysis and conversation analysis. Examining the interplaybetween the social, tools and epistemic processes can show patterns otherwise unable to be detected.The analysis of the processes of learning using DP and gestures focused on the epistemic and thesocial. DP and gestures were used to understand scaffolding in relation to the development of talk and helped toconstruct ideas about design. Emphasis was given to understanding how the prompts provided by tools, contextand social support influenced engagement and the group’s trajectory was contextualized in relation to thescaffold. The use of CA and positioning theory also highlighted epistemic elements in a different way thatincludes social negotiations between participants. MIA of inscriptions offered insights related to the role ofartefacts as resources for the participants in achieving a shared understanding of the problem at hand. Thus, interms of Carvalho and Goodyear’s framework, the focus is on how participants use the resources at hand and therole of their inscriptions and the artefacts produced so as to facilitate the groups’ social interactions andcommunication. When these analyses were combined in Tatiana, we gained insight into the complexity ofinteracting processes of learning.Reflections on the processEntire panelThe purpose of this symposium is to demonstrate the results and processes of a synthetic approach to research ofa computer supported collaborative learning task. In order to carry out the project, a team of twelve researchersin the learning sciences has come together to synthesize their perspectives in terms of methods of analysis aswell as theoretical perspectives. This presentation will give all the participants the opportunity to discuss thechallenges and solutions involved in conducting research of this type including: sharing data; managing thesocial; shared objectives; and future directions. Throughout this process, the research team has had to addressthe challenges of shared data in the social sciences. The files were made available to all, however the dataextracted was unique to each participating researcher. There were three main challenges the team faced: whatdata was to be extracted, to what purpose; how would this data be visualized so that patterns and overlap couldbe noticed by researchers; and how would we present the findings coherently. Maintaining regular contact withthe project team was important, and making time for virtual meetings was valued. We also held presentationmeetings, during which initial results were discussed. Another important social aspect was the mix ofestablished scholars, mid and early-career researchers as well as research students in the team. The studentsgrounded the ongoing progress of the group, as they had specific deadlines for the development of their ownwork. Early-career and research students both had opportunities to have their emergent research ideasrecognized as part of a larger group of researchers, and established and mid-career scholars gained insights intothese new ideas. The development of shared objectives, particularly around research output has been crucial,offering concrete short-term goals for the ongoing progress. They helped to guide our work, and maintained theengagement and interest of the group. We have produced symposium proposals, a journal article (Thompson etal., in progress), and a data paper (Thompson et al., submitted). We hope that the discussion of the challengespresented in this symposium will aid in the application of this method to other areas of the learning sciencesresearch, helping scholars in the field to gain richer insights in issues related to complex learning environments.Even using a subset for this proof of concept, we will demonstrate findings in key areas associated withthe processes of learning as well as the role of the design process scaffold. The use of the tools of synthesis – theframework as well as the visualization – are key in bringing these findings together. Without the analysis toolTatiana, understanding and describing the interactions between perspectives in relation to processes of learningover time would have been far more challenging. The analytic framework was essential for making sense of themultimodal data collected, as well as contextualizing the findings. In future work we plan to incorporate all theCSCL 2015 Proceedings628© ISLSperspectives, and present these analyses in full. Other work has already been done synthesising threeperspectives (Thompson et al., in progress). While the conclusions are preliminary, the initial findings show thatthere are identifiable moments of the interplay of tools, task and social interactions, after which shifts occur inpatterns of tool use, social interaction or the design process. It appears that there are some key moments ofintersecting processes that can affect the trajectory of a group’s behaviour. The addition of further perspectivesare expected to identify further moments of intersection, as well as other changes to the behaviour of the group.The ultimate aim of this synthesis research, as opposed to other multidisciplinary research, is todevelop a new model to understand the interplay of tools, task and social interaction in response to scaffolds in acomplex collaborative learning environment. Unlike ecology, there is not an existing model against which to testthe model. This research is focused on model development, and because of this, we are interested in opening upthe research to more perspectives, to incorporate them into the model we are developing. To that end, we havesubmitted a data paper to a special issue of the British Journal of Educational Technology, and we are open tosharing the data further. As learning scientists we aim to understand how and why students learn in particularlearning environments, given specific tools, tasks, and social interactions. These are complex scenarios that haveyet to be fully explained with the current set of analytic and methodological tools. Borrowing methods fromother fields, more suited to dealing with large datasets and complexity, and describing the complexity with atool adapted from educational design, shows promise for unpacking some of this complexity, to begin to makesense of the interactions between the design, the processes of learning, and their effects on learning outcomes.ReferencesBarwell, R. (2005). Integrating language and content: Issues from the mathematics classroom. Linguistics andeducation, 16(2), 205-218.Carvalho, L. & Goodyear, P. (Eds.). (2014). The architecture of productive learning networks. New York:Routledge.Chen, W., Looi, C-K., Wen, Y. (2011). A scaffolded software tool for L2 vocabulary learning: GroupScribbleswith Graphic Organisers. CSCL2011: Connecting computer supported collaborative learning to policyand practice, Hong Kong.Davis, E. & Linn, M. (2000). Scaffolding students knowledge integration: Prompts for reflection in KIE.International Journal of Science Education, 22, 819-837.Dyke, G., Lund, K., & Girardot, J.-J. (2009). Tatiana: an environment to support the CSCL analysis process.CSCL 2009, Rhodes, Greece, 58–67.Dyke, G., Kumar, R., Ai, H., Rosé, C. P. (2012). Challenging assumptions: Using sliding window visualizationsto reveal time-based irregularities in CSCL processes. International Conference of the LearningSciences (ICLS 2012), Sydney, 363-370.Ehrenstrasser, L., & Spreicer, W. (2012). Defining Multimodality for Tangible Interaction. Paper presented atthe 7th Nordic Conference on Human Computer Interaction (NordiCHI), Copenhagen, Denmark.El-Rifai, W., Kollar, I. & Fischer, F. (2011). Facilitating web design skills through online design-based learning:The case of collaboration scripts and incomplete concept maps. Paper presented at the 2011 CSCLConference, Hong Kong, China.Goodyear, P., Jones, C. & Thompson, K. (2013) Computer-supported collaborative learning: Instructionalapproaches, group processes and educational designs. In Spector, M., Merrill, D., Elan, J., & Bishop,M. J. (Ed) Handbook of Research on Educational Communications and Technology.Harré, R. & Van Langenhove, L. (1999). Positioning Theory: Moral Contexts of Intentional Action. Malden:Blackwell.Hepburn, A., & Wiggins, S. (2005). Developments in discursive psychology. Discourse and society, 16(5), 595.Hepburn, A. (2004). Crying: Notes on description, transcription, and interaction. Research on Language andSocial Interaction, 37(3), 251-290.Heritage, J. (1984). Garfinkel and ethnomethodology. Cambridge, UK: Polity.Hmelo-Silver, C. (2013). Design principles for scaffolding technology-based inquiry. In O’Donnel, M., HmeloSilver, C., & Erkens, G. (Eds) Collaborative learning, reasoning and technology. Routledge.Hogan, K. & Pressley, M. (Eds.). (1997). Scaffolding student learning: Instructional approaches and issues.Cambridge, MA: Brookline Books.Hsu, P. L., & Roth, W. M. (2009). An analysis of teacher discourse that introduces real science activities to highschool students. Research in Science Education, 39(4), 553-574.Kemp, M. W. & Boynton, W. R. (2011) Synthesis in estuarine and coastal ecological research: What is it? Whyis it important, and how do we teach it? Estuaries and Coasts, 35, 1-22.CSCL 2015 Proceedings629© ISLSLave, J. (1988). Cognition in Practice: Mind, mathematics, and culture in everyday life. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.Lester, J. (2011). Exploring the borders of cognitive and discursive psychology: A methodological reconceptionof cognition and discourse. Journal of Cognitive Education and Psychology, 10 (3), 1-14.Luckin, R. (2010). Re-designing learning contexts. Technology-rich, learner centered ecologies. London:Routledge.Maloney, J., & Simon, S. (2006). Mapping children's discussions of evidence in science to assess collaborationand argumentation. International Journal of Science Education, 28(15), 1817-1841.Medina, R., & Suthers, D. D. (2013). Inscriptions becoming representations in representational practices.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 22(1), 33-69.Nivala, M., Saljo, R., Rystedt, H., Kronqvist, P., & Lehtinen, E. (2012). Using virtual microscopy to scaffoldlearning of pathology: A naturalistic experiment on the role of visual and conceptual cues. InstructionalScience. 40(5), 799-811.Norris, S. (2004). Analyzing multimodal interaction: A methodological framework: Routledge.Poole, M. S., & Holmes, M. E. (1995). Decision development in computer assisted group decision making.Human Communication Research, 22(1), 90-127.Potter, J. (2005). Making psychology relevant. Discourse & Society, 16(5), 739-747.Roth, W. M. (2008). The nature of scientific conceptions: A discursive psychological perspective. EducationalResearch Review, 3(1), 30-50.Sacks, H. (1992). Lectures on conversation (Vols. I-II; G. Jefferson, Ed.). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-takingfor conversation. Language, 50(4), 696-735.Snyder, J. (2013). Drawing practices in image-enabled collaboration. ACM Conference on Computer-SupportedCooperative Work (CSCW 2013), San Antonio, TX, USA.Stahl, G. (2014). Workshop: Interaction analysis of student teams enacting the practices of collaborativedynamic geometry. Presented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2014),Boulder, CO. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/icls2014workshop.pdf.Stahl, G., Jeong, H., Ludvigsen, S., Sawyer, R. K., & Suthers, D. D. (2013). Workshop: Across levels oflearning: A workshop on resources connecting levels of analysis. Presented at the InternationalConference of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL 2013), Madison, WI.Web:http://GerryStahl.net/pub/cscl2013workshop.pdfSuthers, D. D., Lund, K., Rosé, C., Dyke, G., Law, N., Teplovs, C., et al. (2011). Towards productivemultivocality in the analysis of collaborative learning. Symposium at CSCL 2011, Hong Kong.Tabak, I. (2004): Synergy: A Complement to Emerging Patterns of Distributed Scaffolding, Journal of theLearning Sciences, 13(3), 305-335Te Molder, H., & Potter, J. (Eds.). (2005). Conversation and cognition. Cambridge University Press.Thompson, K., Ashe, D., Wardek, D., Yeoman, P., & Parisio, M. (2013) Identification of patterns of tool useand sketching practices in a learning by design project. The 10th Int’l Conference on ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, Madison, Wisconsin.Thompson, K., Ashe, D., Carvalho, L., Goodyear, P., Kelly, N., & Parisio, M. L. (2013). Processing andvisualizing data in complex learning environments. American Behavioral Scientist.Thompson, K., Carvalho, L., Aditomo, A., Dimitriadis, Y., Dyke, G., Evans, M. A., Khosronejad, M., MartinezMaldonado, R., Reimann, P. & Wardak, D. (submitted). The synthesis approach to analysingeducational design dataset: Applications of three scaffolds to a learning by design task for postgraduateeducation students. British Journal of Educational Technology.Thompson, K., Carvalho, L., Aditomo, A., Dimitriadis, Y., Dyke, G., Evans, M. A., Khosronejad, M., MartinezMaldonado, R., Reimann, P. & Wardak, D. (under review). A multimodal approach to the analysis ofcomplex learning environments: Synthesis research in the learning sciences.Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes. Harvard UniversityPress.Wood, D., Burner, J. S. & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child Psychologyand Psychiatry, 17, 89-100.Zhang, J. (1997). The nature of external representations in problem solving. Cognitive Science, 21(2), 179-217.AcknowledgmentsWe gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Australian Research Council, through grantFL100100203 as well as the ideas and feedback of colleagues from the Laureate Team.CSCL 2015 Proceedings630© ISLS