Participatory Design With Students for Technology Integration:Shifting Power and Organizational Practices in an Urban SchoolUng-Sang Lee, University of California, Los Angeles, ungsang.lee.10@gmail.comKimberley Gomez, University of California, Los Angeles, kimgomez@ucla.eduAbstract: This paper examines how infrastructuring through participatory design (Le Dantec& DiSalvo, 2013) for school technology practices with students reorganized traditional powerrelations between students and adults, and how such shifts in power relations in turn surfacednew organizational technology practices. Two researchers collaborated with a group of highschool students with a shared goal of designing school technology practices that weremeaningful to the students. Informed by theories of infrastructuring forms of participatorydesign (Le Dantec & DiSalvo, 2013), the collaboration explicitly sought to re-mediate thesocial relations of designing the school’s organizational practices with technology. This studyanalyzes the development and implementation of a student-designed school technologypractice as a case study to examine how infrastructuring forms of participatory designmediated shifts in power relations and organizational practices at the school site. Resultsindicate that forms of participatory design which seeks to address social relations in theprocess and outcomes of design can contribute to shifts in student roles within the school andfacilitate boundary crossing (Akkerman & Bakker, 2011) in which student goals werereflected in new organizational technology practices.Equity as a priority for technology integration in schoolsLiteratures on sociotechnical systems identify the processes in which technologies enter local contexts aremediated by the broader contexts of culture, history, organizational structures, and interactions (e.g. Nardi,1996). In varying educational contexts, digital technologies have been observed supporting student participationin social, political, educational and economic activities (Ito et al., 2013), while also reproducing barriers to suchparticipation for traditionally marginalized students (e.g. Watkins, 2011). For example, Ito and colleagues,through research related to “connected learning” practices, have highlighted the affordances of emergingtechnologies to bridge student epistemologies and goals for participation and agency in broader civic, economic,and educational activities (Ito et al., 2013). Such practices are predicated on boundary-crossing processes inwhich new forms of educational practices are conceptualized through stakeholder knowledge and needs to makeparticipation in capital-producing activities more accessible (e.g. Schwartz, 2015). On the other hand, manyhave documented ways in which access to technology-mediated activities can reproduce existing inequitiesbased on race, gender, class, and other demographic factors (Warschauer & Matuchniak, 2010). What is oftenreferred to as the “digital divide” can be viewed as a direct consequence of existing educational barriers thattraditionally marginalized students experience. What both of these literatures suggest is that inequity is aconsistent concern for technology integration in schools, and that equitable approaches to technology integrationin schools must respond to the situated elements of such a process, such as organizational practices, stakeholderpriorities, and power relations. This study aims to examine the affordances of particular forms of participatorydesign in designing localized approaches to school technology integration, and in particular, how such designmethods may shift power relations in productive ways to develop school organizational practices.Power as mediator of school technology practicesSchools are sites in which broader social inequities can be alleviated and reproduced in a number of ways(Collins, 2009). This is no different for technology integration in schools, where factors such as access, identity,and pedagogy can mediate the extent to which students benefit from the supposed affordances of emergingtechnologies (Warschauer & Matuchniak, 2010). As such, school organizational practices have been recognizedas a key factor in successful technology integration in schools (e.g. Fishman and Pinkard, 2001). This studyviews the relational power between stakeholders and consequent ability to participate in the design of schooltechnology practices as a primary constraint to the development of equitable technology practices in schools.While power, particularly in the context of designing school technology practices is under-examined,fro ma sociotechnical perspective that assumes the social embeddedness of technological practices (e.g. Nardi,1996), it undoubtedly plays a role in mediating the possibilities of technology integration in schools. LadsonBillings (2006) argues that there are historical educational debts that are owed to marginalized students as aresult of their continued exclusion from productive educational domains, and therefore, a purely access-basedCSCL 2017 Proceedings680© ISLSresponse to technology integration is unlikely to fundamentally transform the deep roots of inequity ineducation. One expression of such a debt is the power dynamics within schools that exclude marginalizedstudents from shaping their own educational pathways. Nondominant students, in the context of their schools,tend to be excluded from roles that allow them to meaningfully shape the educational practices that serve them(Delpit, 2006). It is particularly problematic that students are excluded from such processes because studentknowledge developed in various ecologies can become important resources for the design of technologypractices as well as learning processes more broadly (Barron, 2006; Yosso, 2005). In other words, educationalinterventions aimed at equity in technology integration in schools should not be limited to providing access toparticular tools or pedagogy to students, but should also consider how the power relations in designing schooltechnology practices may be remediated to offer more opportunities for knowledge-sharing across stakeholdersand agentic action for non dominant students. This analysis will examine the relationship between shifts inpower and organizational practices in relation to student participation in the remediation of school technologydesign processes.Participatory design and infrastructuringInfrastructuring in participatory design (Le Dantec & DiSalvo, 2013), the iterative refinement of the socialrelations in participatory design processes, provides a useful methodological framework towards removingbarriers for traditionally marginalized stakeholders to participate in design activities. Such a process reflects theoriginal conceptualization of participatory design as an approach to workplace design in Scandinavia, whichfocused on the redesign of social relations between workers and management to develop more equitable workpractices by leveraging insights for design that would otherwise be marginalized. As such, equity in thisinstance is conceptualized as both shifts in power relations for design that include the needs and epistemologiesof traditionally marginalized stakeholders, and the access to practices that express the needs and epistemologiesof stakeholders. Applying this approach to technology integration in schools, the study sought to examine theaffordances of participatory design infrastructuring in developing equitable school technology practices. Whileengaging youth in research and design is not a unique endeavor (e.g. Kirshner et al., 2005; Druin, 2002), moreneeds to be understood about how student participation shifts power relations and design outcomes in schools.Research questionsWith the need to better understand how student participation in school technology design might mediate shiftsin a school’s design and technology practices, this paper asks the following research questions:1. How did social infrastructures of design shift within a participatory design effort aimed at co-designingschool technology practices with students?2. How did emerging social infrastructures for design shift power dynamics in the development oftechnology practices in their school?3. How did the design outcomes and implementation of participatory design with students expand accessto school technology practices that reflected student expertise and needs?Methods: Participatory design researchStudy siteThe site, with 80% Latino and 14% Asian students, and 55% of students classified as “Limited EnglishProficient”, reflected broader challenges of technology integration across urban schools. It had recently acquireda learning software named Schoology, an online Learning Management System (LMS) as well as hardware suchas Chromebooks and Apple computers, gradually transitioning to a 1-to-1 laptop to student ratio. Suchinvestments were met with inconsistent practices and uncreative use due to the lack of training, buy-in, andcoordination across the school stakeholders. Students had indicated that these new tools were mostly used forsubmitting assignments, receiving grades, and taking quizzes.Participatory designResponding to the school site’s needs, the authors of this manuscript recruited an advisory class of 15 highschoolers and their advisory teacher to initiate a participatory design research project (Bang & Vossoughi, 2016)during the 2014-2016 school years to address school technology practices. Participatory design efforts ineducation seek to collaboratively re-mediate educational practices by addressing the sociocultural aspects of aproblem space, including political and institutional dimensions of the design work (Bang & Vossoughi, 2016).CSCL 2017 Proceedings681© ISLSWe concluded that taking on this collaborative approach to design and research will allow us to directly addressissues of power by privileging the voices of nondominant students to shift their roles within the school. Thegroup met once a week to design interventions to make technology use at the school better reflect student needs.In its second year, the program moved to an after school space with an added emphasis on students to engagewith their own personal interests. The students gradually transitioned to a new group of 12 students whocontinued the collaborative design work.Data sources and analysisFor this analysis, one student-proposed shifts in design processes was examined to understand how theimplementation of the interventions addressed shifted the role of students within the school, and how such ashift created opportunities for organizational learning. Therefore, the interventions, and subsequent field notesdescribing the implementation were qualitatively analyzed for their contribution to each aspect of the equityframework.ResultsCase study: Making the collaborative design effort more passion-drivenShifts in design infrastructureAt the beginning of the second year of the participatory design work, four students from the original designgroup met with the first author to discuss potential improvements in the way students engaged with thepartnership. The first year had concluded with a professional development (PD) session organized by thestudents with administrators, teachers, and university researchers as an audience that reflected the first year’sdesign goals that were co-developed by the researchers and students. The design goal of the first year was todevelop practices that were meaningful to students using Schoology, a learning management system (LMS) thatthe school had recently purchased. Consequently, at the PD session, students presented their designs which allutilized the new LMS, such as an ePortfolio system to facilitate more holistic evaluation of students, an archiveof “college-going interviews” of seniors to make college-going knowledge more visible, and an introduction tothe “calendar” feature on the LMS. However, about five students had lost interest in the design work throughthe first year, and did not present at the PD session.At the onset of the second year of the partnership, five students from the original group who hadvolunteered to offer feedback on the first year’s collaboration met with the first author with the goal ofarticulating ways to improve the design methods. Asked why some students seemed to become disengaged fromthe previous year’s work, the students unanimously agreed that the design goal, to develop “school practices”was too limiting, and that students needed to do work that they felt “passionate” about. As a result, the groupdecided to ask future participants to initiate their involvement by engaging with an issue or activity they feltpassionate about, and use digital tools to more deeply engage with their passions with an eye towards using theoutcomes of this work to inform teachers of technology practices that are meaningful to students. With engagingin “passion-driven work” through digital technology as a central thrust of the design group, the collaborationmoved to an after school space with a mostly new group of twelve students who each initiated varioustechnology-mediated, passion-driven projects, such as creating an e-sports (gaming) community, continuing thedevelopment of an ePortfolio system, and building a financial literacy website.PowerStudents who engaged in passion-driven designs emerged as leaders and experts within their particular interestdriven communities. For example, a group of students who founded an e-sports community hosted severalgaming events which they planned, advertised, facilitated, documented, and were attended by dozens of theirpeers. They continued to expand the scope of their work to consider social issues such as gender disparities inthe gaming community, as well as create extramural networks with outside gaming experts such as severaluniversity-based gaming communities. Several teachers have commented on how their perception of some ofthe students have shifted significantly for the better as they have observed the students take on leadership andorganizational roles within their new communities. In another example, the ePortfolio system that wasdeveloped by one of the students served as a prototype for school-wide implementation, and is currently beingtested in several classrooms.Student expertise and needsCSCL 2017 Proceedings682© ISLSDue to the realignment of the social infrastructure of design, the design outcomes further reflected studentexpertise and needs, and expanded the understanding of what it means to learn through technology at the schoolsite. As a result of this shift in design focus, the 12 students who joined the group for the second year eachengaged in technology-mediated activities related to their personal interests. The design outcomes reflectedstudent knowledge and needs. For example the e-sports community designers leveraged their deep knowledge ofcurrent gaming practices outside of school, in particular the rise of e-sports and the tournament formats for suchevents, to successfully host their own events, while the students developing the financial literacy websiteutilized their knowledge of their peers to identify a need for financial literacy education resources. These“boundary-crossing” (Akkerman & Bakker, 2011) technology practices were not available in the schoolenvironment prior to this proposed intervention.Conclusion and implicationsThe findings from this study not only suggests that students should be critical partners in the design oftechnology-mediated educational practices, but that continued examination of how students engage in suchpartnerships can critically influence the design outcomes. The realignment of social infrastructures for design,and the consequent designs that emerged demonstrate that infrastructuring social relations of design can lead tothe design of interventions that remediate traditional power relations in schools to produce more equitabletechnology practices that reflect student expertise and needs. In particular, student engagement withparticipatory design seems to lead to the kind of organizational learning characterized as ‘boundary crossing’(Akkerman & Bakker, 2011), which views learning as the expansion of the object of activity systems throughthe hybridization of traditionally isolated activities within an institution. It is important to note that this studyonly highlighted some of the potential contributions students can make in technology design efforts, and deeperstudies that examine the micro-interactions that mediate the kind of positive outcomes described here are neededto consistently produce positive outcomes. Furthermore, there needs to be a more comprehensive understandingof how knowledge embedded in semiotic tools created by students travel across the school ecology, and howthey are taken up by other stakeholders. Moving forward, we hope to contribute to understandings in both ofthese directions.ReferencesAkkerman, S. F., & Bakker, A. (2011). Boundary crossing and boundary objects. Review of EducationalResearch, 81(2), 132–169.Bang, M., & Vossoughi, S. (2016). Participatory Design Research and Educational Justice: Studying Learningand Relations Within Social Change Making. Cognition and Instruction, 34(3), 173–193.Barron, B. (2006). Interest and self-sustained learning as catalysts of development: A learning ecologyperspective. HUMAN DEVELOPMENT-BASEL-, 49(4), 193.Collins, J. (2009). Social Reproduction in Classrooms and Schools. Annual Review of Anthropology, 38, 33–48.Craig Watkins, S. (2011). Digital divide: Navigating the digital edge.Delpit, L. D. (2006). Other people’s children: cultural conflict in the classroom. New York: New Press :Distributed by W.W. Norton.Druin, A. (2002). The role of children in the design of new technology. Behaviour and Information Technology,21(1), 1–25.Fishman, B. J., & Pinkard, N. (2001). Bringing urban schools into the information age: Planning for technologyvs. technology planning. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 25(1), 63–80.Ito, M., Gutierrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., … Watkins, S. C. (2013). Connectedlearning: An agenda for research and design. Digital Media and Learning Research Hub.Ladson-Billings, G. (2006). From the Achievement Gap to the Education Debt: Understanding Achievement inU.S. Schools. Educational Researcher, 35(7), 3–12. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X035007003Le Dantec, C. A., & DiSalvo, C. (2013). Infrastructuring and the formation of publics in participatory design.Social Studies of Science, 43(2), 241–264.Nardi, B. A. (1996). Activity theory and human-computer interaction. Context and Consciousness: ActivityTheory and Human–computer Interaction, 436, 7–16.Schwartz, L. H. (2015). A funds of knowledge approach to the appropriation of new media in a high schoolwriting classroom. Interactive Learning Environments, 23(5), 595–612.Warschauer, M., & Matuchniak, T. (2010). New Technology and Digital Worlds: Analyzing Evidence of Equityin Access, Use, and Outcomes. Review of Research in Education, 34(1), 179–225.Yosso *, T. J. (2005). Whose culture has capital? A critical race theory discussion of community culturalwealth. Race Ethnicity and Education, 8(1), 69–91. https://doi.org/10.1080/1361332052000341006CSCL 2017 Proceedings683© ISLS