FindingsKinds of algorithms explored during SCAT experience to dateScholars described creating many different algorithms in their games, not only in terms of the rules and procedures(e.g., “...we created algorithms for the rules and instructions for the proper way to play our game”), but also toimplement game functionality in SCRATCH (e.g., “I used the timer for my game, and the coordinates for acharacter to go to a certain place when the game switches levels”, or “Ones that make the character move fromone place to another. Also, when the character touches the coins then the coins will go away”). In addition,Scholars also described exploring algorithms during their SCAT experience outside of game design. For example,for a field trip, the Scholars designed and built clocks using wood, a laser cutter, and a clock mechanism (e.g. ”Imade [a] clock and we had to put [it] together on the computer then got to see how it looked in real life, and Ithought that was cool”).What Scholars liked and disliked about game designOverwhelmingly, Scholars perceived game design as a creative endeavor that was fun and involved problemsolving, both in terms of designing and implementing the game (e.g., “I like [game design] because it’s fun andallows you to express your imagination to the game that you are designing”, “I like that I get to be creative withmy game”, or “I like doing the game designing because I enjoy having to figure the things out”). All of theseaspects of game design (i.e., game design being creative, fun, and involving problem solving) were aspects thatthirty-eight percent (38%), thirteen percent (13%), and another thirteen percent (13%), of Scholars reported likingabout game design, respectively. However, Scholars (twenty-six percent (26%)) disliked debugging their gamesand disliked the amount of time it took to design and implement games (seventeen percent (17%)). Scholars alsodescribed other aspects of game design they disliked including: having to work hard, not being able to implementas much of their games as they hoped, using SCRATCH for a second year to implement their games, and sittingin front of a computer (nine percent (9%) each).Scholars’ perceptions of themselves as game designersThroughout Season 1, Scholars learned a lot about not only game design, but also about the practices of gamedesigners. The facilitator often mentioned that the activities they were engaging in were the same as gamedesigners and that they themselves were game designers. However, the end of season evaluation responsesrevealed that none (0%) of the Scholars saw themselves as game designers. Scholars seemed to suggest thatseeing themselves as game designers implied that they wanted to pursue game design as a career (e.g., “…becauseI just don’t think [game design] is the career I want to have…”, “I don’t see myself as a game designer because Iam not a gamer. I am really not into computer games to the point where I want to design them”, “I do like howwe made the games, but I don’t like all the time it took up and that we had to keep redoing everything and have alot of patience as we were working on a website with a lot of glitches [SCRATCH]. I also did not like the thingswe were using don’t have some of the exact ideas that we had discussed over the summer camp. So, we had tomorph our ideas to fit the computer preferences.” Many Scholars suggested that, while they thought that gamedesign was fun, at this point in their lives, they viewed game design more as a fun hobby than a future career.By the end of Season 2, however, thirty-three percent (33%) of Scholars either currently saw themselvesas game designers, considered game design as a possible career, or affirmed game design was their career ofchoice (e.g., “Maybe because I mostly want to go into animation so this would be leading me to that pathway todo what I want to do”, “I do see myself as a game designer. I really enjoy creating games and I’ve learned somuch in the SCAT program so I want to continue to learn and create games that other people can enjoy”, or “yes,my ideas and creativeness could be useful”). This suggests that some Scholars’ are beginning to see, or alreadysee, alignment between game design and their talents, interests, and future career goals. Further, this findingsuggests that their SCAT experiences have impacted some of the Scholars’ desire to pursue game design as acareer.Scholars also reported applying, sharing, and showcasing the skills, capabilities, and practices theyacquired and developed during SCAT to other settings ranging from school (e.g., “We had an assignment in class,and I got to pull up my game”, “In school we had to kind of do something like creating a game” or “…when itwas the national day of code I showed my math teacher my game and all the code we did”) to communityorganizations like Girl Scouts (e.g., “Yes, me and [my partner] are doing a girl scout competition where we teachgirls in elementary school about coding in order to win a trip to California”) and other technology focusedactivities (e.g., “…I shared what I knew to my robotics camp”). Scholars also described teaching their familymembers about game design (e.g., “I have taught some [of] my family members. I also practice [game design] onmy own”) as well as the impact that their SCAT experience has had on their own problem solving strategies andpractices (e.g., “…[SCAT] may help me to think out my problems to see what is wrong”).ICLS 2016 Proceedings960© ISLSConclusions and implicationsThis paper describes the SCAT project and explores Scholars’ perspectives of their SCAT experience andperceptions of themselves as game designers. Most exciting is the growing shift of Scholars’ perceptions ofthemselves as game designers, as it suggests that Scholars’ SCAT experiences are having an impact not only onthe development of their CAT capabilities, but also in the way that Scholars view themselves and what they arecapable of. However, this shift also suggests that changes in perception that can impact choices can take a longtime to occur. In fact, it was only during the second year that this shift began to take place. Learners need to havenot only opportunities to acquire and develop skills, capabilities, and practices, but they also need time to reflecton those opportunities and experiences and assess whether and how they connect to their own interest, goals, andaspirations. As we engage in the third and final year of data collection, we will continue to explore shifts inScholars’ CAT capability development as well as their understanding of CAT and the continued impact of theSCAT program on their perceptions of themselves as game designers, problem solvers, and critical thinkers.ReferencesCollins, A., Brown, J.S., & Newman, S.E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading,writing, and mathematics. In L.B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction: essays in honor ofRobert Glaser, 453-494. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.DiSalvo, B. J., Guzdial, M., Mcklin, T., Meadows, C., Perry, K., Steward, C. & Bruckman, A. (2009). GlitchGame Testers: African American Med Breaking Open the Console. In Proceedings of DiGRA 2009.Fullerton, T., Swain, C., and Hoffman, S. (2004). Game Design Workshop: designing, prototyping and playtestinggames. San Francisco, CA: CMP Books.International Society for Technology in Education – National Education Technology Standards (2007). NETS forStudents 2007, downloaded from http://www.iste.org/standards/netsfor-students/nets-student-standards2007.aspx.Owensby, J.N. (2006). Exploring the Development and Transfer of Case Use Skills in Middle-School ProjectBased Inquiry Classrooms. Completed Dissertation, Georgia Institute of Technology. Proquest(1115125971).Palincsar, A. & Brown, A. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehensionmonitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1, 117 – 175.Polya, G. (1973). How to Solve It: A New Aspect of Mathematical Method, 2nd Edition. Princeton, NJ: PrincetonUniversity Press.Puntembekar, S., & Kolodner, J. L. (1998). The Design Diary: Development of a Tool to Support StudentsLearning Science By Design. Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences ’98,230-236.Roschelle, J. (1996). Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. In T. Koschmann (Ed.). CSCL:Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 209-248Schneider, G. M. & Gersting, J. L. (2010). Invitation to Computer Science, 5th Edition. Boston, MA: CourseTechnology, Cengage Learning, 4-16.Thomas, J.O. (2014). Supporting Computational Algorithmic Thinking (SCAT): Exploringthe development of computational algorithmic thinking in African-American middle-school girls.Presented and paper published in the Proceedings of the International Conference of the LearningSciences. Online proceedings. Boulder, CO, June 2014.Thomas, J.O. (2008). Scaffolding Complex Cognitive Skill Development: Exploring the Development andTransfer of Case Use Skills In Middle-School Project-Based Inquiry Classrooms. VDM Publishing.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978) Mind and society: The development of higher mental processes. Cambridge, MA: HarvardUniversity Press.Wing, J.M. (2010). “Computational Thinking”. Presented at the Centre for Computational Systems and Biology,Trento, Italy, December 2010.Wing, J. M. (2008). Computational thinking and thinking about computing. Philosophical Transactions of theRoyal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 366(1881), 3717-3725. doi:10.1098/rsta.2008.0118Wing, J.M. (2006). Computational Thinking. In CACM Viewpoint, March 2006, pp. 33-35.AcknowledgmentsWe are grateful for the generous support of the National Science Foundation (DRK-12 1150098).ICLS 2016 Proceedings961© ISLS