The Impact of Peer Tutors’ Use of Indirect Feedback andInstructionsMichael Madaio, Justine Cassell, and Amy Ogan,mmadaio@cs.cmu.edu, justine@cs.cmu.edu, aeo@cs.cmu.eduCarnegie Mellon UniversityAbstract: During collaborative learning, computer-supported or otherwise, students balance task-oriented goals with the interpersonal goals of relationship-building; these goals may conflict, negativelyimpacting learning. In peer tutoring, for instance, tutors may avoid providing feedback to their partners toavoid the face-threat to their tutee. In this paper, we explore how the interpersonal closeness between tutorand tutee impacts tutors’ use of indirectness with feedback and instructions, and the impact those moveshave on tutees’ problem-solving. We found that stranger tutors use more indirect instructions and providemore positive feedback to their tutee than friend tutors, and that stranger tutees attempted and solved moreproblems when their tutors used indirect instructions. We found no effect for dyads of friends, suggestingthat interpersonal closeness reduces the face-threat of direct instructions. These results demonstrate thatdesigners of CSCL tools should incorporate awareness of students’ relationships into their systems, as thatrelationship impacts students’ collaborative learning behaviors.IntroductionIn collaborative learning interactions, whether computer-mediated or face-to-face, students simultaneously pursuethe task-oriented goals of learning and the interpersonal goals of getting along with or building a relationship withother students, much like in other social interactions (Burgoon et al., 1995). In some forms of collaborativelearning, such as peer tutoring, students may offer each other advice, instructions, or feedback. Such pedagogicalbehaviors, while supporting the interactional goal of helping their partner learn, may conflict with theinterpersonal goal of relationship-building with their partner due to the potential for such moves to threaten theirpartner’s “positive face”, or desire to be approved of by others (Brown and Levinson, 1987). Similarly, otherproductive learning behaviors, such as engaging in cognitive conflict, have been found to occur more often ingroups of friends than strangers, perhaps because of a greater importance for strangers in avoiding face-threatwhile pursuing interpersonal goals (Azmitia & Montgomery, 1993). To mitigate the interpersonal consequencesof pedagogical behaviors that are likely to threaten tutees’ face needs, such as giving direct instructions andfeedback, peer tutors without sufficient interpersonal closeness with their tutee might avoid providing thenecessary feedback altogether. If they are more skilled at attending to interpersonal needs, they might phrase theirwords in a polite or indirect manner, to reduce the implicit face-threat (Person et al., 1995). Some computersupports for learning, such as some forms of intelligent tutoring systems, apply a polite style to the feedback andinstructions provided to students, such as “Shall we calculate the result now?”, to mitigate the face threat of directfeedback and instructional directives (Johnson and Rizzo, 2004). An overuse of such polite or indirectinstructional moves, however, may have a negative impact on student learning, due to the ambiguity ofindirectness (Person et al., 1995). Moreover, indirectness may not be the appropriate way for tutors to deliverfeedback in all situations. In fact, previous studies on collaborative learning have shown that the frequency ofpoliteness and the negative impact of face-threat diminishes over the course of a relationship (Ogan et al 2012),following prior work on the decreasing importance of positivity as the interpersonal distance between interlocutorsdecreases (Tickle-Degnen and Rosenthal, 1990). Further, while expert teachers may be communicativelycompetent enough to modulate their feedback and instructions to mitigate the face-threat of directness (KerssenGriep, 2008), it is not clear that untrained peer tutors are able to do so.In order to design computational supports for collaborative learning that both effectively manage faceneeds and support cognitive conflict, we should thus first understand how untrained peer tutors mitigate facethreat to their tutees, either through indirect delivery of instructions and feedback, or by avoiding that feedbackaltogether. In this paper, we first investigate how reciprocal peer tutors’ interpersonal closeness with their tutees,as well as their prior domain knowledge and tutoring self-efficacy, impacts their use and delivery style ofpotentially face-threatening tutoring moves. We then investigate the relationship between peer tutors’ deliverystyle and their tutees’ problem-solving. We found that stranger tutors provide more positive feedback and moreindirect instructions than friend tutors do, and found that tutors with high self-efficacy used significantly moreindirect instructions than low self-efficacy tutors, particularly for tutors with lower rapport with their tutee. Forstranger dyads, independent of their self-efficacy, tutors’ use of indirect instructions was positively predictive oftheir tutees’ number of problems attempted and solved, but for friend dyads, there was no effect. These findingscan help inform the design of CSCL tools that can detect students’ interpersonal closeness and suggest differentCSCL 2017 Proceedings383© ISLSways for students to deliver instructions and feedback to mitigate face-threat, or to intervene to provide that directsupport itself when necessary.Related workReciprocal peer tutoring is a form of collaborative learning where same-age students work together by teachingeach other, despite neither of them being an expert (Palincsar and Brown, 1984). Prior work has shown it to be animprovement over individuals learning alone, but the differences in both content knowledge and pedagogicalknowledge between novice peer tutors and expert tutors may have significant consequences for both the processand outcomes of tutoring (Palincsar and Brown, 1984). Specifically, prior work has argued that providinginstructional feedback, directives, or advice can be highly face-threatening and may be avoided by peer tutors(Person et al., 1995). However, tutors with greater instructional or interpersonal ability may be better able tomitigate face threat to their students, perhaps by presenting feedback in an indirect or polite way (Person et al.,1995), or by using nonverbal immediacy cues as described by Kerssen-Griep (2008). As we have described above,indirectness is one of the conversational strategies that plays a role in face management (others are praise andacknowledgement). To understand the impact of face management on peer tutoring behaviors, in particular thedelivery of feedback and instructions, we draw on Brown and Levinson’s (1987) theory of face management andpoliteness. In this theory, students, like any social actors, are motivated by their desire for what is referred to aspositive face, or, to be approved of by others, and negative face, which is the desire to be autonomous andunimpeded by others (Brown & Levinson, 1987). As a result, tutors’ instructional directives, if they take the formof demands, may threaten students’ negative face, and tutors’ instructional feedback, if given in a blunt manner,may threaten their tutees’ positive face (Brown & Levinson, 1987; Johnson and Rizzo, 2004). However, theseverity of that face-threat, and thus, its negative impact on the tutees, can be mitigated by the use of politenessor indirectness, which may be mediated by the interpersonal closeness between students. This follows TickleDegnen and Rosenthal’s theory that the importance of positivity decreases as the interpersonal closeness betweeninterlocutors grows (Tickle-Degnen and Rosenthal, 1990). However, it is unclear to what extent peer tutorsminimize the face-threat of feedback and instructions by being indirect in their delivery, or how that indirectnessimpacts their tutees’ problem-solving. Accordingly, some intelligent tutoring systems have attempted to mitigatethe face-threat of providing feedback and instructions by phrasing tutor moves in a polite or indirect way, andthey found benefits for some students on some types of questions (Johnson and Rizzo, 2004). However, theirmodel operationalized Brown and Levinson’s social distance as simply decreasing over subsequent sessions witha tutee, which does not account for the dynamic nature of relationship development, as even students who worktogether for multiple sessions may never develop the interpersonal closeness necessary for reducing the face threatof direct feedback.To better operationalize the dynamic development of interpersonal closeness and its impact on facemanagement, we draw on the theory of interpersonal rapport, as described by Tickle-Degnen and Rosenthal(1990), as well as Spencer-Oatey’s (2008) model of face-management. In these theories, we would expect positiveface management strategies to decrease as the relationship between tutor and tutee develops over time (SpencerOatey, 2008; Tickle-Degnen and Rosenthal, 1990). Prior work has found, using friendship as a proxy for longterm rapport, that tutoring dyads of friends do in fact engage in more violations of social norms, such as playfulteasing and social challenges, and that these are correlated with learning gains in friends. Those same behaviorslead to decreased learning among strangers (Ogan et al., 2012). This suggests that the relationship between tutorand tutee allows each to playfully challenge the other while tutoring, in what might be seen as face-threateningacts, when done between friends. In the same vein, the indirectness that may be appropriate or necessary betweenstrangers, to mitigate face threat from direct feedback or instructions, might be unnecessary or even detrimentalbetween friends. Here, to investigate how a dynamic measure of interpersonal closeness can capture changingface-management needs, we use two measures of interpersonal closeness, 1) externally-rated rapport betweenparticipants as a measure of their short-term interpersonal closeness, and 2) the friendship between participantsas a proxy for their long-term interpersonal closeness.Although expert tutors and teachers are able to effectively mitigate the face threat of a tutoring movethrough indirectness, politeness, or a self-effacing disclosure (Kerssen-Griep 2008), untrained peer tutors may notbe as deft in their facework. Although we did not measure tutoring ability, we used the tutors’ score on a pre-testas a proxy for their prior domain knowledge, following Rowan et al.’s (1997) findings that teacher prior domainknowledge was predictive of their students’ performance. In addition to their content knowledge of the domain,prior work has shown the importance of teachers’ instructional self-efficacy for their attention to the interpersonalgoals of teaching as well as the instructional goals (Mojavezi, 2012; Saklofske et al. 1988). Teachers’ self-efficacybeliefs, or the belief about their ability to impact student outcomes and the confidence that they can do so, haveCSCL 2017 Proceedings384© ISLSbeen shown to impact teachers’ use of different types of feedback (Saklofske et al., 1988) as well as students’motivation and achievement (Mojavezi, 2012).MethodsWe seek to investigate how the interpersonal closeness between peer tutors and their tutees impacts the tutors’use of indirectness with instructions and feedback and how those moves in turn impact their tutees’ learning.Research questionsRQ1:Do tutors with lower interpersonal closeness with their tutees provide feedback about their tutees’correctness at different rates than dyads with greater interpersonal closeness? Due to the potential facethreat in giving negative feedback to their partners, we hypothesize that both tutors in dyads of strangersand tutors in low-rapport dyads will provide less negative feedback (Person et al., 1995). Friends andhigh-rapport dyads would have less need for face-threat mitigation, and will thus use more negativefeedback (Spencer-Oatey, 2008).RQ2a: Do tutors with a lower interpersonal closeness with their tutee use more indirect language while tutoringthan tutors with a greater interpersonal closeness? Based on prior literature on the use of indirect languageto mitigate the face-threat of various tutoring moves, we hypothesize that tutors with a lowerinterpersonal closeness with their tutee will use more indirect language while tutoring than tutors indyads with greater closeness (Brown and Levinson, 1987; Johnson and Rizzo, 2004).RQ2b: Do tutors with a lower tutoring self-efficacy use more indirect language while tutoring than tutors withgreater self-efficacy? From prior literature on the use of hedges and subjectivizers to convey uncertainty(Rowland, 2007), we hypothesized that tutors with lower tutoring self-efficacy would use more indirectlanguage due to their uncertainty. However, an alternative hypothesis is that tutors with greater tutoringself-efficacy would attend more to their tutees’ needs for face-management and would use more indirectlanguage with their tutoring moves to mitigate the face-threat of feedback and direct instructions (Brownand Levinson, 1987; Kerssen-Griep, 2008; Saklofske, 1988)RQ3: Does a tutor’s use of indirect feedback lead to improved problem-solving for their tutee? From priorliterature on the motivational benefits of face-threat mitigation, we hypothesize that there will be aninteraction between a dyad’s interpersonal closeness and their use of indirect tutoring language, such thatin stranger dyads and low-rapport dyads (both friend and stranger), when tutors use more indirect tutoringmoves, their tutees will attempt and solve more problems (Kerssen-Griep 2008). An alternativehypothesis is that direct feedback and instruction leads to more problem solving.Dialogue corpus and annotationThe dialogue corpus described here was collected as part of a larger study on the effects of rapport-building onreciprocal peer tutoring. The participants were assigned to 12 dyads that alternated tutoring each other in linearAlgebra equation solving for 5 weekly hour-long sessions, for a total of ~60 hours. Each session was structuredsuch that the students engaged in brief social chitchat in the beginning, then had one tutoring period of 20 minuteswith one of the students randomly assigned to the role of tutor, then engaged in another social period, then hadthe second tutoring period where the other student was assigned the role of tutor. This process was repeated forfive sessions. As each student was randomly assigned to be the tutor for half of the tutoring periods, they werenot expected to have any greater prior knowledge than their partner for the problems they were tutoring them on.All students were supported with a set of instructions on how to teach the particular problems for which they wereassigned the role of tutor. The students took a pre-test before the first session and a post-test after the fifth sessionto assess their learning gains. However, because of a ceiling effect on the pre-test, we used the problems the tuteessolved during the sessions as a proxy for a learning outcome measure for each session. The participants (meanage = 13.5, min=12, max=15) came to a lab on an American university campus in a mid-sized city for the study.Half were male and half were female, assigned to same-gender dyads, so that, in other work with this corpus,gendered differences in the social, rapport-building behaviors of the participants could be identified. Toinvestigate how the use of various tutoring behaviors differs between dyads with varying degrees of interpersonalcloseness, we used friendship as a proxy for long-term closeness and asked half of the participants to bring asame-age, same-gender friend to the session with them, and for the other half of the dyads, we paired them witha stranger. Audio and video data were recorded, transcribed, and segmented for clause-level dialogue annotation.The rapport, or short-term interpersonal closeness between the participants, was evaluated using a “thinslice” approach (Ambady and Rosenthal, 1992), where the corpus was divided into 30-second video slicesprovided to naive, third-party raters in a randomized order, so they would each slice’s rapport, and not the deltaCSCL 2017 Proceedings385© ISLSacross multiple slices. Three raters rated the rapport present in each slice on a Likert scale from 1-7, and a singlerating was chosen for each slice using a bias-corrected weighted majority vote approach, as in Sinha and Cassell(2015). From the 120 thirty-second slices in each session, we calculated a summary rapport score for each session,or the “utopy”, which we use in this paper as our rapport measure. Prior work has shown that statistical summariessuch as a measure of central tendency or proportion of high and low ratings of rapport collapse the temporaldimension and are not as robust as more stochastic-based models which capture the evolution of rapport over time(Sinha, 2016). We thus fit a Markov chain of order 1 to the sequence of 120 rapport ratings for each session, andused the resulting transition probability matrix to generate a measure of the entropy (or, uncertainty) and utopy(Dillenbourg, 2015; Sinha, 2016), or likelihood of the dyad being in a high-rapport state.As part of a larger study on the relationship between rapport-building and peer tutoring, this corpus wasannotated for a set of social, rapport-building verbal and nonverbal behaviors, as well as pedagogical, tutoringrelated behaviors from both the tutor and tutee. Social conversational strategies, as in Sinha and Cassell (2015),include such phenomena as students’ self-disclosure, reference to shared experiences, praise, and social normviolations, each of which serves a rapport-building function, as described in Zhao et al. (2014), withKrippendorff’s alpha for all codes > .75. We annotated the dialogue corpus for a set of tutoring and learningbehaviors, such as question-asking, “knowledge-telling”, or step-level instructions and procedures, and feedbackfrom tutors on their partner’s correctness (Madaio et al., 2016), with Krippendorff’s alpha for all codes > .7. InTable 1, we describe two tutoring strategies relevant in this paper for their potential to threaten the tutees’ face:tutors’ feedback, and their instructions, or “knowledge-telling”. Then, to understand the ways that dyads withtutors of differing levels of interpersonal closeness with their tutees (both friendship status and rapport utopy)mitigated the face-threat of their tutoring instructions and feedback, we coded our corpus for four types ofindirectness, which are often used to soften or mitigate the face threat of being “bald on record” with directinstructions, advice, or feedback (Brown and Levinson, 1987). We annotated for: apologizing, hedging language,the use of vague category extenders, and “subjectivizing” (Zhang, 2013; Neary-Sundquist, 2013; Fraser, 2010),as described in more detail in Table 2. The Krippendorff’s alpha for five trained raters rating all four codes was >.7. Then, we labeled a clause as indirect feedback if the same clause had an annotation for indirectness and anannotation for feedback, either positive or negative. Typical examples of indirect feedback include: “I think yougot it.” “I guess that’s what it is.” “Oh, no, actually, it’s not.” “No, it’s just nineteen.” We labeled each clause asindirect instructions if it had an annotation for indirectness and an annotation for “knowledge-telling”(instructions and directives used by the tutor). Typical examples of indirect instructions are: “Actually, just addfive here.” “I think you’re gonna divide it by a fraction or something.” “I would probably subtract the sixteen.”Finally, we provided the participants with a questionnaire following the study with a set of items for constructsrelevant to rapport-building. We used items about tutors’ self-efficacy for tutoring, a 7-item scale indexingwhether the participants thought they were good tutors and were concerned about tutoring quality, motivation andimpact on their tutee.Table 1: Annotations of Tutoring Moves and Indirect LanguageCodeApologyHedgesSubjectivizerDefinitionApologies used to soften direct speech acts.Qualifying words to reduce the intensity or certaintyof utterances.Words used to indicate uncertainty by referring tovague categories.Words that reduce intensity or certainty.Positive FeedbackNegative FeedbackKnowledge-tellingExplicit evaluations of correct answers or steps.Explicit evaluations of incorrect answers or steps.Explicitly stating procedures or steps for the tutee.ExtendersExample“Sorry, it’s negative 2.”“You just add 5 to both sides.”“You have to multiply orsomething.”“I guess you divide by 3here.”“Yep, that’s it!”“No, that’s wrong.”“Multiply it by the fraction.”ResultsFirst, because friends are generally more talkative than strangers in their peer tutoring interactions (as describedin more detail in Madaio et al., 2016), we normalized the amount of indirect utterances by the total number ofutterances used by that participant in each session. By far the most frequently used marker of indirectness in ourdataset was the use of hedges (e.g. “just”, “actually”, etc.) with normalized mean = .05 and standard deviation =.04, followed by subjectivizers (e.g. “I think”, “I guess”, etc) (m=.02, sd=.03), and apologies (m=.01, sd=.01),and with vague category extenders by far the most infrequent (e.g. “and stuff”, “or something”, etc.) (m=.002,CSCL 2017 Proceedings386© ISLSsd=.01). This distribution aligns with findings from Rowland’s (2007) work studying the use of hedges,subjectivizers (what he calls “shields”), and extenders in student-teacher mathematics lessons. To analyze tutors’use of indirect delivery with their instructions and feedback, we first created an aggregate count of all indirectlanguage, from each of the 4 indirectness codes described above for each participant. Then, after finding the cooccurrence of indirect language with tutors’ feedback and instructions, we normalized those frequency counts bythe total number of “on-task” utterances, or the total number of annotated task-related questions, explanations,feedback, and metacognitive utterances, following Madaio et al. (2016).Table 2: Means and Standard Deviations of Normalized Frequency of Indirectness and Indirect TutoringDyad TypeIndirectnessIndirect FeedbackIndirect InstructionsAll Tutors.09 (.06).002 (.005).01 (.02)Friend Tutors.06 (.05).002 (.005).01 (.02)Stranger Tutors.11 (.06).002 (.01).02 (.03)Tutors’ use of positive and negative feedback (RQ1)First, we investigated our hypothesis that tutors with lower interpersonal closeness with their tutees would usefewer instances of negative feedback (Person et al., 1995). To test this hypothesis, we ran a repeated measuresANOVA on the normalized frequency of tutors’ negative feedback, crossing the between-subjects factors ofRelationship (Friend/Stranger), Rapport (High/Low), Self-Efficacy (High/Low), and the median split of thetutors’ Pre-Test performance (High/Low) with the within-subject factor of Session and Tutoring Period, and usingeach dyad’s tutoring period and session number as error terms. There was no statistically significant effect of anyof the factors on tutors’ use of negative feedback. We then investigated whether stranger tutors were using morepositive feedback to boost their tutees’ face, rather than avoiding negative feedback. We thus ran the same modelon tutors’ use of positive feedback, finding a highly significant effect of relationship on the amount that tutorsused positive feedback (F(1,64) = 12.8, p<.001). To find the direction of that difference, we ran a t-test, and foundthat stranger tutors were significantly more likely (t(71) = 3.77, p<.001) to use positive feedback (m=.17, sd=.12)than friend tutors (m=.08, sd=.08). We hypothesized that stranger tutors may be using more positive feedbackbecause their tutees were solving more problems correctly. Therefore, we conducted a t-test, which showed thatstranger tutees did not solve significantly more problems than friend tutees.Tutors’ use of indirect feedback and instructions (RQ2)We then investigated the hypothesis that stranger tutors, and tutors in low-rapport dyads, would use a more indirectstyle than friend tutors and tutors with high-rapport with their tutees. We ran a repeated measures ANOVA on thetutors’ indirect feedback, using the same within-subject and between-subject factors and the same error terms asin RQ1. To investigate our alternative hypothesis about tutors’ self-efficacy interacting with their relationshipwith their tutee (RQ2b), we included interaction terms for Relationship, Rapport, and Self-Efficacy. There wasno statistically significant effect of any factor on tutors’ use of indirect feedback. We then ran the same repeatedmeasures ANOVA model on tutors’ use of indirect instructions, finding a highly significant main effect ofrelationship on the tutors’ use of indirect instructions (F(1,70) = 7.4, p < .01). To find the direction of thatdifference, we ran a Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test, for comparing means of non-normal distributions, whichshowed that stranger tutors were significantly more likely (U = 3749, p .< .05) to use indirect instructions (m=.02,sd= .03) than friend tutors (m= .007, sd= .02). There was a significant interaction effect of Rapport and SelfEfficacy on all tutors’ use of indirect instructions (F(1,70) = 4.5, p < .05), as seen in Figure 1. High-self-efficacytutors with low rapport with their tutees were significantly more likely (U=4052, p<.001) to use more indirectinstructions (m=.03, sd=.02) than high self-efficacy tutors with high rapport with their tutees (m=.01, sd=.01).This supports our hypothesis that tutors with lower interpersonal closeness (i.e. rapport) with their tutees woulduse more indirect instructions than those with greater interpersonal closeness. However, it is primarily the highself-efficacy tutors with low rapport with their tutees that appear to use this strategy, as they were (marginally)significantly more likely (U=928, p=.07) to use more indirect instructions (m=.03, sd=.02) than low self-efficacytutors with low rapport with their tutees (m=.01, sd=.01).CSCL 2017 Proceedings387© ISLSFigure 1. Interaction Effect of Rapport and Self-Efficacy on Tutors’ use of Indirect Instructions.Impact of tutors’ indirect tutoring on tutees’ problem-solving (RQ3)Finally, we investigated our hypothesis that tutors’ greater use of indirect feedback and instructions is associatedwith greater problem-solving for the tutee, particularly for dyads of lower interpersonal closeness. We ran a linearmixed effect model using the tutees’ percent of problems solved in each tutoring session as the dependent variable,and using the normalized frequency of tutors’ indirect feedback and instructions, tutors’ direct feedback andinstructions, and tutees’ own self-explanations as fixed effects, along with interaction terms for each of the abovewith Relationship and Rapport, with random effects of Dyad and Session. We included the tutees’ selfexplanations, following the findings of Madaio et al. (2016) that tutees’ self-explanations (i.e. annotations ofknowledge-telling) were a more significant predictor of their learning than their tutors’ instructions. We includedthe direct feedback instructions (in addition to the indirect) to see whether that directness impacted tutee learning,due to the potential for negative face-threat. While we found in response to RQ1 that strangers and friends solvedthe same number of problems overall, in this model, stranger tutors’ use of indirect instructions was positivelypredictive (β = .64, p = .05) of their tutees’ problem-solving. We further investigated whether the use ofindirectness with instructions and feedback might serve a motivational role, leading to an increased amount ofproblems attempted for the tutee. We thus ran the same mixed effects model, but with the tutees’ number ofproblems attempted as the dependent variable. In this model, stranger tutors’ use of indirect instructions wassignificantly positively predictive (β = .84, p < .001) of their tutees’ amount of problems attempted. No otherfactors were significant.DiscussionIn this paper, we investigated the extent to which the interpersonal closeness (both short- and long-term) betweenpeer tutors and their tutees impacts their learning, by way of the face-management that tutors engage in whenproviding instructions and feedback. A CSCL system that is not aware of the interpersonal closeness betweencollaborating students may mischaracterize the impact of face-threat mitigation behaviors and respondinappropriately. Here, the differences we found in tutors’ use of indirectness with various tutoring behaviorssuggest that interpersonal, relational aspects of the tutoring interaction impact the pedagogical task goals and viceversa. Although stranger tutors used more positive feedback than friends, their tutees did not solve significantlymore problems than friend-only dyads. This suggests that they may be using that positive feedback to boost theirpartners’ face rather than accurately diagnosing the correctness of their partners’ problem-solving. Further, thelack of significant effects of the positive feedback on tutee learning indicate that, while it may serve a relational,face-boosting role, it may not serve a pedagogically useful role, and may even, as Person et al. (1995) pointed out,lead to ambiguity about the correct procedures or answers, possibly eroding the tutee’s trust in their tutor overtime. Further, the stranger tutors’ use of more indirect instructions than friend tutors suggests that stranger tutorsmay be hedging or qualifying their instructions to avoid the face-threat of directness. The benefits of this facethreat mitigation for dyads with low interpersonal closeness can be seen in the positive effect of indirectinstructions on the amount of problems stranger tutees attempted and solved correctly. However, the benefits ofindirect feedback for tutees disappear as the relationship strengthens between tutor and tutee. While interpersonalcloseness affects tutors’ use of face-threat mitigation strategies, not all tutors engage in equal amounts of facemanagement. Tutors’ self-efficacy for tutoring also impacted their use of indirect instructions, as seen in theinteraction between rapport and self-efficacy. As expected, tutors with low rapport with their tutee were moreCSCL 2017 Proceedings388© ISLSlikely than those with high rapport to give instructions indirectly. However, this effect was present only for highlyself-efficacious tutors. Unexpectedly, there was no difference between low and high rapport dyads for tutors withlow self-efficacy. This suggests that more self-efficacious tutors may be better able to modulate the directness oftheir instructions to attend more to the need for face-management when their interpersonal closeness with theirtutee is lower, irrespective of their actual domain knowledge.For the computer-supported collaborative learning community, researchers who design tools to supportpeer tutoring should be aware of the ways in which the interactional goals of tutoring may be impacted by theinterpersonal goals of face-threat mitigation in the context of relationship-building. That is, the collaborativelearning behaviors exhibited by students may differ depending on whether they are friends or strangers, or have agreater or lower rapport between them, and those same behaviors may have different impacts on student learning,depending on that closeness. Designers of collaborative intelligent tutoring systems, as in Olsen et al.’s (2014)work, might build in awareness of the interpersonal closeness between students, and, in addition to cognitiveinstructional supports, might recommend students phrase their instructions to each other more indirectly wheninterpersonal closeness is lower. These findings can also inform the design of educational dialogue systems, orconversational agents which could support peer tutoring by detecting and responding appropriately to theinterpersonal dynamics between the human students and the conversational agent, and by building a deeperrapport with the students over time, as seen in (Zhao et al. 2014; Sinha et al., 2015) so as to be able to be moredirect and blunt with instructions and feedback. To detect the interpersonal closeness described here, Yu et al.(2013) developed a method for the automatic prediction of friendship, which (the lack thereof) was the strongestpredictor of the use of indirect language with instructions. Zhao et al., (2016) have developed a method for theautomatic detection of rapport based on temporal association rules between multimodal data such as students’conversational moves and nonverbal behaviors and the subsequent change in their rapport. More broadly, thiswork contributes to a more robust understanding of the ways in which interpersonal closeness impacts thecollaborative learning process by way of peer tutors’ face-management. While prior work has hypothesized thatsocial distance impacts the use of politeness and indirectness, our work provides two operationalizations of thatsocial distance, friendship and rapport, and shows how each type of interpersonal closeness differently impactspeer tutors’ face-threat mitigation while tutoring, showing the impact of those face-management tactics fordifferent tutees’ problem-solving.Future work and limitationsThis work is part of a larger research program to understand the ways in which interpersonal rapport impactsteaching and learning, and will be used to inform the design of a conversational agent that simulates a peer tutoras the front end of an intelligent tutoring system. Our goal for this agent is to build rapport with its tutee, reducingthe face-threat of particular instructional moves when necessary by using instructional moves in sociallyappropriate ways. One of the limitations of this work for investigating differences in the effects of rapport thatcan inform such an agent is the small sample size, particularly for dyads of strangers. We are currently conductinga similar study with 16 dyads of strangers to better understand how the rapport-building process develops withindyads starting from the same interpersonal baseline, and how that rapport impacts their teaching and learningprocess and outcomes. Another limitation of this work is the culturally dependent nature of what may be perceivedas face-threatening or indirect by the interlocutors, and future work should take into account the culture of theparticipants in understanding face-threat. In addition, we are currently involved in investigating other potentiallyface-threatening pedagogical behaviors, to understand whether and how high-rapport dyads engage in for instance,cognitive conflict, help-seeking, help-offering, and others. While in this paper, using the normalized aggregatefrequency of a particular set of annotated behaviors revealed interesting differences between groups of dyads,some of the most beneficial tutoring behaviors may occur infrequently or may have their benefits mediated bycontingent patterns of use and responses from their partner (Ohlsson et al., 2007). Therefore, an analysis that doesnot take this contingent, temporal pattern of use into account may miss important effects. To better understandthe contingent patterns of use for particular tutoring and learning behaviors, we plan to use temporal associationand sequence mining to discover the sequences of pedagogical and social behaviors that contribute to greaterrapport and learning, to predict rapport from multimodal features. We intend for this work to contribute to thedesign of socially-aware computer-supported collaborative learning systems, which can more appropriatelyrespond to learners’ social states in pedagogically beneficial ways.ReferencesAmbady, N. and Rosenthal, R. (1992). Thin slices of expressive behavior as predictors of interpersonalconsequences: A meta-analysis. Psychological bulletin, 111(2):256, 1992.CSCL 2017 Proceedings389© ISLSAzmitia, M., & Montgomery, R. (1993). Friendship, transactive dialogues, and the development of scientificreasoning. Social development, 2(3), 202-221.Brown, P., & Levinson, S. C. (1987). Politeness: Some universals in language use. Cambridge, England:Cambridge University Press.Burgoon, J. K., Stern, L. A., & Dillman, L. (1995). Interpersonal Adaptation: Dyadic Interaction Patterns.Cambridge University Press. http://doi.org/10.1007/s13398-014-0173-7.2Dillenbourg, P. (2015). Orchestration graphs: Modeling scalable education. EPFL Press.Fraser, B. (2010). Pragmatic competence: The case of hedging. New Approaches to Hedging, 15–34. Retrievedfrom http://www.bu.edu/sed/files/2010/10/2010-Pragmatic-Competence-The-Case-of-Hedging.pdfJohnson, W. L., & Rizzo, P. (2004). Politeness in tutoring dialogs: “Run the factory, that’s what I’d do.” IntelligentTutoring Systems, Proceedings, 3220, 67–76. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-30139-4_7Kerssen-Griep, J., Trees, A. R., & Hess, J. A. (2008). Attentive Facework During Instructional Feedback: Key toPerceiving Mentorship and an Optimal Learning Environment. Communication Education.Madaio, M. A., Ogan, A., & Cassell, J. (2016). The Effect of Friendship and Tutoring Roles on Reciprocal PeerTutoring Strategies. Intelligent Tutoring Systems.Mojavezi, A., & Tamiz, M. P. (2012). The impact of teacher self-efficacy on the students’ motivation andachievement. Theory and Practice in Language Studies, 2(3), 483–491.Neary-Sundquist, C. (2013). The use of hedges in the speech of ESL learners. Elia: Estudios de LingüísticaInglesa Aplicada, 13, 149–174.Ogan, A., Finkelstein, S., Walker, E., Carlson, R., & Cassell, J. (2012). Rudeness and rapport: Insults and learninggains in peer tutoring. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Including Subseries Lecture Notes inArtificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 7315 LNCS, 11–21.Ohlsson, S., Di Eugenio, B., Chow, B., Fossati, D., Lu, X., & Kershaw, T.C. (2007). Beyond the code-and-countanalysis of tutoring dialogues. In Proceedings of the 2007 conference on AI in Education.Olsen, J. K., Belenky, D. M., Aleven, V., & Rummel, N. (2014, June). Using an intelligent tutoring system tosupport collaborative as well as individual learning. In International Conference on Intelligent TutoringSystems (pp. 134-143). Springer International Publishing.Palinscar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal Teaching of Comprehension-Fostering and ComprehensionMonitoring Activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1(2), 117–175.Person, N. K., Kreuz, R. J., Zwaan, R. A., & Graesser, A. C. (1995). Pragmatics and pedagogy: Conversationalrules and politeness strategies may inhibit effective tutoring. Cognition and instruction, 13(2).Rowan, B., Chiang, F., & Miller, R. (1997). Using Research on Employees' Performance to Study the Effects ofTeachers on Students' Achievement. Sociology of Education, 70(4), 256-284. doi:10.2307/2673267Rowland, T. (2007). ‘Well maybe not exactly, but it’s around fifty basically?’: Vague language in mathematicsclassrooms. In Vague language explored (pp. 79-96). Palgrave Macmillan UK.Saklofske, D., Michayluk, J., & Randhawa, B. (1988). Teachers’ efficacy and Teaching Behaviors, 407–414.Sinha, T., & Cassell, J. (2015, November). We click, we align, we learn: Impact of influence and convergenceprocesses on student learning and rapport building. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on ModelingINTERPERsonal SynchrONy And infLuence (pp. 13-20). ACM.Sinha, T. (2016). Cognitive Correlates of Rapport Dynamics in Longitudinal Peer Tutoring. Availableat http://tinyurl.com/RapportDynamicsSinha2016Spencer-Oatey, H. (2005). (Im)Politeness, face and perceptions of rapport: unpackaging their bases andinterrelationships. Politeness Research, 1(1)(Im), 95–119. http://doi.org/10.1515/jplr.2005.1.1.95Tickle-Degnen, L., & Rosenthal, R. (1990). The nature of rapport and its nonverbal correlates. Psychologicalinquiry, 1(4), 285-293.Yu, Z., Gerritsen, D., Ogan, A., Black, A., & Cassell, J. (2013). Automatic Prediction of Friendship via Multimodel Dyadic Features. Proc. of the SIGDIAL 2013 Conf: Association for Computational Linguistics.Zhao, R., Papangelis, A., & Cassell, J. (2014). Towards a Dyadic Computational Model of Rapport Managementfor Human-Virtual Agent Interaction, 514–527.Zhao, R., Sinha, T., & Cassell, J. (2016). Socially-Aware Virtual Agents : Automatically Assessing DyadicRapport from Temporal Patterns of Behavior. In Intelligent Virtual Agents.AcknowledgmentsThe research reported here was supported, in whole or in part, by the National Science Foundation CyberlearningAward No.1523162, and the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, through GrantR305B150008 to Carnegie Mellon University. The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do notrepresent the views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Education.CSCL 2017 Proceedings390© ISLS