Comparing Students’ Solutions When Learning Collaboratively orIndividually Within Productive FailureClaudia Mazziotti, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, claudia.mazziotti@rub.deNikol Rummel, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, nikol.rummel@rub.deAnne Deiglmayr, ETH Zurich, anne.deiglmayr@ifv.gess.ethz.chAbstract: In this article we focus on evaluating student solutions generated during the initialproblem-solving phase of a Productive Failure study, where problem solving precedesinstruction. In particular, we investigated whether collaboratively learning students came upwith more solution ideas and generated qualitatively better solutions than individually learningstudents. Although descriptively the collaboratively learning students outperformedindividually learning students with regard to both the quantity of solution ideas and the qualityof solutions, we were unable to establish statistically significant differences. Moreover, we didnot find correlations between students’ solutions and their learning outcome. Possible reasonsfor the missing link are discussed. The analyses reported in this paper are based on yetunpublished data from a study by Mazziotti, Loibl & Rummel (2015).Keywords: students’ solutions, collaborative learning, Productive FailureIntroductionInstructional approaches that comprise self-determined problem-solving prior to instruction often include smallgroup collaboration during problem solving. In the Productive Failure approach (PF, e.g., Kapur, 2012), forexample, students first try to collaboratively solve a yet unknown problem (usually generating incomplete orerroneous solution approaches) and then receive explicit instruction building on their prior solution attempts. Inorder to shed more light on the role of small group collaboration for the effectiveness of PF Mazziotti, Loibl andRummel (2015) conducted a 2x2 quasi-experimental study with the factors social form of learning (collaborativevs. individual) and timing of instruction (i.e., problem-solving prior to instruction, or PF vs. problem-solving afterinstruction, or Direct Instruction). We expected higher benefits from collaborative learning compared to individuallearning (within PF) on students’ conceptual knowledge acquisition because mutual collaborative explanationsabout students’ problem-solving ideas trigger elaborative processes which in turn support students’ conceptualknowledge acquisition (Teasley, 1995). However, in our previous study, individual students acquired descriptivelymore conceptual knowledge than their collaborative counterparts. Also when looking only at the students fromthe two PF-conditions, again, the individually learning students descriptively outperformed their collaborativecounterparts.In order to further unpack the role of collaboration within PF, we re-analyze the data from the Mazziottiet al. (2015) study. Our aim is to, go beyond investigating students’ conceptual knowledge at the end of theintervention by analyzing students’ solutions generated during the initial phase of PF. In line with previousresearch on PF, we investigate the quantity and quality of students’ solutions and are thus able to make furthercomparisons between collaboratively and individually learning PF students. Investigating students’ solutions is ofparticular interest as some previous PF-studies (e.g., Kapur, 2012) showed a positive link between the quantityand the quality of students’ solutions and their learning outcome. For example, Wiedmann and colleagues (2012)showed that the number of different solutions as well as the number of high quality solutions were positivelylinked to students’ learning outcomes.Because in the collaborative problem-solving phase of PF, students are not only able to mutually explaintheir solutions but also to iteratively improve them by discussion, we hypothesize that within PF, collaborativelylearning students generate qualitatively better solutions than their individual counterparts. Moreover, thecollaboration may stimulate the solution generation, so we further hypothesize that collaboratively learningstudents come up with more solution ideas than their individual counterparts (as they can only rely on themselves).In line with previous research on PF, we further investigate whether there is a positive link between the qualityand quantity of solutions on the one hand and their learning outcome on the other hand.MethodsIn order to investigate our hypothesis, we report unpublished data from the aforementioned study conducted byMazziotti and colleagues (2015) by analyzing and comparing students’ solutions.ICLS 2016 Proceedings926© ISLSStudy designIn the aforementioned 2x2 quasi-experimental study (N= 228 fifth graders; Mazziotti et al., 2015), we varied thefactors social form of learning (collaborative vs. individual) and timing of instruction (problem-solving prior toinstruction, or PF vs. problem-solving after instruction, or DI), resulting in four experimental conditions (PF-Coll:N= 74 = 34 complete dyads, PF-Ind: N= 49, DI-Coll: N= 57 and DI-Ind: N=48). The experimental procedurecomprised a problem-solving phase (either in dyads or individually) and an instruction phase (designed as a wholeclass lecture). While in both PF-conditions students first tried to collaboratively or individually solve a problemand then received instruction, in both DI-conditions students first received instruction and then tried tocollaboratively or individually solve a problem. As the DI-conditions are beyond the scope of this paper, we hereconcentrate on a more detailed description of the PF conditions.In the problem-solving phase (of the PF-conditions), students were engaged in solving a typical PFproblem which is, in line with the PF design requirements (cf. Kapur & Bielacycz, 2012), a complex problemabout equivalent fractions (see Figure 1). At the beginning of grade 5 students have not yet been formallyintroduced to equivalence of fractions and only have an initial understanding of fractions, so this problem wasquite challenging for students and was not meant to be solvable by the students in the initial problem-solvingphase. To further ensure complexity, our problem implied three (instead of one) problem-solving steps (whichwere not marked as such for the students; see Figure 1). By calculating a solution, applying logical reasoning,making use of a graphical representation (i.e. circle) or drawing various solution ideas, students were able to findmultiple different solution paths (cf. design requirement Kapur & Bielaczyc, 2012, Mazziotti et al. 2015). Duringthe instruction phase, the instructor built upon typical student solutions by comparing and contrasting them withthe canonical solution (cf. Loibl & Rummel, 2014).Problemsolving step 1Steven ordered pizzas for his birthday dinner. For the six boyshe ordered four „Pizza Salami“, and for the three girls heordered two „Pizza Hawaii“. The boys share the four „PizzaSalami“ equally among each other. The girls also share the two„Pizza Hawaii“ equally among each other.Who gets more: Does a boy or a girl get a greater proportion ofpizza? Try to find as many solution paths as possible.Problemsolving step 2Problemsolving step 3Figure 1: The equivalent fraction problem for the problem-solving phase of PF.Overall, the study took place in three mathematics lessons (3x 45 minutes) and followed this procedure:In the mathematics lesson preceding the study, students were asked to fill out a pretest (10-15 minutes) thatassessed students’ mathematical prerequisites regarding fractions equivalence. The problem-solving phase took30 minutes including 15 minutes introduction. The instruction phase took 45 minutes. All students had 45 minutestime to answer the posttest that assessed student’s knowledge of equivalent fractions with open text-based items(6 items, some with multiple subtasks; a maximum of 17 points could be reached).Quality and quantity of solutionsIn order to investigate whether collaboratively learning students generated more and qualitatively bettersolutions compared to individually learning students, we analyzed the quality and quantity of students’ solutionsolutions (cf. Kapur, 2012, Wiedmann et al., 2012). Naturally, quality and quantity are closely linked to the tobe-solved problem (see Figure 1).For solution quality, we rated how well students divided the pizzas for boys and girls (cf. problem-solvingsteps 1 and 2), and how they compared the two proportions (cf. problem-solving step 3). Table 1 illustrates howmany credits students could receive for each problem-solving step. In sum, assessing the quality of all problemsolving steps (dividing by number of boys, dividing by number of girls, comparing) leads to a maximum possiblescore of 9. As unit of analysis we used a single solution, that is, students’ attempt to engage in all three problemsolving steps before restarting a new solution by engaging again in problem-solving step 1. Because 76% of thestudents across both conditions generated only one solution (i.e. attempt to solve all three problem-solving steps),we only rated the quality of this first solution.To determine the quantity of solution we did not focus on the entire solution as unit of analysis (i.e.,students attempt to engage in all three problem-solving steps), but used a more fine-grained approach indetermining the quantity of solution ideas per problem-solving step. This was more appropriate for our targetgroup because coming up with a new idea for a single problem-solving step rather than coming up with threeICLS 2016 Proceedings927© ISLScompletely new ideas for all three problem-solving steps (i.e., a complete solution) is already challenging andtherefore not highly likely (cf. 76% of all students generated only a first solution). In particular, Ruwischhighlights that young students have difficulties to desist from an idea and to re-orientate towards a new one(Ruwisch, 1999). As a coding example, drawing the four pizza Salami and dividing them for the six boys intohalves was coded as one solution idea for problem-solving step 1, and drawing and dividing the four pizza Salamifor the six boys into quarters as an alternative way was coded as another solution idea for problem-solving step 1.We summarized the number of solution ideas across all problem-solving steps into one sum score.Table 1. Rating of the quality of students’ solutions per each problem-solving stepProblem-solving stepProblem-solving steps1& 2: Dividing the pizzafor boys and girlsProblem-solving step 3:Comparing twoproportions of pizzaRatingDividing equally, fairly and without a remainder (e.g., into sixths, thirds, twelfths).(1 point for trying to divide + 1 point for dividing equally + 1 point for dividingwithout leaving a remainder = 3 points)Diving equally but unfairly (e.g., halves, quarters, fifths). (1 point for trying todivide + 1 point for dividing equally = 2 points)Avoidance strategies: Stating that some children are not hungry, or ordering morepizza so that children get whole pizzas. (1 point for trying to divide whole pizzasamongst the children = 1 point)Not trying to divide (0 points).Both pizzas are divided into the same amount of pieces (e.g., both pizza Salami andpizza Hawaii are divided into twelfths). Students can thus “prove” that each boyand girl receives the same proportion of pizza. (1 point for trying to compare + 1point for comparing the equal amounts of pieces + 1 point for reaching the correctconclusion that each child receives the same number of pieces = 3 points)The two pizzas are divided into different numbers of pieces (e.g., pizza Salami intothirds and pizza Hawaii into twelfths). Due to a superficial comparison, studentsconclude correctly that each boy and girl receives the same proportion of pizza. (1point for trying to compare + 1 point for reaching the correct conclusion that eachchild receives the same number of pieces = 2 points)The two pizzas are divided into different numbers of pieces (e.g., pizza Salami intothirds and pizza Hawaii into eights). Due to a superficial comparison, studentsconclude incorrectly that either a boy or a girl receives a smaller or greaterproportion. (1 point for trying to compare = 1 point)Not trying to compare (0 points).Two coders were trained to assess the quality of students’ first solution and the quantity of students’solution ideas. To determine interrater reliability for the quantity of solution ideas, the raters both coded 43% ofthe paper-based data (i.e. PF-Coll and PF-Ind condition) and reached satisfactory interrater reliability (quantity ofsolution ideas κ = .65). To determine inter-rater agreement for the quality of the first solution, they both rated asubset of 20% of students’ first solution. Agreement was high (ICCabsolute= .79; 95%-CI [.53; .92]). Disagreementswere resolved by discussion.Results and discussionTo test whether collaboratively learning students or individually learning students generated a higher quantity ofsolution ideas and a higher quality of the first solution, we calculated two univariate ANOVAs with the factorcondition (PF-Coll vs. PF-Ind) and either quantity of solution ideas or quality of the first solution as the dependentvariable. Table 2 shows means and standard deviations of both PF-conditions. Descriptively, the collaborativelylearning students outperformed individually learning students with regard to both quality of their solution (F[1,81]=2.178, p=.144) and the quantity of students’ solution ideas (F[1,81]=0.949, p=.333), but the differences werenot statistically significant.In line with previous PF-studies, we calculated correlations between students’ learning outcomes andtheir solutions. There was no significant correlation between students’ learning outcome and the quality ofstudents’ solution (r(117) =-.011, p=.902), or the quantity of students’ solution ideas (r(117)=.081, p=.385).Looking at each PF-condition separately, we did not find significant correlations between students’ learningoutcome and the quality of their solution (PF-Coll: r(68)=.084, p= .495; PF-Ind: r(49)=-.086, p= .555), or theICLS 2016 Proceedings928© ISLSquantity of solution ideas ( PF-Coll: r(68) =.32 p=.793; PF-Ind: r(49)=.173, p= .233). Overall, there was nopositive link between students’ solutions and their learning outcome.Table 2. Quantity and quality of solutions from individually and collaboratively learning studentsQuality of solutionsQuantity of solution ideasPF-CollM4.974.53SD2.11.8N (dyads)3434PF-IndM4.184.12SD2.571.92N4949In conclusion, when comparing whether collaboratively or individually learning students generated moreand qualitatively better solutions, we found a small and statistically non-significant advantage of collaborativeover individual learning for both the quantity of solution ideas and quality of the first solution. Still, during thecollaborative problem-solving process, students might have iteratively improved their solution by discussingstrengths and weaknesses of their solution in ways that our analysis could not yet capture. In order to support thisconclusion, our next step is to investigate how collaboratively learning students developed their solutions in thecourse of the discussion, by analyzing students’ verbal process data.In line with the aforementioned research on PF, we further investigated whether there was a positivelink between students’ solutions and the learning outcome. We were not able to replicate this link, as other PFresearchers before us (e.g., Loibl & Rummel, 2014). One possible explanation for the missing correlation in ourand other previous studies might be the short learning time and in our case a domain specific issue that is thepersistence of students’ misconceptions about fractions which were reflected in their solutions. In other words:Students’ misconceptions were too persistent to be resolved prior to the test phase. An indication in this directionis that students’ average scores on the post-test still fell short of the maximum score (PF-Coll: M= 10.31, SD =2,45; PF-Ind: M = 10.8, SD= 2.41 out of 17 points). In a next step of analysis we thus aim to investigate howstudents’ misconceptions which will be extracted from the verbal process data are linked to students’ posttestscores.Another possible explanation may be that although students were asked about the same knowledgecomponents (KC; Koedinger, Corbett & Perfetti, 2012) as for example comparing two fractions with unlikedenominators and numerators during the problem-solving and the test phase, the differences of superficialcharacteristic between the PF problem (i.e., concrete situation) and some test items (i.e., abstract situation) wastoo large. Therefore, students may not have been able to recognize the KCs in the learning and test phases asidentical. For future research, we thus propose to either keep also superficial characteristics of the to-be-solvedproblem and test items as identical as possible or to ask students’ to generate the KCs by themselves while solvingtest items. In sum, the question of how students’ solutions are linked to students’ learning outcome cannot yet beanswered.ReferencesKapur, M. (2012). Productive failure in learning the concept of variance. Instructional Science, 40(4), 651-672.Kapur, M., & Bielaczyz, K. (2012). Designing for Productive Failure. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(1),45-83.Koedinger, K. R., Corbett, A. T., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The knowledge-learning-instruction framework:bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36(5), 757–798. doi:10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.xLoibl, K. & Rummel, N. (2014). The impact of guidance during problem-solving prior to instruction on students’inventions and learning outcomes. Instructional Science, 42(3), 305-236. DOI: 10.1007/s11251-0139282-5.Mazziotti, C., Loibl, K, & Rummel, N. (2015). Collaborative or individual learning within Productive Failure:Does the social form of learning make a difference? In Proceedings of the 11. International Conferenceon Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning 2015.Ruwisch, S. (1999). Probleme des Sachrechnens. Am Beispiel Kinderbowle. Praxis Grundschule, 22 (2), 29-33.Teasley, S. D. (1995). Communication and collaboration: The role of talk in children’s peer interactions.Developmental Psychology, 31(2), 207-220.Wiedmann, M., Leach, R., Rummel, N. & Wiley, J. (2012). Does group composition affect learning by invention?Instructional Science, 40, 711-730. doi:10.1007/s11251-012-9204-yICLS 2016 Proceedings929© ISLS