A Multivocality Approach to Epistemic Agencyin Collaborative LearningJun Oshima, Research and Education Center for the Learning Sciences at Shizuoka University,joshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jpRitsuko Oshima, RECLS at Shizuoka University, roshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jpWataru Fujita, Graduate School of Informatics, Shizuoka University, wfujita@firstclass.inf.shizuoka.ac.jpAbstract: The purpose of this study was to propose a multivocality approach to analyzingshared epistemic agency in collaborative learning and to test its effectiveness by examiningactual datasets. We proposed the combination of social network analysis (SNA) and in-depthdialogical analysis as a multivocality approach and analyzed discourse transcriptions ofcollaborative reading comprehension by university students as datasets. First, we identifiedpivotal points of discourse where students might engage in an epistemic action towardalleviating a lack of knowledge. Then, we conducted in-depth analysis of discourse segmentsaround the pivotal points. Results revealed that pivotal points identified by SNA wereconfirmed as alleviating lack of knowledge by further in-depth dialogical analysis. We furthersucceeded in identifying dialogical patterns in the shared epistemic agency and eachindividual student’s contribution to them.Keywords: shared epistemic agency, multivocality approach, social network analysis, in-depthdialogical analysisIntroductionIn the learning sciences, and particularly in the knowledge creation metaphor of learning (Paavola &Hakkarainen, 2005), intentional engagement by students in collaborative learning (including collaboration skillsand intrinsic motivation) is discussed in terms of epistemic agency. In the metaphor of learning, students areexpected to be involved in knowledge creation practice through collaborative construction of knowledge objects(Bereiter, 2002). In creating knowledge in the classroom, Scardamalia (2002) discussed the collective cognitiveresponsibility of students to contribute their ideas toward collective knowledge advancement. She definesintentional engagement by students in collective knowledge advancement as epistemic agency, and proposesthis agency as a new goal of instruction in the knowledge age (Scardamalia, Bransford, Kozma, & Quellmalz,2012). Based on the previous conceptualization of agency (Bandura, 2001; Emirbayer, & Mische, 1998; Palonen& Hakkarainen, 2000; Scardamalia, 2002; Schwartz & Okita, 2004; Stahl, 2006; Wertsch, Del Rio, & Alvarez,1995), Damş a, Kirschner, Andriessen, Erkens, and Sins (2010) further propose shared epistemic agency as anew concept for identifying intentional student engagement in collaboration. Shared epistemic agency is a newlayer beyond epistemic agency, comprising individual agency within collective activity, as proposed byScardamalia (2002). Shared epistemic agency, then, focuses more on the group level of agency in collaboration(Stahl, 2006). Students in collaborative groups engage in the wholly joint epistemic actions of (1) being awareof their lack of knowledge, (2) alleviating this lack of knowledge, (3) creating shared understanding, and (4)generative collaboration. To regulate their joint epistemic actions, students also engage in (1) projection bysetting goals and creating joint plans; (2) regulation by monitoring and reflecting on their own advancement;and (3) relation by transcending conflicts, redirecting critical feedback, and creating space for others’contributions. As agency in collaboration is multilayered, students should use both epistemic agency and sharedepistemic agency when intentionally engaging in collaborative learning (Damş a, 2014).An assessment approach for evaluating multilayered agency by learners has not yet been established.Because the agency in collaborative learning should appear at either the individual (Scardamalia, 2002) or grouplevel (Damş a, 2014; Damş a et al., 2010) across different time scales, any single analytic approach would beunable to cover both. We plan to examine a new analytic approach to epistemic agency in collaborative learningfrom the perspective of the “productive multivocality approach” (Suthers, Lund, Rosé, Teplovs, & Law, 2013).The term “multivocality” is derived from a seminal work by Bakhtin (1981) discussing the presence of multiple“voices” in texts. The term refers to multiple voices of researchers who engage in the collective discourse of afield, such as the learning sciences. An assumption of the multivocality approach is that we can advance ourknowledge in the learning sciences through the challenge of converting different epistemologies that usuallymake independent contributions into an interdisciplinary approach that is complementary in an integrativemanner. In a book challenging this interdisciplinarity (Suthers et al., 2013), researchers from differentCSCL 201562© ISLSdisciplines engage in productive discourse by analyzing shared datasets of social interaction in learning contextsfrom their own epistemological perspectives and methodologies.One example dataset provided in this book was discourse among first-year university students engagingin collaborative problem solving in chemistry (Sawyer, Frey, & Brown, 2013a). From the results of an in-depthqualitative analysis, Sawyer, Frey, and Brown (2013b) concluded that two groups (Gillian vs. Matt) differedsignificantly in their strategic approaches. Based on conversation analysis of the two groups, Sawyer et al.(2013b) described profiles of the two groups. The Gillian group went beyond pure calculation by discussingconceptual ideas about what they had learned and engaged in collaborative knowledge construction throughmutual reflection upon ideas. Conversely, the Matt group was involved in calculation activities withoutarticulate recognition of what they had learned. In terms of shared epistemic agency, the Gillian group exertedtheir shared epistemic agency toward engagement in collective knowledge advancement. We (the first and thesecond authors in this paper) approached the same discourse dataset using a different methodology: socialnetwork analysis (SNA). The original discourse transcription was converted into a bipartite graph of vocabularyand conversation turns, and a temporal social network of vocabulary was constructed. By investigating temporalchanges in several network indicators, we quantitatively identified pivotal points of discourse when studentsengaged in collective knowledge advancement. In addition, we further identified each individual agency bycalculating individuals’ contributions to the total social network (Oshima, Matsuzawa, Oshima, & Niihara,2013). The interrelation between in-depth qualitative analysis and SNA was found to be complementary andproductive. Both analyses provided unique and replicated findings. SNA demonstrates its analytic power whenwe are interested in a global view of discourse. We can create graphs of the transition of indicators as adiscussion proceeds. After catching the global view of knowledge advancement, we can select several discoursesegments to investigate more carefully. In this study, we used dialogical analysis (Wertsch, 1993) and SNA in acomplementary and integrative manner to analyze epistemic agency at the individual and group levels.The purpose of this study was to propose a multivocality approach to analyzing epistemic agency incollaborative learning and demonstrate how the proposed approach would actually function in an integrativemanner. The context of learning of interest in this study was collaborative reading comprehension whereuniversity students collaboratively read articles to construct their conceptual understanding (a pedagogicalapproach to the learning environment) through jigsaw-based activities. Discourse transcriptions during theactivity were analyzed by an integrative framework of SNA and in-depth dialogical analysis. The integrativeanalytic approach was focused on an action in shared epistemic agency, and particularly, alleviating a lack ofknowledge. Alleviating a lack of knowledge is an important action for students in collaborative readingcomprehension because students who read different articles attempt to co-construct their understanding byexamining given sources (authors’ arguments in the articles), collaboratively collecting new information tounderstand different authors’ arguments, and structuring a new conceptual understanding to integrate argumentsfrom different articles.MethodsCollaborative reading comprehension was implemented as a part of an intensive course during the summer termof a teacher certification program at a Japanese public university. The course was run for four consecutive days,and the activity was conducted during the first day and a half. The second author was the instructor. Towardfulfilling the course requirements, eight third-year undergraduate students in the engineering departmentparticipated in this study. The goal of the course for students was to understand basic concepts of computersupported collaborative learning (CSCL) in order to appropriately apply lesson plans. The goal for students inthe collaborative reading comprehension was to understand basic principles of how to design learningenvironments (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 1999).Collaborative reading comprehensionCollaborative reading comprehension is an activity structure designed based on the jigsaw method (Aronson &Patnoe, 2011; Brown & Campione, 1996). It encourages learners to engage in collaborative knowledgeconstruction through building an understanding of multiple document resources (Figure 1). Students were firstplaced in expert groups after listening to an instructor’s brief lecture on “the learning environment,” which wasthe target concept. In each expert group, four students collaboratively read and constructed an understanding ofone document, which they then explained to others in jigsaw groups. Through expert group collaboration, eachstudent produced a summary by taking notes while listening to an audiobook on an iPod and discussing theirideas based on their notes. After the expert groups finished, jigsaw groups were formed; these groups consistedof one student from each expert group. Students in the jigsaw groups worked to integrate the ideas contained inthe four different documents based on the student expert’s explanations for each document. After discussing theCSCL 201563© ISLSfour documents, the students reported how ideas from the documents were related to one another and interpretedthem with reference to the basic framework of learning environments in the Knowledge Forum CSCL system.Figure 1. Participatory structure of collaborative reading comprehensionDocuments used in the activity came from a book on how people learn in Japanese (Inagaki & Hatano,1989). We selected four chapters of the book, covering four basic principles of learning environments: learnercentered, knowledge-centered, assessment-centered, and community-centered. Each chapter was transcribed toelectronic form and reprinted as a standalone document. These documents were given as listening assignmentsto the expert groups, and we instructed students to take notes for organizing ideas from their document inrelation to the learning environments concept. In jigsaw groups, students brought the ideas summarized from thedocuments on their note taking and discussed how the ideas from different documents could be integrated foradvancing their understanding of the principles of learning environments. To facilitate the knowledge creationprocess, we further provided students with a whiteboard, on which a large Venn diagram of the learningenvironment was drawn, as well as sticky notes for inscribing and manipulating their ideas as knowledge objectson the shared space.Multivocality analysisAs discussed in the previous section, we proposed a multivocality approach to analyze shared epistemic agencyin collaborative reading comprehension by shedding light on alleviating a lack of knowledge. All discourseactivities in expert and jigsaw groups were video-recorded and transcribed verbatim. We were particularlyfocused on discourse activities in the jigsaw group. Students engaged in discourse exchange 1,021 times injigsaw group A and 921 times in jigsaw group B. One reason to pay attention to the jigsaw activity was thatstudents were expected to actively engage in creating new ideas by integrating their knowledge from fourdifferent documents.SNA for identifying pivotal points for alleviating lack of knowledgeFor identifying pivotal points in discourse exchange for alleviating lack of knowledge, we conducted SNA bythe following procedure. An assumption we held was that we would be able to represent collective knowledgeadvancement as structural change in a network of vocabulary that students used in their discourse. Thevocabulary in this context refers to words used for representing argumentations in the documents students read.The structure of vocabulary refers to meaningful links between words in a sentence or an exchange. Whenstudents used words in their exchange, we assumed that they attempted to create meaningful links betweenwords. In other words, we attempted to automatically create concept maps based on students’ discourse data(although we could not correctly identify the meaning that students assigned to their links between words).CSCL 201564© ISLSFigure 2. Social network analysis with KBDeXBased on this assumption, we first created a bipartite graph of words × exchanges. The first author anda trained graduate student independently detected noun words that they thought represented authors’argumentations in the four documents. We used 305 noun words that both the author and graduate studentdetected for creating the bipartite graph. Then, we used an application called KBDeX (Oshima, Oshima, &Matsuzawa, 2012) to visualize a temporal network structure of vocabulary and calculate network indicators.KBDeX provides a temporal network visualization and automatically created graphs of network indicators(Figure 2). For identifying pivotal points, we paid attention to the temporal transition of a sum of degreecentralities. The degree centrality is a measure of how many nodes are linked to a specific node ranging from 0to 1. In other words, the degree centrality means how dense a network structure is. When we saw a remarkableincrease in the sum of degree centralities of all nodes in a network from one exchange to another, we assumedthat the latter exchange contributed to either making an existing network denser or restructuring an existingnetwork by adding new words in such a way that a more robust structure was constructed. Thus, the increase inthe sum of degree centralities may indicate that students in a group engaged in more robust ideas related to theoriginal argumentations in the documents, a pivotal point in alleviating a lack of knowledge. In this study, weidentified the pivotal points through visually inspecting transition of the sum of degree centrality coefficientsand the individuals in a group who were involved in the pivotal points of exchanges.In-depth dialogical analysis for revealing how students exerted their shared epistemic agencyOur SNA approach was hypothetical in nature and required complementary content analysis. Therefore, we alsoconducted in-depth dialogical analysis (Bakhtin, 1981; Wertsch, 1993) of discourse segments related to pivotalpoints identified in SNA. First, we detected sequences of discourse exchanges by tracing discourse back fromcorresponding pivotal points. Then, we evaluated whether automatically detected pivotal points were related toalleviating a lack of knowledge. Finally, if the sequences of discourse exchanges represented alleviating a lackof knowledge, we further analyzed how individual students in a group dialogically contributed to their sharedepistemic agency.ResultsSNA for discourse transcriptions in collaborative reading comprehensionAfter reading transcriptions of discourse by two jigsaw groups (A and B), the first and third authors helddiscussions to divide the entire discourse into several discourse scenarios for each group. Here, a scenario refersto sequences of discourse exchanges in which students discussed ideas related to each other. For group A, thetotal discourse was segmented into three scenarios. Group B was segmented into two. Figures 3 and 4demonstrate how the sum of degree centralities transited in scenarios by groups A and B, respectively. Circleddiscourse exchanges in each graph were identified as pivotal. By looking at the discourse exchanges around thepivotal points, we found that discourse exchanges identified were pivotal for alleviating a lack of knowledge.Table 1 shows how many pivotal contributions each student had in discourse scenarios. In group A,student A1 was found to be a key contributor toward alleviating a lack of knowledge. In group B, on the otherhand, key contributors in discourse were different across two scenarios. Students B2 and B4 had manycontributions in the first scenario, but B1 and B2 had many contributions in the second scenario, when B4missed the class.CSCL 201565© ISLSa. Scenario #1b. Scenario #2c. Scenario #3Figure 3. Transitional changes in the sum of degree centralities in discourse scenarios by jigsaw group Aa. Scenario #1b. Scenario #2Figure 4. Transitional changes in the sum of degree centralities in discourse scenarios by jigsaw group BTable 1. Frequencies of pivotal contributions by studentsStudent A1Student A2Student A3Student A4CSCL 2015Scenario 14410Jigsaw Group AScenario 2Scenario 37702200066Student B1Student B2Student B3Student B4Jigsaw Group BScenario 1Scenario 21956205Absent© ISLSIn-depth dialogical analysis of sequences of discourse exchanges related to pivotalpointsAfter our SNA of discourse transcriptions, we further conducted in-depth analysis of discourse segments relatedto the pivotal points. Due to space limitations, we report one segment from each jigsaw group. The following isa segment of discourse from group A regarding the learner-centered design. The original discourse was inJapanese, and we have translated it into English.Student A2:Student A1:Student A3:Student A1:Student A3:Student A1:It is not easy for learners to conduct intentional learning when their contextdoes not support them. They need tools for engaging in intentional learning.So, we are discussing the context rather than the learners, aren’t we?But it is too simplistic to describe that this is entirely the issue of contextbecause of the existence of tools for students.We had better not say like “OK, this is an issue of context because of tools.”No, we should not. Yesterday, we discussed that the authors argued for thecommunity-centered design when they described the context includingothers, tools, and so on because these factors facilitate students to intend tolearn.Yeah, we did.We should not misunderstand the authors’ argument. They did not arguethat the context, such as others or tools, determines how students learn. Inmore precise terms, they argued that the context does facilitate how studentsintend to learn. These are remarkably different, aren’t they?In the discourse segment, the last discourse exchange by student A1 was identified as pivotal by SNA.In his last discourse exchange, student A1 alleviated a lack of knowledge about the learner-centered design andthe community-centered design, and their interrelation as discussed in the documents. In the sequence ofdiscourse exchanges, students A2 and A3 were found to engage in epistemic actions for student A1, whoultimately utilized his turn to facilitate their awareness of the problem (i.e., the first turn by student A2 and thethird turn by student A3). In jigsaw group A, dialogues for exerting shared epistemic agency were representedby this example of discourse. Student A1 was responsible for ultimately promoting shared understandingtowards alleviating their lack of knowledge, and other students (A2, A3, and A4) started sequences of discourseexchanges by creating awareness.In jigsaw group B, we also found students’ established dialogues for their shared epistemic agencytowards alleviating a lack of knowledge. However, the dialogical practice in jigsaw group B was different fromthat in jigsaw group A.Student B4:Student B3:Student B4:Student B3:Student B4:Student B2:Student B4:CSCL 2015B3, in what you said.Yeah.The authors proposed a variety of ideas related to different sections [in theVenn diagram of learning environment]. But all the ideas are related to thecommunity-centered design.In chapter 7, I read that the core concept was the community-centereddesign. All ideas are placed in intersections between the communitycentered design and others.I agree. I first did think that the community-centered design wasindependent of the three other designs. But, after your idea, I now think thatthose are overlapped like the Venn diagram. The community-centereddesign is related to all the others.I also think so.Age is also another factor for designing learning environments, I think.Depending the age of learners, we have to put different priority on the fourdesigns. For younger kids, for instance, the knowledge-centered design doesnot seem to have much priority on designing learning.67© ISLSIn this discourse segment, the last discourse exchange by student B4 was identified as pivotal in SNA.Student B4 was engaged in integrating the other students’ ideas to alleviate the preexisting lack of knowledge.The difference in dialogical patterns between the two jigsaw groups was that student B4 was also responsible forthe awareness of the group’s lack of knowledge. He intended to elicit others’ ideas by revoicing others (i.e., thethird discourse exchange). Other students (B3 and B2 in this discourse segment) were engaged in epistemicagency to provide additional information and examine B4’s argument. This dialogical pattern was frequentlyseen in jigsaw group B to engage in their shared epistemic agency.We accidentally found another pattern by group B. On the second day, when student B4 missed a class(scenario #2), other members were engaged in discourse holding different roles. The most remarkable result wasthat the role of student B1, who had not been active in scenario #1, changed to one of active engagement,identifying and alleviating the group’s lack of knowledge by regulating other group members, just as student B4had done in scenario #1.DiscussionWith discourse transcriptions as data, we conducted a multivocality approach to analyzing students’ sharedepistemic agency, specifically, toward alleviating a lack of knowledge. As a multivocality approach, weproposed a combination of SNA and in-depth dialogical analysis. In the following, we discuss the potentialproductivity of this approach.SNA can be used for numerically identifying pivotal points of the alleviation of a lack of knowledge aswell as the creation of awareness. The rapid increase in the sum of degree centrality coefficients of nodes wasconfirmed as a vital sign for collective knowledge creation. Dialogical analysis of discourse segments aroundpivotal points in SNA suggested that we could numerically identify how students engaged in the particularactions of shared epistemic agency. However, there might be pivotal points of discourse exchanges that wecould not address by SNA. To test this, we must conduct in-depth dialogical analysis for all the transcriptionsand compare results between the dialogical analysis and SNA.We also examined each individual’s contribution by counting and comparing numbers of pivotal pointsby different students. On the contrary to our naive prediction of egalitarian contribution, we found idiosyncraticcontribution patterns. Some students made more contributions than others. In group A, one student was mostlyresponsible for the agency, whereas several students had critical contributions in group B. As discussed in thenext paragraph, however, these patterns of social interaction were rather productive practices where studentsengaged in shared epistemic agency in a variety of ways.Complementary in-depth dialogical analysis provided us with rich information for clarifying howstudents engage in their epistemic actions toward alleviating a lack of knowledge. The pattern of eachindividual’s contribution was found to be stable, indicating that students might have their cultural epistemicpractices established through their experiences of being together across several courses before taking thiscourse. In group A, students more collaboratively regulated their agency, whereas specific students in jigsawgroup B (B4 and B1) were dominant. It was also found that students’ epistemic practices were resilient tounpredictable events. Even when a dominant student (B4) was not present, remaining students in jigsaw group Bcould maintain their epistemic practice through different contribution patterns (student B1, who had beeninactive in scenario #1, took over the regulation of the epistemic actions of the group).ConclusionsIn summary, the multivocality approach combining SNA and in-depth dialogical analysis to shared epistemicagency in collaborative learning was found to be productive in that SNA presented a macroscopic view of howstudents in groups engage in epistemic actions to create their new knowledge. On the other hand, in-depthanalysis of discourse segments identified as pivotal by SNA provides a more microscopic view of groupcognition (Stahl, 2006). This study dealt with small datasets of just two groups in collaborative readingcomprehension. For further testing the reliability of the combination of SNA and in-depth dialogical analysis ofshared epistemic agency, we need to conduct future studies (1) to deal with larger-sized datasets and (2) toanalyze different epistemic actions.ReferencesAronson, E., & Patnoe, S. (2011). Cooperation in the classroom: The jigsaw method (3rd ed.). London, UK:Pinter & Martin, Ltd.Bakhtin, M. (1981). Discourse in the novel. In M. Holquist (Ed.), The dialogic imagination (pp. 259–422).Austin, TX: University of Texas.CSCL 201568© ISLSBandura, A. (2001). Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 1–26.Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (Eds.) (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, andschool. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1996). Psychological theory and the design of innovative learningenvironments: On procedures, principles, and systems. In L. Schauble & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovationsin learning: New environments for education (pp. 289–325). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence ErlbaumAssociates.Damş a, C. I. (2014). Shared epistemic agency and agency of individuals, collaborative groups, and researchcommunities. In J. L. Polman, E. A. Kyza, D. K. O’Neill, I. Tabak, W. R. Penuel, A. S. Jurow, K.O'Connor, T. Lee, & L. D’Amico (Eds.), Learning and becoming in practice: The InternationalConference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) 2014, Volume 1 (pp. 440–447). Boulder, CO: InternationalSociety of the Learning Sciences.Damş a, C. I., Kirschner, P. A., Andriessen, J. E. B., Erkens, G., & Sins, P. H. M. (2010). Shared epistemicagency – An empirical study of an emergent construct. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(2), 143–186.Emirbayer, M., & Mische, A. (1998). What is agency? American Journal of Sociology, 103, 962–1023.Inagaki, K., & Hatano, G. (1989). How people learn—The world of everyday cognition. Tokyo, Japan: Chuokoronsha. [in Japanese].Oshima, J., Matsuzawa, Y., Oshima, R., & Niihara, Y. (2013). Application of social network analysis tocollaborative problem solving discourse: An attempt to capture dynamics of collective knowledgeadvancement. In D. Suthers, K. Lund, C. Rose, C. Teplovs, & N. Law (Eds.), Productive Multivocalityin the Analysis of Group Interactions. New York: Springer.Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Matsuzawa, Y. (2012). Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer: A social networkanalysis application for knowledge building discourse. Educational Technology Research &Development, 60, 903–921.Paavola, S., & Hakkarainen, K. (2005). The knowledge creation metaphor—An emergent epistemologicalapproach to learning. Science & Education, 14, 535–557.Palonen, T., & Hakkarainen, K. (2000). Patterns of interaction in computer-supported learning: A socialnetwork analysis. In B. Fishman & S. O’Connor-Divelbliss (Eds.), Proceedings of the FourthInternational Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 334–339). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Sawyer, K., Frey, R., & Brown, P. (2013a). Peer-led team learning in general chemistry. In D. Suthers, K. Lund,C. Rose, C. Teplovs, & N. Law (Eds.), Productive Multivocality in the Analysis of Group Interactions.New York: Springer.Sawyer, K., Frey, R., & Brown, P. (2013b). Knowledge building discourse in peer-led team learning (PLTL)groups in first-year general chemistry. In D. Suthers, K. Lund, C. Rose, C. Teplovs, & N. Law (Eds.),Productive Multivocality in the Analysis of Group Interactions. New York: Springer.Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith(Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67–98). Chicago, IL: Open Court.Scardamalia, M., Bransford, J., Kozma, B., & Quellmalz, E. (2012). New assessments and environments forknowledge building. In P. Griffin, B. McGraw, & E. Care (Eds.), Assessment and teaching of 21stcentury skills (pp. 231–300). New York, NY: Springer Science+Business Media.Schwartz, D., & Okita, S. (2004). The productive agency in learning by teaching. Retrieved August 28, 2014,from http://aaalab.stanford.edu/papers/Productive_Agency_in_ Learning_by_Teaching.pdfStahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA:MIT Press.Suthers, D. D., Lund, K., Rosé, C. P., Teplovs, C. & Law, N. (Eds.). (2013). Productive Multivocality in theAnalysis of Group Interactions. New York: Springer.Wertsch, J. (1993). Voices of the mind. Harvard: Harvard University Press.Wertsch, V. J., Del Rio, P., & Alvarez, A. (1995). Sociocultural studies: History, action, and mediation. In J. V.Wertsch, P. del Rio, & A. Alvarez (Eds.), Sociocultural studies of mind (pp. 1–36). Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 24240105.CSCL 201569© ISLS