Investigating Analogical Problem Posing asthe Generative Task in the Productive Failure DesignJun Song Huang, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University,junsong.huang@nie.edu.sgRachel Lam, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, rachel.lam@nie.edu.sgManu Kapur, Hong Kong Institute of Education, mkapur@ied.edu.hkAbstract: Research on Productive Failure and preparatory mechanisms has consistentlydemonstrated a positive learning effect when students generate problem solutions beforereceiving formal instruction. However, it has been less examined whether the effect still holdswhen the generative task does not involve problem solving. Using a 2x2 experimental design,this study investigated the effects of generative tasks that involve analogical problem posing(without solving) on learning and transfer. Pedagogical sequence (i.e., generation-first orinstruction-first) and type of analogical reasoning task (i.e., generating one’s own analogicalproblems or generating analogical mappings between given analogical problems) were the twofactors manipulated. Preliminary analysis revealed no multivariate effects of the factors. Thus,we discuss the learning mechanisms enacted by analogical reasoning, reliability of theinstruments, and the participants’ prior condition as possible reasons and to inform futurestudies.IntroductionWhile teachers often provide students direct instruction before having them generate their own ideas, problemsolutions, or conceptions of topics, recent studies on Productive Failure (Kapur, 2008, 2010) have shown thebenefits of allowing students to generate first, at the onset of learning, and afterward receive direct instruction(Kapur, 2014; Loibl & Rummel, 2014). These studies show that students who generate (G) first and receiveinstruction (I) later (which we refer to as the G-I sequence) experience an initial performance dip after thegeneration phase, yet have subsequent success in learning after instruction. This is the crux of the ProductiveFailure phenomenon. Schwartz and Martin (2004) explain that a generative type of task prepares students fortheir future learning in a subsequent phase of direct instruction, such as a lecture.The existing Productive Failure work uses problem solving as the generative task, and Kapur (2012) hasfound that the number of (typically suboptimal) solutions that students generate is positively correlated to learningoutcomes. However, there are other types of generative tasks and it is an open question as to whether theProductive Failure phenomenon would still apply. For example, prior work has shown that the generative activitiesof summarizing a text (Grabowski, 2004) and self-explaining (Chi, De Leeuw, Chiu, & LaVancher, 1994) producebetter outcomes than less generative activities (highlighting and reading the text twice, respectively). However,these works did not involve a manipulation of pedagogical sequence.An extended question is whether activities that offer more degrees of freedom in generation may lead tobetter learning and transfer. By this, we mean tasks that have multiple possible canonical answers. It makes sensethat in general, learning activities that cognitively engage students in similar ways (e.g., generating ideas, rules,principles, solutions, etc.) would produce similar learning outcomes (Chi, 2009). However, studies by Loibl andRummel (2014) and Kapur (2014) both suggest that different types of generative tasks may lead to differentlearning effects. For example, in Kapur’s (2015) work on problem posing, which has more degrees of freedom asstudents may pose problems with different problem goal states, results showed that posing problems led to bettertransfer outcomes than solving problems, but worse conceptual knowledge outcomes. Thus, differing degrees offreedom may lead to learning and transfer trade-offs, and testing these effects is necessary.In this study, we examine analogical problem posing (Gentner & Holyoak, 1997) as the generative task,because analogical reasoning—the underlying cognitive process—has a substantial possibility for varying thedegrees of freedom. In analogical reasoning, leaners perceive relational similarities (Gick & Holyoak, 1980)between two problems, recognize them as an analogy, and transfer prior knowledge (i.e., problem solution) fromone problem (i.e., source) to the other (i.e., target). Holyoak and Koh (1987) regard relational similarities asproblem structures that are functionally relevant to solving the source and target problems. Analogical reasoningis found to help students focus on relational similarities rather than on idiosyncratic surface features between twosituations (Gentner & Markman, 1997). For example, Gentner, Loewenstein and Thompson’s (2003) study on thetransfer of negotiation strategies shows that explicitly comparing source and target cases that share a commonunderlying principle can be illuminating even if the common principle is only partially understood in either case.ICLS 2016 Proceedings998© ISLSWe used analogical reasoning in two different ways to correspond to different degrees of freedom ingeneration. One type of activity is called Student-Generated Analogous Problems (SGAP). SGAP requiresstudents to generate their own analogical problems to a given problem, compare and contrast the similarities anddifferences, and make modifications of their analogies. The other type of activity is called Teacher GivenAnalogous Problems (TGAP). TGAP requires students to generate and encode relational similarities between thesource and target problems (which are both given by the teacher). This process is called analogical mapping(Gentner & Markman, 1997) or analogical encoding (Gentner et al., 2003). The SGAP and TGAP tasks differ indegrees of freedom in generation; in the SGAP task, one problem may have many possible analogues whereas inthe TGAP task, the similarities between two given problems are limited and fixed. Thus, to extend theunderstanding of the Productive Failure phenomenon, in this study we used SGAP and TGAP tasks todifferentiate generativity of the tasks.The main research questions addressed (a) whether the effect of pedagogical sequence holds in analogicalproblem posing and (b) whether the degrees of freedom in generation in analogical reasoning tasks affect theoutcomes of pedagogical sequence.MethodsA 2x2 experimental study was conducted using the factors of (a) pedagogical sequence (Generation firstInstruction later, G-I, vs Instruction first-Generate later, I-G) and (b) generative task (student-generated analogousproblems, SGAP, vs teacher-given analogous problems, TGAP). Thus, there were four conditional groups in thisstudy: SGAP-I (i.e., students generating analogous problems, followed by instruction), TGAP-I (i.e., studentsgenerating analogical mappings for teacher given analogous problems, followed by instruction), I-SGAP, and ITGAP.SampleThe study was conducted in an all-girls high-achieving secondary school in Singapore. A total of 117 seventhgrade girls from five classes took part in the study at the end of the school year. Participants were randomlyassigned to conditions, which took place in two different instructional environments (1). Six students had missingdata, representing 5.13% of the total participants. Therefore, our total sample size was 111: 25 in SGAP-I, 29 inTGAP-I, 26 in I-SGAP and 31 in I-TGAP.Materials and measurementsThe learning goal was to formulate a system of linear equations for word problems. Three measurements werecollected on student prior ability. As formulating equations for word problems requires math knowledge andlanguage comprehension ability, the participants’ national exam results from sixth grade (referred to as PSLE)were collected as a measurement of their general academic ability (2). We collected the participants’ analogicalreasoning ability (i.e., AR ability) using domain-free pictorial items isomorphic to Raven’s Advanced ProgressiveMatrices (Raven, Raven, & Court, 1998). The instrument measured the participants’ domain-free general ability.The Cronbach’s α of the 16-item AR test was .65. The participants’ prior knowledge specific to algebra (i.e., prioralgebraic knowledge) was measured by a 10-item pretest concerning the conceptual knowledge of algebra and theability to formulate linear equations for one-variable and two-variable word problems. Of the ten items, one wasexcluded from data analysis due to its low reliability. The Cronbach’s α of the final 9-item instrument was .64.The posttest comprised three measures. A six-item learning instrument measured the participants’ abilityto formulate a system of linear equations for word problems with two and three unknown variables. One item wasexcluded from data analysis due to its low reliability. The Cronbach’s α of the final five-item instrument was .55.A posttest with four items on conceptual knowledge measured the participants’ understanding of algebraicrepresentations involving three variables. One item was excluded from data analysis due to its low reliability. TheCronbach’s α of the final three-item instrument was .75. A six-item posttest on transfer measured the participants’ability to formulate equations for word problems involving four unknown variables, nonlinearity, and inequalities.The Cronbach’s α of this instrument was .60.ProceduresThe study involved four sessions and each session lasted about one hour. All participants took the AR and algebrapretests in Session 1 and posttest in Session 4. The manipulations occurred in Sessions 2 and 3.In the SGAP-I condition, the SGAP task was implemented in Session 2. Students were given a wordproblem with two unknown variables and asked to generate an analogous problem that involved three unknownvariables. In the instruction phase (Session 3), the teacher presented the step-by-step procedures on how toformulate a system of linear equations for a word problem with two unknown variables. She then showed anotherworked example and compared the two problems to highlight their similarities and differences. The participantsICLS 2016 Proceedings999© ISLSthen practiced on four new word problems (all with two unknown variables). The answers were given at the endof the session. For the TGAP-I condition, the TGAP task was implemented in Session 2. Students were given twoword problems with the same context; one involved two unknown variables and the other three unknownvariables. Rather than generating analogous problems, they identified the similarities and differences between theproblems. In Session 3, the same instruction was received as in the SGAP-I condition.The I-SGAP and I-TGAP conditions were similar to the respective SGAP-I and I-TGAP conditions,except that the instruction was given in Session 2 and the generative task (SGAP or TGAP) in Session 3. Tominimize teacher effects, the same teacher taught the instruction phase in all conditions. Similarly, the sameresearcher and teacher jointly facilitated all the SGAP and TGAP tasks. All participants were also given the samegeneric training on analogies, which was not specific to mathematics.Data analysis and initial findingsThe descriptive statistics for the PSLE and pre- and posttest scores are presented in Table 1. ‘Table 1: Summary of PSLE, AR ability, pretest, and posttestsMaxScorePSLEAR abilityPrior algebraic knowledgePosttest–LearningPosttest–ConceptualknowledgePosttest–TransferSGAP – ITGAP – II – SGAPMI – TGAPMSDMSDSDMSD30016905030262.18.5640.6028.369.604.932.9319.417.838.16258.38.1738.1024.627.742.9313.738.86263.59.6247.3327.234.652.9019. 168.66260.29.0339.8526.355.272.6315.438.755.247.649.088.889.298.426020.368.4717.028.5424.129.8822.068.63SGAP: Student-Generated Analogous Problems; TGAP: Teacher-Generated Analogous Problems; I: Direct InstructionWe conducted a One-Way ANOVA to test the mean differences in prior knowledge across the fourconditional groups. There were no significant difference in AR ability, F(3, 107)=1.308, p=.276, nor prioralgebraic knowledge, F(3, 107)=1.512, p=.216. There was a difference in PSLE, F (3, 107)=4.027, p=.009.We conducted a two-way MANCOVA with posttest scores on learning, conceptual knowledge andtransfer as the three dependent variables, pedagogical sequence and generative task as the two factors, and PSLE,AR ability and prior algebraic knowledge as the covariates. The data analysis revealed that pedagogical sequence,generative task and their interaction did not have overall multivariate effect (Wilk’s ᴧ from .95 to .984, p from.153 to .642, partial η2 from .016 to .050). To inform future studies, the data were explored further. Somespeculations from this exploration are discussed in the next section.Conclusion and discussionThis study investigated the Productive Failure phenomenon by testing the effects of (a) pedagogical sequenceand (b) degrees of freedom of generation in a task via analogical problem posing, thereby extending prior work,using a 2x2 experimental design. We used PSLE, AR ability and prior algebraic knowledge as covariates for thefollowing reason. Prior research on Productive Failure and analogical transfer suggests that such measures ofprior knowledge/ability affect learning and transfer. In particular general academic ability (in our study, PSLEscore), domain-free general ability (e.g., AR ability), and domain-specific knowledge (e.g., prior algebraicknowledge) have shown effects on post performance, thus, we deemed it important to include these in our model.A two-way MANCOVA test did not reveal any significant multivariate effect of the two factors or theirinteraction. From the data exploration, we speculate that the participants’ prior knowledge/ability (e.g., prioralgebraic knowledge, PSLE and AR ability) might have had strong enough effects on learning and transfer thatthey possibly overshadowed any effects of the conditional manipulation. Another interpretation is that the learningmechanisms manipulated by the two factors were not strong enough to be detected. For example, whilepedagogical sequence, generative task and their interaction did not have overall multivariate effect (Wilk’s ᴧ from.95 to .984, p from .153 to .642, partial η2 from .016 to .050), prior algebraic knowledge had strong multivariateeffect (Wilk’s ᴧ=.826, p= .000, partial η2=.174). If this speculation is true, it suggests that compared to theproblem-posing task examined by Kapur (2015), an analogical problem posing task might be weaker in enactinglearning and transfer mechanisms. The speculation will be examined when we analyze the artifacts generated bythe participants in the SGAP and TGAP tasks.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1000© ISLSThe relative low reliability of the instruments, especially the posttest instruments on learning(Cronbach’s α =.55) and transfer (Cronbach’s α =.60), might have also made it difficult to detect any learning andtransfer effects that were induced by the two factors. For example, in our data exploration, we conducted the pairwise comparison between SGAP-I vs TGAP-I with prior algebraic knowledge as a covariate. The univariateanalysis showed a main effect of generative task on conceptual knowledge (p=.051, partial η2=.073) with SGAPI condition outperforming TGAP-I condition. In this model, the variance could be explained by the factor (b)generative task, but the overall univariate model was not significant (p= .144, partial η2=.073). Thus, we willimprove the reliability of the instruments in our future studies.Another reason for the non-significant multivariate effect could be the profile of our participants. Theparticipants in this study were from an all-girls high-achieving school. It is possible that differences in outcomescould not be detected due to a strong effect of their high prior ability. We aim to conduct future studies using amore general population of students (i.e., represented a range of ability levels) to test this effect.In summary, we attempted to extend the Productive Failure design by replacing the problem solvingtask with analogical problem posing tasks. The data did not show an overall multivariate effect of pedagogicalsequence and generative task. This could due to multiple reasons, such as how strongly the learning mechanismswere enacted, how reliable the instruments were, and how high-achieving students’ prior ability influenced theirlearning. In our further analysis, we will examine the types of analogical problems and analogical mappingsgenerated by the participants in the four conditions to understand the mechanisms enacted by each conditionalgroup.Endnotes(1) The SGAP-I and TGAP-I groups were hosted in a lecture hall and the I-SGAP and I-TGAP groups in a computer lab.(2) The national exam is called the Primary School Leaving Examination (PSLE). The PSLE result refers to the T-score, therelative rank of a student’s performance compared to all the other students in the whole cohort.ReferencesChi, M. T. H. (2009). Active-Constructive-Interactive: A conceptual framework of differentiating learningactivities. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1(1), 73-105.Chi, M. T. H., De Leeuw, N., Chiu, M.-H., & LaVancher, C. (1994). Eliciting self-explanations improvesunderstanding. Cognitive Science, 18(3), 439-477.Gentner, D., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Reasoning and learning by analogy. American Psychologist, 52(1), 32-34.Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Thompson, L. (2003). Learning and transfer: A general role for analogicalencoding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(2), 393-408.Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist,52(1), 45-56.Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306-355.Grabowski, B. (2004). Generative learning contributions to the design of instruction and learning. In D. Jonassen(Ed.), Handbook of research on educational communications and technology (2nd ed., pp. 719-743).Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Holyoak, K. J., & Koh, K. (1987). Surface and structural similarity in analogical transfer. Memory and Cognition,15(4), 332-340.Kapur, M. (2012). Productive failure in learning the concept of variance. Instructional Science, 40(4), 651-672.Kapur, M. (2014). Productive Failure in learning math. Cognitive Science, 38, 1008-1022.Kapur, M. (2015). The preparatory effects of problem solving versus problem posing on learning from instruction.Learning and instruction, 39, 23-31.Loibl, K., & Rummel, N. (2014). The impact of guidance during problem-solving prior to instruction on students'inventions and learning outcomes. Instructional Science, 42, 305-326.Raven, J., Raven, J. C., & Court, J. H. (1998). Manual for Raven's Advanced Progressive Matrices. Oxford:Oxford Psychologists Press.Schwartz, D. L., & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare for future learning: The hidden efficiency ofencouraging original student production in statistics instruction. Cognition and Instruction, 22, 129-184.AcknowledgmentsThis work is funded by the National Institute of Education’s research grant (OER 02/15 HJS). We thank theparticipating students, the teacher who conducted the instruction section, and the researcher and the teacher whojointly facilitated the SGAP and TGAP sessions. We thank school partner (Ms Chew Meek Lin), collaborator(Madam Kum Fong FOO), and research assistant (Ms Lena HENG) for their respective contributions.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1001© ISLS