Collaborative Argumentation During a Making and TinkeringAfterschool Program With Squishy CircuitsSoo Hyeon Kim, Penn State University, sxk541@psu.eduHeather Toomey Zimmerman, Penn State University, heather@psu.eduAbstract: This study investigates how young children engage in collaborative argumentationduring Making and Tinkering (M&T) afterschool program using Squishy Circuits. Twoperspectives guide the work: constructionism to explore M&T practices and everydayargumentation to explore the ways peers support each other in collaborative argumentation.The video-based study was conducted during an hour-long afterschool learning sessions overthree weeks. Episodes of learners’ collaborative argumentation practices were analyzed byexamining talk, body formation, gestures, and tool handling. The findings expand currentresearch on argumentation by describing and characterizing the collaborative argumentationpractices that occurred during M&T. Findings also contribute an understanding ofcollaborative argumentation as a theoretical framework to expand constructionism.Emerging research suggest that at a young age, children can engage in argumentation (Monteira & JiménezAleixandre, 2016; Siry, Ziegler, & Max, 2012). Young children’s argumentation includes purposefulobservation (Monteira & Jiménez-Aleixandre, 2016), evidence construction, and theory formulation (Manz,2016). Most science education argumentation findings are from classroom contexts where teacher support isavailable; less is known about argumentation practices in informal spaces with peer support. As such, our studyfocuses on collaborative argumentation practices during a Making and Tinkering (M&T) afterschool programby investigating the question: what are the ways that peers support each other in collaborative argumentation?Theoretical framework: Constructionism and everyday argumentationWe use constructionism (Papert & Harel, 1991) as a lens to explore children's M&T activities. Constructionismbuilds on constructivism in which knowledge is not transmitted, but rather is constructed from personalexperiences. Physical artifacts that are created and accessible during construction become “objects-to-thinkwith” to support learners to make connections as they build new knowledge (Kafai, 2006, p. 39). We seek toexpand the theory of constructionism with the addition of a second lens, collaborative argumentation.Collaborative argumentation is dialogical (Baker, 2002). Prior studies have highlighted the importanceof collaborative sense-making (Zimmerman, Reeve, & Bell, 2010) as well as different social modes of coconstruction and communicative approach that support or hinder the argumentation practices in scienceclassrooms (Jiménez-Aleixandre, 2007; Weinberger & Fischer, 2006). Yet the field of education needs to knowmore about the manner in which learners engage in collaborative argumentation in out-of-school time settings.Bricker and Bell (2008) argue that research has failed to consider what everyday argumentation practices andcompetencies learners bring with them to new learning experiences. They have shown that youth’s everydayargumentation shares great similarity to scientific argumentation practices. Building from an everydayperspective on argumentation, we seek to understand how children’s collaborations in M&T are dialogicallyconstructed through appropriation of their everyday practices and competencies.MethodologyThis study took place at an elementary school in the northeastern region of the United States. A 3-weekafterschool program was developed around understanding the concept of circuitry using Squishy Circuits(Johnson & Thomas, 2010). Squishy Circuits includes LED lights, motors, buzzers, and a battery pack with twowires that can be connected to conductible Play-Doh™ to create a circuit. We chose to use Squishy Circuitsbecause of its technological affordance to make the circuitry using Play-Doh™. We also provided iPads forsmall groups to collaborate with for their research and photo-documentation of the artifacts that they created.Out of 48 children in the afterschool program, seven children who were interested in the topicconsented to be in our study (8-9 years; 3 female). The two male children had previous experience with SquishyCircuits. The researchers were both observers and participants. The seven children were video-recorded forthree weeks. Fieldnotes were taken during and after each session. Pictures of Squishy Circuit models and ideasketches were collected. Given that all modes of communication are used in argumentation, the analysis wasguided by Goodwin (2007)’s embodied participation framework, paying particular attention to howargumentation is achieved through spatial and body formation as well as tool handling. Analysis followedmethods of both conversation analysis (Ochs & Capps, 2009; Schegloff, 1991) and interaction analysisCSCL 2017 Proceedings676© ISLS(Erickson, 2004). First, content logs (Jordan & Henderson, 1995) were created and then analyzed along withethnographic fieldnotes. Adopting Baker (2002)’s definition of argumentation as “cooperative explorations of adialogical space of solutions” (p. 306), episodes were identified where groups faced a problem in relation tobuilding their model with Squishy Circuits. Then, we identified episodes of collaborative argumentation wherelearners engaged in argumentation without the support from the facilitator. Most of the episodes of collaborativeargumentation occurred for a short duration, except for those that occurred during the first week. We presentone of the extended episodes here from a group of girls, Elina (8 years old) and Nicole (9 years old). Their caseis representative of sustained collaborative argumentation in our dataset.FindingsOur preliminary analysis illustrates that children in our dataset supported each other to engage in collaborativeargumentation through collaborative meaning-making talk and role-taking.Everyday language supported collaborative argumentation in M&TThe collaborative meaning-making talk was developed through the appropriation of everyday language. Theexcerpt below starts after Elina and Nicole engaged in a challenge to make one LED light up. They decided tomake an alien with two illuminated eyes. Their plan to light two LEDs in one structure of Play-Doh™ was animpossible task without the use of insulating dough. As they continued to struggle, the researcher shared twoprinciples: 1) a circuit needs two pieces of dough, and 2) the longer lead of the LED has to be connected to thedough that is connected with the red wire of the battery pack. The researcher shared the metaphor of LEDhaving the “right shoes” to explain the concept of polarity and suggested flipping the LED when it does not lightup. The episode presented below starts at Nicole and Elina’s first attempt to light one LED after the circuitryprinciples had been explained by the facilitator.0102030405060708Elina:Researcher:Nicole:Researcher:Elina:Nicole:Elina:((to researcher)) Well this might work now, because I turned it around.Right. Notice((looking at Elina and back to researcher)) But it has to be two different things.Notice how… Right exactly. Nicole just said something really important. Therehas to be two different things. Two different pieces of Play-Doh™.((keeps looking down at her Play-Doh™))((makes a little phone with Play-Doh™)) So this could be a phone for it.((looks up at researcher)) Oh! So it needs something for the alien.After sharing of principles of circuitry, Nicole soon noticed that the problem with their model was due to onlyhaving one piece of Play-Doh™ (line 3). However, Nicole’s explanation did not trigger any reaction from Elina.Elina was deeply engaged in making the model that she hardly glanced away from the Squishy Circuits model(line 6). What was a pivotal moment for Elina was to see that the alien model could now have a phone to act asa second piece of Play-Doh™ (line 8). This moment of realization was supported by Nicole’s use of everydaymaking vocabulary such as “a phone for the alien” (line 7). The researcher had highlighted the importance ofhaving a second piece of Play-Doh™. However, the scientific explanation of how circuits work did not causeany change of action from Elina until Nicole re-framed the scientific explanation in relation to their alien model.When a solution was offered in everyday language (not in scientific terms) — grounded to the features of theirmodel — Elina understood the circuitry concept. This episode highlights the importance of children’s everydaylanguage in developing the collaborative meaning-making talk during argumentation in M&T.Role-taking in support of developing a collaborative argumentationOur analysis of the videorecords also showed that peers’ role-taking supported them to initiate and sustain theirengagement in collaborative argumentation. We found evidence that Nicole and Elina engaged differently inargumentation practices of identifying problems, offering solutions, and engaging in the trial-and-error spirit ofM&T as they took on different roles. Findings showed that their different ways of engaging in argumentationinfluenced each another to create a model that was functional and also aesthetically pleasing. The excerptpresented below is a continuation of the previous from above.01020304Nicole:Elina:Nicole:CSCL 2017 ProceedingsHow about a phone? ((brings the phone in front of Elina’s face))Ok, a phone, hehe. But I am making it more exotic. ((pinches wire into thephone))((turns the battery on)) Ok, let’s just plug it in ((grabs the wire)). Wait and then677© ISLS05060708091011Elina:Nicole:Elina:Nicole:Elina:one, we only need one ((takes one LED out)), one eye ((puts LED to phone)).Oh, one eye, ok…That looks really weird.We need it… ((brings the LED that is in the phone near to the alien to connect))No. I know we could make this the eyes and then we could make this the nose((puts LED in as a nose and makes marks with fingers to create eyes)).But we need this to stick into like... ((makes gestures))Look ((raises the model in the air))! There's the eyes and there's the nose!12131415Nicole:Elina:Nicole:((looks at the model)) And then one has to be in here ((points to the phonestructure)) and one has to be in here ((points to the alien structure)).Like this? ((puts one LED lead to phone and the other lead to alien structure))And then turn it on ((turns the battery pack on)).16171819Both:Nicole:Elina:Nicole:((notice that LED light is not on))Switch it around. Maybe it's in the wrong shoes.((switches the orientation of the wire))((notices the light is still not on)) Maybe it's in the wrong spot ((shrugs)).20Elina:((Puts LED near the alien’s head where the other LED light is)) Nope ((nods)).Throughout their collaboration, Nicole and Elina identified problems, offered solutions, and investigated bytrial-and-error, but they did so by taking on different roles. Nicole acted in an engineer role when she suggestedthat her group explore functional solutions. Nicole’s discourse and tool handling were aligned to the engineeringdesign process: progressing from identifying the problem (not having two pieces of Play-Doh™) to offering apossible solution (a phone), to testing (plugging wires and turning on), to identifying a new problem (two LEDsin one Play-Doh™ piece), to finally offering an explanation to make sense of the scientific concepts with herpartner (LED leads have to be plugged into separate pieces of Play-Doh™). Elina approached the task by actingin a designer role. Elina’s discourse and tool handling related to making aesthetic refinements to the model(using the wires to make the phone exotic), noticing an aesthetically unpleasing element (not having two eyes),and suggesting an alternative design (LED could be the nose).The girls’ different ways of engaging in argumentation allowed them to recognize that the engineeringand design roles were both needed to build a model that was functional and aesthetically pleasing. At first, Elinadid not fully attend to the functionality of the model when Nicole made attempts to orient Elina’s attention tothe problem of having two LEDs in one Play-Doh™ (lines 4-5). After a few conversational turns, Elina began toincorporate Nicole’s suggestions in terms of fixing the model to function (line 14, 18, 20). In this regard, Elinaand Nicole’s different roles supported them to sustain their engagement in collaborative argumentation.DiscussionThis study’s findings expand the current conceptions of everyday argumentation by illustrating how objects-tothink-with (Kafai, 2006) such as Squishy Circuits allow young children to engage in collaborativeargumentation using the interactional social processes of collaborative meaning-making talk and role-taking.The Squishy Circuits models supported these two girls (and others in our study) to understand the concept ofcircuitry. Importantly, the M&T tools as object-to-think-with acted as a concrete artifact from which the learnerscould generate evidence to inform their arguments about their design solutions. The visual and tactile feedbackfrom the Squishy Circuits model supported Nicole and Elina to test out their ideas and identify errors in theirphysical models, allowing them to expand their understanding of circuity. In this regard, we posit that the role ofphysical objects in constructionism can be extended from objects-to-think-with into objects-to-argue-with. Weposit that considering M&T as a rich context for engaging in argumentation can provide an additional rationalefor bringing these M&T activities to formal and informal learning environments.Our study showed that these two young girls had a capability to support each other through the use ofeveryday language and role-taking. Through their everyday language Elina and Nicole made connection toscientific concepts, which has been shown by the prior work to be an important skill in-school (Siry et al., 2012)and out-of-school (Zimmerman, Reeve, & Bell, 2008). Furthermore, Nicole’s support of Elina, through hershifts in gaze and body formation can be seen as similar to the supports that adults use to bring the child sharethe same stance towards the activity (Goodwin, 2007). Also, through emergent role-taking Elina and Nicolerecognized both the value of engineering and design roles in order to build a model that was functional andaesthetically pleasing. Different roles supported them to argue for different ways of doing things, which is inresonance with Papert and Harel (1991)’s idea of two styles that are relevant to constructionism: analytic formalstyle and bricolage style in which the work is organized through negotiation rather than planning. Consequently,CSCL 2017 Proceedings678© ISLSour study’s finding suggest that peers can support each other with their everyday language and role-takingduring M&T in out-of-school settings as part of their collaborative argumentation. As such, we highlight theimportance of making space for small group conversations using everyday language to allow children tocollaboratively make sense of scientific concepts. Furthermore, we advocate for designing the M&T activity in away that learners can equally address the functionality and the aesthetics.ImplicationsOur findings illuminated that collaborative argumentation during M&T may be characterized differently fromyoung children’s argumentation practices in science. Argumentation practices in M&T were targeted to findingdesign solutions. This solution-focus influenced the nature of children’s argumentation because it allowedlearners to argue for multiple solutions. Consequently, learners used purposeful observation to identify problemsin M&T rather than asking questions. Evidence construction was concerned with testing the functionality of asolution in M&T instead of justifying a scientific phenomenon. Collaborative argumentation in M&T led tocreating solutions instead of formulating theories. These differences lead us to advocate for recognition ofengineering argumentation. We will explore the nature of engineering argumentation in future M&T studies.This study focused on investigating the ways peers supported each other to engage in collaborativeargumentation during M&T. For future research, we hope to extend our analysis to investigate how and whysuch collaborative argumentation occurred by studying interaction within and across multiple peer groups.Furthermore, we advocate for future research to identify argumentation practices in other fields to inform thespectrum of argumentation practices that learners can engage in. This will support informal and formaleducators, as well as researchers, to understand the different types of argumentation that may support learners’sense-making — expanding the idea of argumentation across disciplines and settings.ReferencesBaker, M. J. (2002). Argumentative interactions, discursive operations and learning to model in science. In P.Brna, M. Baker, K. Stenning, & A. Tiberghien (Eds.), The Role of Communication in Learning to Model(pp. 303–324). Mahwah New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Bricker, L. A., & Bell, P. (2008). Conceptualizations of argumentation from science studies and the learningsciences and their implications for the practices of science education. Science Education, 92(3), 473–498.Erickson, F. (2004). Talk and soocial theory: Ecologies of speaking and listening in everyday life. Polity.Goodwin, C. (2007). Participation, stance and affect in the organization of activities. Discourse & Society,18(1), 53–73.Jiménez-Aleixandre, M. P. (2007). Designing argumentation learning environments. In S. Erduran & M. P.Jiménez-Aleixandre (Eds.), Argumentation in science education (pp. 91–115). Netherlands: Springer.Johnson, S., & Thomas, A. (2010). Squishy Circuits: A Tangible Medium for Electronics Education. In CHI2010 Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 4099–4104). Atlanta, GA.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction Analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39–103.Kafai, Y. B. (2006). Constructionism. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences(1st ed., pp. 35–46). New York: Cambridge University Press.Manz, E. (2016). Examining evidence construction as the transformation of the material world into communityknowledge. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 53(7), 1113–1140.Monteira, S. F., & Jiménez-Aleixandre, M. P. (2016). The practice of using evidence in kindergarten: The roleof purposeful observation. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 53(8), 1232–1258.Ochs, E., & Capps, L. (2009). Living narrative: Creating lives in everyday storytelling. Harvard Univ. Press.Papert, B. S., & Harel, I. (1991). Situating Constructionism. Constructionism, 36(2), 1–11.Schegloff, E. A. (1991). Conversation analysis and socailly shared cognition. Perspectives on Socially SharedCognnition, 150–171.Siry, C., Ziegler, G., & Max, C. (2012). “Doing science” through discourse-in-interaction: Young children’sscience investigations at the early childhood level. Science Education, 96(2), 311–326.Weinberger, A., & Fischer, F. (2006). A framework to analyze argumentative knowledge construction incomputer-supported collaborative learning. Computers and Education, 46(1), 71–95.Zimmerman, H. T., Reeve, S., & Bell, P. (2008). Distributed Expertise in a Science Center: Social andIntellectual Role-Taking by Families. Journal of Museum Education, 33(2), 143–152.Zimmerman, H. T., Reeve, S., & Bell, P. (2010). Family sense-making practices in science center conversations.Science Education, 94(3), 478–505.CSCL 2017 Proceedings679© ISLS