The 3R Orchestration Cycle:Fostering Multi-Modal Inquiry Discoursein a Scaffolded Inquiry EnvironmentCresencia Fong, University of Toronto, cresencia.fong@utoronto.caRebecca M. Cober, University of Toronto, rebecca.cober@utoronto.caRichard Messina, Dr. Eric Jackman Institute of Child Study, richard.messina@utoronto.caTom Moher, University of Illinois at Chicago, moher@uic.eduJulia Murray, Dr. Eric Jackman Institute of Child Study, julia.murraye@utoronto.caBen Peebles, Dr. Eric Jackman Institute of Child Study, ben.peebles@utoronto.caJames D. Slotta, University of Toronto, jslotta@oise.utoronto.caAbstract: This paper reports on second and third iteration classroom trials of CommonKnowledge (CK2 and CK3 respectively) – a pedagogical and technological innovation thatsupports teacher orchestration of inquiry discourse occurring in the digital CK environmentand face-to-face in the classroom. CK facilitated the scaffolding of grade 5/6 students throughphases of collaborative biodiversity (CK2) and astronomy (CK3) inquiry. Using tablets,students contributed to a community knowledge base that was publicly displayed on aninteractive whiteboard (IWB). The IWB visualized the community’s idea flow, enablinglearners to sort their ideas along socially-negotiated categories. Inquiry work done in the CKenvironment affected the knowledge work done in the face-to-face classroom discussions, andvice versa. We observed that teachers used an orchestration cycle of Reflect-Refocus-Release(3R) as a means of managing this blended learning environment. A comparison of teachers’Reflect discourse structures between both iterations indicate such patterns vary with inquirytask demands.Keywords: orchestration, discourse, inquiry, collaboration, blended learning environmentIntroduction and objectivesAdvances in computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL) research have yielded technologies wherediscourse plays a fundamental role of collaborative knowledge building (e.g., Group Scribbles - Roschelle et al.,2007; ConcertChat - Stahl, 2006). Some CSCL environments have used the technology to “script” collaborativeproblem solving processes within a community (e.g., CollPad - Nussbaum et al., 2009). Other CSCLenvironments scaffold online discourse and add an element of crowd sourcing (e.g., “likes” for promisingthreads; PeppeR - Hewitt et al., 2013) for collaborative learning in a face-to-face (F2F) environment (e.g.,InterLACE - Coopey et al., 2013; Moodle - Dougiamas & Taylor, 2003; Knowledge Forum - Scardamalia,2002). Inquiry discourse can be viewed as a social process of meaning construction (Vygotsky, 1962). Suchdiscourse may include argumentation (Kuhn, 1993), theory-building (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 2012), orexplanation building (Sandoval & Reiser, 2004). However, the underlying goal of all these environments is thepursuit of deeper understanding and the epistemic practice of science (Nickerson, 1985).In learning environments that aim to engage students as a knowledge community in collective inquirytoward the production of knowledge as a product, there is typically a heavy reliance on teacher-guided oralcommunity discourse (Slotta & Najafi, 2010). However, this places a serious burden on teachers to orchestrateinquiry in blended learning environments (i.e. F2F classrooms incorporating computer-mediated activities), asthey must continuously traverse online and F2F environments to guide discourse towards productive paths ofinquiry. If technology for guiding inquiry and discourse is to minimize teachers’ “orchestration load”(Dillenbourg, 2012), we must first understand how teachers guide such multi-modal inquiry and discourse, inorder to design scaffolding technology to relieve some of their orchestration load. Hence, there remains a needfor research of discourse and activity sequences in technology-mediated inquiry environments. This study seeksto identify patterns of teacher orchestration and forms of teacher-guided inquiry discourse in the successfulapplication of community note-sharing environments in elementary classrooms.We continue to innovate on the development of Common Knowledge (CK) – a content-agnosticpedagogical and technological note-sharing application for collaborative inquiry. Using tablets, studentscontribute to a community knowledge base that is publicly visible from the IWB. This interactive displayvisualizes the community’s idea flow and enables learners to sort their ideas by topic. Building on theCSCL 2015 Proceedings39© ISLSaffordances of the second iteration (CK2), the third iteration (CK3) incorporates an inquiry script, scaffoldingthe community through phases of science inquiry: Brainstorm, Propose, and Investigate. Students brainstormquestions and theories, by contributing Brainstorm notes; students then propose research trajectories and designexperiments to test their theories, by contributing Proposal notes. Such contributions inform subsequent work influid interest groups (each supported by an interest-specific shared interactive display), in which studentsinvestigate the proposed research, sharing findings via Report notes, and making inter-group connections. Thispaper will report on CK2 and CK3 classroom trials, presenting an observed Reflect-Refocus-Release (3R) cycleof teacher orchestration that occurred across multiple iteration enactments, and a comparison of teacherdiscourse structures occurring in the Reflect orchestration phase.Theoretical perspectiveKnowledge buildingOur research is grounded in the theoretical tradition of classrooms as Knowledge Communities, wherecommunity members value a diversity of expertise, metacognitive awareness, a common goal of advancing thecollective knowledge, and a means by which to share learning (Bielaczyc & Collins, 1999). KnowledgeBuilding is one of the most prominent examples of the knowledge community approach and has been advancedas a powerful way of learning (Bielaczyck, 2011; Hmelo-Silver & Barrows, 2008; Scardamalia & Bereiter,1996). Students engage as a knowledge community in collaborative inquiry discourse with peers and teachers toimprove emergent understanding, and are scaffolded by a CSCL environment such as Knowledge Forum(Scardamalia, 2002).Knowledge community and inquiryThe Knowledge Community and Inquiry (KCI - Slotta & Najafi, 2010; Slotta & Peters, 2008) approach has beenadvanced as a more accessible model for real-world classrooms and their inevitable “extrinsic constraints”(Dillenbourg et al., 2012), such as time, curriculum relevance, and assessment. In KCI, students are scaffoldedto work as a knowledge community in building a collective knowledge base, which becomes a resource forsubsequent scaffolded inquiry activities, targeting specific learning goals (Peters & Slotta, 2010; Slotta &Najafi, 2012).The role of discourse in a knowledge community approachLanguage has been shown to be a central mediator of thinking and learning within a knowledge community(Wertsch & Smolka, 1994), as communication with peers and teachers generates new meaning or insight aboutnext steps for inquiry (Sfard, 2007). Reciprocal Teaching (Palincsar & Brown, 1984) was conceived as atransitional discourse structure to help students progress from teacher-mediated dialogue to independent smallgroup discussion, with a gradual fading of teacher direction and structure. Bereiter and Scardamalia (2008)define five levels of classroom dialogue, varying in their levels of structure and teacher directedness.O'Connor and Michaels’ (1996) analysis of “revoicing” – the oral or written re-phrasing of a student'scontribution by another participant (often the teacher) – describes how teachers orchestrate group lessonsthrough language socialization into intellectual practices, by positioning students in relation to each other andaligning them with the academic content at hand. Teacher “revoicing” of student comments can advancediscussion by (1) using student contributions to introduce new ideas or terminology, (2) reframing studentcontributions to steer the discussion in toward a productive direction, (3) positioning a student in relation to theargument by attributing his or her comment to a stance, or (4) creating alignments and oppositions within anargument – thereby positioning students in relation to their peers (O’Connor & Michaels, 1996). “Revoicing”thus offers a means for teachers to orchestrate classroom discourse and foster idea growth, reinforcing collectiveepistemology and guiding inquiry progression.Scripting and orchestrationKnowledge community approaches typically rely on the teacher to foster community knowledge sharing andcollaboration. Yet collaborative learning research has shown that learners need guidance to engage in such“high-level” collaboration processes (Weinberger et al., 2010). To compensate for learners’ lack ofcollaboration skills (i.e. lack of internal collaboration scripts), external collaboration scripts may be usedinitially and gradually faded as learners develop their collaboration skills internally (Fischer et al., 2012). CKincorporates collaboration scripting (involving elements of crowd sourcing and interest-based social groupings)and an inquiry script (comprised of successive inquiry phases) designed to support the community’s eventualknowledge convergence. The enactment of even the most thoughtful pedagogical designs, whether facilitated byCSCL 2015 Proceedings40© ISLStechnology or not, requires thoughtful management of students, activity, resources, technology, and time – whatDillenbourg contentiously (Roschelle, Dimitriadis, & Hoppe, 2013) redefined as ‘orchestration’: “how a teachermanages, in real time, multi-layered activities in a multi-constraints context” (Dillenbourg et al., 2012; p.1).Indeed, one CK design objective was to minimize teachers’ cognitive load, what Dillenbourg calls“orchestration load” (2012). As an “orchestration tool” (Dillenbourg et al., 2012), the inquiry and collaborativescripts at the heart of CK’s technological design and topic-focused visualizations, enable the knowledgecommunity to cope with their incoming ideas arising from all members ostensibly “talking” simultaneously, andoffer a technology structure to manage the community’s inquiry process.The study lends new insight into how forms of knowledge building can be integrated into a KCIcurriculum and KCI-scripted technology design. It further offers an example of how teachers may orchestratethese to foster collaborative inquiry toward productive trajectories and forms of discourse, by which theyfacilitate the knowledge community’s inquiry progress.MethodThis study is part of a program of design research to investigate theory and practice of the KCI model, and issituated within the broader multi-year “Embedded Phenomena & Inquiry Communities” (EPIC) collaborativeresearch project (Moher & Slotta, 2012). The teachers and the school’s vice principal—all co-authors on thispaper and masters of Knowledge Building practice—have been included in iterative CK co-design cycles(Roschelle, Penuel, & Shechtman, 2006) since 2011. Data sources from our observations of grade 5/6classrooms included field notes, video recordings, teacher and student interviews, and data logs of CKdiscussions. A grounded approach (Glaser & Strauss, 1967) to video coding was used to determine teachers’orchestrational and discursive scaffolds. Participants were two veteran grade 5/6 teachers, ‘Brad’ and ‘Jen’, in aprivate elementary school located in a large Canadian city, with 23 students each (approximately equal numbersof grade 5 and 6 students). By our third iteration of CK, Brad had been teaching for 8 years, and Jen for 5 years.The school has an emphasis on inquiry and Knowledge Building pedagogy.In enactments of CK2, students were engaged for nine weeks during the fall of 2011 in a biodiversityinquiry curriculum—WallCology Embedded Phenomena— where they were tasked with investigating a virtual“live” ecosystem located “within” their classroom’s walls (Moher & Slotta, 2012). CK2 was integrated into thebroader suite of WallCology inquiry tools that guided students through six successive content-based inquiryphases, in which they were tasked with determining each species’ life cycle, environmental and foodpreferences, and the ecosystem’s food web. Students entered observations and CK notes about the four habitatslocated within their classroom walls, observed through a “WallScope” (a large monitor) mounted on each wall.In each phase, students could continuously access their peers’ CK notes from tablets, as well as compose CKnotes, incorporating pre-programmed science content and process keyword tags that were specific to the inquiryphase at hand. Online CK2 discussions were integrated into the inquiry curriculum, with specified discussiongoals. Teachers also launched spontaneous CK2 discussions, as they felt were warranted.CK3 was a content-agnostic standalone application, which closely coupled an inquiry script with atechnology script. Knowledge communities were scaffolded through phases of astronomy inquiry, towardsknowledge convergence that was connected to teachers’ curriculum goals of addressing the topics of gravity,scale, and nested systems. It also aimed to capitalize on the physical classroom layout as an additionaldimension of collaboration scripting and collective knowledge mapping. This was a 9-week grade 5/6Astronomy inquiry progression supported by CK3, and was enacted in the spring of 2013.To investigate teachers’ orchestration of classroom activity, the cumulative amount of classroom timeteachers allocated to inquiry activity involving CK3 over the 9-week enactments was noted. A groundedapproach to video coding of CK2 and CK3 enactments was used, with coarse-grain coding focused on teachers’activity orchestration. Any teacher-guided community oral discussion involving at least one student speaker andlasting for at least one minute, was coded as a community discourse episode (“CDE”). Student-driven activitiesthat involved Common Knowledge were coded as “SD-CK”. Video data of two 90-minute CK2 classroomperiods and three 90-minute CK3 classroom periods from each teacher were chosen for finer grain coding, basedon the richness of CK-driven classroom discourse and opportunities for CK note contributions during the samesession. We sought to analyze the class periods with the most uninterrupted usage of CK, in order to capturewhat might be construed as characteristic inquiry orchestration patterns. Finer grain coding focused on teachers’discourse patterns during CDEs, to discover possible discourse patterns emerging from teachers’ moves.CSCL 2015 Proceedings41© ISLSFindings and discussionTeachers’ activity orchestrationPercentage of EnactmentTimeVideo coding of Brad’s and Jen’s CK2 and CK3 enactments for teacher-guided community discourse episodes(“CDE”), and student-driven activities that involved Common Knowledge (“SD-CK”) revealed that studentsparticipating in CK3 enactment in both Brad’s and Jen’s classrooms spent more time in student-driven activitiesthan in teacher-guided activities. This is reversed from the pattern seen in CK2 enactment, where teacher-guidedactivity was favored (see Figure 1). Jen in particular, showed a dramatic shift in her allocation of classroom timefrom CK2, when 55% of the time in which CK2 was a focus was given to teacher-guided community discussionepisodes (CDE); to CK3, where only 24% was given to CDE. In CK3 enactment, students were given more timeto work independently in the CK3 environment, enabling them to reflect more meaningfully (as evidenced bytheir CK3 notes) on their own CK3 contributions and that of their peers.60%Common Knowledge Activity in CK2 and CK3EnactmentsCDE Activity(CK2 Enactment)50%40%SD-CK Activity(CK2 Enactment)30%20%CDE Activity(CK3 Enactment)10%0%Brad's OrchestrationJen's OrchestrationCK EnactmentSD-CK Activity(CK3 Enactment)Figure 1. A comparison of teachers’ orchestrated time in CK2 and CK3 enactments, spent on communitydiscourse episodes (CDE) and student-driven inquiry in the CK environment (SD-CK).It is interesting to this study that changes to our script and technology features could induce such alarge behavioral shift in classroom discourse structures. One possible explanation for this shift is that CK2 wasmore content-oriented (i.e., WallCology investigations), while CK3 was more process-oriented (i.e. studentdriven astronomy inquiry), with no predetermined content or referent for discourse. As such, discussions duringCK2 enactment were more content–oriented, and less process-oriented; whereas discussions during CK3enactment were more process-focused, looking for patterns and connections within the knowledge base.Furthermore, the student-driven nature of CK3 content resulted in the teacher spending more time in smallgroup interactions with student collaborators working on common inquiry goals. This resulted in moreorchestration time given to student-driven inquiry activity in the CK3 environment, and less time given tocommunity reflection discussion.Qualitative video analysis and closer examination of the sequencing of CDE and SD-CK events forCK2 and CK2 enactments, revealed that teachers guided their communities towards productive inquiry throughrounds of CDE in which they scaffolded students to reflect upon and discuss their peers’ CK3 notes,culminating in teachers’ instructions that refocus the community’s subsequent inquiry activity, whereuponstudents were released to pursue their inquiry trajectories (i.e., SD-CK) – resulting in further note contributionsto the community knowledge base. This 3R cycle (Reflect-Refocus-Release) figured prominently in teachers’orchestration of their enactments. Reflective discourse was pivotal in helping students develop awareness oftheir community’s state of knowledge, achieve knowledge convergence, and receive teacher guidance towardsproductive inquiry.Figure 2 provides more details about teachers’ orchestration of CK3 activity during the three classroomsessions of CK3 enactments that were selected for further analysis. The top level of each teacher’s panel (i.e., “#of Notes”) presents students’ note contribution activity corresponding to SD-CK events. During the three classsessions, Brad’s students contributed 21 Brainstorm notes (including Build-on notes from peers), 19 Proposals,and 15 Reports, while Jen’s students contributed 64 Brainstorm notes (including Build-ons), 39 Proposals, and 4Reports. The number of notes shown begins with a non-zero value, as some notes had been contributed in classsessions preceding those that were coded.CSCL 2015 Proceedings42© ISLSFigure 2. Enactment timeline for Brad’s (top) and Jen’s (bottom) orchestration of CK3 activity during their threeselected class periods of CK3 enactment. The black vertical lines delineate the end of one period and thebeginning of the next period. The yellow vertical line marks when Brad initiated the Propose phase of inquiry(Jen initiated the Propose phase in a different session). The blue vertical lines mark when each teacher initiatedthe Investigate phase of inquiry. For each teacher, the bottom (red/pink) level shows the orchestrationsequencing of CK3 activity. The top level shows students’ contributions of different types of CK3 notes.The red/pink “CK Activity” graphs in Figure 2 illustrate teachers’ pacing and sequencing of the Reflect(CDE, red) and Release (SD-CK, pink) phases of the 3R orchestration cycle. Students produced knowledgeartifacts during the Release phases, in the form of CK3 notes – as can be seen in the increase of notes (see “# ofNotes” graphs in Figure 2) during the Release phases. Similar analyses were done on two selected class sessionsof each teacher’s CK2 enactment, and also showed increases in note contributions during SD-CK (Release)events. For enactments of both iterations, teachers used students’ CK notes to launch and guide F2F communitydiscussion during the Reflect phase of their orchestration. Teachers often concluded a discussion with Refocusinstructions intended to provide direction to students about strategies to address issues that emerged from thatdiscussion.Teachers’ discourse patternsThe continuous back-and-forth movement between student-driven activities in the CK environment (Release)and community discourse events (Reflect), each informing the other, was guided by teachers’ Refocusinginstructions. These instructions emerged naturally from student input during Reflection community discussions.A closer examination of teachers’ discourse moves during these discussions was done to investigate how theyfacilitated the discussions towards productive trajectories and guided ensuing student-directed inquiry work forthe subsequent Release phase of activity orchestration.A grounded approach to video coding of teachers’ discourse moves during their facilitation ofcommunity discourse events (i.e. Reflect phase of orchestration) in their two selected CK2 enactment sessionsand their 3 selected CK3 enactment sessions, revealed four orientations of teacher-initiated exchanges: (1)Teacher Reflection (TR), in which the teacher “revoices” or engages in a personal reflection about recent ideasor progress; (2) Individual Student Reflection (IR), in which individual students or groups were posed an inquiryquestion; (3) Whole Class Reflection (CR), in which the teacher poses a reflection question to the classroom as awhole; and (4) Class Instruction (CI), in which the teacher issued straightforward instructions to the class.Teachers used these orientations to guide community discourse, promote reflection on the community’scollective knowledge base, and engage the community in discursive knowledge work.CSCL 2015 Proceedings43© ISLSPercentage of DiscourseMovesSince Brad and Jen had similar discourse orientation patterns to each other, in their enactments of bothiterations, the distribution of teachers’ discourse orientations were collapsed across teachers and a comparisonwas done between teachers’ discourse orientations for CK2 and CK3 enactments (see Figure 3). Notably,teachers placed less emphasis on community reflection (CR) and individual student reflection (IR) in CK3enactment than they had in CK2 enactments, with increased emphasis on community instruction (CI) andteacher reflection (TR) in CK3 enactment. This shift in teachers’ discourse patterns may again be attributed tothe differing inquiry task demands between content-focused CK2 and process–focused CK3.50%Teachers' Discourse Orientations During CommunityDiscourse Episodes (CDE) in CK2 and CK3 Enactments40%30%20%Teachers' Discourse Moves(CK2 Enactment, n = 504)10%Teachers' Discourse Moves(CK3 Enactment, n = 563)0%CICRIRDiscourse OrientationsTRFigure 3. A comparison of teachers’ discourse orientations during community discourse episodes (CDE), as apercentage of teachers’ total discourse moves, over their selected class periods of CK2 and CK3 enactments.Teachers’ discourse orientations: community instruction (CI), community reflection (CR), individual reflection(IR), and teacher reflection (TR).All coding was done by the first author, with code key refinement done through a process of inter-raterchecking with this study’s second rater, who independently coded 20% of teachers’ video-recorded discoursemoves during their selected enactment sessions, for the four discourse orientations (CI, CR, IR, TR). Inter-rateragreement was 94%, and the inter-rater reliability was found to be Cohen’s Kappa = 0.91.Teachers used TR discourse orientations to model their knowledge work processes as they interactedwith students’ CK note contributions. Such processes may begin with identifying common themes, uniqueperspectives, and knowledge gaps, then move into relating ideas to prior knowledge or prior experiences,assessing the community’s current epistemic approach, and suggesting a new epistemic approach. Teachers alsoused TR discourse orientations to amplify students’ ideas in the public sphere, “revoicing” ideas, sometimesfusing this with their own phrasing toward a purposeful direction and seeking student validation of—or responseto—their particular “revoicings”. Such discourse moves can be seen as disrupting the traditional teacher-studentpower dynamic, since the student is now positioned to evaluate what the teacher said. CR and IR orientationswere often employed to empower students through role-casting individual students (IR) or the community-atlarge (CR) as legitimate participants of inquiry (e.g., questioner, observer, theorizer, inquirer), whilesimultaneously seeking students’ explanations of what they had shared in CK notes or spoken comments. CRand IR orientations were also used, less frequently, to encourage students to verbally build-on an idea,synthesize multiple ideas or multiple CK notes, comment about the current epistemic approach, or suggest anew epistemic approach to pursuing the inquiry.Conclusions and implicationsIn a CK-mediated classroom, students engage in collective inquiry in an online notes-based environment and inteacher-guided discussions in the classroom environment. The inquiry work done in one learning environmentaffects the knowledge work done in the other, and vice versa. We observed that teachers utilized anorchestration cycle of Reflect-Refocus-Release (3R) as a means of managing this complex balance. Teachers’refocusing instructions were critical in guiding inquiry work done in the CK environment, and the work done inthe student notes was vital to informing teachers’ scaffolding of whole class reflections.An interesting shift in the allocation of instructional time occurred between CK2 and CK3 enactments,evidently as a result of the differing forms of inquiry (and differing technology scripts to support these) in thetwo enactments. CK2 was integrated into a more content-focused WallCology curriculum progression, withteachers allocating more time for community discussion (i.e., Reflect) and less time for independent studentwork periods (i.e., Release). CK3 scaffolded students through a more process-focused student-driven inquiryprogression, with teachers allocating less time for community discussion, and more time for independent studentwork periods. This suggests discourse patterns/structures vary with inquiry task demands. Perhaps teachers feltCSCL 2015 Proceedings44© ISLSa greater need to guide student inquiry differently in both cases, spending more time in small group interactionsduring students’ work period, to guide the process-focused CK3 enactment.Teachers’ discourse moves during community discourse episodes in all three iterations revealed thepresence of four discourse orientations: class instruction (CI), community reflection (CR), teacher reflection(TR), and individual reflection (IR). Once again, there were observed differences in discourse patterns betweenCK2 and CK3 enactment, in terms of the degree to which the teachers used each of the four orientations. Asubstantial reduction in the use of IR and CR orientations was seen in CK3 enactment, accompanied by anincrease in community instruction (CI) and teacher reflection (TR). These different patterns are also likely aconsequence of shifting task demands across the two iterations. Teachers, in their discourse, must move theclass through the inquiry script, using the technology environment as an orchestrational tool. Between CK2 andCK3, profound design changes were made to the technology and inquiry script. CK3 shifted away from contentembedded technology features (e.g., pre-programmed keywords related to inquiry phase at hand) and contentdriven inquiry script, towards content-agnostic technology features and a process-driven inquiry script. Thesedesign shifts clearly impacted the forms of discourse arrived at by the teachers as they followed the pedagogicalscript.However, a limitation of CK3’s focus on scripted inquiry progression of autonomous student inquiryphases is that it may have hindered the breadth of students’ investigations. Teachers did remark about this tradeoff, and should be a consideration in any future design efforts.By engaging students in reflective note-sharing as part of a scripted inquiry progression, we were ableto investigate how CK could help students and teachers engage in a Knowledge Community and Inquiry (KCI)approach. By adding CK as an inquiry scaffold, we produced a blended form of learning environment, whereindividual students develop and share their inquiry work within a common digital repository, motivatingteacher-guided discussions, which in turn motivate new, refocused inquiry using CK. The note-sharing systembecomes a tool that mediates between the two learning environments: students’ collective inquiry done in thedigital note-sharing environment and community knowledge work done during teacher-guided classroomdiscussions. Successful mediation of this blended learning environment entails the agile orchestration of inquiryactivity between the online and F2F environments, and strategic guidance of the community toward inquiryprogression. Hence the note-sharing system serves a dual purpose: to mediate between inquiry learningenvironments, and to support teachers’ orchestration of the learning progression.ReferencesBereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (2008). Toward Research-Based Innovation. In C. for Educational Research &Innovation (Eds.), Innovating to Learn, Learning to Innovate (pp. 67–87). Organization for EconomicCo-operation and Development (OECD).Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (2012). Theory Building and the Pursuit of Understanding in History, SocialStudies, and Literature. In M. J. Lawson & J. R. Kirby (Eds.), The Quality of Learning. New York, NY,USA: Cambridge University Press.Bielaczyc, K., & Collins, A. (1999). Learning communities in classrooms: A reconceptualization of educationalpractice. Instructional-Design Theories and Models: A New Paradigm of Instructional Theory, 2, 269–292.Bielaczyck, K. (2011). Strengthening the Conceptual Foundations of Knowledge Building Theory andPedagogy. Hong Kong, China: Symposium at the 9th International Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning Conference.Booth, K. S., Fisher, B. D., Lin, C. J. R., & Argue, R. (2002). The mighty mouse multi-screen collaborationtool. In Proceedings of the 15th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology(pp. 209–212). Retrieved from http://people.cs.ubc.ca/ fisher/uist2002mouse.pdfCoopey, E., Schneider, L., & Danahy, E. (2013). InterLACE: Interactive Learning And CollaborationEnvironment. In N. Rummel, M. Kapur, M. Nathan, & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), To See the World and aGrain of Sand: CSCL 2013 Conference Proceedings (Vol. 2, pp. 388–391). Madison, Wisconsin, USA:International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS).Dillenbourg, P., Dimitriadis, Y., Nussbaum, M., Roschelle, J., Looi, C. K., Asensio, J. I., … others. (2012).Design for classroom orchestration. Computers & Education.Dougiamas, M., & Taylor, P. (2003). Moodle: Using Learning Communities to Create an Open Source CourseManagement System. In World Conference on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia andTelecommunications (Vol. 2003, pp. 171–178).Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Stegmann, K., & Wecker, C. (2012, August). Toward a Script Theory of Guidance inComputer-Supported Collaborative Learning.CSCL 2015 Proceedings45© ISLSGlaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research.Chicago, IL, USA: Aldine.Hewitt, J., Brett, C., & MacKinnon, K. (2013). A Study of Private Messaging Within an AsynchronousDiscussion Environment. In N. Rummel, M. Kapur, M. Nathan, & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), To See theWorld and a Grain of Sand: CSCL 2013 Conference Proceedings (Vol. 2, pp. 46–49). Madison,Wisconsin, USA: International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS).Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Barrows, H. S. (2008). Facilitating collaborative knowledge building. Cognition andInstruction, 26(1), 48–94.Kuhn, D. (1993). Science as argument: Implications for teaching and learning scientific thinking. ScienceEducation, 77(3), 319–337.Moher, T., & Slotta, J. D. (2012). Embedded Phenomena for Knowledge Communities: Supporting complexpractices and interactions within a community of inquiry in the elementary science classroom. In J. vanAalst, K. Thompson, M. J. Jacobson, & P. Reimann (Eds.), The Future of Learning: Proceedings of the10th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2012) (Vol. 2, pp. 64–71). Sydney,NSW, Australia: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Nickerson, R. S. (1985). Understanding Understanding. American Journal of Education, 201–239.Nussbaum, M., Alvarez, C., McFarlane, A., Gomez, F., Claro, S., & Radovic, D. (2009). Technology as smallgroup face-to-face Collaborative Scaffolding. Computers &Education, 52(1), 147–153.O’Connor, M. C., & Michaels, S. (1996). Shifting participant frameworks: Orchestrating thinking practices ingroup discussion. In D. Hicks (Ed.), Discourse, Learning, and Schooling (pp. 63–103). New York, NY:Cambridge University Press.Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehensionmonitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1(2), 117–175.Peters, V. L., & Slotta, J. D. (2010). Scaffolding knowledge communities in the classroom: New opportunitiesin the Web 2.0 era. Designs for Learning Environments of the Future, 205–232.Roschelle, J., Penuel, W. R., & Shechtman, N. (2006). Co-design of innovations with teachers: Definition anddynamics. In Proceedings of the 7th international conference on Learning sciences (pp. 606–612).Bloomington, Indiana.Sandoval, W. A., & Reiser, B. J. (2004). Explanation driven inquiry: Integrating conceptual and epistemicscaffolds for scientific inquiry. Science Education, 88(3), 345–372.Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective Cognitive Responsibility for the Advancement of Knowledge. LiberalEducation in a Knowledge Society, 67–98.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1996). Student communities for the advancement of knowledge.Communications of the ACM, 39(4), 36–37.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge building environments: Extending the limits of the possiblein education and knowledge work. In Encyclopedia of distributed learning (pp. 269–272). ThousandOaks, CA: Sage Publications.Sfard, A. (2007). When the rules of discourse change, but nobody tells you: Making sense of mathematicslearning from a commognitive standpoint. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(4), 565–613.Slotta, J. D., & Najafi, H. (2010). Knowledge Communities in the Classroom. In P. Peterson, E. Baker, & B.McGaw (Eds.), International Encyclopedia of Education (pp. 189–196).Slotta, J. D., & Najafi, H. (2012). Supporting Collaborative Knowledge Construction with Web 2.0Technologies. In N. Lavigne (Ed.), Emerging Technologies for the Classroom: A Learning SciencesPerspective. Springer.Slotta, J., & Peters, V. (2008). A blended model for knowledge communities: Embedding scaffolded inquiry. InProceedings of the 8th international conference on International conference for the learning sciencesVolume 2 (pp. 343–350). International Society of the Learning Sciences.Tchounikine, P. (2013). Clarifying Design for Orchestration: Orchestration and Orchestrable Technology,Scripting and Conducting. Computers & Education.Vygotsky, L. (1962). Thought and Language. Cambridge, MA, USA: The MIT Press.Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K., & Fischer, F. (2010). Learning to argue online: Scripted groups surpassindividuals (unscripted groups do not). Computers in Human Behavior, 26(4), 506–515.Wertsch, J. V., & Smolka, A. L. B. (1994). Continuing the dialogue: Vygotsky, Bakhtin & Lotman. In H.Daniels (Ed.), Charting the agenda: Educational activity after Vygotsky (pp. 69–92). London:Routledge.Zhang, J. (2010). Technology-supported learning innovation in cultural contexts. Educational TechnologyResearch and Development, 58(2), 229–243.CSCL 2015 Proceedings46© ISLS