Newcomer Integration in Online Knowledge Communities:Exploring the Role of Dialogic Textual ComplexityNicolae Nistor, University of Munich, Germany/Walden University, USA, nic.nistor@lmu.deMihai Dascălu, University “Politehnica” Bucharest, Romania, mihai.dascalu@cs.pub.roȘtefan Trăușan-Matu, University “Politehnica” Bucharest, Romania, stefan.trausan@cs.pub.roAbstract: Using online knowledge communities (OKCs) as informal learning environmentsposes the question how likely these will integrate newcomers as peripheral participants.Previous research has identified surface characteristics of the OKC dialog as integrativitypredictors. Yet, little is known about the role of dialogic textual complexity. This contributionproposes a comprehensive approach based on previously validated textual complexity indexesand applies it to predict OKC integrativity. The dialog analysis of N = 14 blogger communitieswith a total of 1937 participants identified three main components of textual complexity: dialogparticipation, structure and cohesion. From these, dialog cohesion was higher in integrativeOKCs, thus significantly predicting OKC integrativity. This result adds to previous OKCresearch by uncovering the depth of OKC discourse. For educational practice, the study suggestsa way of empowering learners by automatically assessing the integrativity of OKCs in whichthey may attempt to participate and access community knowledge.IntroductionLearning in knowledge communities (KCs) is a significant topic of the Learning Sciences (Bereiter &Scardamalia, 2014), especially in the context of social web applications, that in recent decades dramaticallyextended the possibilities of communication and collaboration, giving birth to online KCs (OKCs). In this context,newcomer integration in KCs is a research topic of increasing importance (Eberle, Stegmann, & Fischer, 2014).In the relatively new domain of Learning Analytics, some attempts have been made to automatically monitor andpredict newcomer integration in OKCs as a first step in an informal learning process (Nistor et al., 2015b). Suchstudies assume that community practice is reflected in, or even an organic component of, the community discourse(Wenger, 1998); consequently, newcomer integration in OKCs can be monitored and predicted by automateddialog analysis (Baker & Siemens, in press). Yet, little is known about the textual attributes of the OKC dialog,and specifically about its textual complexity. This contribution (1) proposes a comprehensive approach to textualcomplexity, and (2) applies this approach in the dialog analysis of blogger OKCs in order to (a) identify the grounddimensions of dialogic textual complexity and (b) predict how likely the OKCs generating this dialog willintegrate newcomers. The results are expected to contribute to a deeper understanding of OKC discourse andpractice, thus enabling the integration of OKCs in formal collaborative learning environments, and empoweringlearners by supporting more efficient knowledge sharing in OKCs (Nistor et al., 2015c).Theoretical backgroundDialogic textual complexity in knowledge communitiesKC research (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 2014; Wenger, 1998) describes discourse as connecting communitypractice, participants, and their knowledge about the practice. As such, discourse appears to be the essence ofexperience-based knowledge construction and sharing in KCs, which comprises the interplay betweenparticipation and reification. While participating, KC members acquire experience and reify it, thus developingcultural artifacts. Artifacts, in turn, support participation at a higher level. KC discourse includes both processes.At the same time, KC discourse includes the negotiation of meaning and the collaborative construction of sharedknowledge, thus supporting the transition from distributed to shared knowledge (Wenger, 1998). Regarding theKC dialog as the spoken dimension of discourse, from a linguistic perspective, the following dialog characteristicscan be observed:Initiation of, and participation in, the community dialog. KC members participating in the communitypractice and encountering various problems will initiate and participate in a dialog aimed at coordinating activities,negotiating meaning and constructing shared knowledge. As a measurable result, a number of words, utterancesand discussion threads will be produced (Dascălu, 2014).Dialog structure. Connecting practice and knowledge about practice requires at linguistic level a specificvocabulary. Therefore, the produced words and utterances will build upon discourse structures consisting of mainnotions and connectors of these notions, such as cue phrases, co-references, speech acts, adjacency pairs, andrhetorical schemas (Jurafsky & Martin, 2009).ICLS 2016 Proceedings914© ISLSDialog cohesion. Carrying out community practice and collaboratively constructing knowledge overlonger periods of time (Wenger, 1998) requires cohesive dialog. Both the threads of utterances produced aroundsingle moments of practice, and different dialogs emerging in time from the community practice will be cohesive.This implies local cohesion (i.e., the dialog will be cohesive in itself, as shown by the dialog structure dimension),as well as global cohesion (i.e., between discussion threads and dialogs within the community practice)(McNamara, Graesser, & Louwerse, 2012).These three dimensions of the collaborative KC dialog were named here in the order of increasing textualcomplexity. Initiation of, and participation in, the community dialog is supposed to reflect the surface, dialogconnectedness its structure, and dialog cohesion the depth of KC discourse.The assessment of collaborative dialog appears to be a productive method of quantitative KC research.After several decades of qualitative research, quantitative methods become more visible in the empiricalapproaches to knowledge communities. In Learning Analytics, particularly in Discourse Analytics, methodsincluding social network analysis, clustering, and factor analysis were applied to identify socio-cognitivestructures and predict learning in technology-based environments (Baker & Siemens, in press). Assuming thatcommunity discourse is tightly connected with socio-cognitive structures, practice and learning (Wenger, 1998),Nistor et al. (2015c) use ReaderBench, an automated dialog analysis tool based on Bakhtin’s (1981) dialogismand on the polyphonic model of discourse (Trăușan-Matu, 2010), to assess the quality of the collaborative textbased dialog in OKCs. These dimensions were correlated with participants’ expertise and centrality in the KC(Nistor et al., 2015c). Yet, little has been done to quantitatively assess the textual complexity of the KC dialogand to explore its relationship with the KC structure and processes.Assessing textual complexityEvery dialog must be understood by the individuals involved in it. Building on this basic assumption, severalcategories of complexity indexes have been developed and validated ranging from surface factors to more indepth dialog characteristics such as syntax and semantics (Dascălu et al., 2013; 2015). Firstly, the surface categoryis based on statistics of individual analysis elements (words, phrases, paragraphs) derived from classic readabilityformulas, as well as Page’s (1966) grading technique for automated scoring covering basic structure complexity(e.g., number of words, of commas, of sentences, word length, average number of syllables per word, or of wordsper sentence) and word/character entropy. Secondly, the syntax category changes the focus to statistics appliedper different parts of speech (e.g., nouns, prepositions, pronouns), as well as the complexity of the parsing tree interms of its maximum depth and its size of the parsing structure (Dascălu, 2014). Thirdly, the semantics anddiscourse analysis category is based on cohesion graphs (Dascălu, 2014), the strength of the links betweendifferent analysis elements (intra-contribution between sentences, inter-contributions to reflect a cohesive flow),as well as named entities identification and specific discourse connectives covering coordination, subordination,conditions, contrasts or sentence linking.MethodologyResearch questionsGiven the comprehensive collection of indexes named above, it is still unclear which of these are representativefor the notion of OKC dialog complexity and predictive of newcomer integration. Therefore, the followingresearch questions are examined: (1) Which independent dimensions of textual complexity can be identified inthe OKC dialog? (2) Which of these can predict newcomer integration?Data collectionThe analysis was conducted on the Internet, in blogger communities publicly available on the blogspot.com andwordpress.com platforms. In a prior study, the researchers had attempted to initiate discussions in several blogcommunities, observing that some communities were more open to dialog and more likely to integrate newcomersthan others, consequently the former were regarded as integrative (n = 3), the latter as non-integrative (n = 11)OKCs. After these N = 14 blogger communities with a total of 1937 participants were chosen, the entirecommunity discourse produced within a year (ending with the day of the intervention that should have initiatednew conversation threads) was downloaded and automatically analyzed. No personal data of the participants werecollected.Data analysisThe textual complexity analysis tool provides a wide range of indexes out of which 89 dialog indexes were used:18 surface indexes (e.g., average sentence length in characters, average number of commas per sentence, averagenumber and standard deviation of words in sentence, word entropy), 25 syntactic indexes (e.g., average numberof nouns/ pronouns/ prepositions/ adjectives/ adverbs/ verbs per sentence/ paragraph, average parsing tree depth,ICLS 2016 Proceedings915© ISLSaverage parsing tree size), and 46 semantic indexes (e.g., average number of named entities per paragraph, averagenumber of connector type per paragraph, average paragraph/contribution score, average sentence-paragraph/interparagraph/intra-paragraph/paragraph adjacency/ transition cohesion in terms of Wu-Palmer, Latent SemanticAnalysis and Latent Dirichlet Allocation semantic distances) (see overview in Dascălu, 2014). Because these werestrongly correlated with each other, a main component analysis was performed to determine the independentdimensions of textual complexity. Afterwards, two subsamples of n = 3 integrative (with a total of 270participants) and n = 4 non-integrative (460 participants) blogger OKCs with the same discussion topic (politicsand economy) were chosen, and compared with respect to the main components of the textual complexity.Subsequently, a discriminant analysis was performed in order to assess the adequacy of the classification.FindingsPrincipal component analysisThe 89 selected textual complexity indexes were reduced to three factors accounting for 91% of the total variance.Three dimensions resulted after eliminating 49 indexes with eigenvalues smaller than 1 and cross loadings over.4 on more than one factor, performing varimax rotation and saving the components according to the AndersonRubin method. Factor 1, interpreted as Dialog Structure, includes 28 factors, classified as discourse connectors(e.g., number of conjuncts per paragraph), syntactic indexes (e.g., number of verbs per paragraph), and indexes ofbasic structure and word diversity (e.g., number of words per paragraph). Factor 2, interpreted as Dialog Cohesion,includes 16 indexes, classified as local cohesion indexes (e.g., sentence-paragraph cohesion) and global cohesionindexes (e.g., inter-contribution and transition cohesion). Factor 3, interpreted as Dialog Participation, includes 6indexes (e.g., number of initiated discussion threads).Predicting newcomer integrationDialog Cohesion was higher in integrative OKCs (z values M = .21, SD = 1.11) than in non-integrative OKCs(M = -.02, SD = .88), and the difference was statistically significant with F(1, 728) = 9.924, p = .002. DialogParticipation was also higher in integrative OKCs (M = .11, SD = 2.49) than in non-integrative OKCs (M = -.07,SD = .47), however this difference failed to reach statistical significance with F(1, 728) = 2.219, p = .14.Discourse Structure was roughly the same (.24-.25) in both subsamples. A discriminant analysis confirmed DialogCohesion as a significant predictor of OKC integrativity, with Wilks λ = .987, p = .002.DiscussionAiming to explore the role of dialogic textual complexity, and to predict how likely OKCs integrate newcomers,this study analyzed the dialog produced in blogger OKCs and identified three complexity dimensions: DialogParticipation, Dialog Structure, and Dialog Cohesion. These synthesize a large number of indexes from previousresearch literature describing textual complexity (Dascălu, 2014).From these, the surface factor Dialog Participation was somewhat higher in integrative OKCs, which isin line with the differences reported by Nistor and colleagues (2015b). As a possible explanation, integrativeOKCs are more open to dialog, and more active, more “talkative”, which opens newcomers more opportunities toparticipate and access specific OKC knowledge (Eberle et al., 2014).More interestingly, the Dialog Cohesion, the most in-depth complexity factor, was significantly higherin integrative than in non-integrative OKCs, thus predicting OKC integrativity. This result adds to previous OKCresearch, and suggests that integrativity may be an aspect of the previously established community discourse.Nistor et al. (2015a) measured dialog quality as the percentage of social knowledge building per utterance, aparticipation centered, thus a surface indicator in terms of textual complexity. This study goes beyond the surfaceand uncovers the depth of OKC dialog. In non-integrative OKCs, the socio-cognitive component (mainlyknowledge construction and sharing between active members) may dominate the community discourse, while inintegrative OKCs this component may be balanced with the social component (member identity negotiation anddevelopment, new member recruitment, monitoring and training – Eberle et al., 2014). Therefore, the morebalanced and complex nature of practice in integrative OKCs may result in a more complex discourse and,respectively, dialog.ConclusionsFor the practice of computer-supported collaborative learning, this study suggests a way of empowering informallearners who attempt to access OKC knowledge. Automated analysis tools can indicate their chances of successwith a particular OKC, and thus enable them to be more efficient in their search of a responsive community. Thus,OKCs can also be integrated in formal learning environments (Nistor et al., 2015c).ICLS 2016 Proceedings916© ISLSFor research and development in the Learning Sciences, this study contributes to the relatively newdomain of Learning Analytics with more accurate procedures and tools for monitoring and predicting learningbehaviors (Baker & Siemens, in press) and, more generally, with a deeper understanding of OKC discourse andpractice. Further research will propose and evaluate formal learning scenarios based on OKC integration andparticipation.ReferencesBaker, R., & Siemens, G. (in press). Educational data mining and learning analytics. Cambridge handbook of thelearning sciences (2nd edition). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. http://www.columbia.edu/~rsb2162/BakerSiemensHandbook2013.pdfBakhtin, M. M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: Four essays. London: The University of Texas Press.Bereiter, C. & Scardamalia, M. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: One concept, two hills toclimb. In S. C. Tan, H. J. So, & J. Yeo (Eds.), Knowledge creation in education (pp. 35-52). New York:Springer.Dascălu, M. (2014). Analyzing discourse and text complexity for learning and collaborating. Studies inComputational Intelligence (Vol. 534). New York: Springer.Dascălu, M., Stavarache, L. L., Dessus, P., Trăușan-Matu, S., McNamara, D. S., & Bianco, M. (2015). Predictingcomprehension from students’ summaries. In 17th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence inEducation (AIED 2015) (pp. 95–104). New York: Springer.Dascălu, M., Trăușan-Matu, S., & Dessus, P. (2013). Cohesion-based analysis of CSCL conversations: Holisticand individual perspectives. In N. Rummel, M. Kapur, M. Nathan, & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), 10thInternational Conference on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning 2013 (pp. 145–152).Madison, USA: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Eberle, J., Stegmann, K., & Fischer, F. (2014). Legitimate peripheral participation in communities of practice:Participation support structures for newcomers in faculty student councils. Journal of the LearningSciences, 23(2), 216-244.Jurafsky, D., & Martin, J. H. (2009). An introduction to natural language processing. Computational linguistics,and speech recognition (2nd ed.). London: Pearson Prentice Hall.McNamara, D. S., Graesser, A. C., & Louwerse, M. M. (2012). Sources of text difficulty: Across the ages andgenres. In J. P. Sabatini, E. Albro, & T. O'Reilly (Eds.), Measuring up: Advances in how we assessreading ability (pp. 89–116). Lanham, MD: R&L Education.Nistor, N., Dascălu, M., Stavarache, L. L., Serafin, Y., & Trăușan-Matu, Ș. (2015a). Informal learning in onlineknowledge communities: Predicting community response to visitor inquiries. In G. Conole, T. Klobucar,C. Rensing, J. Konert, & E. Lavoué (Eds.), Design for teaching and learning in a networked world. 10thEuropean conference on Technology Enhanced Learning, EC-TEL 2015, Toledo, Spain, September 1518, 2015, Proceedings (pp. 447-452). New York: Springer.Nistor, N., Dascălu, M., Stavarache, L. L., Tarnai, C., & Trăușan-Matu, Ș. (2015b). Predicting newcomerintegration in online knowledge communities by automated dialog analysis. In Y. Li, M. Chang, M.Kravcik, E. Popescu, R. Huang, Kinshuk, & N. S. Chen (Eds.), State-of-the art and future directions ofsmart learning (pp. 13-17). New York: Springer.Nistor, N., Trăușan-Matu, Ș., Dascălu, M., Duttweiler, H., Chiru, C., Baltes, B., & Smeaton, G. (2015c). Findingopen-ended learning environments on the Internet: Automated dialogue assessment in academic virtualcommunities of practice. Computers in Human Behavior, 47(1), 119-127.Page, E. (1966). The imminence of grading essays by computer. Phi Delta Kappan, 47, 238–243.Trăușan-Matu, Ș. (2010). The polyphonic model of hybrid and collaborative learning. In F. Wang, L. J. Fong, &R. C. Kwan (Eds.), Handbook of research on hybrid learning models: Advanced tools, technologies, andapplications (pp. 466–486). Hershey, NY: Information Science Publishing.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice. Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge, UK: CambridgeUniversity Press.AcknowledgmentsThis work has been partially funded by the EC H2020 project RAGE (Realising and Applied Gaming Eco-System,http://www.rageproject.eu, grant agreement No 644187) and the Sectorial Operational Program Human ResourcesDevelopment 2007-2013 of the Romanian Ministry of European Funds according to the Financial AgreementPOSDRU/159/1.5/S/134398.ICLS 2016 Proceedings917© ISLS