Integrating Social Problem Solving with Programming to EnhanceScience Agency Through Creation of Mobile Apps in Middle SchoolNoora F. Noushad, Jooeun Shim, and Susan A. Yoonnoora@gse.upenn.edu, jshim@gse.upenn.edu, yoonsa@upenn.eduUniversity of PennsylvaniaAbstract: The study investigates the potential of integrating Social Problem Solving withprogramming to enhance science agency among middle school students. Science agency hasbeen emphasized as an important skill to support an understanding of the real-life applicabilityof science. Educators find it challenging to develop action-oriented mindset among students.In this paper, we evaluate a curriculum that encourages middle school students to identifyproblems that interfere with their daily lives and take action by creating mobile apps toresolve them. We analyze reflections of 13 students over a series of twenty-four classes, tocreate mobile apps using App Inventor. Our findings suggest that enabling students to createsocially relevant mobile app can be a precursor to developing an action-oriented mindset.Keywords: science agency, app inventor, programming in middle schoolIntroductionEmphasis has been made by educators to enhance science agency among students to encourage them to becomethinkers and doers of science (Basu et al., 2009; Repenning et al., 2015). Initiatives continue to be taken to bringscience agency to schools through curricula that support conceptual understanding of science while encouragingstudents to take action in their community. Most of these initiatives report an enhanced understanding of science,however, the challenge in linking student knowledge with action remains (Buxton, 2010; McNeill & Vaughn,2012). Scholars continue to express difficulty in enabling students to perceive themselves as agents of change,in other words, capable of causing or preventing issues that affect their environment. Our paper attempts toaddress the challenge of enhancing student agency by engaging students in a project that provides them with thetools to carry out action at an individual or community level while equipping them with the knowledge of socialissues that affect their environment. We use the Social Problem Solving (SPS) framework to help studentsidentify problems that interfere with their daily functioning and App Inventor (AI) to enable them to carry outactions to address these issues. The aim of the paper is to determine the potential of integrating SPS andprogramming to enhance science agency among middle school students. Specifically, the paper seeks to answerthe following research questions 1) Does SPS and programming result in the creation of mobile apps thataddress relevant social problems? 2) Does SPS and programming aid in the development of science agencyamong students?Theoretical frameworkThe curriculum design for this study is guided by research on science agency (Basu et al., 2009; McNeill &Vaugh, 2010), SPS (Buxton, 2010; Chang, et al., 2004), and use of discourse-intensive pedagogy to introducecomputational concepts to students (Grover & Pea, 2013). We used AI to enable students to carry out actions.AI is a blocks-based programming tool, which allows novice programmers to make apps for Android devices(Wolber et al., 2015).The science agency literature emphasizes creating a “doer” mindset where learners perceive themselvesas capable of advancing the world by taking action at an individual or community level (Basu et al., 2009;McNeil & Vaugh, 2012). Research on creating critical science agency with high school students show that theyare more likely to take action when (a) issues are personally relevant to them (Skamp et al., 2004); and (b) whenconceptual knowledge is accompanied by means for the learner to carry out impactful action (McNeill &Vaughn, 2012). Our curriculum encourages agency by enabling students to create mobile apps that addresspersonally relevant issues.The SPS literature defines social problems as issues that may interfere with the functioning ofindividuals in their lives (Chang et al., 2004). SPS is a strategy used to help individuals determine copingstrategies for these specific problems (D’Zurilla & Nezu, 1999). These problems may vary in degree ofrelevance to the learner (i.e., from personal issues to issues in one’s community). Programming with AI wasselected as the tool in our study to enable students to carry out the action of addressing social problems due toCSCL 2017 Proceedings597© ISLSits portability and visual drag & drop programming features. Features such as GPS, location sensor, and barcodereader allow students to develop innovative ways to address context relevant issues (Kumar, 2014). Snappingtogether graphical blocks of code also makes it easier for novice programmers to emulate the creation of mobileapps in real life (Wolber et al., 2015).MethodsThe curriculum was carried out as a choice class entitled, “App Inventor for Science,” at a neighborhood schoolin West Philadelphia. The curriculum was designed for 7th-grade and ran twice a week for 45 minutes over 12weeks. The curriculum was delivered in 3 blocks.Programming with AI: This block aimed to familiarize students with the programming tool. Studentswere taught to program through a combination of instruction and guided discovery to foster understanding ofcore programming concepts (Grover & Pea, 2013). Students worked in pairs to solve mini app challenges,where they tinkered with programs that had software bugs (i.e., intentionally placed errors in programmingcode) to make the apps function, while exploring core programming concepts. This provided room for discoursearound student misconceptions of variables, control structures, procedures, and so on. Support in the form ofapp cards was also provided which was designed to gradually decrease scaffolding as learners become morecapable with AI (Repenning et al., 2015).Selecting social problems: During this block, students were guided through SPS’s problem-solutionframework (Chang et al., 2004) to identify issues that affected them at personal (e.g., cognitive issues),interpersonal (e.g., issues at home or school), and community levels (e.g., issues in one's neighborhood). Focuswas placed on engaging students in conversations that enabled them to critically question how events took placein their communities. After identifying a social problem, students were encouraged to think about ways that anapp could resolve the issue.Creating context relevant apps: In the final block, students created mobile apps for the problemidentified. The process began with paper-prototyping, where students selected AI components they wanted touse in their design and sketched their app screens on paper. The prototypes were then reviewed for theirfeasibility by the instructors and peers. Once reviewed, students began programming the apps. Additional appcards were provided based on each team’s needs. Students tested their apps and revised them based on feedbackthey received from prospective app users. Final apps were presented through poster presentations that includeddescriptions of the social problem, app solution, and limitations of the app.Participants and data collectionIn this pilot study, we worked with 13 middle school 7th-grade students. Six students were girls and seven wereboys. All students had little or no programming experience. Students worked in pairs except for one team wherea student had to drop out due to personal reasons. Semi-structured exit interviews that were focused oncapturing student learning, served as the primary data source for this study. Student’s poster presentations andmobile applications served as secondary sources of data. Responses from interviews were coded by tworesearchers (first two authors) for two pre-set codes–learner’s selection of the social problem, and thedevelopment of an agency mindset. Interview questions which probed for descriptions of mobile apps andselection of context relevant issues were triangulated with ratings provided by participants on the generalusability of each team’s app to determine the relevance of social problems selected by participants (researchquestion 1). In addition, each mobile app was checked for its functionality by the researchers. To analyze thedevelopment of an agency mindset among participants (research question 2), participant responses to thefollowing interview question was analyzed, “Has the way you understand technology or the way you perceiveissues that affect people around you changed as a result of participating in this course? The analysis revealedthree emergent themes: (a) Change in student perceptions about being capable of creating technology for socialgood; (b) Increased awareness of the role one plays in contributing to social issues; and (c) Perceptions oftechnology as a way to advance one’s creativity.FindingsArtifacts created and social problems selectedOut of 13 students, 11 were able to create fully functioning mobile apps that catered to various social problemsin their environment. Students created apps to address issues of nutrition, fitness, energy consumption, recyclingpollution, and distraction. Out of seven apps created, six apps directly addressed various issues in the learner's’CSCL 2017 Proceedings598© ISLScontext and one did not (i.e., RealCreatureFinder app). Table 1 shows students’ descriptions of their apps alongwith their environmental usability and motivation behind selecting the issue.Table 1: Description of student’s apps along with team member’s motivation behind selecting the social issue(Title) Issue(Weightless) Students arebullied due to their weightand appearance.(PAS) Students aren’t awareof the food being served atschool and waste food whenthey pack food from home.(No time to play) Studentsare easily distracted whenthey log in to complete theirhome assignments.(Energy) Unmonitoredusage of appliances resultsin energy wastage.(Pollution) Children aren’taware of the harmful effectsof pollution.(RealCreatureFinder) Thereis a lack of creativity amongadults and teens.(TrashBro) Students haveonly limited knowledgeabout recycling.App SolutionThe app provides a diet and workout planalong with videos of workout sessionsbased on the selection of time periodwithin which he/she would like to see thedesired months.Motivation“Well, I know a lot of people who would like toloose weight and who get made of and have a lot ofanxiety dieting and stuff because of their weight andtheir appearance because people get bullied onhow, how fat they are or how skinny they are inschool.”The app allows users to access and view “Some kids may like some lunches and not likethe breakfast and lunch menu served atother lunches and they may want to save some foodschool and displays the nutritional value by not bringing lunch everyday to school if theyof selected items.know the lunch being served that day.”Users can log into any online resource“Usually when I do my homework I usually getassigned by school to complete theirdistracted so most of the time I never get myassignments for a set time. Once the time homework done on time. So I just thought makingis completed, the app makes a celebratory an app would help me, help other people like menoise and displays, “You have done it!” who get distracted when doing homework.”The user can record the time spent on“A lot of people wanted to do air pollution andvarious appliances and generate anwater pollution and stuff like that. But not a lot ofelectricity bill based on usage.people look at electricity and say that is a problem.”The provides users with animated videos “We can always see trash when there is a trash canthat explain the long-term and short-term like right next to it. People are the main source ofdangers of using pollutants.pollution and I think if you…raise awarenessaround it then people will try to stop it more.”The app allows users to summon various “We have an obsession with unicorns and othermythical creatures by using spells. Each mythical creatures so we decided to make an appof the characters have separate screensabout it.”with detailed information about them.The app provides information on various “I have trouble recycling, like at home, when I use akinds of trash. It has a game that sorts’tissue I throw it into the recycling, but I found out itrandom trash correctly into 'recycle',can’t go into recycling. This way I learned more'compost', and 'trash' bins.about it which will make the environment cleaner.”The degree of usability varied with the apps. Among the apps created, No time to play and PASresonated most highly with participants in terms of usability. Out of 13 students, seven stated that they woulduse the No time to play app as it helped them deal with the issue of getting distracted while doing assignmentsonline. Six students stated that they were more likely to use PAS because the app provided a way for them totrack the lunch being served at school, which helped them decide whether or not to bring lunch from home.About the apps that dealt with social problems at a community level (i.e., the Energy app and Pollution apps),five students stated that although they found the apps to be a good solution to relevant issues such as energywastage and recycling, they did not see themselves using the app. Eleven students rated RealCreatureFinder as anon-useful app. The reasons included the impracticality of the app, as ‘those creatures don’t exist’ (seven out ofeleven students) and the inefficiency of the app in addressing the ‘issue of enhancing imagination’ (four out ofeleven students). The analysis of post interviews indicated the significant role self-expression played inidentifying app ideas. Eleven students said that they were motivated to pick a social problem that they or theirfriends had experienced at home or their school. While two students mentioned that they wanted to create anapp that aligned more with their interests with less focus on addressing a social problem. The developers of theRealCreatureFinder app decided to pursue the topic that appealed more to their personal interest when a conflictarose between picking a relevant social problem over a topic that was more interesting to them (i.e., unicorns).Development of an agency mindset: Perceiving self as a “doer of science”The majority of participants were able to create a link between using the knowledge of programming and takingaction to address social issues. Ten out of 13 students mentioned that learning how to program mobile appshelped them see how they were capable of creating technology that was useful to their environment while twomotioned that it helped them to think of ways to advance their creativity. The developer of the Energy appCSCL 2017 Proceedings599© ISLScommented, “Before this class, I was just seeing technology as a place where one could do many things butwhen I came to this class I learned what I can actually do with technology to better the world.” A developer ofthe TrashBro app stated, “In science class, we learn about science and technology. We have brief descriptions ofpollution and atoms and less of technology. In this class I see technology enables us to interact with science andnow I can make my own app.” The remaining three students mentioned that the class helped them thinkcritically about how their actions added to some of the issues they selected in class. A developer of the Pollutionapp commented, “I feel like I shouldn’t waste stuff more, before, like when I go for dinner, because I spend allof my time in that room and then when my mom calls me down for dinner I used to just leave my light on andcomputer till I come back, but then I turn it off so that I don't waste power now.” Overall, the analyses ofstudent experiences show that while a majority of participants were able to critically think of ways in which theycould create technology for social good, some were able to reflect on how their daily actions might be altered toaddress social problems.DiscussionThe study analyzed the potential for integrating the knowledge of programming with SPS to enhance the scienceagency among middle school students. Our findings suggest that enabling students to create socially relevantmobile applications can be a precursor to developing an action-oriented mindset. Majority of students reportedenhanced awareness in terms of being capable of developing technology for social good as a result of engagingin the curriculum. These findings suggest a way to address the challenge of creating a link between conceptualknowledge of social issues and taking action at a community or individual level among learners (Buxton, 2010;McNeill & Vaughn, 2012). The reported changes in student perception of technology being used for social goodalso suggests a powerful way to introduce programming to promote computational perspectives – perceivingprogramming as a tool to create artifacts of value to oneself and others among middle school learners (Brennan& Resnick, 2012). Studies have shown that the extent to which students perceive an issue to be personallyrelevant influences their decision to take an action to impact an issue (Skamp et al., 2004). The majority ofstudents were not only able to successfully select issues that were personally relevant by using the SPSframework but were also able to create apps that appealed to the interest of other users. However, our findingssuggest that if a conflict of interest rises between personal interests and picking a social problem that may not bepersonally relevant, the learner is less likely to engage in taking action.ReferencesBasu, S. J., Calabrese Barton, A., Clairmont, N., & Locke, D. (2009). Developing a framework for criticalscience agency through case study in a conceptual physics context. Cultural Studies of ScienceEducation, 4(2), 345–371.Brennan, K., & Resnick, M. (2012). New frameworks for studying and assessing the development ofcomputational thinking. Annual American Educational Research Association Meeting, Vancouver, BC,Canada, 1–25.Buxton, C. A. (2010). Social problem solving through science: An approach to critical, place-based, scienceteaching and learning. Equity & excellence in education, 43(1), 120-135.Chang, E. C., D'Zurilla, T. J., & Sanna, L. J. (2004). Social problem solving: Theory, research, and training.American Psychological Association.D'Zurilla, T. J., & Nezu, A. M. (1999). Problem-solving therapy: A social competence approach to clinicalintervention. Springer Publishing Company.Grover, S., & Pea, R. (2013, March). Using a discourse-intensive pedagogy and android's app inventor forintroducing computational concepts to middle school students. In Proceeding of the 44th ACMtechnical symposium on Computer science education (pp. 723-728). ACM.Kumar, D. (2014). Digital playgrounds for early computing education. ACM Inroads, 5(1), 20-21. McNeill, K.L., & Vaughn, M. H. (2012). Urban High School Students’ Critical Science Agency: ConceptualUnderstandings and Environmental Actions Around Climate Change. Research in Science Education,42(2), 373–399.Repenning, A., Webb, D. C., Koh, K., Nickerson, H., Miller, S. B., Brand, C., & HerManyHorses, I. (2015).Scalable Game Design: A strategy to bring systemic Computer Science Education to schools throughgame design and simulation creation. ACM Transactions on Computing Education, 15(2), 1–31.Skamp, K., Boyes, E., & Stanisstreet, M. (2004). Students' ideas and attitudes about air quality. Research inScience Education, 34(3), 313-342.Wolber, D., Abelson, H., & Friedman, M. (2015). Democratizing Computing with APP Inventor. ACMSIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and Communications Review, 18(4), 53–58.CSCL 2017 Proceedings600© ISLS