Reflections on Pair E-Crafting: High School Students’ Approachesto Collaboration in Electronic Textiles ProjectsBreanne K. Litts, Utah State University, breanne.litts@usu.eduDebora A. Lui, University of Pennsylvania, deblui@upenn.eduSari A Widman, University of Pennsylvania, sawidman@upenn.eduJustice T. Walker, University of Pennsylvania, justicew@upenn.eduYasmin B. Kafai, University of Pennsylvania, kafai@upenn.eduAbstract. Pair programming is one of the most popular and successful collaborative learningactivities in computer science education wherein students organized in pairs alternate betweenwriting and guiding coding on the screen. In this paper, we examine a complementaryapproach by taking pair programming into a tangible space where pairs coded lights andsensors of an Arduino-based microcontroller, designed programmable and functional circuits,and sewed an electronic textile. We analyzed the reflections of 23 students, who worked inpairs over a series of fifteen 90-minute workshop sessions, about their experiencescollaborating and communicating across the different domains of e-textiles creation (e.g.,design, circuitry, coding, and crafting). Student perceptions highlighted potential causes ofthese interactions across these multiple domains, which are distinct from pair programmingactivities. In the discussion, we address how these perceptions inform the design anddevelopment of more equitable pair e-crafting arrangements.IntroductionThe recent call for computer science education for all (Smith, 2016) stresses the need for better understandingthe design of different contexts, tools, and communities for learning and teaching computing. One of the mostpromising arrangements in learning coding has been pair programming (McDowell, Werner, Bullock, &Fernald, 2003), wherein tasks and communication are prescribed within interactions between two individuals.While past research of pair programming has focused on screen collaborations, the potential benefits of thesecollaborations for more tangible computing activities (such as robotics or electronic textiles) is apparent,especially in terms of opportunities for peer support and reduction of material costs. For this reason, we focus ona new pair arrangement of work within these multimodal computational contexts that we call “pair e-crafting.”Building on pair programming, pair e-crafting emphasizes partnership between students in building anelectronic textile (e-textiles; Buechley, Peppler, Eisenberg, & Kafai, 2013), where students must negotiate thephysical realm of electrical circuits sewn together with conductive thread, along with the digital realm ofcomputer code that controls these circuits. In order to accommodate the multiplicity of these activities,individual tasks and interactions are not as prescribed as with pair programming; however, this partnership stillrequires coordination and team communication for success.In this paper, we contribute an understanding of how students negotiate and coordinate the demandsposed by multimodal computational work within a paired partnership. We draw on perceptual data to gainperspective on how student pairs conceptualized their engagement with each other, looking particularly atdistribution of tasks and communication contexts. We interviewed a class of 23 students, who worked in pairson e-textile designs, to address the following questions: 1) How did students conceptualize collaboration anddistribution of tasks across the different domains of e-textiles creation? 2) How did they communicate withinthese collaborations? In emphasizing students’ perception of these issues, our findings provide a basis on whichto inform future implementation of collaborative, multimodal programming activities.BackgroundWithin the literature on novice programming, most studies have focused on student’s individual performance inhow they come to understand key programming concepts and practices (Soloway & Ehrlich, 1984). While someearly studies found that students were not able to learn productively in small teams when compared to studentsengaged in solo programming (e.g., Webb, Ender & Lewis, 1986), other studies found that teams withexperienced students design were more capable of providing equitable access to computer work forinexperienced members, calling this peer pedagogy (e.g., Ching & Kafai, 2008). The design of pairprogramming has addressed these benefits and challenges by more explicitly structuring the collaborativeinteractions between learners (McDowell et al., 2003; Denner, Werner, Ortiz & Campe, 2014). Equitableparticipation within collaborative teams becomes even more of an issue in multimodal computational activitiesCSCL 2017 Proceedings569© ISLSlike e-textiles and robotics, where projects require coordination across screen-based and physical domains. Fromresearch on robotics, we know that collaborative interactions can be mitigated by uncertainty, gender, andagency (e.g. Sullivan, Keith, & Wilson, 2015). Similarly, studies on collaborative e-textiles arrangementssuggest that equitable participation in the different required domains (design, crafting, circuitry, and coding) isdifficult to accomplish depending on individuals’ prior and perceived experience within these areas (Buchholz,Shively, Peppler & Wohlwend, 2014; Kafai, Searle, & Fields, 2014), something that can be exasperated withinteam collaboration of three or more (Litts, Kafai, & Dieckmeyer, 2015). In our current study of pair e-crafting,we explore smaller teams of two students emulating pair programming. From related work observing socialinteractions in pair e-crafting (Lui, Litts, Widman, Walker, & Kafai, 2016), we know that coordination of tasksand communication are key factors in determining pair productivity and success. For that reason, we primarilyfocus on students’ perceptions of their pair experience, examining how students’ understandings of tasks andcommunication framed their interactions, in order to help shed light on how to best address potential challengesand opportunities for collaborative learning.MethodsParticipants and workshop designWe conducted this study with 23 high school juniors (4 boys, 19 girls, 16-17 years old), within a STEM electivecourse at a charter school in a Northeastern metropolitan city. Prior to the study, the teacher put students in pairsaiming to balance personality traits and existing friendships. Over fifteen 90-minute class periods, pairs wereguided through the creation of a collaborative e-textiles sign that spelled out the name of the school and waspublicly displayed. Each pair was assigned a pre-designed canvas print of a single letter created by an artstudent in the same school, and responsible for making these pieces interactive by adding components such asLilyPad Arduinos, switches, sensors, and LEDs and generating codes four different light patterns. The teachertogether with graduate assistants prepared and guided classroom sessions. After an introduction to e-textiles, theclass was divided into two major phases. During phase one (roughly 5 days), pairs focused on project planning,including its design, when students made decisions about the aesthetics and functionality of their project, and itscircuitry, when students mapped out the appropriate connections between the electrical components. Duringphase two (roughly 10 days), pairs focused on project construction, including coding the behaviors of the projectusing text-based Arduino code, and crafting by sewing the project together.Data collection and analysisAt the end of the workshop, we conducted semi-structured interviews (averaging 15 minutes) with all 23students individually, which we video recorded and transcribed. We asked about their processes working ontheir designs, experiences working with a partner, experience working on a design project, and their feedback onthe structure of the course. Two authors coded all of the interviews in several iterative cycles followingpreviously published coding methods (Saldaña, 2009). In the first cycle, we began with provisional codes,drawing from prior research on pair programming and e-textiles. We focused on two key features of pairprogramming collaboration (tasks and communication) and four domains of e-textiles (design, circuitry, coding,and crafting). We then employed several rounds to develop subcodes and themes. These are further elaboratedin the findings. Across all interviews there were 215 coded excerpts in total.FindingsIn our findings, we provide students’ perceptions about task distribution and communication, which shaped theirpeer interactions and design process.Distributing tasks across e-textiles domainsPairs described different approaches toward distributing tasks around domain-types. Of the 163 task-relatedexcerpts (out of 215 total), 69 were coded as design, 39 as circuitry, 83 as coding, and 85 as crafting. Therelative proportion of these domains corresponded to our observations of the class: students spent much moretime with the coding and crafting of their projects than circuitry and design. These codes were not mutuallyexclusive, as our previous research on collaborative e-textiles revealed inherent interdisciplinarity of tasks (Littset al., 2015; Lui et al., 2016). We also looked at whether, and how, students perceived the different e-textilesdomains as supporting more shared or individual work approaches, something we coded as mutually exclusive.In terms of shared tasks, 80% and 79% (55 of 69 design codes, and 31 of 39 circuitry codes) of students’reporting on design and circuitry respectively, expressed these as shared rather than individual. As described byCSCL 2017 Proceedings570© ISLSstudents, this resulted from the inherently interconnected nature of design and circuitry—that is, it is impossibleto determine the visual layout of an e-textiles project without considering the necessary electrical connections,and vice versa. In terms of individual tasks, 54% and 59% (or 45 of 83 coding codes and 50 of 85 craftingcodes) of students’ reporting on coding and crafting respectively, identified work in these domains as individualrather than shared. Mostly, this was because crafting and coding were distinct tasks only one person couldperform at a time and required different kinds of expertise. As a result, all pairs except one adopted moreindividual approaches towards these tasks. Thus, while students generally saw circuitry and design as moreinterrelated domains and thus more easily shared, they saw coding and crafting as domains that were inherentlydistinct, requiring separate realms of knowledge and skills.Communicating within a pair e-crafting arrangementStudents reported three primary contexts in which they communicated about their project: decision-making, peerpedagogy, and absences. Decision-making (57 of 215 total excerpts) captures communication related to keyproject-related decisions pairs made throughout their design process. Most decision-making 54% (or 31 of 57)was related to the overall design of the project whereas 42% (25 of 57) were related to crafting, 40% (23 of 57)related to coding, and 23% (13 of 57) related to circuitry. This distribution can partially be explained by theprominence of design in the project in general. As described by students, project decisions involving design(i.e., the aesthetic placement of components, the usability of the project) always trickled down to the otherdomains of work. Peer pedagogy (33 of 215 total excerpts) captures instances where students reported teachingor learning from their partner, which most often occurred in the domain contexts of coding (21 times of 47 taskoccurrences) and crafting (20 times of 47 task occurrences) compared to circuitry (3 of 47 task occurrences) ordesign (3 of 47 task occurrences). Many students divided their labor within coding and crafting domainsaccording to their relative comfort and expertise; however, when instructors asked students to switch roles,students described explaining their tasks to their partners as well as tips for how to be successful in these arenas.Students also reported peer pedagogy with regard to troubleshooting their project, because it requireddiagnosing whether the issue was due to circuitry, crafting, or code. Finally, a few students also mentionedabsences (13 of 215 total excerpts) as a key context of communication. Dealing with absences presents a reallife challenge of doing heavy design work in teams over extended time periods. Almost all the pairs within theworkshop dealt with at least one absence over the course of project, while a few experienced excessive partnerabsences (up to 8 over 15 days). Some of these students described overcoming this obstacle through explicitcommunication strategies, such as individual project updates outside of class or FaceTiming in class. One pair,though, did not explicitly address these issues and instead opted to work independently, which eventually led tofeelings of frustration and difficulties completing the project on time.DiscussionOur goal in this study was to better understand pair learning arrangements for high school students in making etextiles designs in order to inform the design of future collaborative learning arrangements within computationalcontexts. In this section, we share what we learned from student reflections about equitable distribution of work.Tensions of siloing work in pair e-craftingOur findings reveal how collaboration can occur within the context of computational projects that involve bothphysical and digital construction. Though students had more potential avenues for individual engagement andinterests (design, circuitry, coding, crafting), we also illustrated how this can work against more equitablelearning arrangements through the creation of siloed work, roles, and identification. Given the multimodalcomplexities involved in e-textiles, it makes sense that students felt more at ease sticking with and developing asense of expertise within a single domain. Here students emulated models of distributed labor that can be seenwithin many professional technological contexts, where teams are often comprised of different people withdifferent expertise, knowledge, or skills. However, in educational contexts where we want students to gain equalaccess to different forms of knowledge and understanding, these distributed models of collaboration can resultin ongoing knowledge inequities, wherein students who are already comfortable with certain topics (e.g.,coding, circuitry) remain ahead and others remain behind. This inequity is further exasperated by the valuejudgments that are often affiliated with the different domains of e-textiles, which are usually viewed within thefalse binary of ‘low-tech’ or ‘high-tech’ (i.e., crafting and coding, respectively). Thus, in planning for pair workwithin multimodal contexts, it is important balance the benefits of supporting students’ existing interests andexperiences with the potential dangers of allowing students to self-segregate into these roles and identification.Designing for fluency across domainsCSCL 2017 Proceedings571© ISLSOne major advantage of multimodal computational contexts for learning is that it can provide multiple avenuesfor individual engagement and learning (Kafai, Searle, & Fields, 2014). Within a classroom, however, there is aneed to push people beyond their comfort zones toward new arenas. From this perspective, how can we promotethe ethos of self-motivation and personal expression, even while getting students to do things that they mightnot otherwise pursue on their own? A possible solution is to leverage moments of decision-making andtroubleshooting that naturally arise within these tangible computational contexts, as these interdisciplinaryproblem spaces require strategic sharing and negotiation of expertise between partners. Educators using pair ecrafting arrangements might consider capitalizing these moments by providing scaffolds to help studentsdevelop their inter-domain thinking and efforts. Another solution involves a more structured arrangement ofsharing tasks that are more individual in nature. Borrowing from the pair-programming model (McDowell et al.,2003), this was something we implemented on the fly within the workshop when we asked students to switchroles. Not only was this a key trigger for peer pedagogy during which pairs taught each other their respectivetasks, but also this process forced students to become more engaged with a new domain. In future designs, weplan to embed more purposeful task-switching throughout the design process to explore how it impacts equity inpair e-crafting. While this solution does not address all the challenges that student faced when working incollaborative maker arrangements, it is a foundation upon which more equitable work within making can occur.ReferencesBuchholz, B., Shively, K., Peppler, K., & Wohlwend, K. (2014). Hands on, hands off: Gendered access incrafting and electronics practices. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 21(4), 278-297.Buechley, L., Peppler, K., Eisenberg, M., & Kafai, Y. (Eds.). (2013). Textile messages: Dispatches from theworld of e-textiles and education. New York, NY: Peter Lang.Ching, C. C., & Kafai, Y. B. (2008). Peer pedagogy: Student collaboration and reflection in a learning-throughdesign project. Teachers College Record,110 (12), 2601-2632.Denner, J., Werner, L., Campe, S., & Ortiz, E. (2014). Pair Programming: Under What Conditions Is ItAdvantageous for Middle School Students? Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 46(3),277-296.Kafai, Y., Fields, D., & Searle, K. (2014). Electronic textiles as disruptive designs: Supporting and challengingmaker activities in schools. Harvard Educational Review, 84(4), 532-556.Litts, B. K., Kafai, Y. B., & Dieckmeyer, E. (2015). Collaborative electronic textile designs by high schoolyouth: Challenges and opportunities in connecting crafts, circuits, and code. In Proceedings of theFabLearn Conference on Creativity and Fabrication in Education, Stanford, California, 26-27September. New York, NY: ACM.Lui, D. A., Litts, B.K., Widman, S.A., Walker, J.T., & Kafai, Y.B. (2016). Collaborative maker activities in theclassroom: Case studies of high school student pairs’ interactions in designing electronic textiles. InProceedings of the FabLearn Conference on Creativity and Fabrication in Education, Stanford,California, 14-16 October. New York, NY: ACM.McDowell, C., Werner, L., Bullock, H., & Fernald, J. (2003, May). The impact of pair programming on studentperformance, perception and persistence. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference onSoftware engineering (pp. 602-607). IEEE Computer Society.Saldaña, J. (2009). The coding manual for qualitative researchers. Sage: ChicagoSmith, M. (2016, January, 30). Computer Science for All. [Web log post]. Retrieved fromhttps://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2016/01/30/computer-science-all.Soloway, E., & Ehrlich, K. (1984). Empirical studies of programming knowledge. IEEE Transactions onSoftware Engineering, (5), 595-609.Sullivan, F., Keith, P., & Wilson, N. (2015). Examining power relations in an all-girl robotics learningenvironment. In Proceedings of the 2015 Computer Supported Collaborative Learning Conference(vol. 2, 861-863). Gothenburg, Sweden.Webb, N., Ender, P., & Lewis, S. (1986). Problem-Solving Strategies and Group Processes in Small GroupsLearning Computer Programming. American Educational Research Journal, 23(2), 243-261.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by a grant (#1509245) from the National Science Foundation to Yasmin Kafai, JaneMargolis and Joanna Goode. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in thispaper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation,University of Pennsylvania, or Utah State University.CSCL 2017 Proceedings572© ISLS