Using a Video-Based Approach to Develop Pre-Service ScienceTeachers’ Understanding of How to Teach the Nature of ScienceKennedy Kam Ho Chan, Anthony Ka Lok Cheng, Carol Kwai Kuen Chan, and Benny Hin Wai Yungkennedyckh@hku.hk, chengkla@hku.hk, ckkchan@hku.hk, hwyung@hku.hkThe University of Hong KongAbstract: This study examined if and how the dialogic discourse triggered by viewingmultiple authentic classroom video footage arranged in themes enhanced pre-service scienceteachers’ (PSTs’) PSTs’ understanding of the explicit-reflective approach. The findingssuggest that the PSTs made use of several sense-making strategies to interpret the variousclassroom enactments of the explicit-reflective approach captured in the video clips. This inturn led to new ideas and understandings of how the explicit-reflective approach could be bestimplemented in actual classrooms.IntroductionEnhancing students’ conceptions of the nature of science (NOS), their cognitive understandings of the enterpriseof science and the nature of scientific knowledge, has been regarded as essential to their scientific literacy.Arguably, efforts to promote contemporary views of NOS among learners are largely unproductive unlessteachers’ understanding of how to provide quality NOS instruction is first enhanced. Despite this, fewer studieshave described how to effectively enhance PSTs’ understanding of the specific pedagogy for teaching. Amongthe small but growing number of studies, few have used authentic classroom videos to enhance PST learning.Hence, few details have been available in the literature on how videos can be used to enhance PSTs’understanding of NOS-specific pedagogy in teacher education activities. This study aims to fill this gap byexploring the use of a video-based approach to improve PSTs’ understanding of the instructional approach mostgermane to effective NOS instruction, that is, the explicit-reflective approach (Akerson, Abd-El-Khalick &Lederman, 2000). We engaged the PSTs in dialogic discussions of multiple authentic classroom video clipsarranged in a series by themes (e.g., concluding a lesson on NOS). Our research question is: In what ways doesdialogic discussion triggered by exposure to multiple authentic classroom video clips provide opportunities forPSTs to discuss different ways of using the explicit-reflective approach in NOS instruction?MethodsContext of the studyTen science PSTs seeking certification to teach high school science voluntarily participated. They attended twothree-hour teaching sessions on teaching NOS conducted by the teacher-researcher (the first author).Pedagogical designWatching multiple authentic classroom videos in a series: The PSTs watched authentic classroom video footageselected and edited from the video archive of a prior local professional development. Short video clips (<5minutes) were organised for presentation by sorting them into themes (e.g., introducing students to NOS,concluding a lesson on NOS). These short video clips were presented successively with a brief pause inbetween.Dialogic discourse: After watching a series of teaching videos, open-ended prompts (i.e., (1) What didyou notice in the videos?) were used to elicit the PSTs’ opinions of them. The students’ views and collectiveconsensus were made visible on a large whiteboard.MethodsMultiple data sources include (1) videos of the two lessons (three hours each) and (2) exit reflections of thePSTs. We identified the turns in which the PSTs commented on more than one video in the lesson transcripts.Codes were developed to characterize the strategies the PSTs used to make sense of the video clips using theconstant comparison method. The transcripts were then searched for instances in which the PSTs discusseddifferent ways of implementing the explicit-reflective approach and codes was developed to characterize theirunderstanding through inductive analysis of the transcripts and the exit reflections.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1565© ISLSFindings and discussionBelow is one illustrative example of the video-mediated dialogic discussion.1Teacher:Anything you noticed? And you want to share with us? (Wait 3s) Yes, Kathy.2Kathy:I think Teacher A [Video A], Ms Chow [who used] only 1 sentence [to describe the goal ofthe lesson] is too simple. It is too abstract for students to get a quick concept of whatscience is. But for, I think evolution, Mr Tam [i.e., Video B], he tries to compare the twosentences to tell what science is and it is more practical. …3Teacher:It seems that you don’t agree with Fred’s idea. Fred mentioned that it is good to simplifythe key term, but then you think, probably, it is not that desirable to simplify too much …What is the purpose of investigating or exploring the two cases [in Video B]?4Tom:5Teacher:6Carrie:7Teacher:8Tom:He pointed out there’re two aspects of NOS. He wanted them [the students] to know whichis theory, the nature of theory and law. And then the other case was how we can generatescientific knowledge without doing experiments.Yes, Carrie.I like Video B [i.e., Mr Tam’s video] and [Video] E because what the point is talking aboutwith NOS is related to the content of the lesson. But, for [Videos] A, C and D, it seemslike the lesson is just on NOS, but because NOS is supposed to be taught for every topic,so I don’t agree that they should just start the lesson like, this is a lesson about NOSAny more that you want to share with us? Any more that you noticed?Ms Tam [in Video E] was, I think, the only one who started with an example and then askstudents to infer the NOS from the example of the food pyramid. So… so that it’s kind ofopposite to what Mr Tam [in Video B] did, which is to list out the aspects of NOS. Butthen, in [Video] E, Ms Tam asked… so the students arrived at the conclusion themselves.In Turn 1, one of the PSTs, Kay, compared and contrasted two videos within the series of videos andidentified two different ways of introducing the lesson goals in an NOS-focused lesson. The teacher-researcherco-ordinated the discussion by contrasting the ideas without imposing any judgement (Turn 6). He thenprompted the PSTs to consider the rationales underpinning the teacher’s actions in Video B (Turn 3). Thisquestion led the PSTs to realize the connection between the lesson’s activities (i.e., examining historical casesrelated to evolution) and targeted aspects of NOS (i.e., scientific theory and laws, empirical NOS) as evident inTom’s utterance (Turn 4). This discussion of integrating the teaching of science content with aspects of NOSfurther motivated Carrie to spontaneously express a new idea (Turn 6). Carrie categorized the five videos intotwo different groups (i.e., situated NOS instruction and VS non-situated NOS instruction). After highlightingthe differences between the two groups of videos by Carrie (Turn 6), Tom further expressed his views on one ofthe groups. The strategies used to interpret the videos included identifying Video E as an “odd man” (Turn 8)evidenced by Tom saying that the teacher in Video E “was the only one” adopting a certain approach toteaching. He then went on to contrast this video with Video B from the video group previously identified byCarrie. From there, he brought up a new idea, that there were at least two different approaches (i.e., inductiveand deductive) to embedding NOS into science content teaching. This opened up further discussion on how bestto conduct an NOS lesson in which the teacher overtly makes the aspects of NOS visible to the learners.Conclusion and implicationsThe data suggest that exposing PSTs to thematically-arranged video footage can potentially deepen theirexaminations and interpretations of the explicit-reflective approach. We also illuminated several sense-makingstrategies the PSTs used to interpret videos viewed in a thematic manner (e.g., comparing videos, categorisingvideos, odd man), thereby contributing to the literature on the use of video in teacher education.ReferencesAkerson, V. L., Abd-El-Khalick, F., & Lederman, N. G. (2000). Influence of a reflective explicit activity-basedapproach on elementary teachers' conceptions of nature of science. Journal of Research in ScienceTeaching, 37(4), 295-317.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1566© ISLS