Reflecting on Epistemic Ideals and Processes:Designing Opportunities for Teachers’ Epistemic GrowthShiri Mor-Hagani, University of Haifa, shihag@gmail.comSarit Barzilai, University of Haifa, sarit.barzilai@edu.haifa.ac.ilAbstract: This paper reports on a design experiment that explored designs for supportingteachers’ epistemic growth. Specifically, the study examined how reflective activities contributeto growth in understanding and caring about epistemic ideals and processes. The context of thestudy was an online course on digital information literacy. Teacher participants engaged in twotypes of reflective activities designed to promote epistemic growth: reflective experience tasksand reflective journals. Analysis of the journals revealed that participants experienced growthin understanding of epistemic ideals and processes, in pedagogical knowledge about teachingepistemic ideals and processes, and in appreciation of the importance and value of using andteaching epistemic ideals and processes. Participants described the course readings and thereflective experience tasks as the main contributors to growth. These activities jointly enabledthem to significantly expand their understandings of epistemic ideals and processes in ways thatwere personally and professionally meaningful.IntroductionThe increasingly complex epistemic environments that await learners out of school make it ever more importantto seek better ways of promoting learners’ epistemic growth, that is, growth in learners’ ways of knowing andtheir understandings of how people know (Barzilai & Chinn, 2018). Teachers are central to this project becausethe ways in which they engage in instruction and dialog have a formative impact on learners’ epistemologies. Animportant current challenge of epistemic cognition research is, therefore, to clarify the ways in which teachers’epistemic growth can be supported. Teachers’ epistemic growth has the dual nature of involving growth of oneselfand of one’s capacity to promote the growth of others (Buehl & Fives, 2016). Many researchers argue thatreflection is key to supporting teachers’ epistemic growth (e.g., Feucht, Lunn Brownlee & Schraw, 2017).However, there is scant empirical evidence of whether reflection can indeed effectively promote teachers’epistemic growth and, relatedly, little understanding of how to design meaningful reflective activities.Our conceptualization of epistemic cognition is grounded in the AIR model of epistemic cognition (Chinn,Rinehart, & Buckland, 2014). In brief, this model describes epistemic cognition as comprised of: (a) Epistemicaims and value - the epistemic goals actors set and the perceived importance of these goals; (b) Epistemic ideals– standards or criteria that can be used to evaluate whether epistemic aims have been achieved and the quality ofepistemic products; and (c) Reliable epistemic processes - procedures or strategies that can successfully achieveepistemic aims and create epistemic products.Recently, Barzilai and Chinn (2018) argued that the goal of epistemic education should be to promotelearners’ apt epistemic performance, defined as performance that achieves valuable epistemic aims throughcompetence. They further identified five aspects of epistemic performance that are important to achieving thisgoal: (a) engaging in reliable cognitive processes that can lead to achievement of epistemic aims; (b) adaptingepistemic performance to diverse situations; (c) metacognitively regulating and understanding epistemicperformance; (d) caring about and enjoying epistemic performance; and (e) achieving epistemic aims togetherwith others. Each of these aspects involves competent engagement with epistemic aims and value, ideals, andprocesses. In the present study, we use this framework, called the Apt-AIR framework, to conceptualize the goalsof teachers’ epistemic growth. We focus on growth in two specific aspects of Apt-AIR—understanding epistemicperformance and caring about epistemic performance. Briefly, growth in understanding of epistemic performanceis defined as increase in metacognitive understanding of epistemic aims, ideals, and processes. Growth in caringabout epistemic performance is defined as valuing epistemic aims, ideals, and processes and aspiring to achieveor apply them (Barzilai & Chinn, 2018).The potential contribution of reflection in education has been emphasized and described by numerousresearchers and theorists (e.g., Dewey, 1933; Schön, 1983). For instance, Schön (1983) argued that a “reflectivepractitioner” reflects on her aims, tacit norms, and performance as part of her practice, with the intention of puttinginto action what she realized or learned. In this study, we adopt Boud, Keogh, & Walker’s (1985, p. 19) definitionof reflection as “those intellectual and affective activities in which individuals engage to explore their experiencesin order to lead to new understandings and appreciations.” Yet, we specifically focus on experiences related toICLS 2018 Proceedings1129© ISLSachieving epistemic aims. Thus, our working definition for reflection on epistemic cognition is those intellectualand affective activities in which individuals engage to explore their epistemic aims, ideals, and processes in orderto lead to new (or to change in) understandings, appreciations, and performance. Because epistemic aims, ideals,and processes are cognitive constructs, reflection on them is a metacognitive activity.In this report, we focus on examining teachers’ reflections on epistemic ideals and processes because thesewere the main foci of their reflections. Thus, the questions we explore are: (1) How do teachers reflect on changesin understanding and caring about epistemic ideals and processes? (2) How do teachers perceive the contributionof the reflective activities in an academic course, and the manner in which they interplay with other coursecomponents, to changes in understanding and caring about epistemic ideals and processes?MethodThe context of the study was an intensive 7 week summer MA course on digital information literacy that was fullyonline. Participants were 17 teachers with diverse teaching experience in several age bands and subjects. Thecourse included four components that were jointly intended to promote epistemic growth along the five aspectsof the Apt-AIR framework. The first two components involved two different types of reflective activities:(a) Reflective experience tasks – These tasks posed information problems that required engagement incognitive epistemic performance. The tasks involved searching, evaluating, and integrating online informationsources about various current topics (e.g., organic food, cellular radiation, and Brexit). These topics areappropriate for teaching digital literacy because they are richly and diversely represented online. Two tasksincluded questions from different domains to prompt adaptive epistemic performance. Participants were alsoasked to describe the criteria and strategies they used and to evaluate their effectiveness, in order to fosterunderstanding and regulation of epistemic performance. One week later, participants met online in groups tocreate a shared list of epistemic criteria and strategies for addressing the challenge. This feature was designed toencourage participation in epistemic performance with others and to enhance caring about epistemic performanceby developing a commitment to shared ideals and processes (Chinn, Duncan, & Rinehart, 2017).(b) Reflective journals - Participants were asked to write four journal entries in which they consideredtheir beliefs regarding issues such as what is valuable knowledge, what are good sources of knowledge, and howis knowledge justified. This activity fostered understanding and regulation of epistemic performance, albeit in amore open-ended way that encouraged participants to form connections between their learning experiences andtheir personal and professional experiences. The last journal entry invited participants to look back to their firstentry and to consider if there were any differences in the entries and why. In the last entry, participants were alsoasked if there is anything that they would like to “take” from the course into their professional practice.(c) Readings and discussions – Students read articles on digital literacy, which discussed strategies suchas searching, evaluation, and integration. Following reading, students participated in weekly discussions. Thisactivity fostered understanding of epistemic performance and engaged students in participation in epistemicperformance through critical discussions that created opportunities for developing shared understandings.(d) Design tasks – Participants also engaged in collaborative design of instructional units for fosteringdigital information literacy. These created additional opportunities for participating in epistemic performance.The present findings are based on analysis of participants’ reflective journals and on retrospectiveinterviews with four of the participants. These were analyzed using codes that were inductively inferred overseveral rounds of coding and refining. Interrater reliability by two independent judges was Kappa 0.79 to 1.00.ResultsGrowth in understanding of epistemic ideals and processesParticipants described two interrelated planes of growth in understanding of epistemic ideals and processes:Growth in understanding of epistemic ideals and processes for knowing online (70.6% of the participants)– Participants reflected on gaining better understanding of valuable ideals and processes. For example, Belladescribed growth in understanding of epistemic criteria: “I understand that there are criteria that help evaluatinginformation and how much these criteria are prioritized differently by different people.” When reflecting on theirown ideals and processes, some participants (41.2%) were surprised to discover that their strategies and standardsfor knowing online fall short. For example, Monica discovered that she often relies on inadequate criteria: “I findmyself often searching for information… in the same way that my students search for information and accordingto the same criteria – ease of use, website design, the order of the results, etc.”Growth in pedagogical knowledge about teaching epistemic ideals and processes for knowing online(64.7%) - Increase in understanding of their own and others’ epistemic ideals and processes was a gateway toincrease in pedagogical knowledge about teaching epistemic ideals and processes. Experiencing the challenges ofICLS 2018 Proceedings1130© ISLSaptly employing epistemic ideals and processes gave participants new appreciation of the difficulties that studentscan experience. This led to growth in pedagogical understanding:My personal experiences revealed the fact that although the Internet is an inseparable part of mylife, I don’t really know how to use it effectively and even find it hard to analyze the actions that Imake in order to evaluate or locate information sources. The difficulty that I describe also surfacedin the articles that we read in the course, and it helps me understand more deeply the pedagogicalrationale and challenge that face us when we talk about digital literacy. (Monica)Gaining better understanding of valuable ideals and processes led the participants to reconsider theirinstruction and to set new teaching goals. Carmen reflected: “Following the course… I think I can say that theprinciple of critique… is the focus of knowledge acquisition, especially good knowledge. The ability to selectideas according to criteria that are adapted to the content and situation will enable me to critically examine newideas.” When reflecting about her teaching, Carmen described a change in her beliefs about what it means to teachdigital literacy: “I understand now that throughout my work as a teacher, I did this partially and did not deepenthe need for and the meaning of thinking critically during evaluation processes.”Growth in caring about epistemic ideals and processesTeachers described several aspects of growth in caring about epistemic ideals and processes:Growth in appreciation of the importance and value of using epistemic ideals and processes (52.9% ofthe participants) - Participants described greater appreciation of the importance of using epistemic ideals andprocesses to achieve epistemic aims. For example, Dana reflected that she understood that “it is very important tocheck source trustworthiness and reliability in all stages because not all of the information in certain.”Growth in appreciation of the importance and value of teaching epistemic ideals and processes (52.9%)- Participants also expressed greater appreciation of the importance of teaching epistemic ideals and processes forknowing online. For example, Rose described how: “My awareness of the process of integrating texts and themany difficulties during this process, after learning about it and experiencing it myself, strengthened in me thefeeling of how important and critical it is to teach digital literacy today.”Expressions of explicit intent to teach epistemic ideals and processes (94.1%) - Perhaps the strongestexpressions of caring were participants’ expressions of intent to foster their students’ capacities to use epistemicideals and processes. Nearly all of the participants made such statements, e.g., “I am certain that during the yearI will teach the students various criteria for evaluating information sources” (Ginna).Reflections on reasons for growthThe prompts in the last journal entry invited participants to consider possible reasons for change in their epistemiccognition. Participants most frequently attributed change to the course papers and reading discussions (58.8%),followed by the reflective experience tasks (41.2%), and to a lesser degree the reflective journals (11.8%). Onlyone student mentioned the design tasks as a reason for change. Participants’ explanations of how these elementscontributed to change suggested five main mechanisms at play that jointly enabled growth:(a) Practically engaging with epistemic ideals and processes. The reflective experience tasks contributedto growth by expanding participants’ practical experiences with ideals and processes. This was important forgrasping these ideals and processes and refining understandings of them. For example, Bella wrote that she learnedfrom the experiential tasks “that there can be different conditions and different approaches to the same strategy,depending on the specific information that we try to seek and evaluate.”(b) Expanding knowledge of epistemic ideals and processes. In tandem with these tasks, the course readingshelped participants gain new knowledge about valuable ideals and reliable processes for online problem solvingand helped them understand why these are important and reliable. Noah wrote in his journal:One of the most meaningful points of the course for me was the paper by Rouet (2006) and the studyby Wineburg [(1991)] that was described in that paper. I discovered that my condition today is inbetween the novices and the experts [in Wineburg’s study], with a considerable leaning towards thenovices… The ways in which the experts looked at the information, even information that seemedtrustworthy, made me ask how much I activate my critical sense when I read information online.(c) Critically reflecting on own epistemic ideals and processes. Noah’s quote demonstrates anothermechanism at play. In the reflective writing tasks, participants used their growing knowledge of epistemic idealsand processes to reconsider their own ideals and processes. Thus, the theoretical and empirical readings enabledICLS 2018 Proceedings1131© ISLSthe participants to gain a new perspective on their epistemic performance, as learners and as teachers. For example,Anna wrote that the readings led her to: “gradually start doubting myself and thinking before I act.”(d) Collaboratively understanding and reflecting on epistemic ideals and processes. When participantspooled together the knowledge they gained from performing the reflective experience tasks and from the readings,they achieved a better grasp of ideals and processes. Ronna described the collaborative sessions: “We tried toclarify the concepts together. We often argued.… We talked about the issues in order to go deeper.”(e) Making the connections between course experiences and epistemic performance. Although only twostudents referred to the reflective journals as instigators of growth, we believe that these journals had a subtle yetimportant contribution. The journals prompted participants to consider the connections between their courseexperiences and their epistemic performance, that is, they encouraged higher-order reflection on processes ofepistemic change. For example, David wrote in his journal: “I think that one of the things that I learned aboutmyself and about digital literacy is to metacognitively observe how I investigate and construct knowledge.”Conclusions and implicationsPromoting teachers’ epistemic growth, and their capacity to promote the epistemic growth of their students, is acritical educational challenge in the digital age. Current research emphasizes reflection on practice as a centralmechanism of promoting teachers’ epistemic growth (e.g., Feucht et al., 2017). However, little is known abouthow to productively engage teachers in reflection on their epistemic performance. In this study, we used the AptAir framework (Barzilai & Chinn, 2018) to design activities that integrated reflection on epistemic performancein teachers’ learning experiences. Analysis of participants’ reflections indicated that they experienced growth inunderstanding and caring about epistemic performance and that this growth was enabled by the combined effectsof engaging in epistemic performance, in adaptive and collaborative ways, along with an increase in metacognitiveunderstanding of epistemic ideals and processes, and ongoing reflection.The findings suggest that simply prompting teachers to reflect on their epistemic cognition might not besufficient to foster meaningful epistemic growth. Expanding teachers’ awareness of appropriate epistemic idealsand process, how these can be employed, and conditions on their use, may be critical for helping teachers gain anew perspective on their epistemic cognition. In addition, gaining new practical experiences in applying epistemicideals and processes may be an important foundation for growth. The reflective experience tasks, a new format ofreflective activity designed for this course, enabled teachers to closely examine in situ how they engage inepistemic performance and to compare their epistemic performance to that of their peers and to that of the novicesand experts described in the literature they read. The interconnections that participants formed between theirpersonal and collaborative experiences and the literature enabled them to gain new insights into their ownepistemic performance and into their students’ performance. The reflective experience tasks and, to a lesserdegree, the reflective journals, also helped teachers learn to metacognitively reflect on their performance. In turn,growth in understanding of epistemic performance led teachers to appreciate the value of epistemic ideals andprocesses and to care more deeply about their instruction. However, teachers minimally engaged in reflection onepistemic aims and value. Thus, more work is needed to examine how to better foster refection on these facets.ReferencesBarzilai, S., & Chinn, C. A. (2018). On the goals of epistemic education: Promoting apt epistemic performance.Journal of the Learning Sciences. doi:10.1080/10508406.2017.1392968Boud, D., Keogh, R., & Walker, D. (1985). Reflection: Turning experience into learning. London: Kogan.Buehl, M. M., & Fives, H. (2016). The role of epistemic cognition in teacher learning and praxis. In J. A. Greene,W. A. Sandoval & I. Bråten (Eds.), Handbook of epistemic cognition (pp. 247-264). New York, NY:Routledge.Chinn, C. A., Duncan, R. G., & Rinehart, R. W. (2017). Epistemic design: Design to promote transferableepistemic growth in the PRACCIS project. In E. Manalo, Y. Uesaka & C. A. Chinn (Eds.), Promotingspontaneous use of learning and reasoning strategies: Theory, research, and practice for effectivetransfer. New York, NY: Routledge.Chinn, C. A., Rinehart, R. W., & Buckland, L. A. (2014). Epistemic cognition and evaluating information:Applying the AIR model of epistemic cognition. In D. Rapp & J. Braasch (Eds.), Processing inaccurateinformation (pp. 425-454). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Dewey, J. (1933). How we think: A restatement of the relation of reflective thinking to the educative process.Boston, D.C.: Heath and Co.Feucht, F. C., Lunn Brownlee, J., & Schraw, G. (2017). Changing epistemic cognition in teaching and teachereducation: A focus on reflection and reflexivity [special issue]. Educational Psychologist, 52(4).Schön, D. A. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action. New York: Basic Books.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1132© ISLS