Infrastructuring for Participatory Design of School TechnologyPractices: How Students Refined Design PracticesUng-Sang Lee, University of California, Los Angeles, ungsanglee@ucla.eduAbstract: This paper analyzes the ways in which student partners in a school-basedparticipatory design project (Le Dantec & DiSalvo, 2013) constructed and refined the designpractices. Two researchers collaborated with a group of high school students with a sharedgoal of designing school technology practices that were meaningful to the students. Informedby theories of infrastructuring in participatory design (Le Dantec & DiSalvo, 2013), thecollaboration explicitly sought to re-mediate the social relations in the design of schooltechnology practices. Four themes emerged in relation to the ways students sought toconstruct and refine the design space: Relevance to Student Interests; Opportunities forResponsibility and Growth; Expansion and Refinement of Activity; and Ensuring Use.Implications of the findings are discussed.Purpose of the studyThis paper analyzes the ways in which student partners in a school-based participatory design project (LeDantec & DiSalvo, 2013) constructed and refined design practices. Informed by participatory design literaturethat argues for the need for infrastructuring, the continuous refinement of the collaborative activity amongstakeholders of participatory design parterships (Le Dantec & DiSalvo, 2013), the author partnered with a smallgroup of students and teachers through two academic years between 2014-2016 to design technology practicesthat were responsive to the needs of local school stakeholders. In the context of this partnership, participantswere both explicitly and implicitly encouraged to refine the practices of the partnership. The paper offers athematic analysis of the ways in in which the student participants recommended shifts to the design activity overtime in order to better understand student perspectives on how participation in collaborative research and designendeavors may be better supported.Challenges in school technology integrationThe drive to introduce up-to-date technology resources in K-12 settings has been met with considerableobstacles, exemplified, for example, by Los Angeles Unified School District’s (LAUSD) well-publicizedchallenges in rolling out its 1-to-1 iPad program. An evaluation of the iPad rollout by Margolin and hiscolleagues (2014) found that most schools that received the hardware along with instructional software did nothave the adequate infrastructure, organization, and training to shift teaching practices through the newlyacquired tools. This was particularly unfortunate, considering the many affordances of educational technologiessuch as the iPads and related software, which allow students and teachers to interact across physical learningecologies, pursue self-driven learning, and experience learning in multimodal texts (e.g. Peppler & Kafai, 2007;Barron, Gomez, Pinkard & Martin, 2014). More concerning is the fact that in spite of evident systemicconstraints to shifting school technology practices, the discourse surrounding these challenges often placed theblame on LAUSD students, majority of whom come from traditionally marginalized backgrounds, as deviant“hackers” that were unprepared to utilize these tools (LA Times, 2015).The episode highlights two concerns pertaining to integrating technology in schools. First, the episodeechoes arguments made by a number of researchers that the way technologies are introduced to schools mustpay attention to the sociocultural contexts in which they are being introduced to, and conceptualize practicesthat respond to unique needs across those contexts (e.g. Barron et al., 2014). This necessitates processes oftechnology integration in schools that can make aspects of the local context visible. Second, related to the firstpoint, but needing particular emphasis, is that like most schooling practices, school technology use is valued,and mediated by broader social power structures (Selwyn, 2016; Delpit, 2006). The fact that LAUSD studentswere thought of as “deviant”, echoing broader deficit views of this very student body, suggests that technologyuse at schools have the potential to reproduce problematic social discourses and power relations. Therefore, asresearchers such as Selwyn (2016) argue, echoing earlier researchers across educational contexts (e.g. Delpit,2006), who is represented, and how they are represented in the process of technology integration design aregreatly consequential for educational equity. How students, especially those from nondominant communities,are represented in this process holds particular weight because of their traditional non-representation ineducational design processes (Delpit, 2006).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1161© ISLSParticipatory design and infrastructuring for student participationInfrastructuring in participatory design (Le Dantec & DiSalvo, 2013), the iterative refinement of the socialactivity to support democratic stakeholder participation in the design process, provides a useful methodologicalframework towards addressing the issues identified above. In particular, developing knowledge around howstudent participation in the design of school technology practices can be facilitated, and how that in turnmediates various outcomes relating to use and social structures in schools, can guide how school technologyintegration processes can be made more equitable for students. Participatory design as an approach toeducational design focuses on the redesign of social relations between stakeholders to develop more equitableeducational practices. While a number of researchers have partnered with students and children in educationaltechnology design, such as Schwartz’s (2015) study of how the Funds of Knowledge of immigrant Latino/astudents informed the design of a technology-mediated literacy curriculum (Schwartz, 2015), usinginfrastructuring as a design framework offers a unique perspective on how these partnerships may be built andmodified while simultaneously facilitating the development of concrete design outcomes that are situated in thecontext of use.With the need to better understand how student participation in school technology design mightmediate shifts in a school’s design and technology practices, this paper asks the research question: In what waysdid student participants in a school-based participatory design project (Le Dantec & DiSalvo, 2013) seeking todevelop localized technology-mediated learning practices change the design infrastructure? By examining thisresearch question, the paper hopes to provide insights into the characteristics to the design activity that aresought by students, and help encourage students to engage in the design of school technology practices.MethodsStudy backgroundThe site, a public university-partnership school in a large urban school district in California with 80% Latinoand 14% Asian students, and 55% of students classified as “Limited English Proficient”, reflected broaderchallenges of technology integration across urban schools. It had recently acquired a learning software namedSchoology, an online Learning Management System (LMS) as well as hardware such as Chromebooks andApple computers, gradually transitioning to a 1-to-1 laptop to student ratio. Such investments were met withinconsistent practices and uncreative use due to the lack of training, buy-in, and coordination across the schoolstakeholders. Students had indicated that these new tools were mostly used for submitting assignments,receiving grades, and taking quizzes.Responding to the school site’s needs, the author of this manuscript partnered with a small group ofhigh-school students and teachers to carry out a participatory design research project (Bang & Vossoughi, 2016)to design school technology practices. Participatory design as a research method was chosen due to theassumption that a method aimed at collaboratively re-mediate educational practices by addressing thesociocultural aspects of a problem space, including the political and institutional dimensions of the design work(Bang & Vossoughi, 2016) would allow for theoretical insights into how school technology practices responsiveto local context. During the 2014-2015 school year, an advisory class of 15 high-school students and theiradvisory teacher, along with the author formed the initial design group. In its second year (2015-2016),responding to feedback from the initial group of students, the collaboration moved to an after school space withan added emphasis on students to engage with their own personal interests. The students gradually transitionedto a new group of 12 students who continued the collaborative design work. Meetings generally consisted ofchecking in with students to generate feedback on the structure of collaboration, design goals, and designoutcomes, as well as work-shopping prototypes of student designs including an ePortfolio system to facilitatemore holistic evaluation of students, an archive of “college-going interviews” of seniors to make college-goingknowledge more visible, and a video gaming tournament centered on the development of safe spaces forstudents. Most importantly, all aspects of participation by students were voluntary.Data collection and analysis: Design infrastructure as an activity systemThis analysis examined field notes and design artifacts form design meetings, as well as participant interviewresponses from the two-year study. Data points where students either made recommendations to shift theinfrastructure of design, or took actions that concretely shifted the infrastructure of design were isolated, anddescriptive coding was utilized to summarize the nature of the recommended or acted upon shift. Thesedescriptions were then grouped into larger themes that generalized the refinements students made regarding thedesign practices of the partnership. To identify instances of students making recommendations to, or activelyICLS 2018 Proceedings1162© ISLSshifting the design practices of the partnership, the collaborative endeavor was viewed during analysis as itsown unique activity system that had its own set of design goals, tools and symbols, participant roles,community, and expectations (Engeström & Sannino, 2010). Instances of students refining this activity systemwas identified when students referred to any these aspects of the design activity system and recommendedchanges or directly acted to change an aspect of the activity system. Both explicit recommendations and directaction were captured for this analysis because the analysis is primarily interested in the design infrastructuresstudents wanted to see.FindingsThe findings from the study will be presented in two parts. First, a representative vignette that encompasses thethemes that were identified across the general data set will be shared. After the vignette is shared, the fivethemes that were identified, Relevance to Student Interests, Opportunities for Responsibility and Growth,Expansion of Activity, Refining Infrastructure, and Ensuring Use will be described using the vignette.Vignette: Transitioning to an after school programAt the beginning of the second year of the participatory design work (2015), four students from the originaldesign group met with the first author to discuss potential improvements in the way students engaged with thepartnership. The first year had concluded with a professional development (PD) session organized by thestudents with administrators, teachers, and university researchers as an audience. This reflected an earliersession where students articulated a desire to share their designs with teachers because they “needed to learnhow to use some of these tools” and they “were able to decide what happened in classrooms”. The design goalof the first year was to develop practices that were meaningful to students using Schoology, a learningmanagement system (LMS) that the school had recently purchased, but in the view of teachers and students stillin its infancy of use at the school. Consequently, at the PD session, students presented their designs which allutilized the new LMS, such as an ePortfolio system to facilitate more holistic evaluation of students, an archiveof “college-going interviews” of seniors to make college-going knowledge more visible, and an introduction tothe “calendar” feature on the LMS. However, about five students had lost interest in the design work throughthe first year, and did not present at the PD session.At the onset of the second year of the partnership, five students from the original group who hadvolunteered to offer feedback on the first year’s collaboration met with the author with the goal of articulatingways to improve the design methods. Asked why some students seemed to become disengaged from theprevious year’s work, the students unanimously agreed that the design goal, to develop “school practices” wastoo limiting, and that students needed to do work that they felt “passionate” about. As a result, the groupdecided to ask future participants to initiate their involvement by engaging with an issue or activity they feltpassionate about, and use digital tools to more deeply engage with their passions with an eye towards using theoutcomes of this work to inform teachers of technology practices that are meaningful to students. With engagingin “passion-driven work” through digital technology as a central thrust of the design group, the collaborationmoved to an after school space with a mostly new group of twelve students who each initiated varioustechnology-mediated, passion-driven projects, such as creating an e-sports (gaming) community, continuing thedevelopment of an ePortfolio system, and building a financial literacy website.Themes from student recommendations to refine design infrastructureRelevance to student interestsThe student recommendation to foreground student “passions” in the design process described in the vignette isrepresentative of how students consistently sought to center their interests as they designed school technologypractices. Many of the student recommendations referred to the need to make the design process enjoyable andengaging by ensuring opportunities for students to connect the design work with interests developed in and outof school, such as fictional writing, gaming, photography, and financial literacy.Opportunities for responsibility and growthStudents in this vignette are beginning to view themselves as authority figures within the design partnership. Forexample, the students who gathered to reflect on the previous year’s partnership took on an additionalresponsibility to improve the quality of the partnership, while earlier in the year, students constructed anopportunity to position themselves as experts in relation to teachers by organizing a professional developmentsession. Once again, students frequently sought, or created opportunities for themselves to develop skillsnecessary to, and take on greater responsibilities in the design process.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1163© ISLSExpansion and refinement of design activityAnother observation made throughout the design partnership, and observed n the vignette is that students playedan active role in constructing the ways in which infrastructuring occurred. In other words, students sought todevelop ways in which they can participate in the refinement of the design process. While this is an a prioriaspect of participatory design processes like this, it is noteworthy that students actively sought out, and createdopportunities to participate in this process.Ensuring useFinally, students sought to participate in design processes that would ensure the use of their designs in school.For example, the professional development session that the students planned at the end of the first year waspartly due to the recognition that teachers hold significant authority within the school to utilize the designs thatwere developed by students. Students modified the design process through a rationale of ensuring use of thedesigns.Conclusions and implications: Promises and complications of infrastructuringThe findings in this paper suggest that student participation in this design partnership echoed existing researchon participatory design, learning, and human-computer interaction. Existing research has found that studentsseek out learning opportunities that speak to their interest across ecologies (Barron, 2006), that studentsengaging in participatory inquiry and design seek out learning and greater responsibility in the context of thework (Kirshner, 2007), and that participatory design work often leads to designs that are rooted in the localcontext (Bang & Vossoughi, 2016), as well as providing opportunities for activity systems to expand beyondtheir original boundaries (Engeström & Sannino, 2010). What is noteworthy about this study is that studentsseem to have endorsed the value of these concepts in the context of participatory design. Therefore, in futureparticipatory design endeavors with students, some of the themes identified in the findings can support thedevelopment of frameworks to support the formation of student participatory design spaces.The findings also serve to complicate the notion of “equity” and “democracy” in design processes. Asis evident in some of the findings, and particularly in the vignette, the themes identified in this analysisinteracted in complex ways that prevents any observer from making definitive judgments on the quality ofparticipation and equity in the design process. There were times, as seen in the vignette for example, whenstudents would sacrifice a level of agency over their designs with the desire to make the designs accessible to agreater number of students. On the other hand, some of the modifications to the design practices that wererecommended by students and subsequently taken up, such as facilitating the design activities to include workrelated to their personal interests, suggests that involving students in the construction of collaborative practicespositions them in a position of relative authority. These complications suggest the value of continuouslyreflecting on and refining the characteristics of participatory design processes as they unfold.ReferencesBang, M., & Vossoughi, S. (2016). Participatory design research and educational justice: Studying learning andrelations within social change making.Barron, B. (2006). Interest and self-sustained learning as catalysts of development: A learning ecologyperspective. Human development, 49(4), 193-224.Barron, B., Gomez, K., Martin, C. K., & Pinkard, N. (2014). The digital youth network: Cultivating digitalmedia citizenship in urban communities. MIT Press.Dantec, C. A. L., & DiSalvo, C. (2013). Infrastructuring and the formation of publics in participatorydesign. Social Studies of Science, 43(2), 241-264.Delpit, L. (2006). Other people's children: Cultural conflict in the classroom. The New Press.Engeström, Y., & Sannino, A. (2010). Studies of expansive learning: Foundations, findings and futurechallenges. Educational research review, 5(1), 1-24.Kirshner, B. (2007). Introduction: Youth activism as a context for learning and development.Margolin, J., Hauser, A., Heppen, J., Blum, J., Haynes, E., Chavez, S., ... & Rickles, J. (2015). Evaluation ofLAUSD’s Instructional Technology Initiative.Peppler, K. A., & Kafai, Y. B. (2007). From SuperGoo to Scratch: Exploring creative digital media productionin informal learning. Learning, Media and Technology, 32(2), 149-166.Selwyn, N. (2016). Minding our language: why education and technology is full of bullshit… and what mightbe done about it.Schwartz, L. H. (2015). A funds of knowledge approach to the appropriation of new media in a high schoolwriting classroom. Interactive Learning Environments, 23(5), 595-612.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1164© ISLS