Toward the Design of Scaffolds for In-the-World SituatedScience Reflections Through WearablesSharon Lynn Chu, Brittany Garcia, and Beth Nam,sharilyn@tamu.edu, brinni@tamu.edu, namieux@tamu.eduTexas A&M UniversityAbstract: This paper presents a study with 38 elementary school-aged children using smartwatches in their everyday lives for reflections on 3 science topics. We analyzed the recordingsretrieved to understand what and how children noticed their everyday experience to relate toscience. Findings identify the types of noticing ‘triggers’, common faults in the science reflections, and the nature of the reflections. We discuss how our findings point to recommendationsfor the design of scaffolds to support situated reflective learning through smartwatches.IntroductionThe need to help students see the relevance or value of science in their everyday lives has long been a goal of bothformal and informal education. Curriculum relevant to students’ everyday lives may be a way to eventually develop individuals that will form a scientifically literate citizenry, but it is challenging for science teachers to connect formal science concepts taught in the classroom to everyday situations (Cajas, 1998, 1999). We argue thatwearable technologies can potentially address the problem of personal relevance in formal science learning byhaving students reflect on how specific concepts are present in and can be applied to situations and objects thatthey are familiar with in everyday experience. Our research looks at how wearable devices may be used to enablestudents to have such situated reflections about science. Through qualitatively analyzing situated reflection recordings made by 38 elementary aged students, we aim to understand what kinds of scaffolds are needed to supportstudents to produce effective science reflections in their day-to-day life.Theoretical frameworkOur research posits that the smartwatch has critical properties that can support out-of-school situated learning,especially in science. Situated learning posits the importance of the “integration of subject-matter knowledge andeveryday knowledge…for children’s conceptual development” (Hedegaard, 1998). Unlike desktop computers,smartwatches do not require the user to be tethered to a specific location, and when well-designed, may enablesituated science reflections. Reflection entails purposeful thinking oriented toward a goal (Dewey, 1997). Moon’s‘map of learning’ (Moon, 2013) defines five stages of learning that range from the least to the most reflective:Stage 1 – ‘taking notice of new information’; Stage 2 – ‘Making sense’; Stage 3 – ‘Making meaning’; Stage 4 –‘Working with meaning’; Stage 5 – ‘Transformative learning’. Using this framework as a starting point, we breakdown the process of capturing a reflection with a smartwatch as consisting of at least three aspects:1) Noticing, or being able to identify what could potentially relate to science in one’s everyday environment– everyday life and everyday environments are noisy, unlike a classroom setting where the focus ofattention is deemed to always be on the teacher and on the content to be learned;2) Determining how the identified item interrelate with science – this is dependent upon recollection of thescience concept at a specific moment and current level of understanding; and3) Deciding to capture the reflection into the smartwatch – the user must first be motivated to initiate thecapture, and second encode the reflection in a format suitable for capture.Our goal is to understand what kinds of scaffolds need to be designed into a science reflection smartwatchapp to support the first two processes. We addressed two research questions: i) What kinds of science reflectionsdo elementary school-aged students capture using smartwatches?; and ii) What kinds of structures are needed tosupport children’s situated reflections through smartwatches?.Table 1: Summary tableMethods and AnalysisWe conducted a study in which 38 participants used commercial smartwatches to capture reflections on the sciencetopics of friction, gravity, and the oxygen-carbon dioxidecycle throughout their everyday lives. The study was donein two phases: i) 20 children (12 boys and 8 girls) aged 8 to11 were invited to a lab to use the Samsung Gear Neo 2; andICLS 2018 Proceedings1699© ISLSii) 18 children (7 boys and 11 girls) aged 10 to 11 from a local elementary school science class used the ASUSZenwatach 2. Both watches allowed for 48 hours of continuous use and voice recordings. Students were told todo recordings of whatever they thought could be related to the given science topic in their everyday life over twoand half days. A total of 131 recordings were collected and transcribed. The first row of Table 1 shows the totalnumber of recordings for each science topic.FindingsTable 1 shows the % of recordings motivated by an aspect of the child’s observation of the real world; the averagenumber of science principles by topic; and the percentage of recordings with faulty principles by topic. We proposed earlier that situated science reflections involve at least three aspects: noticing science in the world, relatingone’s observation to science, and being motivated to capture reflections. Our analysis of the reflections led to: 3categories of noticing science (observation, doing an activity, and engaging in an experiment); 3 categories ofinaccuracy of reflections (wrong mental models, lack of knowledge, ambiguity or conflicts). E.g., in the followingrecording, the child attributed a wrong cause to the science concept: “The friction of me writing with my pencilsince the paper was a solid surface it would not move back.” The ‘solidness’ of the surface is not the reason whythe paper did not slide back; and 4 types of reflection recorded (explanation, reason/cause and effect, use, andquestion-asking). Each category had sub-categories, shown in Figure 1 with percentages indicatingprevalence.Discussion and conclusionThis study showed that the approach of situated reflection through the smartwatch allows for the integration of science learning and personal relevance, whereas working through a set of application questions in class is far less powerful. Recordings were heavily skewed toward observing one’ssurroundings for the topic of O2 – CO2 cycle. Forgravity, the emphasis was on observing a specificevent, and for friction, reflections happened morewhile doing an activity. The ease of making situated reflections appears related to the type of content. Friction and gravity are both principles, whileO2 – CO2 cycle is more of a representation. Faultyreflections were caused mostly by gaps in Figure 1. Types of noticing 'triggers' (top' Types of inaccuracies (middle); Types of application (bottom).knowledge but over time we expect children tolearn more complex models of how the science concepts work. Problems with inaccuracies and lack of clarity inthe recordings are more problematic because although the children demonstrated that they can recognize featuresfrom an everyday situation and relate them to science concepts, associations made were only general and studentsfailed to retrieve precise factual information about the science concept. Moreover, while the recordings weretremendously rich in terms of application domains, a significant number of reflections tended to be descriptive.We suggest that smartwatch scaffolds are needed to: i) stimulate inquiry-based activities; ii) account for the typeof science topic assigned; iii) identify patterns of faults in reflections to request review and recapture; and iv)convey factual information related to the science concept to motivate deeper level reflections.ReferencesBarnett, S. M., & Ceci, S. J. (2002). When and where do we apply what we learn?: A taxonomy for far transfer.Psychological bulletin, 128(4), 612.Cajas, F. (1998). Using out‐of‐school experience in science lessons: an impossible task? International Journal ofScience Education, 20(5), 623-625.Cajas, F. (1999). Public understanding of science: Using technology to enhance school science in everyday life.International Journal of Science Education, 21(7), 765-773.Dewey, J. (1997). How we think: Courier Corporation.Hedegaard, M. (1998). Situated learning and cognition: Theoretical learning and cognition. Mind, Culture, andActivity, 5(2), 114-126.Moon, J. A. (2013). Reflection in learning and professional development: Theory and practice: Routledge.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1700© ISLS