Beyond Analogy: Qualitative Dimensions of Comparing in MathClassSarah L. White, Northwestern University, sarahwhite@u.northwestern.eduAbstract: Comparisons have been shown to be effective for improving students’understanding of mathematical concepts and procedures. The evidence for the effectiveness ofcomparisons has primarily come from laboratory experiments on analogy and analogy-basedinterventions in math classrooms rather than investigations of naturalistic math classrooms. Asa result, the qualitative aspects of comparisons that may be important for the effectiveness ofcomparisons have been understudied. This paper describes preliminary research on qualitativedimensions of comparisons. Analysis of video-recordings of a math classroom resulted inidentification of 244 naturally occurring comparisons that were coded along five dimensions.Two dimensions related to the ambiguity of comparisons and a system for representing suchambiguity are extensively discussed herein. Potential effects of ambiguity of comparisons onlearning are outlined.Keywords: comparison, analogy, mathematics, qualitative methods, representationIntroductionComparing – the act of identifying similarities and differences – underlies many of the things we do every day.Research in cognitive psychology, such as analogical reasoning (e.g., Gentner & Markman, 1997), has beenprimarily focused on comparisons in laboratory settings with limited applications to classroom contexts. Someresearch on comparisons in classroom contexts has been situated in math because of its highly patterndependent nature. Overall, the consensus across theoretical and applied studies is that making comparisonsleads to improvements in procedural and conceptual knowledge in mathematics (e.g., Alfieri, Nokes-Malach &Schunn, 2013), but more work needs to be done to document why and how such improvements might arise.Many interventions in math classrooms have demonstrated the effectiveness of comparison-focusedactivities versus “business-as-usual” math teaching (e.g., Rittle-Johnson & Star, 2011; Schwartz & Martin,2004) but they have not qualitatively examined the mechanisms by which such activities led to learning gainsrelative to control groups. Providing only quantitative differences between treatment and control groups’changes in test scores and limited description of both the interventions and of the control group conditionsmakes it more difficult to replicate the findings in additional studies that evaluate comparison as a mechanism.One study has suggested that the frequency with which students alternate discussing examples in a comparisonfocused activity might be important for the development of students’ conceptual understanding of mathematicalcontent (Schwartz, Chase, Oppezzo, & Chin, 2011). More qualitative data on how students’ thoughts orbehaviors during the learning experience varied across conditions would provide insight as to what kinds ofstudent behaviors teachers should encourage and inform how student-to-student interactions might productivelyinteract with teacher-to-student interactions before, during, and after a comparison-focused activity (Kapur,2015).One study has helped make comparison research more readily applicable by describing qualitativedimensions of comparisons made in naturalistic, non-experimental math classrooms (Richland, Holyoak &Stigler, 2004). These researchers used a very strict definition of analogy, a specific subtype of comparison, toanalyze only utterances in which a relationship between two entities was explicitly identified. Although theseexplicit analogies may be more straightforward to analyze because all of the elements of the mapping are clearlyspecified, the authors themselves acknowledged that other “hints at mapping” occurred that were not capturedby their analysis. Gaining a better understanding of the prevalence and additional qualities of less-clearlydefined comparisons as they occur in non-experimental classrooms would further inform teachers as to whatteaching with comparisons might look like and help elucidate how students might learn from comparisons otherthan analogies.MethodThe data analyzed for this study were primarily video recordings of a sixth-grade honors math class during the2017 spring semester. This class was situated in a well-resourced middle school in a suburb of a largeMidwestern city. This class was selected because the teacher’s emphasis on inquiry-based learning andICLS 2018 Proceedings1065© ISLSCommon Core State Standards mathematical practices – such as finding patterns, considering multiple solutionstrategies, and reasoning like a mathematician, all of which involve comparisons – made the class a goodcandidate for observing comparisons.To identify comparisons systematically, comparisons were defined as any utterance that communicateda relationship between two or more entities. This definition extended the criteria used by Richland et al. (2004)which only included analogies (typically a relationship of similarity) between two specified entities and allowedfor the examination of previously undocumented “hints at mapping.” This definition included relationships otherthan similarity, such as difference (e.g., two different strategies) and relative quality (e.g., a more efficientstrategy). Comparisons of more than two entities were also included. Using the operational definition ofcomparison described above, two researchers collaboratively identified any utterances that included comparisonin a subset of the video data selected from two days of class during a statistics unit focused on variability andmean absolute deviation. Any disagreements about which utterances included comparisons were resolvedthrough discussion.Qualitative dimensions of comparisonAfter identifying instances of comparison, all instances were iteratively coded along five dimensions to capturethe variety of the comparisons. The five dimensions were: 1) type of entities compared, 2) type of relationship,3) how explicit or implicit the entities were, 4) how explicit or implicit the relations were, and 5) in what contextthe comparison was made. Two dimensions – the types of entities that were compared and the context in whichthe comparisons were produced – were also analyzed by Richland et al. (2004) in their analysis of analogies.The other three dimensions emerged from the data as important variables that captured a variety that has notpreviously been examined in literature on comparisons. For this paper, two of the latter dimensions – howexplicit or implicit the entities and relations of the comparisons were – will be presented because thesedimensions have not previously been analyzed in the literature and have some potential implications forteaching and learning through comparison.Representational systemTo analyze the comparisons, a representational system was created that is similar to diagrams used in models ofstructure mapping theory of analogy (Gentner & Markman, 1997). In this representational system, squaresrepresent entities (objects or relationships as entities). If the entity was explicitly mentioned (including by usageof a pronoun), the square was black. If an entity was only implied, it was represented as a white square. Linesrepresented relationships. If a relationship among entities was explicit, it was shown as a solid line connectingtwo or more squares. If a relationship among entities was only implied, this relationship was represented with adotted line connecting two or more squares. Representations that exhibit a range of comparisons, as well as howthey were coded on the two dimensions of comparison ambiguity (discussed below) are included in Table 1.Comparison ambiguity: Explicitness of entities and relationsThese representations allowed for categorizing of comparisons according to two dimensions: entity explicitnessand relation explicitness. Entity explicitness refers to how many entities, explicit and implicit, were compared ina comparison. If additional entities were mentioned besides the ones that were the main focus of the comparison,the comparison was labeled as including entities at “multiple levels.” Relation explicitness refers to how implicitor explicit the relation was in a comparison. The difference between the two categories of relation explicitness Alignment and Relation specified - is that comparisons categorized as alignments did not have any obviousrelational language such as “similar” or “different”. Instead, these alignment comparisons usually had parallelstructure that implied an interpretable relation among entities but did not have connecting words thatcommunicated the relation explicitly. Combining entity explicitness and relation explicitness gave an overalldimension of a comparison’s lack of explicitness, or ambiguity. See Table 2 for counts of comparisons of eachtype of ambiguity.Table 1: Representations of ComparisonsRepresentation and UtteranceThisAlmost lookslikeICLS 2018 ProceedingsNumberlineEntityexplicitnessTwo named“This almost looks like a number line here”1066RelationexplicitnessRelationspecified© ISLSData set“Like, if Iwere to tellyou there wasa meanabsolutedeviation often, and thenhadhadData setMean absolutedeviation of 2Mean absolutedeviation of 10a data set that had a mean absolute deviation of two”NumberlineBargraphlikeisisMeanZeroMeanIs negativeZerolikeAnythingpast thatlikelikenegative.”“Like,on anumberline,howlike,themeaniszero,anythingpastthat isTwo namedand multiplelevelsAlignmentOne namedand multiplelevelsRelationspecifiedTable 2: Counts of Comparisons by Category of AmbiguityEntity explicitnessRelationexplicitnessAlignmentRelation specifiedSub-totalsOne named;other(s)implied233760Twonamed504090More thantwo entitiesnamed184260One named,multiplelevels33Two named,multiplelevels141514More thantwo,multiplelevels22Subtotals105139244Results and discussionComparisons were frequently made during the selected two days in this mathematics classroom. Casting a muchwider and different net than Richland et al. (2004), 244 comparisons were identified in two days of class.Relatively few comparisons – only 16.4% of all comparisons identified – fit the definition of analogy used inRichland et al. (2004) – comparisons with two entities explicitly named and an explicit relationship. Althoughmore comparisons had an explicit relationship (139 vs 105), several of the comparisons with explicitrelationships also had ambiguous entities. Even though the most common type of entity explicitness was twoexplicit entities (90), more comparisons of this type had implicit (50) than explicit relationships (40).The patterns of ambiguity of relations and entities outlined above reveal that comparisons in formsother than analogies were quite prevalent. Existing models of analogical reasoning already have ways ofexplaining how we map the entities and relations of a comparison with an explicit relation and explicit entities(e.g., Falkenheiner, Forbus & Gentner, 1989). However, such models do not currently address how we are ableto process and accurately interpret comparative statements in which the relation and the entities are moreambiguous.The implications of entity explicitness, relation explicitness and overall comparison ambiguity for howcomparison supports learning are as of yet unclear, but there are a few possibilities. Like in everydayconversation and interactions, the more ambiguity in an action, the more likely it is to be misinterpreted. Thesame may be true for these ambiguous comparisons. It is likely true that these ambiguities require more in termsof mental resources to identify entities and test out plausible interpretations. One way that these alternativeinterpretations may affect learning outcomes is that students would not demonstrate as much improvement intheir understanding, however it is measured, because processing these comparisons could require too muchcognitive load (e.g., Richland, Begolli, Simms, Frausel & Lyons, 2016). With more mental resources devoted toICLS 2018 Proceedings1067© ISLSinterpreting the comparison, fewer resources may be available for integrating the new information from thecomparison into existing knowledge structures. Alternatively, if students are still able to integrate thecomparison into their existing knowledge structures, they may incorporate some misalignments into theirknowledge structures due to a misinterpretation.However, another possibility is that ambiguity could lead to greater improvements in students’understanding of whatever is compared. Students may learn more from processing ambiguous comparisons thanfrom processing explicit comparisons for the very reason that students must do a lot more cognitive work tryingto interpret ambiguity than they would for a more explicit comparison. This possibility relies on the tenets ofconstructivism (e.g., Piaget, 1964) that posit that no changes in knowledge occur unless a student does the workof integrating new knowledge with their prior knowledge. Greater ambiguity would likely require more effortfulintegration than explicit comparisons, so an ambiguous comparison would require at least some connection withexisting structures just to interpret it at all as opposed to a more explicit comparison that may integrate lessextensively with existing knowledge structures, if at all.A third possible mechanism for how greater ambiguity could result in improved learning outcomesinvolves comparisons at multiple levels. It is possible that more ambiguous comparisons are initially moreconfusing and more likely to be misinterpreted than more explicit comparisons, but having to evaluate severalplausible interpretations could reap the previously shown benefits of comparison twice over: testing how eachplausible interpretation fits with existing knowledge would involve both comparing the fit across interpretationsas well as comparing the entities within each interpretation of the comparison. This process seems to align withhow the fit of an interpretation of an analogy is performed according to structure mapping models(Falkenheiner, Forbus, & Gentner, 1989). Future research that examines processing time as well as learninggains resulting from systematic variations in entity and relation ambiguity will help to elucidate which of thesepossibilities for the mechanism of how ambiguity of comparisons affects learning is most tenable.Although these results are at present derived from only one classroom, they still have implications forteaching in math classrooms more broadly. Having a framework for the ambiguities of comparisons can aidteachers in identifying aspects of their own and students’ comparative statements that may be potentiallyconfusing. Recognizing ambiguous comparisons and thinking through the possible ways that students mightmisinterpret them can help teachers deduce why a student might have a certain misconception. If less ambiguouscomparisons are more beneficial for learning, then it becomes important for teachers to be more careful withtheir comparative language as well as encourage more explicit and precise communication of comparativestatements by students.ReferencesAlfieri, L., Nokes-Malach, T. J., & Schunn, C. D. (2013). Learning through case comparisons: A meta-analyticreview. Educational Psychologist, 48(2), 87-113.Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). The structure-mapping engine: Algorithm andexamples. Artificial intelligence, 41(1), 1-63.Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist,52, 45–56. doi:10.1037/0003066X.52.1.45Kapur, M. (2014). Productive failure in learning math. Cognitive Science, 38(5), 1008-1022.Piaget (1964). Development and learning. In R. E. Ripple & V. N. Rockcastle (Eds.), Piaget Rediscovered, 720.Richland, L. E., Begolli, K. N., Simms, N., Frausel, R. R., & Lyons, E. A. (2016). Supporting mathematicaldiscussions: the roles of comparison and cognitive load. Educational Psychology Review, 1-13.Richland, L. E., Holyoak, K. J., & Stigler, J. W. (2004). Analogy use in eighth-grade mathematicsclassrooms. Cognition and Instruction, 22(1), 37-60.Rittle-Johnson, B., & Star, J. R. (2011). 7 The Power of Comparison in Learning and Instruction: LearningOutcomes Supported by Different Types of Comparisons. Psychology of Learning and MotivationAdvances in Research and Theory, 55.Schwartz, D. L., & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare for future learning: The hidden efficiency ofencouraging original student production in statistics instruction. Cognition and Instruction, 22, 129–184. doi:10.1207/s1532690xci2202_1Schwartz, D. L., Chase, C. C., Oppezzo, M. A., & Chin, D. B. (2011). Practicing versus inventing withcontrasting cases: The effects of telling first on learning and transfer. Journal of EducationalPsychology, 103(4), 759.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1068© ISLS