Multimodal Reflection: Adolescents Remixing and Sharing TheirExperiences in an Informal STEM+L AcademyBlaine E. Smith, University of Arizona, blainesmith@email.arizona.eduJi Shen, University of Miami, j.shen@miami.eduShiyan Jiang, University of Miami, s.jiang@umiami.eduGuanhua Chen, University of Miami, gxc186@miami.eduMarie Hamaoui, University of Miami, marierestler@gmail.comJuan Torralba, University of Miami, jxt677@miami.eduAbstract: This study reports how 31 adolescents enrolled in an informal academy focused onSTEM and digital literacies reflected on their experiences by creating short multimodalvideos. Initial findings reveal how students remixed a variety of modes—includingphotographs, videos, text, animation, and music—to reflect on their learning, collaborations,and digital projects. Students simultaneously composed for multiple audiences through theirmultimodal reflections, while learning more about themselves and new technical skills.Keywords: reflection, multimodality, digital literacies, adolescents, STEAM learningIntroductionReflection is the process of returning to experience, connecting with thoughts and feelings during thatexperience, and reexamining it through a new perspective (Boud, Keogh, & Walker, 1985). The importance ofreflection as a conduit for learning and personal growth has been emphasized for some time in educationalresearch (Dewey, 1933). However, much of this work has occurred in English Language Arts settings withstudents writing reflections after they submit an essay (Yancey, 1998). To date, little research has examined howyouth reflect on their processes when creating multimodal projects (however, see Smith & Dalton, 2016). Thisstudy contributes to this underdeveloped area by exploring how culturally and linguistically diverse adolescentsreflected on their experiences in an informal STEM+L academy by creating multimodal video reflections.Theoretical frameworkWe draw from social semiotics theory (Kress, 2010), which is based on the assumption that various modes (e.g.,visuals, text, sound, movement) are integral in meaning making. The unique interweaving of different modescommunicates messages that no single mode can express independently (Jewitt, 2009). In addition, composersleverage the modal affordances of specific modes when creating their messages (Kress, 2010).We also employ a sociocultural view of multimodal composition which forefronts the dialogicrelationship between composers and their composing tools (Wertsch, 1998). Just as modes offer communicativeaffordances (Kress, 2010), tools similarly offer unique possibilities for constructing meaning and reflection.Composers not only communicate through their orchestration of modes but simultaneously also formidentities—representing personal goals, interests, and self-presentation techniques (Rowsell & Pahl, 2007).Finally, remix is a core practice when students reflect through multiple modes. When remixing,composers manipulate and recombine modes and media to create new meaning (Knobel & Lankshear, 2008).MethodsThe study was conducted in the context of a STEM+L (“L” stands for digital literacies) academy for adolescents(ages 10-13) to develop knowledge, interests, and identities related to STEM practices and digital literacies.Participating students worked in small groups to produce a multimodal science fiction as their final project. Theacademy consisted of three components: a five-day summer camp, fall extension (once every month), and finalpresentation. A total of 42 students completed the summer camp (26 male, 16 female; 19 Latino/Hispanic, 14Black, 5 Other, 4 White), and a total of 33 students returned on the first session for the fall extension.During the first fall session, students were taught how to use Windows Moviemaker to produce videosand then asked to individually create a 1-minute video that reflected upon their experience in the summeracademy. Students had freedom in the content and format of their videos and were offered a variety of prompts,including how they collaborated, favorite and challenging aspects of the academy, and main “take-aways.”Students were provided a variety of multimedia data from the study, including photographs and videos ofICLS 2018 Proceedings1449© ISLSstudent presentations, guest speakers, group work, and their final products. Students also had the latitude toinclude their own visuals, text, or music. The entire task, including a tutorial, took ~90 minutes.Initial data analysis involved recursively coding students’ video reflections and their perspectivesgathered through online surveys to generate emergent categories for how students reflected through multiplemodes. Future analysis will also involve creating multimodal transcripts for videos and incorporating videoobservations for focal students as they created their reflections.Preliminary findings and implicationsA total of 31 videos were produced (length ranging from 14-209 seconds). Students leveraged the affordances ofmultiple modes and digital tools to reflect upon their experiences in the academy in three distinct ways.First, there were similarities in how students remixed different modes and media in their reflections.Students relied on visuals—photographs and embedded video clips—to “show” important elements of theircollaborative process and interesting guest speakers. Text was often layered on top of visuals to provide detailson their experience (Figure 1). Sergio explained, “Videos show what we did. Text and voice explain the video.”Music was used to convey affective dimensions of students’ experience (e.g., “optimistic music”).Figure 1. Examples of different ways students remixed media in their multimodal reflections.Second, students’ reflections were targeted for multiple audiences. A majority of students explainedthey had other viewers in mind when creating their video—including to “show people how we learn and whatwe do” and “how fun the academy was.” Sean explained, “My goal was to create a video that would persuadeviewers to come to [the STEM+L academy] and experience these moments themselves. I wanted to createsomething appealing and also interesting.” In addition to reaching others, students also explained personal goals(e.g., “to please myself”) and motivations to have “the best” video out of their peers.Lastly, students’ videos and perspectives revealed how they learned on multiple levels through creatingtheir reflections. Along with sharing the collaboration skills and science content they acquired, students alsoexplained how their experience of creating the videos helped them to acquire new technical skills. Additionally,some students shared personal benefits from the video reflection. Maya revealed how she “learned that sharingexperiences can help you connect with other people” and Fabian explained, “I learned that I like science.”We believe our study will shed light on the value of asking students to reflect upon and share theirexperiences through multiple modes in digital spaces.Selected ReferencesBoud, D., Keogh, R., & Walker, D. (1985). Reflection, turning experience into learning. London, UK: KoganPage.Dewey, J. (1933). How we think. Boston, MA: D.C. Heath.Knobel, M., & Lankshear, C. (2008). Remix: The art and craft of endless hybridization. Journal of Adolescent &Adult Literacy, 52(1), 22–33.Kress, G. (2010). Multimodality: A social semiotic approach to contemporary communication. NY: RoutledgeSmith, B. E. & Dalton, B. (2016). “Seeing it from a different light”: Adolescents’ video reflections about theirmultimodal compositions. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 59(6), 719-729.Yancey, K.B. (1998). Reflection in the writing classroom. Logan: Utah State University Press.AcknowledgementsThis material is based upon work supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) under grant numberDRL1713191. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions expressed in this poster are those of the authors and donot necessarily reflect the views of the NSF.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1450© ISLS