Supporting Inquiry Learning as a Practice: A Practice Perspectiveon the Challenges of IBL Design, Implementation and ResearchMethodologyFleur R. Prinsen, Welten Institute, Open University of the Netherlands, fleur.prinsen@ou.nlAbstract: Inquiry Based Learning (IBL) provides learners with an authentic learningchallenge and valuable opportunities to improve their scientific domain knowledge, whileexpanding their repertoire of creative skills and attitudes. But mastering the “what”, “why”and “how” of the cultural tools that science employs, and appropriating the structures andsystems designed to enculturate them into communities of inquiry is no easy feat. Taking apractice perspective on IBL can illuminate some challenges that teachers, students andeducational designers encounter, and may help researchers operationalize important variables,capturing the complexity of this learning practice. A new definition of IBL will be unpackedshowing the added value of regarding it as a practice. This will inform the pedagogical designapproach, but will also hold implications for methods of research. The feasibility of theambition to enculturate learners into an authentic practice, providing them with transferrableskills, will be discussed.Keywords: Inquiry Based Learning, practice, authentic, design, implementationIntroductionInquiry experiences can provide valuable opportunities for learners to improve their scientific domainknowledge and expand their repertoire of creative learning skills and attitudes (Saunders-Stewart, Gyles, &Shore, 2012). Mastering scientific inquiry means mastering the “what,” “why,” and “how” of the cultural toolsthat scientists employ (Lehrer and Palincsar, 2014). These tools (e.g. systematic ways of thinking, researchinstruments, and conventions like peer-review) are embedded within the activities through which scientists buildtheir knowledge. When introducing Inquiry Based Learning (IBL) into the educational context, this representsconsiderable complexities and uncertainties for both teachers and learners. Still, IBL is increasingly valued andrecognized as a powerful form of learning, fit for the 21st century (Hmelo-Silver, Duncan and Chinn, 2007).According to Anderson’s (2002) definition “Inquiry science is a hands-on constructivist approach toscience education. Students address teachers’ and students’ questions about natural phenomena or events byconducting scientific investigations in which they collaboratively develop plans, collect and explain evidence,connect the explanations to existing scientific knowledge, and communicate and justify the explanations”(Anderson, 2002). This definition specifies some explicit activities that students and teachers engage in.Students conduct collaborative scientific investigations, that mimic to some degree the practices of actualscientists who are co-creating new knowledge. Through their collaborative activities they practice moresystematic ways of thinking (applying e.g. critical thinking, analytic thinking and information literacy), learn touse instruments (computer/technical) and practice their collaboration and communication skills. Throughengaging in inquiry practices, students can become aware of the process of producing, testing, and revisingknowledge and the criteria of evaluating knowledge claims (Smith, Maclin, Houghton, & Hennessey, 2000).Still, the implementation of IBL often runs into problems. The richness in social meanings, embeddedin the practices of scientific communities of inquiry, may not be easily grasped in the context of schools, sinceactivities in that context draw on implicit or explicit understandings of how learning takes place that are not indirect accordance, or are discontinuous with the epistemology underlying the practice of IBL. But in the 21stcentury we should be preparing students to engage in a multiplicity of communities, and help them be awarehow learning can happen across contexts (e.g. Kim, Hung, Jamaludin & Lim, 2014). Consequently, bothteachers and students need to learn to balance and manage the tensions that arise when ‘stepping into’ a differentcontext of learning (see also Hung, Ng, Koh, & Lim, 2009).But how do we best explain the difficulties that learners have in mastering and appropriating (Wertsch& Rozin, 1998) the cultural tools of science inquiry? How do we get learners engaged in this complex process?What kind of conceptual and technological tools can we apply? An often cited publication by Edelson, Gordin,& Pea (1999) lists several challenges of IBL and how they might be addressed through technology andcurriculum design. These challenges (motivation, accessibility of investigation techniques, backgroundknowledge & skills, and practical constraints in the learning context) are still prevalent today. The current paperICLS 2016 Proceedings74© ISLSproblematizes the way in which these challenges are framed, and provides some thoughts towards explainingwhy students may not respond to pedagogical and technological IBL designs the way we anticipate. The aim isto introduce a relational epistemology of practice, and a new definition of IBL, which will help those involved(teachers, designers, researchers and learners) better understand and appropriate the structures and systems thatare designed to help build their own communities of inquiry. Figure 1 provides an overview of theconsiderations which emanate from taking a practice perspective on IBL.Figure 1. Epistemology, Design, Research and Pedagogy of IBL as Practice.A relational epistemology of practiceIBL draws on several theoretical frameworks to explain how learning happens; for instance experientiallearning theory (Healey, 2005), situated learning (Crawford, 2007), constructivist theories of learning (HmeloSilver et al., 2007), social learning theory (Bandura, 1986; West, 2009) and socio-cultural theory (Wortham,2008; Kyza, 3012). These theories all consider aspects of epistemology. Epistemologies specify the nature ofknowledge (e.g certainty/diversity), how knowledge develops (ways of knowing, e.g. the relationship betweenthe knowers and the known), and how it is justified (quality control). Our epistemologies influence how we, asteachers (Lunenberg, Ponte & van de Ven, 2007) researchers (Fenstermacher, 1994; Allert, 2010), designers(Chee, 2011) or learners (Hogan & Maglienti, 2001; Baek, & Schwarz,2015), view the world and act in it. Theyinfluence how we see learning, how we study and support it, and how we (chose to) learn and assess.If we want to support deep learning (involving critical thinking, analysis, and evaluation skills) andmeaning making, our epistemological beliefs and those held by students matter. Said simply, if we think that allknowledge is already ‘out there’, that google is an authoritative source for true and certain knowledge, and thatwe can just look up THE answer to our questions, why would we even engage in inquiry as learners? Students’epistemologies are dependent on the contexts in which they encounter knowledge (Hammer and Elby, 2002;Sandoval and Morrison, 2003). Maybe we pay too little attention to the view of knowledge which is held inpractical educational contexts, and to the implications this view has for our understanding of IBL and it’spractical design. IBL activities, when not properly embedded in (or as an expansion on) the primary context(Dohn, 2013) of learning, are at risk of not being experienced as fully meaningful. They are introduced as sideprojects, after which we return to what is really at stake.IBL most often involves collaborative arrangements, and many educational IBL designs involvetechnological support. Suthers (2006) discussed several epistemologies applicable to collaborative learningarrangements, supported by technological designs. He lays bare a variety of assumptions we may hold of whatit means to learn in collaborative settings. A common account of learning seems to position itself somewherebetween purely individual epistemologies (learning remains a process within individual minds) and completelyintersubjective epistemologies (learning consists of interactions), stating that learning is a group activity thatresults in individual changes. In IBL approaches learning is often characterised as a form of collaborativeknowledge construction (Stahl, 2000), implying an interactional constructivist epistemology.So interaction between people leads to learning, but does this provide us with a complete picture ofwhat is going on when we introduce IBL into classrooms? An intersubjective epistemology assumes aparticipatory process within which beliefs are enacted, without being necessarily mutually accepted.Intersubjectivity is a process of mutual constitution (Matusov, 1996, Wegerif, 2006). When students arenegotiating their understandings of how they are supposed to learn (and which beliefs to hold in the process),this represents learning at an interpersonal level. To better support learning as becoming embedded within theICLS 2016 Proceedings75© ISLSpractice of a community, learning might additionally have to be addressed at the community level, wherelearning is a process of legitimate peripheral participation (Lave & Wenger, 1999). When IBL is first introducedwe cannot assume that a community of scientific practice can be instantly created and that it will pursueexternally driven goals; we should not ignore the critical issues of negotiated meaning, personal history andtrajectories of learning (e.g. Henderson, 2015). Shared goals and expectations will have to be negotiated andcultural tools appropriated. Scientific epistemology refers to beliefs and views about how scientific knowledgeis developed and justified, and involves a set of ideas and assumptions about the nature of science (Hogan andMaglienti 2001; Sandoval 2005). Even though it is difficult to attain the levels of epistemological understandingthat professional scientists attain (Wu & Wu, 2011; Chuy et al., 2010), we could introduce students as legitimateperipheral participants (Lave & Wenger, 1999) in a community that develops scientific practice.The technological tools we, as educational designers, introduce also need to be considered. These toolsbecome similarly embedded in the practice of IBL, and they hold representations that externalise the designers’beliefs about what is important in IBL practice. The (broader) pedagogical design shapes, and to some extentmay constrain the activities that students develop. Technology design can provide possibilities for certain(intersubjective) relations, but may not for others. Thus, the consequence is that an applicable epistemologyincludes the tools available and considers how the students relate to them. This epistemology is not onlyintersubjective, it is relational; a relational epistemology of practice. The epistemology of IBL is in essence thatknowledge emerges, or is constructed, in relational interaction, between learners, more knowledgeable others,and the cultural resources of a community of practice (CoP). Based on the ideas presented about regarding IBLfrom a practice perspective, a new definition of IBL Practice is introduced:Inquiry-Based Learning Practice: Engagement in continuous, immersive and meaningful inquiryactivities, organised around recognised and shared goals, applying a repertoire of skills and attitudesnecessary for participation in a community of inquiry, while negotiating, mastering and appropriatingits cultural tools.This expansive definition achieves a couple of things, which will now be demonstrated by unpacking anddiscussing its elements. First, it explicitly includes the cultural tools of a broad community of inquiry. Whendoing inquiry, students enter into a tradition of knowledge creation evolving for centuries. Being aware that we,as learners, are standing on the shoulders of giants, that we can take an active role in the co-generation ofknowledge, science being collective in nature (Schibeci, 1986; Fleer, 2013) both humbles and empowers us. Thedefinition further reminds us that knowledge is continuously being (re)developed. To speak of a practice, theparticipants need to hold some things in common, and the definition claims a clearly recognized common goal isnecessary. The activities that we design for IBL may not initially be perceived as meaningful. Students are oftentask-oriented and are not often invited to consider if these tasks trigger meaningful activity for them. Meaning iscreated and negotiated in activity, and activity is formed by the meaning it instantiates and perpetuates (Dohn,2014). The use of the term immersive reminds us that we should help students cross the boundaries thatscience’s cultural tools might raise for them, not only by providing appropriate designs that support seamlesslearning interactions, but by examining with them the relations they are forming with each other and with thecultural tools of science. The referral to the ‘community of inquiry’ aims to evoke the concept of ‘community ofpractice’, not simply as an aspirational state of harmonious collaboration, an instrumentalist strategy(Henderson, 2015), or a way to achieve the adoption of (mobile) IBL technology, but to ensure we acknowledgethe complex relationship between technology, learners, the collective and a ‘given’ socio-cultural context.Design issuesSo given the complex relationship between these elements, how do we design for IBL practice? According toWenger (1998), practice is not a result of design but a response to design. Even if a set of procedures areimposed on the learners, the practices surrounding them will be a result of negotiated meaning by theparticipants. The activities students engage in are emergent from the design of tasks, the affordances of thelearning environment (Suthers, 2006), and the division of labor. Participants are bound by socially constructedwebs of belief (essential to understanding what they do), and are not simply connected through the tasks they aregiven (Brown, Collins, & Duguid 1989). This means that, even though the teacher and the mediating technologycan provide cues for activities, how they will emerge remains to a certain degree uncertain. The consequence ofthis uncertainty is that it may be wise to apply broad principles providing teachers and educational designerswith useful guidance and helpful foci, without constraining creativity. Educational design generally needs to bebased on a pedagogical framework (e.g. Protopsaltis, Bedek, Kopeinik, Prinsen, & Parodi, 2015), but whenimplementing and adapting such a design, we should consider taking the practice of IBL as a starting point. Thismay prevent us from designing systems that do not amply (seamlessly) support the developing practice. AICLS 2016 Proceedings76© ISLSlearning environment, instead of being viewed as an application, might more productively be conceived of as anapproach (Downes, 2005), that encourages the development of communities of inquiry. For instance, personallearning environments (PLE’s) allow for a certain degree of flexibility, providing contextually appropriatetoolsets that can be adjusted (e.g. by being modular) according to current needs and circumstances. Even if wecannot design learning itself, from a CoP stance we can design an environment that will either facilitate orfrustrate emergent practices and identity (Wenger, 1998). The fact that practices are by nature in constantdevelopmental flux means that IBL design will not necessarily progress toward an ideal or ‘always successful’design, but that the possibility of adaptation will be key. User-driven development and formative evaluations(Bedek et al., 2015) can be adopted as part of the ongoing design process, allowing to pinpoint and help resolvearising issues in a process of collaboration between technology development and pedagogy.IBL entails the application of a repertoire of skills and attitudes, and mastery of cultural tools.Extensive scaffolding is employed in inquiry learning approaches (Hmelo-Silver et al., 2007), reducingcognitive load through cognitive apprenticeship (Quintana et al., 2004), and allowing students to learn incomplex domains. The main assumption behind such designs is that given structure and guidance, students willbecome increasingly accomplished problem-solvers. Scaffolding is provided through task structuring, coachingand the provision of hints. A literature review on potential types of guidance for supporting student inquirywhen using for instance virtual and remote labs (Zacharia et al., 2015) identifies six types of guidance;constraining the process, using a performance dashboard, providing prompts, providing heuristics, scaffolding,and direct presentation of information. Care should be taken, though, to not forget that we are designing anenvironment that engages students in an ongoing social process and that their systematic ways of thinking arenot just mediated by artefacts but also through dialogue about the reasons behind provided structure andguidance. Guidance thus also means that teachers provide time to pause and identify the rules and norms(conventions) governing the collective understanding in the moment, placing the perceptions and views of themembers of the culture under study.Since IBL is a social process, many current designs include feedback (e.g. dashboards) and reflectiontools (e.g. digital notebooks, or reflection widgets) with which social factors and student perceptions can beexamined. Additionally, the affordances of social media are increasingly integrated to support collaborationacross time and space, and to provision more just in time support. The ways in which the inclusion of suchmedia actually supports continuous, immersive and meaningful IBL activities is still under study.Students’ responses to technological designs are most often examined through usability measures, andthe examination of cognitive load and student motivation. Sometimes engagement is examined through log-filedata. Usability tests often does not include pedagogical criteria (Nokelainen, 2006), even though pedagogicalusability should be central to any design effort. This brings us to further consider some issues relating to howthe reconceptualization of IBL impacts on the ways in which we research the success of our designs.(Research) Methodological issuesHow do we research and capture inquiry learning as a practice? It is a challenge to move abstractconceptualisations into the realm of actual data. When we assert that “students’ employment and understandingof provided cultural tools (elements of our designs) are embedded in, and interdependent with, complex socialand cultural contexts (e.g. Rasmussen & Ludvigsen, 2010; Säljö 2010), it makes sense to follow students’activities in context and over time, to focus on students’ interaction trajectories (Ludvigsen et al., 2011) and onthe process of knowledge construction and meaning making. Situated learning provides us with a messy reality,but CoP (social practice theories) can have significant value as an analytical framework to understand it.The CoP approach has been criticised as being too abstract, and consequently too difficult tooperationalize (Storberg-Walker, 2008). It is clear that practice is not only the thing that members do(participate/activity), but also the ways in which they understand what they do (attributed meaning). Still, thereis uncertainty as to the appropriate level of analysis (Storberg-Walker, 2008); are we analysing at the level ofcollective meaning (examining mutual engagement; interactions) or individual meaning (examiningparticipation)? This is a multi-level issue, and a challenge to understand how an event at one level can shape anevent at another.By capturing interaction patterns (e.g. through network analysis, actor network analysis, and/orsemantic analysis) and how they develop over time, we can focus on the relations being formed with provided(and emergent) cultural resources. This means combining quantitative ánd qualitative measures. Whilecollecting evidence of students using the tools (e.g. through logs) and applying inquiry skills, we should alsoconsider to what level they appropriate them; if they recognise their use and value.Storberg-Walker (2008) provides, as one solution to the problem of capturing collective meaningmaking, the establishment of research to practice partnerships, in which practitioners take a leading role inICLS 2016 Proceedings77© ISLSidentifying, assessing, critiquing, and problematizing aspects of practice. It seems that not only teachers andstudents should engage in the ongoing social process of inquiry, but researchers should immerse themselves inthe local practices more often and co-engage in the negotiation of the tools supporting inquiry practice. After all,they are themselves practical experts.Implications for the educational contextThe aforementioned issues have clear indications for the educational context. Introducing a new practice in thiscase means introducing a new view of knowledge and of how learning takes place. This requires explicitattention, since learners’ epistemologies influence how they see and approach learning. Making time to explorewith students their views on the Nature of Science can help bring to light their current conceptions (Wu & Wu,2011) and introduce novel conceptions, more in line with how the source, the nature and the justification ofknowledge is perceived in communities of inquiry.Working from a relational epistemology will place the focus on the group as a learning agent. Theapplication of social learning analytics (Buckingham Shum & Ferguson, 2012) can help shift the focus towardsproperties of learning which come into being through social activity. They can help examine how students areinterdependent of each other in the IBL process.Since IBL practice can only be emergent, as a response to educational design, it seems design can onlyprovide scaffolds and cues for IBL activities, but cannot determine this response. The ways in which studentsrespond needs additional monitoring, e.g. by providing them with opportunities to reflect on their experience. Inthis way they can explore how their personal viewpoints, feelings and values fit with the practices of science.It is clear that especially the ‘why’ of the cultural tools needs explicit negotiation (discovering thereasoning behind the practice). It may help to provide students with exemplary cases and to discuss with themthe role of activity structures, supporting systems and artefacts. Learning technologies form only one componentof the IBL ‘orchestration’, that is, “the process of productively coordinating supportive interventions acrossmultiple learning activities, occurring at multiple social levels” (Dillenbourg et al. 2009, 12).Conclusion and discussionThe exposition above attempts to make the cases that all the uncertainty, discomfort and hard work that go intosupporting IBL as a practice is worth it too make IBL a meaningful and productive experience for students. Ofcourse the perspective laid out in this article will be disputed, and there are many remaining questions, forinstance relating to the level of authenticity we can provide in and outside the classroom. Knight et al. (2014)endorse that students should be given the opportunities to engage in authentic learning challenges, wrestlingwith problems and engaging in practices increasingly close to the complexity they will confront when theymove on from school. According to Knight et al. (2014) the focus on practice reflects this growing recognitionin educational thinking. But it might be that there is no such thing as real authenticity in the context of ourclassrooms; are they by their nature artificial? In a draft version of a paper on ‘Defining authenticity’, Brownand Menasche (2006) argue for degrees of authenticity, rather than positing it as a binary concept (authentic ornot authentic). They define three types of task authenticity: ‘genuine’, ‘simulated’ and ‘pedagogical’ and statethat genuine authenticity "exists when learners engage in tasks in ways and for reasons they would in the realworld" (Brown & Menasche, 2006, p.3).But if IBL practice is considered as being in constant developmental flux, and can only approachauthenticity, then what do we mean by taking ‘IBL practice’ as a starting point when implementing and adaptingIBL designs in practice? We should realise that mimicking the actual practices of professionals is anunobtainable ideal in the context of e.g. primary and secondary schools. As Wu & Wu (2011) rightfully pointout, when we aim to examine whether students apply the epistemological beliefs of professional scientists (i.e.,formal epistemology), rather than the views and ideas they generated during inquiry practices in school (i.e.,practical epistemology; Sandoval 2005), we will find that students still hold naïve epistemological views.Clearly we should take into account their proximal knowledge of the nature of science (Hogan 2000; Sandoval2005). Their practical epistemology (involving ideas of the nature of knowledge, the approach of producingknowledge, and the criteria of evaluating knowledge) will more accurately reflect their decisions whileconstructing scientific knowledge and the criteria they apply in the evaluation of the knowledge which they aredeveloping. Studies of how professionals learn in practice (Cheetham & Chivers, 2001) show that the point ofbecoming a fully competent professional is often not reached until long after professional training has ended,and reaching it involved a range of experiences in the authentic CoP context.An additional concern that touches on learner participation in the practice of IBL is a concern overequity. Learners should be provided with learning opportunities that are equitable in access and quality. TheICLS 2016 Proceedings78© ISLSsocial and cultural dynamics of the collaborative practices within learning communities may have differentialeffects on learner participation and outcomes (e.g. Prinsen, Terwel, Zijlstra, & Volman, 2013). For instance, notall learners develop similar interests in science (Prinsen, 2012). According to Schreiner & Sjøberg (2007),interest in science can be conceptualized as a process of identification that develops within personally relevantsocial practices. The development of interest is a process that is mediated in various social contexts (Costa,1995) and with various cultural artefacts, through participation in practices in which particular values areenacted (e.g., Bøe, Henriksen, Lyons & Schreiner, 2011). Those who, through practice, identify successfullywith science persevere and re-engage with it over time. Hung and Chen (2007) develop a similar argument whenthey propose approaches, which emphasize the identity enculturation aspect in diverse communities.Finally, design should take into account the developmental stages at which the IBL practice currentlymanifests itself. Schools, at any one point, have their own form of authentic practice which will have to be fitinto a continuum of approaches that move towards the practices of actual professional scientific communities.Authentic learning challenges, according to Knight et al. (2014), provide the opportunity for developingtransferable skills and competencies, and the qualities needed to thrive in complexity and uncertainty. An oftenheard question from teachers is “Should or should we not decrease the complexity of the IBL process?” Eventhough there are many challenges presented in this paper, we may have to accept the complexity of IBL andprogressively support students in grappling with this complexity, without expecting them to ‘get it right’ toosoon. The newly proposed definition would suggest that it is a continuous process, and if we want learning tobecome a life-long endeavour, we owe it to our students to let them work through the struggles they willinevitably encounter when they continue to inquire the phenomena of life.ReferencesAllert, H. (2010). Coherent social systems for learning: An approach for contextualized and community-centredmetadata. Journal of interactive Media in Education, 2004(1), Art-7.Anderson, R. D. (2002). Reforming science teaching: What research says about inquiry. Journal of ScienceTeacher Education, 13(1), 1–12.Baek, H., & Schwarz, C. V. (2015). The influence of curriculum, instruction, technology, and social interactionson two fifth-grade students’ epistemologies in modeling throughout a model-based curriculumunit. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 24(2-3), 216-233.Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:Prentice-Hall.Bedek, M. A., Firssova, O., Stefanova, E. P., Prinsen, F., & Chaimala, F. (2014). User-driven Development ofan Inquiry-Based Learning Platform: Qualitative Formative Evaluations in weSPOT. InteractionDesign & Architecture (s), (23), 122-139.Bøe, M. V., Henriksen, E. K., Lyons, T., & Schreiner, C. (2011). Participation in science and technology:Young people’s achievement-related choices in late modern societies. Studies in Science Education,47(1), 37-71.Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educationalresearcher, 18 (1), 32-42.Dillenbourg, P., Järvelä, S., & Fischer, F. (2009). The evolution of research on computer-supportedcollaborative learning. In Technology-enhanced learning(pp. 3-19). Springer Netherlands.Chee, Y. S. (2011). Learning as becoming through performance, play and dialogue: A model of game-basedlearning with the game Legends of Alkhimia.Cheetham, G., & Chivers, G. (2001). How professionals learn in practice: an investigation of informal learningamongst people working in professions. Journal of European Industrial Training, 25(5), 247-292.Chuy, M., Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., Prinsen, F., Resendes, M., Messina, R., ... & Chow, A. (2010).Understanding the nature of science and scientific progress: A theory-building approach. CanadianJournal of Learning and Technology/La revue canadienne de l’apprentissage et de latechnologie, 36(1).Costa, V. B. (1995). When science is “another world”: Relationships between worlds of family, friends, school,and science. Science education, 79(3), 313-333.Crawford, B. A. (2007). Learning to teach science as inquiry in the rough and tumble of practice. Journal ofresearch in science teaching, 44(4), 613-642.Dohn, N. B. (2014). Implications for Networked Learning of the ‘Practice’ Side of Social Practice Theories: ATacit-Knowledge Perspective. In The design, experience and practice of networked learning (pp. 2949). Springer International Publishing.Downes, S. (2005). Feature: E-learning 2.0. Elearn magazine, 1.ICLS 2016 Proceedings79© ISLSEdelson, D. C., Gordin, D. N., & Pea, R. D. (1999). Addressing the challenges of inquiry-based learningthrough technology and curriculum design. Journal of the learning sciences, 8(3-4), 391-450.Fenstermacher, G. D. (1994). The knower and the known: The nature of knowledge in research onteaching. Review of research in education, 3-56.Fleer, M. (2013). Affective imagination in science education: Determining the emotional nature of scientific andtechnological learning of young children. Research in Science Education, 43(5), 2085-2106.Hammer D, Elby A (2002) On the form of a personal epistemology. In: Hofer BK, Pintrich PR (eds) Personalepistemology the psychology of beliefs about knowledge and knowing. L. Erlbaum, Mahwah, pp 171–192.Healey, M. (2005). Linking research and teaching exploring disciplinary spaces and the role of inquiry-basedlearning. Reshaping the university: new relationships between research, scholarship and teaching, 6778.Henderson, M. (2015). The (mis)use of community of practice: Delusion, confusion and instrumentalism ineducational technology research. In Scott Bulfin, Nicola F. Johnson and Chris Bigum (Eds). Criticalperspectives on education and technology. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. pp.127-140.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Duncan, R. G., & Chinn, C. A. (2007). Scaffolding and achievement in problem-based andinquiry learning: A response to Kirschner, Sweller, and Clark (2006). Educational Psychologist, 42(2),99-107.Hogan, K. (2000). Exploring a process view of students’ knowledge about the nature of science. ScienceEducation, 84(1), 51–70.Hogan, K., & Maglienti, M. (2001). Comparing the epistemological underpinnings of students' and scientists'reasoning about conclusions. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(6), 663-687.Hung, D., & Chen, D. T. V. (2007). Context–process authenticity in learning: implications for identityenculturation and boundary crossing. Educational Technology Research and Development, 55(2), 147167.Hung, D., Ng, P.T., Koh, T.S., & Lim, S.H. (2009). The social practice of learning: A craft for the 21st century.Asia Pacific Education Review, 10, 205–214.Kim, M. S., Hung, W. L. D., Jamaludin, A. B., & Lim, S. H. (2014). Expanding “within context” to “acrosscontexts” learning: a case study of informal and formal activities. Interactive LearningEnvironments, 22(6), 704-720., DOI: 10.1080/10494820.2012.745424Knight, S., Wise, A. F., Arastoopour, G., Williamson Shaffer, D., Buckingham Shum, S., & Kirschner, P. A.(2014). Analytics for learning and becoming in practice. In: International Conference of the LearningSciences (ICLS 2014), 23-27 June 2014, Boulder, Colarado, pp. 1680–1683.Kyza, E. A. (2013). Networked Technologies to Foster Students’ Collaboration and Reflection. In EmergingTechnologies for the Classroom (pp. 113-126). Springer New York.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1999). Legitimate peripheral participation. Learners, learning and assessment, London:The Open University, 83-89.Lehrer, R., & Palincsar, A. S. (Eds.). (2014). Investigating Participant Structures in the Context of ScienceInstruction: A Special Issue of Cognition and Instruction (Vol. 22). Routledge.).Ludvigsen, S. R., Rasmussen, I., Krange, I., Moen, A., & Middleton, D. (2011). Temporalities of learning inintersecting trajectories of participation. In S. R. Ludvigsen, A. Lund, I. Rasmussen, & R. Säljö (Eds.),Learning across sites: New tools, infrastructures and practices. London: Routledge.Lunenberg, M., Ponte, P., & Van De Ven, P. H. (2007). Why shouldn't teachers and teacher educators conductresearch on their own practices? An epistemological exploration. European educational researchjournal, 6(1), 13-24.Matusov, E. (1996). Intersubjectivity without agreement. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 3(1), 25-45.Nokelainen, P. (2006). An empirical assessment of pedagogical usability criteria for digital learning materialwith elementary school students. Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 9(2), 178-197.Prinsen, F.R. (2012). Connective possibilities: Supporting the development of interest in science; inclusion ofgirls in (online) knowledge networks. Approved ELS Starting grant application. Utrecht University.DOI 10.13140/RG.2.1.4563.4320.Prinsen, F. R., Terwel, J., Zijlstra, B. J., & Volman, M. M. (2013). The effects of guided elaboration in a CSCLprogramme on the learning outcomes of primary school students from Dutch and immigrantfamilies. Educational Research and Evaluation, 19(1), 39-57.Protopsaltis, A., Bedek, M., Kopeinik, S., Prinsen, F., & Parodi, E. (2015). DELIVERABLE D2.3.2: RevisedPedagogical and Diagnostic Frameworks. Collaborative Grant Agreement No.: 318499 Last accessed:http://portal.ou.nl/documents/7822028/5a4e60fd-8698-4e3c-ab1d-b9ecf4413e15.ICLS 2016 Proceedings80© ISLSQuintana, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R. G., ... & Soloway, E. (2004). Ascaffolding design framework for software to support science inquiry. The journal of the learningsciences, 13(3), 337-386.Rasmussen, I., & Ludvigsen, S. (2010). Learning with computer tools and environments: A socioculturalperspective. International handbook of psychology in education, 399-435.Säljö, R. (2010). Digital tools and challenges to institutional traditions of learning: technologies, social memoryand the performative nature of learning.Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 26(1), 53-64.Schibeci, R. A. (1986). Images of science and scientists and science education. Science Education, 70(2), 139149.Schreiner, C. & Sjøberg, S. (2007). Science education and youth's identity construction - two incompatibleprojects? In D. Corrigan J., Dillon, & R. Gunstone (Eds.), The Re-emergence of Values in the ScienceCurriculum. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.Shum, S. B., & Ferguson, R. (2012). Social learning analytics. Journal of educational technology &society, 15(3), 3-26.Rogers, Y., & Price, S. (2008). The role of mobile devices in facilitating collaborative inquiry in situ. Researchand Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 3(03), 209-229.Sandoval, W. A. (2005). Understanding students’ practical epistemologies and their influence on learningthrough inquiry. Science Education, 89, 634–656.Sandoval WA, & Morrison K (2003) High school students’ ideas about theories and theory change after abiological inquiry unit. J Res Science Teach 40(4):369–392. doi:10.1002/tea.10081Saunders-Stewart, K. S., Gyles, P. D., & Shore, B. M. (2012). Student Outcomes in Inquiry Instruction ALiterature-Derived Inventory. Journal of advanced academics, 23(1), 5-31.Smith, C. L., Maclin, D., Houghton, C., & Hennessey, M. G. (2000). Sixth-grade students' epistemologies ofscience: The impact of school science experiences on epistemological development. Cognition andInstruction, 18(3), 349-422.Stahl, G. (2000). A model of collaborative knowledge-building. In Fourth international conference of thelearning sciences (Vol. 10, pp. 70-77). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2000a.Storberg-Walker, J. (2008). Wenger's communities of practice revisited: A (failed?) exercise in appliedcommunities of practice theory-building research. Advances in Developing Human Resources, 10(4),555-577.Suthers, D. D. (2006). Technology affordances for intersubjective meaning making: A research agenda forCSCL. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 315-337.Suthers, D. D. (2005, May). Technology affordances for intersubjective learning: A thematic agenda for CSCL.In Proceedings of th 2005 conference on Computer support for collaborative learning: learning 2005:the next 10 years! (pp. 662-671). International Society of the Learning Sciences.Tsourlidaki, E. (2015). Identifying potential types of guidance for supporting student inquiry when using virtualand remote labs in science: a literature review. Educational technology research anddevelopment,63(2), 257-302.Wegerif, R. (2006). A dialogic understanding of the relationship between CSCL and teaching thinkingskills. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(1), 143-157.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning as a social system. Systems thinker, 9(5), 2-3.Wertsch, J. & Rozin, M. (1998). Mind as Action. New York: Oxford University Press.West, R. E. (2009). What is shared? A framework for understanding shared innovation withincommunities. Educational Technology Research and Development, 57(3), 315-332.Wortham, D. W. (2008). Activity systems in the inquiry classroom. ProQuest.Wu, H. K., & Wu, C. L. (2011). Exploring the development of fifth graders’ practical epistemologies andexplanation skills in inquiry-based learning classrooms. Research in Science Education, 41(3), 319340.Zacharia, Z. C., Manoli, C., Xenofontos, N., de Jong, T., Pedaste, M., van Riesen, S. A., Kamp, E.T., Mäeots,M., Siiman, L., & Tsourlidaki, E. (2015). Identifying potential types of guidance for supporting studentinquiry when using virtual and remote labs in science: a literature review. Educational technologyresearch and development,63(2), 257-302.ICLS 2016 Proceedings81© ISLS