Community-Based Design Partnerships:Examples from a New Generation of CHAT/DBRJosé W. Meléndez (co-chair), University of Illinois at Chicago, jmelen5@uic.eduJosh Radinsky (co-chair), University of Illinois at Chicago, joshuar@uic.eduShirin Vossoughi, Northwestern University, shirin.vossoughi@northwestern.eduAnanda Marin, University of California Los Angeles, marin@gseis.ucla.eduMegan Bang, University of Washington, mbang3@uw.eduCharlene Nolan, University of Washington, nolanc3@uw.eduNathan Phillips, University of Illinois at Chicago, phillipn@uic.eduVirginia Killian Lund, University of Illinois at Chicago, vkilli2@uic.eduWendy Gonzales, University of Illinois at Chicago, wmarti6@uic.eduShawndra Allen-Hegbe, University of Illinois at Chicago, sallen26@uic.eduDavid Bild, Chicago Academy of Sciences / Peggy Notebaert Nature Museum, dbild@naturemuseum.orgIlana Bruton, Chicago History Museum, bruton@chicagohistory.orgJaclyn Carmichael, Project Exploration, jcarmichael@projectexploration.orgEmma Martell, Lincoln Park Zoo, emartell@lpzoo.orgAni Schmidt, Chicago History Museum, schmidt@chicagohistory.orgSusan Jurow (co-discussant), University of Colorado Boulder, susan.jurow@colorado.eduRogers Hall (co-discussant), Vanderbilt University, rogers.hall@vanderbilt.eduAbstract: There has been great interest recently, across research communities, in theintersection of formative interventionist methodologies (originating in cultural-historicalactivity theory, or CHAT) and design-based research (originating in the learning sciences). Arecent special issue of the Journal of the Learning Sciences was dedicated to exploring“CHAT/DBR” from multiple perspectives (Penuel, Cole & O’Neill, 2016). Beyond thesimilarities and differences between these methodologies, this scholarship also imagines newpossibilities and orientations drawing on the two traditions – new roles for researchers andcollaborators, alternative “argumentative grammars” (Kelly, 2004) underlying theseapproaches, and even new conceptions of learning itself. This symposium highlights the workof emerging scholars whose research employs variations of CHAT-inspired DBR incollaborative, community-grounded work oriented toward social change. The session offersinnovative perspectives on how we conceptualize learning; rethinking design in our methods;what constitutes a learning environment; and rethinking relationships among researchers,partners, learners and interventions.Focus of the symposiumThere has been great interest recently in the intersection of formative interventionist methodologies (originatingin cultural-historical activity theory, or CHAT) and design-based research (originating in the learning sciences).A recent special issue of the Journal of the Learning Sciences was dedicated to exploring “CHAT/DBR” frommultiple perspectives (Penuel, Cole & O’Neill, 2016). Beyond the similarities and differences betweenmethodologies, this scholarship also imagines new possibilities and orientations drawing on the two traditions –new roles for researchers and collaborators, alternative “argumentative grammars” (Kelly, 2004) underlyingthese approaches, and even new conceptions of learning itself.The JLS special issue offered case studies of CHAT-DBR projects that, while diverse in methods andtheoretical framing, suggested a set of “family resemblances.” For one thing, the learning environments tend tobe removed from the familiar learning-sciences context of the classroom. In the words of Cole & Packer (2016),“although the learning sciences may have escaped from the laboratory, it has not escaped very far. Rather, it hasescaped to the school classroom, a (very) artificial setting that gave shape to laboratory procedures in the firstplace” (Cole & Packer, 2016, p. 505). By contrast, the CHAT/DBR cases in the special issue moved notablyfarther from the “container” of the classroom (Leander, Phillips & Taylor, 2010), out to urban gardens, floodingfavelas, programs for migrant youth, and other complex and evolving contexts. With this “escape” came morediverse conceptualizations of learning itself, decoupled from the strictures of curriculum and assessments.Also, as noted in the introduction to the special issue, another common feature of CHAT/DBR work is“a concern with praxis, or practical human activity to transform the world” (Penuel et al, 2016, p. 490). WhileDBR has always had an intent to effect change in real-world learning environments (Brown, 1992), the conceptICLS 2018 Proceedings1312© ISLSof praxis moves further from a linear model of (for example) researchers effecting change in teachers’ andstudents’ environments. Instead, it is concerned with the ways learners identify contradictions between therealities of their lives and the imagined futures they desire (Freire, 1970); collaborative design becomes a meansof internal transformation of the activity system that has both theoretical and practical implications (Gutierrez &Vossoughi, 2010). Rather than assume that transformation must be positive or “successful” in obtaining predetermined outcomes (cf. O’Neill, 2016), this stance offers lenses for examining the ways tensions andcontradictions in activity systems evolve with change, potentially both transforming and reproducing issues ofequity/inequity and agency/oppression.These features of CHAT/DBR projects – engagement with more diverse learning environments, and afocus on praxis or expansive learning – point to some fundamental theoretical and methodological shifts thatwere evident in the case studies and the commentaries in the JLS special issue, and extend through the papers inthis symposium. We use the symposium to explore a handful of these issues more deeply, through the lenses ofemerging scholars whose research employs variations of CHAT-inspired DBR in collaborative, communitygrounded work oriented toward social change.By highlighting the work of junior scholars, the symposium provides a window on directions this workis moving in the learning sciences community. The Discussant role in this symposium will be played by anintergenerational pair of scholars with intimate knowledge of these research traditions: Drs. Susan Jurow andRogers Hall. The discussion will be in the form of a conversation about the ways these papers advance theexploration of CHAT/DBR in the learning sciences; trends that are visible in the work of these emergingscholars; and challenges for the LS community in moving this line of research forward.Major issues illustrated by the collective workThe issues arising from the JLS special issue that organize this symposium are:1. Re-conceptualizing research-design partnerships – who designs, who researches, who learns2. Re-examining the research endeavor itself, including the life cycles of research projects and designs3. Studying learning processes at different scales of time, space, social organization, and units of analysis4. Historicizing learning processes and design work5. Embracing power struggles as central to learning and researchIn this section we review some of the key implications of each of these interconnected issues, and preview howthey are illuminated in the papers in the symposium. Descriptions of the individual presentations follow.Re-conceptualizing research-design partnershipsIn the studies shared in this symposium, the term “participants” refers to a collective whole that includescommunity members, organizational representatives, educators and researchers (including those who engage inmultiple capacities, e.g. participant action researcher). Community residents and others are not differentiated intheir capacity to enact change in their communities, while researchers are not positioned as external entitiescoming to a community to provide answers or solutions. Key defining features of these projects are the waycollaboration is structured, the way divisions of labor are negotiated, and the way designs for learning are cocreated. This is the central focus of the paper by Meléndez & Radinsky, and is addressed in different ways ineach of the papers.This process of co-design and co-research inevitably surfaces tensions and contradictions. The exerciseof agency by one partner can elicit push-back or resistance from another. The insights afforded by CHAT/DBRinclude revelation of underlying relationships of power, and opportunities to re-mediate these relationships (#5below). Importantly, the division of labor – who designs, who constructs goals – is explicitly negotiated, as partof the design itself. This is a focus of the paper by Phillips et al, through the lens of “mutual appropriation.” Theassumption is that hierarchies of power and agency are to be confronted and negotiated, with a focus on theneeds, histories, and possible futures of members of historically disenfranchised communities.Re-examining the research endeavor itselfThis focus on collaborative design and shared ownership of the three key aspects of any DBR project – research,design, and learning – upsets some of the traditional underpinnings of university-based research projects. Forexample, grant cycles, generally channeled through a university (with indirect costs accruing to the universitypartner), lock into place a number of constraints on collaborations that tend to disempower partners outside theuniversity. Processes of expansive learning and iterative co-design may take many years to evolve, and so maynot fit neatly into these funding cycles, as is the case for the design circles discussed by Marin, Bang & Nolan.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1313© ISLSThe nature of academic publications and conferences can reinforce assumptions that the important intellectualwork of the project resides with academics, undervaluing the contributions of community partners. Theassumption that published research should reflect “successful interventions” can distort the narratives that areproduced from a project (O’Neill, 2016).Each of the projects here struggles to re-mediate and reconfigure these assumptions and norms ofresearch. The languages of CHAT and DBR offer different affordances for constructing practices that affordlonger-term and more equitable collaborations around research and design. The projects seek to identify thelonger histories and trajectories of each of the learning environments engaged in the partnership, beyond anindividual design that may emerge within a given project -- an explicit focus of Vossoughi’s “sister-spaces,”which evolve from project to project, extending the life cycle of particular concepts, ethical groundings andanalytic foci. Each paper in the symposium reveals the ways multiple voices are brought to bear, and the waysthe structures of the partnership mediate these negotiations.Studying learning processes at different scalesAs noted above, researchers have highlighted the need for analytical approaches that take into account differentscales of time to study learning in practice (e.g., Engeström, 2011; Lemke, 2000; Sannino et al., 2016). Theseresearchers have made the argument for longer scales of time in studying learning in analytical units beyond theindividual – collective- and system-level learning that opens up new possibilities of what the learning processesthemselves can be. Supra-individual units of analysis are found in each of the papers here.As the learning sciences branch out into more naturalistic and less formalized settings, some of thedistinctions between teaching and learning break apart. In these settings, the collaborative design processincludes a negotiation of what is to be learned -- a conceptualization that can shift during the life of a project,across cycles of design and analysis. Participants from different communities bring different assumptions aboutlearning, such that initial intentions and goals are subject to change: “[t]hese intentions … are seen as only thestarting point, which a truly expansive learning process typically confronts and deviates from if the learners areto produce their own collective designs”, with their own learning goals (Sannino, et. al, pg. 3).This “deviation,” as learners collectively come to new awareness, facilitates participants’ agenticengagement in activity, producing collective-level learning (Roth & Lee, 2007). Changes to practices areconceived of as learning processes, entailing an “expansion in the object or subject … of activity” (Greeno &Engeström, 2014, p. 5). Rather than documenting the obtainment of pre-existing objectives, “[e]xpansivelearning is a creative type of learning in which learners join their forces to literally create something novel,essentially learning something that does not yet exist” (Sannino et al., 2016, p. 5). These processes are seen insymposium papers by Meléndez & Radinsky (as system-level learning), Vossoughi (as evolving subject-subjectrelations), and Phillips et al (as learning on the move).Historicizing learning processes and design workThe papers in this symposium, in different ways, attempt to meet the challenge of more deeply historicizing thelearning processes and designs at the heart of each project. One way in which this is accomplished is inattending to learning phenomena not just as present-day challenges, but as grounded in longer-term historicalprocesses: settler-colonial epistemologies and work to desettle those conceptions (Marin, Bang & Nolan);movements for critical literacies and political education (Vossoughi); and participatory budgeting as amovement for democratic empowerment (Meléndez & Radinsky).Another aspect of historicizing this work is in extending (and attending to) the histories of the designprocesses themselves. Longer term engagements with co-designers require “a degree of knowledge andlegitimacy” among the partners (O’Neill, 2016, p. 499) that is beyond what has often been the norm in learningsciences work in the past. Shared histories of collaborators plays a key role in establishing deep levels of trust,reciprocity, and local knowledge of practices and context (Penuel, Cole & O’Neill, 2016). In these moreextended histories of co-design, learning scientists, along with other participants, engage in “joint learningactivity to identify and refine the goals of the intervention and make visible the historical dimensions of acommunity’s practices” (Guttierez & Jurow, 2016, p. 5).As such, the emphasis is on how participants engage with history not as disjointed events of the past,but as “resources and understandings of the past into the future” which support new forms of learning, agency,and imagined possibilities (Guttierez & Jurow, 2016, p. 7). This involves attending to complex relationshipsamong present, past and future. In Vossoughi’s paper, a critical lens is brought to the analysis of histories toprovide structural critiques of normative hierarchies of power and imagined possible futures, while taking aprefigurative stance that attends to consequential impacts in the here and now (Bang & Vossoughi, 2016). InICLS 2018 Proceedings1314© ISLSMeléndez & Radinsky’s paper, learning outcomes include a hybrid space where political imaginaries of thefuture emerge alongside critical reflections on the past.Embracing power struggles as central to learning and researchResearch incorporating the political realm is a relatively new focus for the learning sciences (Radinsky &Tabak, 2017). The Politics of Learning Writing Collective calls for more explicitly political theorizations oflearning (Philip et al, 2017), to “address the powered and politicized contexts and consequences of learning inways that make it possible for children, families, and communities to create thriving, self determined lives”(p.4). There is a need for research not only that attends to power as an abstract term, but more importantly, thatshows how it manifests itself in practice, in relationship to learning. The papers in this symposium document avariety of contexts where questions of “diversity, inequality, conflict, complementarity, cooperation, anddifferences of power and knowledge are socially produced, reproduced and transformed” (Lave, 1988, p. 10).The papers in this symposium study designs from the perspective of how they engage power relations,including ways that they perpetuate or transform these relations. The papers dialogue with the concept ofhistorical agency (Gutierrez & Jurow, 2010), illustrating the ways in which agency is at the heart of designinglearning environments where equity and social justice are front and center (Philip et al, 2017). Recognizing thepower relationships inherent in the practices of research, the papers in this symposium use CHAT-DBR totrouble those relationships, aiming to re-mediate hierarchies of epistemology and pedagogy.One way to operationalize power is through identifying tensions and contradictions in the activity forwhich we design. “Historically formed contradictions” (Sannino et al, 2016) necessitate historical analysis ofthese tensions. Yet, even when tensions and contradictions are resolved, if we take an activity system to be anevolving and complex unit, new crystallizations of practices and innovative pathways of participation should beexpected to yield new tensions and contradictions in future design cycles. The papers in this symposium all casta different light on contradictions that emerge and evolve over the course of collaborative design partnerships.From stunted limitations to awakened imaginaries: Expansive learning amongLatino immigrant participants in participatory budgetingJosé W. Meléndez and Josh RadinskyThe authors provide a three-year case study of the Participatory Budgeting Process in the 49th ward of Chicago.Since the 1970s, local demands for more direct and meaningful participation in government processes that havedirect impact on communities and individuals’ lives have been growing. The communicative turn inparticipatory planning (Habermas, 1996) and the rise of social movements pushing for re-definitions ofcitizenship identity (Dagnino, 2003; Ellison, 1997; Flores, 2003) have resulted in a growing number ofparticipatory, deliberative, democratic processes. The focus of this paper is one example of this movement,called participatory budgeting, originating in Brazil and studied here in Chicago’s 49th Ward (PB49), the firstever PB process in the U.S. Processes such as PB49, which can have meaningful impact in communities, oftenare not representative of all constituents who are impacted by the decisions, either in participation levels or inwho is at the decision making table. This study examined three iterations (which we positioned as designed) ofthe PB49 process to investigate contradictions in how democratic practices (both direct and representational)played out in situ for a historically under-represented community: Latino immigrants.Using a CHAT/DBR approach, the study revealed expansive learning related to civic engagement, andthe development of civic capacities. As a case of praxis, the enactment of (and reflections on) designedinnovations to PB49 over three years led to changes in the structures of participation, as well as new politicalimaginaries of future possible selves for members of the ward’s predominant-Spanish speaking Latinoimmigrant community. These expansive learning processes were documented at the collective and systemslevels: at the collective level participants demonstrated qualitative changes in their agency, both over theirinvolvement with the PB49 process but also over the designed interventions that were being created in the nameof, for, and by participants. Evidence of collective learning also included figuring out how the city bureaucracyworks; conceptualizations of the needs of the Latino immigrant community; and emergent political imaginaries.At the system level of learning, this was noticed through changes in practices (new language and tools),activity structures, and greater incorporation of new participants - not just in numbers, but also in a change inthe object of activity. Three distinct system level learning findings were: the inability to support predominantLatino immigrants participants involvement in the first iteration; the expansion of the object of activity in thesecond iteration, resulting in the creation of new activity structures; and the eligibility of predominant Latinoimmigrants participants to join the leadership committee. With the push to expand participatory processes, thisICLS 2018 Proceedings1315© ISLSCHAT-inspired community-based design research partnership is an example of how a democratic process itselfis up for re-designing for social justice and equity learning environment.Sister-spaces: Participatory design research as a tool for studying learning ascollective, historical and prefigurative activityShirin VossoughiParticipatory Design Research (PDR) refers to a family of interventionist methodologies that include formativeinterventions (Engeström, 2011), Social Design Experiments (Gutiérrez & Vossoughi, 2010), and CommunityBased Design Research (Bang, Medin, Washinawatok, & Chapman, 2010). Methodologically and conceptually,PDR works to interweave structural critiques of normative hierarchies of power with imagined possible futures,taking a proleptic or prefigurative stance that attends to consequential impacts in the here and now (Bang &Vossoughi, 2016). This paper aims to further theorize the collective, historical, and prefigurative dimensions oflearning within PDR through an analysis of sister-spaces.Sister-spaces are educational contexts separated by physical space and/or historical era that embodyparallel values (Espinoza, Vossoughi & Rose, Under Review). Sister-spaces can also be thought of as thesettings that grow from settings, often through individuals who experience possible forms of activity and thendraw from that experience as a resource for design within a distinct context (what Zavala [2016] refers to as therepetitions of practice across space that embody developmentally new activity).The sister-spaces that form the primary objects of analysis in this paper include: a summer academicprogram for high school-aged migrant students (The Migrant Student Leadership Institute, or MSLI), whichunderstood itself as a student of historical models of political education and critical literacy, and two recentcases in which core principles from MSLI served as guides in the development and study of an after-schooltinkering setting and a summer bridge program. Information sources include key design documents, participantreflections, and ethnographic and interactional analysis of teaching and learning across the three settings.Findings elucidate the three dimensions—collective, historical and prefigurative— introduced above.One way of conceptualizing collective learning within DBR/CHAT projects is to move beyond individualviews of subject-object relations to treat the community or collective itself as the subject who designs, iteratesand studies a given setting. Recent work on PDR has also argued for foregrounding subject-subject relations asa domain of learning in itself (Bang & Vossoughi, 2016). Building from these perspectives, I consider howrelations across activity systems may constitute a distinct realm of learning and resource for pedagogy anddesign. As Gutiérrez and Arzubiaga (2012) argue, “the relations among and contradictions that exist betweenactivity systems are central to the analysis of human activity” (p. 205). Studies of multiple activity systems oftenconsider how people move and participate across distinct settings (home and school, for example), or analyzeobject-oriented activity across two or more settings to develop more adequately complex views of humanactivity, and to identify transformative potentialities.Taking a slightly different lens, I foreground the dimension of time, and consider what it means to treatparticular settings as learners in relation to other settings, be they present or past. This historical dimension oflearning raises new questions: how is learning mediated across time and space? If settings can be learners andteachers, what kinds of collective zones of proximal development might emerge between and across activitysystems? How might attention to longer time-scales productively shift how we define the “outcomes” or “fruits”of learning? What role does memory play in the ways individuals and collectives draw from past experiences todesign present and future activity? Lastly, prefiguration refers to forms of social change-making activity thatseek to enact or inhabit the kind of future they are working to bring into being, to express the political ends oftheir actions through their means (Yates, 2015). To better understand the prefigurative qualities of designedsister-spaces, I argue that we need views of present activity that account for historical traces (echoes ofprinciples and practices in other times and places), and views of activity systems past that attune us to the waysthey sowed seeds for future action and possibility.Community based place designing: Innovations in design practices forexpansive science educationAnanda Marin, Megan Bang, and Charlene NolanThe socio-ecological challenges of the 21st century will mark an important time in the evolution, adaptation, andreimagining of human communities and our relations with more-than-human life and the natural world - whatwe call nature-culture relations. Developing forms of education that prepare children to engage in problemsolving that also cultivate decolonial social and ecological justice is critical. In our work, we have engaged andICLS 2018 Proceedings1316© ISLSexplored the heterogeneity of human-nature relations that structure forms of learning with young people, theirfamilies, and communities as the central object of inquiry in the design and implementation of learning.Increasingly scholars are studying the ways in which constructions of relations between humans and the naturalworld shape cultural practices and impact knowledge, reasoning, and learning about, in, and with the naturalworld in cultural ecologies (e.g. Bang, 2015; Medin & Bang, 2014; see also: Lee, 2008; Rogoff; 2003). We havefocused on the relational construals between natural and human worlds, and have broadly referred to thisorientation as relational epistemologies. We suggest that observing and creating human-nature relations (e.g.relations with land, water and more-than-human life) is a routine, though deeply under-explored, part of humanlearning and activity that impacts what is learned, how learning happens, and why it is consequential.In this paper we present findings focused on designing early science learning environments forIndigenous children and their families. This study is part of an iterative community based design project whichinvolved community members, researchers, and graduate students to design and implement land-based earlyscience learning programs that facilitate and support Indigenous ways of knowing and western science. Landbased science education refers to science learning that is designed in places with critical historicity, engagesIndigenous ways of knowing and responds to the affordances of such places. The program was committed toemploying and reinforcing relational epistemologies (Bang & Marin, 2015; Bang & Medin, 2010). Afoundational activity in the program was remaking plant and animal relatives, by which we mean youth learnedabout culturally salient plant and animals as well as the cultural practices, histories and stories about them.The data for this study included 12 design meetings and 24 implementations in which communitymembers and scholars came together to design early science learning environments which we called “LittleOnes.” Each of the design sessions and implementation were audio and video recorded. Field notes were takenas well and facilitator debrief meetings were audio recorded as well. This data was content logged and thematicanalyzed across all data sets. Drawing from this broader analysis this paper focuses in on how design practicesevolved over the course of the project and how it expanded core understandings of culture, learning, andteaching practices across the practice.Overall we find that designers developed Indigenous pedagogies of walking, reading, and storying land(Cajete, 2000; Kawagley, 2006) through what we call place designing practices. Walking, reading, and storyingland was comprised of at least three dimensions: coordinating attention and observation, generatingexplanations and finding evidence, and creating a story about the perceptual field. Importantly, these dimensionsare all assembled through the layering of discursive, embodied, and ambulatory micro-practices (questions anddirectives, pointing gestures, shifts in movement) that involve a kind of onto-epistemological navigation whereparticipants weave their way through emergent understandings of local phenomena. In this paper we trace howthese pedagogical foci came to be and how design practices took shape as this pedagogical vision solidified. Forexample, we trace the evolution of design practices that began inside buildings in which the content and practiceof learning was talked “about” to a shift in which designers and teachers engaged in place designing in whichthey were both engaged in the learning activities they were planning with young people and their families asthey were planning – what we call withness planning (see Shotter, 2012). Importantly we trace how criticaldecolonial reflections on meanings of culture, learning, and land led to innovative design practices andultimately learning and teaching practices. These practices enabled transformative learning and ecologicalsystems in ways that were culturally robust. We draw implications from this work for how place baseddesigning practices made new semiotic landscapes (e.g. Goodwin, 2013) and specifically geo-semiotic (Scollon& Scollon, 2003) landscapes, available to educators in ways that expanded opportunities for learning and couldbe utilized across other teaching and learning contexts. Further we draw implications about how the innovatingdesign practices may be a critical site of innovation to create more equitable and just learning opportunities.Migrations, persistence, and mutual appropriation: Research/practice on themoveNathan C. Phillips, Virginia Killian Lund, Wendy Gonzales, Shawndra Allen-Hegbe, David Bild, Ilana Bruton,Ani Schmidt, Jaclyn Carmichael, and Emma MartellWe report on an ongoing research-practice partnership among university-based researchers and communitypartners from museums and cultural institutions in Chicago. We draw on ethnographically-documented sharedexperiences researchers and community partners have had over four years as we have worked to develop anddistribute tools for documenting, assessing, and reflecting on “learning on the move” (Taylor, 2017). Wecontinue to design and iterate tools/activities intended to be easily implemented by both novice and experiencededucators to guide program participants, educators, and staff in educational settings (e.g., zoos, schools,museums, after-school programs) in identifying their own learning on the move, reflecting on that learning, andICLS 2018 Proceedings1317© ISLSconsidering implications and intersections of learning taking place everyday across people’s lives with learningfrom/in formalized settings.Our approach to partnership and collective design and iteration is one of “mutual appropriation”(Downing-Wilson, Lecusay, & Cole, 2011), in which concepts, curricular materials, and activities take rootwithin the communities of our partnership but also within organizations outside of our partnership as we shareand distribute them. We view our partnership as both focused on better understanding and reflecting on teachingand learning “on the move” but also recognizing that, simultaneously, the objects, structures, curricula, andconcepts created by/in the partnership are also mobile. The movements of initial innovations can be described as“migrating and persisting over time, but participants appropriate these ideas and concepts, reshaping anddeploying them in unpredictable ways through personal interpretation and experience” (Downing-Wilson et al.,2011, p. 658; emphasis original). We view this as productive and healthy mutual appropriation, as allparticipants “are doing their best to achieve the common goals that anchor [our] continued interactions, whilestaying focused on [our] individual activities, which may or may not mesh perfectly with those of the otherparticipants” (Downing-Wilson et al., 2011, pp. 658-659).In this paper, we explore intersections of CHAT and DBR in the context of this particular researchpractice partnership, highlighting voices from across our partnership. We approach this analysis of distributedmeans and meaning making through the lens of transliteracies (Stornaiuolo, Smith, & Phillips, 2017) to observeand account for the ways that research-practice partnerships construct meaning and practice that migrates,persists, and is mutually appropriated at various scales (of time, participation, organizational structure) andalong (sometimes) intersecting trajectories with participants and practitioners.Our findings include the following: With respect to migration, conceptual movement is central to theproject’s goals, but we have found that migratory pathways, destinations, and adaptations are challenging totrack especially as generations of sharing spreads. With respect to persistence, we have found that some ideas,concepts, and activities do persist across scales of time and space. As some ideas migrate and assimilate to newcontexts, other ideas retain their character as they are taken up by new participants in new places for newpurposes. In our partnership, we have been purposeful about attending to persistence, consistently(re)calibrating around our emerging understandings of learning on the move. With respect to mutualappropriation, we have found that sharing our appropriations openly with each other has led to succeedingcycles of appropriation. We have found that openness around mutual appropriation does not mitigate frustration,disarticulations, and questions around commitments to persistence amidst migration but rather that opennessallows us to better understand each other's’ positions, commitments, and values with respect to key concepts inongoing iterations and cycles of conceptual production and meaning making.Significance of the contributionsThe papers in this symposium offer a coordinated attempt to move the conversation about CHAT/DBR forwardin our field. By focusing on the work of junior scholars and their collaborators, the symposium offers a view notonly of the state of the field, but of the near horizon of work that engages these methodologies and concepts.The five threads identified, running across the papers, offer a framework for engaging with the affordances,possibilities and challenges of CHAT/DBR. The great diversity of the learning contexts, designs forcollaborative work, and critical questions across the papers offers a promising opportunity to explore theboundaries of where CHAT/DBR might take us as a field.ReferencesArchibald, J. A. (2008). Indigenous storywork: Educating the heart, mind, body, and spirit. UBC press.Bang, M., Medin, D., Washinawatok, K., & Chapman, S. (2010). Innovations in culturally based scienceeducation through partnerships and community. In New science of learning (569-592). Springer NY.Bang, M., & Vossoughi, S. (2016). Participatory design research and educational justice: Studying learning andrelations within social change making.Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. The journal of the learning sciences, 2(2), 141-178.Cajete, G. (2000). Native science: Natural laws of interdependence. Clear Light Pub.Cole, M., & Packer, M. (2016). Design-based intervention research as the science of the doubly artificial.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25(4), 503-530.Dagnino, E. (2003). Citizenship in Latin America: an introduction. Latin American Perspectives, 3-17.Daniels, H. (2010). Implicity or Invincible Mediation in the Development of Interagency Work. In ActivityTheory in Practice: Promoting Learning Across Boundaries and Agencies (Ed.), Daniels, H., Edwards,A., Engeström, Y., Gallagher, T., & Ludvigsen, S. R. Pgs. 105-125. Oxford, UK: Routledge.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1318© ISLSDowning-Wilson, D., Lecusay, R., & Cole, M. (2011). Design experimentation and mutual appropriation: Twostrategies for university/community collaborative after-school interventions. Theory & Psychology,21(5), 656-680.Ellison, N. (1997). Towards a new social politics: citizenship and reflexivity in late modernity. Sociology, 31(4),697-717.Engeström, Y. (2011). From design experiments to formative interventions. Theory & Psychology, 21, 598-628.Engestöm, Y. & Sannino, A. (2016). Expansive learning on the move: Insights from ongoing research/Elapredizaje expansive en movimiento: Aportaciones de la investigación en curso. Infancia yAprendizaje, 39(3), 401-435.Espinoza, M., Vossoughi, S. & Rose, M. (Under Review). Matter of social fact: Studying dignity and theeducational process.Flores, W. V. (2003). New citizens, new rights: Undocumented immigrants and Latino cultural citizenship.Latin American Perspectives, 30(2), 295-308.Freire, P. (1970). Cultural action and conscientization. Harvard Educational Review, 40(3), 452-477.Greeno, J. G. (2016). Cultural-Historical Activity Theory/Design-Based Research in Pasteur’s Quadrant.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25(4), 634-639.Greeno, J. G., & Engeström, Y. (2014). Learning in activity. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbookof the Learning Sciences (2nd Edition). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Jurow, A. S. (2016). Social design experiments: Toward equity by design. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 25(4), 565-598.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Arzubiaga, A. (2012). An ecological and activity theoretic approach to studying diasporicand nondominant communities. Research on schools, neighborhoods, and communities: Toward civicresponsibility, 203-216.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Vossoughi, S. (2010). Lifting off the ground to return anew: Mediated praxis,transformative learning, and social design experiments. Journal of Teacher Education, 61, 100-117.Habermas, J. (1996). Contributions to a discourse theory of law and democracy. Cambridge: Polity Press.Kelly, A. (2004). Design research in education: Yes, but is it methodological? Journal of the Learning Sciences,13(1), 115-128.Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in Practice. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Leander, K. M., Phillips, N. C., & Taylor, K. H. (2010). The changing social spaces of learning: Mapping newmobilities. Review of research in education, 34(1), 329-394.Lemke, J. L. (2000). Across the scales of time: Artifacts, activities, and meanings in ecosocial systems. Mind,culture, and activity, 7(4), 273-290.O’Neill, D. K. (2016). Understanding design research–practice partnerships in context and time. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 25(4), 497-507.Penuel, W. R., Cole, M., & O’Neill, K (2016). Introduction to the Special Issue. Journal of the LearningSciences, 25(4), 487-496.Philip, T. M., Jurow, A. S., Vossoughi, S., Bang, M., & Zavala, M. (2017). The Learning Sciences in a New Eraof US Nationalism. COGNITION AND INSTRUCTION, 35(2), 91-102.Radinsky, J., & Tabak, I. (2017). Outgoing editors’ note: The Journal of the Learning Sciences as a mirror oftrends in the field.Rogoff, B. (2003). The cultural nature of human development. Oxford University PressRoth, W. M., & Lee, Y. J. (2007). “Vygotsky’s Neglected Legacy”: Cultural Historical Activity Theory. Reviewof Educational Research. 77(2), 186-232.Sannino, A., Engeström, Y., & Lemos, M. (2016). Formative interventions for expansive learning andtransformative agency. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25(4), 599-633.Scollon, R., & Scollon, S. W. (2003). Discourses in place: Language in the material world. Routledge.Stornaiuolo, A., Smith, A., & Phillips, N. C. (2017). Developing a Transliteracies Framework for a ConnectedWorld. Journal of Literacy Research, 49(1), 68-91.Taylor, K. H. (2017). Learning Along Lines: Locative Literacies for Reading and Writing the City. Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 1-42.Yates, L. (2015). Rethinking prefiguration: Alternatives, micropolitics and goals in social movements. SocialMovement Studies, 14(1), 1-21.Zavala, M. (2016). Design, participation, and social change: What design in grassroots spaces can teach learningscientists. Cognition and Instruction, 34(3), 236-249.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1319© ISLS