The Effects of Inquiry-Based Learning in Higher EducationStatistics Tutorials on Students’ Self-Efficacy, Attitudes, andAchievement EmotionsPetra Bod, LMU München, petra.bod@campus.lmu.deDaniel Sommerhoff, LMU München, sommerhoff@math.lmu.deAbstract: This pilot investigation explored the effects of an inquiry-based learning environmenton students’ self-efficacy, attitudes, and achievement emotions in the context of highereducation statistics tutorials. Results showed positive effects of the learning environment,leading to increased self-efficacy, and more positive attitudes and achievement emotions. Firstevidence on the intercorrelations among the three variables point towards positive, pairwiserelationships. The findings emphasise the need for future research and a larger scaleinvestigation on the topic.IntroductionStatistics is an increasingly important and relevant subject in the age of big data. The ability to analyse andinterpret data is becoming essential in many professional tracks. Despite the subject’s importance, largeproportions of students in higher education do not like statistics classes, and up to 80% of these students showsigns of statistics anxiety (Onwuegbuzie & Wilson, 2003). To effectively reduce this high figure, research needsto investigate the mechanisms underlying students’ negative reactions towards statistics, and try to improve thecurrent situation, for example via changes in the instructional design of statistics classes.Here, the instructional design inquiry-based learning (IBL) appears promising, as it was found to increasestudents’ confidence in and attitude towards mathematics in higher education (Laursen, Hassi, Kogan, Hunter &Weston, 2011). Based on these findings in mathematics, our project aimed to explore the effects of IBL in thecontext of statistics, which is the most relevant aspect of mathematics in most social sciences. For this, wedesigned an inquiry-based learning environment within a postgraduate-level statistics tutorial and measured itseffects on students’ self-efficacy to learn statistics, as well as their attitudes and achievement emotions towardsthe subject.BackgroundPrior research on the emotions of university students showed that statistics anxiety is negatively correlated withstudents’ self-efficacy to learn the subject (Perepiczka, Chandler & Becerra, 2011), which provided grounds forour project to further examine self-efficacy in the context of higher education statistics. However, several othervariables have been indicated to influence students’ overall view of a subject, such as attitudes and achievementemotions (Di Martino & Zan, 2011; Pekrun, 2006). Although IBL was shown to have a positive effect on thevariables individually, these three aspects have not been investigated together in this context up to now.The observed positive effects can be related to the fact that IBL encourages students to overcomeobstacles on their own, providing grounds for encountering authentic success, which was emphasised as the mosteffective way to induce self-efficacy in academic settings (Bandura, 2009). The positive effects as well as theconnectedness of the three variables can further be explained by the control-value theory (Pekrun, 2006), whichhighlights the influence of students’ perceptions of their control over a given task, as well as the subjective valueof that task.Research Questions1. Does IBL lead to an increase in students' self-efficacy to learn statistics, positive attitudes, and positiveachievement emotions towards statistics?For this question, positive results were expected based on similar findings in higher education mathematics,and the similarity between both subjects.2. Are self-efficacy, attitudes, and achievement emotions positively correlated in the context of statistics?MethodThe intervention spanned over five subsequent tutorials for a Master’s level statistics class. Each session consistedof the distribution of a real-life scenario to help students understand the practical applications of statisticalICLS 2018 Proceedings1365© ISLSmethods. Based on the scenario and other related documents, students would embark on individual journeys ofinquiry, and complete a series of steps: formation of research questions, data analysis, interpretation of results,and presentation of research findings. The tasks were created to match the stages of the inquiry cycle (Murdoch,2006).Testing was carried out at three timepoints: during the first (N = 20), the third (N = 14), and the fifthsession (N = 8). The first and last measurements assessed all three variables, providing a pre-post comparison,whereas the second measurement only assessed students’ achievement emotions. We measured students’responses on three Likert-type scales from existing literature, which were adapted to the context. The scalesmeasured the three variables of interest, namely self-efficacy (Finney & Schraw, 2003), attitudes (Schau &Emmioglu, 2012), and achievement emotions (Pekrun, Goetz & Perry, 2005). All three scales were found highlyreliable (α > .92).ResultsCompared to the start of the intervention, students showed higher levels of self-efficacy to learn statistics (d =1.10), more positive attitudes (d = 0.94), and more positive achievement emotions (d = 1.42). Achievementemotions showed a positive trajectory from the first to the third (d = 1.04), as well as the third to the fifth session(d = 0.31). A significant correlation was only found between attitudes and achievement emotions at the pre-test(ρ = .85, p < .001). The other correlations did not reach significance, but showed partially moderate relationships:attitudes and achievement emotions (post: ρ = .47, p = .243), achievement emotions and self-efficacy (pre: ρ =.42, p = .098, post: ρ = .17, p = .691), and attitudes and self-efficacy (pre: ρ = .21, p = .366, post: ρ = .24, p =.570).DiscussionResults underline that the use of IBL has a positive influence on students’ self-efficacy to learn statistics, and ontheir attitudes and achievement emotions towards statistics, which is in line with prior research (Laursen et al.,2011). Our results further expand the scope of previous research by analysing the relation among the threevariables, showing a strong connection between attitudes towards learning statistics and students’ achievementemotions during the IBL sessions. The other correlations did not reach significance, likely due to the small samplesize in this first investigation. Moreover, the lack of a control group requires cautious interpretation of thelongitudinal results. The continuation of the project aims to overcome these limitations and to allow a moredetailed analysis of the relationship between IBL and students’ affective outcomes in higher education statistics.ReferencesBandura, A. (2009). Cultivate Self - efficacy for Personal and Organizational Effectiveness. Handbook ofPrinciples of Organization Behavior, 179–200.Di Martino, P., & Zan, R. (2011). Attitude towards mathematics: A bridge between beliefs and emotions. ZDM International Journal on Mathematics Education, 43(4), 471–482.Finney, S. J., & Schraw, G. (2003). Self-efficacy beliefs in college statistics courses. Contemporary EducationalPsychology, 28(2), 161–186.Laursen, S., Hassi, M.-L., Kogan, M., Hunter, A.-B., & Weston, T. (2011). Evaluation of the IBL mathematicsproject: student and instructor outcomes of inquiry-based learning in college mathematics. Universityof Colorado Boulder, (April), 204.Murdoch, K. (2006). Inquiry learning: journeys through the thinking processes. Teacher Learning Network, 13(2),32-34.Onwuegbuzie, A. J., & Wilson, V. A. (2003). Statistics Anxiety: Nature, etiology, antecedents, effects, andtreatments--a comprehensive review of the literature. Teaching in Higher Education, 8(2), 195-209.Pekrun, R. (2006). The control-value theory of achievement emotions: Assumptions, corollaries, and implicationsfor educational research and practice. Educational Psychology Review, 18(4), 315–341.Pekrun, R., Goetz, T., & Perry, R.P. (2005). Academic Emotions Questionnaire (AEQ). User’s manual.Department of Psychology, University of Munich.Perepiczka, M., Chandler, N., & Becerra, M. (2011). Relationship Between Graduate Students’ Statistics SelfEfficacy, Statistics Anxiety, Attitude Toward Statistics, and Social Support. The Professional Counselor,1(2), 99–108.Schau, C., & Emmioǧlu, E. (2012). Do introductory statistics courses in the United States improve students’attitudes? Statistics Education Research Journal, 11(2), 86–94.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1366© ISLS