Crossing Boundaries: Reflexive Analysis of Collaborative Learningin Research InstitutionsKevin Crouse, Jeanette Joyce, and Veronica L. Caverakevin.crouse@gse.rutgers.edu, jeanette.joyce@gse.rutgers.edu, veronica.cavera@gse.rutgers.eduRutgers Graduate School of EducationAbstract: Researchers have increasingly looked at characteristics of learning organizations,which engage in constant transformation to facilitate organizational learning in order to remainsuccessful. While much of this research has looked at organizational practices and theembedded social networks within and across private firms, little research has reflexivelyconsidered academia. Yet, professional interactions within academic disciplines that crossnarrow research specializations are critical for the continued advancement of public science. Inthis study, we employ a sequential mixed-methods study design to establish a base of empiricalresearch that is introspective of the collaborative research environment of academia. We firstemployed purposeful semi-structured interviews to understand the value academic leaders placein cross-specialization interactions and then collected questionnaires from which we conductedstatistical and social network analyses to describe the characteristics of and variation withindisciplinary interaction networks and the relationships between network attributes andperceptions of a positive, collaborative learning environment.IntroductionIn our research, we seek to better understand the organizational factors that facilitate a collaborative learningenvironment for faculty researchers. This study therefore focuses on “research interactions,” which we define asintellectual exchange across sub-disciplinary specializations within an academic discipline in ways that supportthe sharing of heterodox scholarship. As an example of this distinction, we seek more to capture professionalinteractions between a cognitive psychologist developing a learning tutor and a social psychologist researchingattachment rather than those between two linguists who frequently collaborate together. We argue, as do manyothers (e.g., Maxwell, 2004; NRC, 2002; Phillips, 1993), that these diverse interactions are critical to the continuedadvancement of public research and the sciences.Prior research investigating faculty communities in higher education finds significant cultural dividesbetween disciplines and the sub-disciplines within them (Becher & Trowler, 2001) and characterizes the researchenvironment as occupationally turbulent and extremely competitive (Cameron & Tschirhart, 1992). Currentresearch into scholarly exchange often focuses on co-authorship and citation networks (e.g., Ding, 2011; Velden,Haque, & Lagoze, 2010) or on building research collaboration across disciplines and within the specializationsthat span them (Denicolo, 2004; Jedele, 2010). Previous research has also focused on organizational learningthrough network interactions within private workplaces (e.g., Cross & Israelit, 2009) and between firms (e.g.,Larsson, Bengtsson, Henriksson, & Sparks, 1998; Powell, 1996) and how this leads to increased productivity.However, we found no empirical research that attempted to investigate the characteristics that supportcollaborative learning that spans research specializations within disciplinary communities in academia.To address this gap, we designed a mixed-methods, dual-stage project to develop a foundation of thecollaborative interactions among research faculty that do not share primary research interests. The first, qualitativephase focused on conceptualizing “interaction” using in-depth, semi-structured interviews with academic leaders.In the second, quantitative phase, we administered a questionnaire to research faculty and employed inferentialstatistics and social network analysis (SNA) to understand the relationships in each disciplinary unit of ourresearch site.MethodsIn phase one, we generated a semi-structured interview protocol from a review of the literature. We includedquestions to elucidate research interaction in formal and informal contexts as well as how these interactionssupport a community of practice (Wenger, 1998). Items sought to bring to light the value researchers place onscholarly interactions across specializations, the function and dimensions of professional trust in academia, andhow contextual factors such as the physical environment, available resources, and social hierarchy affectopportunities for interaction.Interviews were conducted in tandem, with one researcher as the lead and the other taking field notes tosupplement the audio recording. This phase employed responsive interviewing (Rubin & Rubin, 2012) to collectICLS 2016 Proceedings791© ISLSdata and a grounded theory approach (Strauss & Corbin, 1997) to move toward an understanding of interaction.Grounded theory allows us to consider both consensus and diversity of data to develop a rich but bounded workingdefinition of academic interaction that allow for variation in perspectives.For phase two, we operationalized the dimensions identified in phase one into a two-part questionnaireadministered electronically to all tenure-track faculty in disciplinary units with doctoral programs at the university.We define the “disciplinary unit” as the highest organizational level that represents a conceptual discipline, suchas “Psychology” or “Social Work”; thus, the disciplinary unit at times refers to different formal units within thesame university. The first part of the questionnaire asks each participant to identify colleagues in the disciplinaryunit with whom they interact, the frequency of interaction, and a set of context variables. We use these data for asocial network analysis that examines the frequency, density, and structure of each research discipline in our siteto understand the degree of variation in professional disciplinary communities. The second part of the surveycaptures salient indicators of the organizational environment, including beliefs regarding the collaborativeclimate, the degree that interactions across specialization lead to productive outcomes for the field, whetherinteraction patterns are influenced by race and gender, and whether the local collaborative environment issupported or impeded by factors that include technology, the layout of the physical environment, and socialhierarchy.Research questions for the full study include:1. How do faculty leaders understand research interactions across specialization and to what extent are theyvalued for collaborative learning and scientific progress?2. What factors impede and facilitate such interactions?3. With what frequency do research interactions across specializations happen in disciplinary units and howmuch variation is observed across a broad set of them?4. How do characteristics of interaction networks relate to perceptions of professional climate?SampleThis study focused on all disciplinary units engaged in significant research at a large public university listed bythe Carnegie Classification as having “high research activity.” We used the presence of a doctoral program leadingto a research Ph.D. as an indicator of a significant research focus; this led to the inclusion of 62 units. From thisset, we constructed a typology of “fields”, which are sets of disciplines with similar approaches (such as “thehumanities”).For phase one, we categorized university and academic leaders based on the level of their responsibilityand then selected interview participants in order to obtain perspectives on scholarly interaction that cross disparatefields, as different disciplines have significantly different cultures (Becher & Trowler, 2001). We also selectedparticipants to maximize demographic variation as research shows that race and gender have salient effects onacademic research contexts and networks (Sax et al, 2002; Scheurich & Young, 1997). A total of 16 academicleaders were included (see Table 1). While we succeeded in obtaining significant gender variation (N=7 female),the lack of people of color in academic leadership roles (as described by Aguirre & Martinez, 2007) made itdifficult to diversify based on race (N=3 nonwhite). Interviews lasted 30 to 90 minutes and were in person, withthe exception of one that was conducted by videoconference. Table 1 shows participant codes, administrativelevel, and field for the phase one interviews. We interviewed two leaders at the disciplinary level of the humanitiesas the units at our site do no formally define programs in a way that meets our criteria.Table 1: Matrix of disciplinesField:Example:Level:AboveDisciplineDisciplinaryUnitProgramPhysical SciencesPhysics,BiologySocial SciencesEducation,EconomicsInterdisciplinaryGender Studies,Ethnic StudiesHumanitiesEnglish,PhilosophyProfessionalSocial Work,Engineering♂♀♂♂♂♂♀♀♀, ♂♂♂♂♀N/A♀, ♀For phase two, a custom online survey that leveraged modern web interfaces and a database backendwas designed and administered to all tenure-track faculty within identified units. The first part of the survey askedICLS 2016 Proceedings792© ISLSthe participant to select all faculty with whom they regularly interact and asked them to indicate (a) if they sharethe same research focus, (b) if they have collaborated in the last two years, (c) how often they interact in personand electronically, (d) whether they would approach that individual to ask a question in their field of expertise,and (e) whether they would approach that individual to ask a question about their professional life. From thesalient constructs that emerged from the first phase, we generated and field tested 50 survey items; each constructhad between three and seven items connected to it. We attended faculty meetings in disciplinary units to introducethe project and to increase response rates. We additionally contacted faculty non-responders directly by email.Only units with better than 50% response rates will be included in final analysis, and we will highlight the rangeof variation we see in network density, centrality, and perceived organizational environment in our selection ofunits for presentation.AnalysisPhase one qualitative analysisDuring interviewing, we performed preliminary analysis and open coded emergent topics to develop the initialcode set. We iteratively refined the protocol and code book to increase clarity and gain further insight intoemergent themes. After all interviews were completed and initially coded, we decided upon the final codebookusing a consensus model and re-coded all interviews to ensure complete coverage.Phase two quantitative analysisThe social networks for each disciplinary unit will be constructed and correlational statistics will be used tocontextualize them. We compare network structures overall and consider centrality characteristics for individualnodes and for researcher cliques. Aggregated to the disciplinary level, we calculate measures for networkcentralization, network density, average tie strength, and clique census. From the survey questions, we calculateaggregate measures for perceptions of open sharing of research, fairness of resource allocation, factors in thephysical environment, the use of new technology, and perceptions of cultural divides based on sub-discipline. Wethen use regression analysis to determine how organizational factors are seen to facilitate or inhibit the perceivedcollaborative environment and how it relates to network characteristics. We also will conduct HLM withdisciplines nested within fields to see if there are systematic differences at the field level. Finally, we will conducta cluster analysis on the results of the SNA and climate survey to determine where each disciplinary unit falls onthree dimensions – network centralization, network density, and an aggregate indicator of the organizationalclimate.FindingsPreliminary results from phase one participants indicate that there appear to be points of convergence acrossdisciplinary units and points of divergence between both units and fields. The importance of informal interactionswas consistently regarded as critical to both heterodox interaction and organizational learning in academia, whichis consistent with similar findings in the private sector (e.g., Fayard & Weeks, 2007). The time requirements forinteractions that would not directly benefit scholarly output were consistently regarded as a constraint. Mostfactors, however, were more nuanced and could either inhibit or facilitate scholarly interactions. This includedaffordances in the physical environment (e.g., office configurations or the availability of comfortable spaces thatencouraged informal meetings), leadership practices and staff support, resource allocations, cultural dividesbetween sub-disciplines, and differential treatment and expectations of women and researchers of color.Technology was notable as it is substantially changing the organizational context in ways that most academicleaders believe are not yet clear: new communication modalities were often cited as a benefit to formal interaction,but the lack of physical presence due to off-site work was a significant inhibitor to informal interactions.Conclusions and implicationsWe find that all the academic leaders interviewed agreed that organizational practices and environmentalaffordances affect faculty interdynamics. Our study further establishes an empirical base quantifying the variationof characteristics. These include the collaborative environment and interaction networks within disciplinarycommunities of practice in academia. A limitation of our study is that the singularity of each discipline in oursite prevents us from drawing inferences about broader cultures within disciplines or specializations. Futureresearch will investigate whether variations are generally consistent, as well as provide insights into howinteraction networks across schools might impact the role of local disciplinary units as learning organizations.More data is also needed to understand leadership policies that can improve the collaborative environment andICLS 2016 Proceedings793© ISLShow knowledge transfer in research-based universities compares to private workplaces, where an establishedresearch base on organizational learning already exists.ReferencesAguirre, A., & Martinez, R. (2007). Diversity leadership in higher education. ASHE Higher Education Report,32(3), 1-113.Becher, T., & Trowler, P. (2001). Academic tribes and territories: Intellectual enquiry and the culture ofdisciplines. Bristol, UK: Open University Press.Burnett, P. C. (1999). The supervision of doctoral dissertations using a collaborative cohort model. CounselorEducation and Supervision, 39(1), 46-52.Cameron, K. S., & Tschirhart, M. (1992). Postindustrial environments and organizational effectiveness in collegesand universities. The Journal of Higher Education, 63(1), 87-108.Cross, R. L., & Israelit, S. (2009). Strategic learning in a knowledge economy. Newton, MA: ButterworthHeinemann.Denicolo, P. (2004). Doctoral Supervision of Colleagues: Peeling off the Veneer of Satisfaction and Competence.Studies in Higher Education, 29(6), 694-707.Ding, Y. (2011). Scientific collaboration and endorsement: Network analysis of coauthorship and citationnetworks. Journal of Informetrics, 5(1), 187-203.Fayard, A. L., & Weeks, J. (2007). Photocopiers and water-coolers: The affordances of informal interaction.Organization Studies, 28(5), 605-634.Jedele, R. E. (2010). A Faculty ‘C’ Change: Inspired by Learning Communities. Thought & Action, 2010, 107114.Larsson, R., Bengtsson, L., Henriksson, K., & Sparks, J. (1998). The interorganizational learning dilemma:Collective knowledge development in strategic alliances. Organization Science, 9(3), 285-305.Maxwell, J. A. (2004). Causal explanation, qualitative research, and scientific inquiry in education. EducationalResearcher, 33(2), 3–11.National Research Council (2002). Scientific research in education. Washington, DC: The National AcademiesPress.Phillips, D. C. (1993). Subjectivity and objectivity: An objective inquiry. In M. Hammersley (Ed.), EducationalResearch, Current issues (pp. 57–72). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.Powell, W. W. (1996). Inter-organizational collaboration in the biotechnology industry. Journal of Institutionaland Theoretical Economics (JITE), 152(1), 197-215.Rubin, H. J., & Rubin, I. S. (2011, October 11). Qualitative interviewing: The art of hearing data. Sage.Sax, L. J., Hagedorn, L. S., Arredondo, M., & Dicrisi III, F. A. (2002). Faculty research productivity: Exploringthe role of gender and family-related factors. Research in Higher Education, 43(4), 423-446.Scheurich, J. J., & Young, M. D. (1997). Coloring epistemologies: Are our research epistemologies raciallybiased? Educational Researcher, 26(4), 4-16.Smith, R. L., Maroney, K., Nelson, K. W., Abel, A. L., & Abel, H. S. (2006). Doctoral programs: Changing highrates of attrition. The Journal of Humanistic Counseling, Education and Development, 45(1), 17-31.Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. M. (1997). Grounded theory in practice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.Vaughan, G. B. (1996). Paradox and promise: Leadership and the neglected minorities. New Directions forCommunity Colleges, 1996(94), 5-12.Velden, T., Haque, A. U., & Lagoze, C. (2010). A new approach to analyzing patterns of collaboration in coauthorship networks: mesoscopic analysis and interpretation. Scientometrics, 85(1), 219-242.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Boston: Cambridge UniversityPress.Yin, R. K. (2013). Case study research: Design and methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.ICLS 2016 Proceedings794© ISLS