Developing a Text-Integration Task for Investigating andTeaching Interdisciplinarity in Science TeamsSimon Knight, University of Technology Sydney, simon.knight@uts.edu.auKate Thompson, Griffith University, kate.thompson@griffith.edu.auAbstract: Integrating information from multiple sources is an important literacy skill thatinvolves: identifying intra and inter-textual ties; modeling relationships between sources andclaims; and evaluation of the claims made. Tasks that involve reading, interpreting andsynthesizing multiple sources have been explored particularly in the epistemic cognitionliterature. Interdisciplinarity is a growing area of interest in education, with commensurateinterest in the learning sciences regarding the means by which we induct students intointerdisciplinary ways of thinking and working. While interdisciplinary contexts frequentlyinvolve connecting multiple sources, from different disciplines, these text-integration tasks havenot been well investigated.Introduction: Text integration as a lens on learningRouet (2006), suggests key skills important in the context of dealing with multiple sources (particularly richmultimedia environments): integration of prior knowledge and across documents (including competing claims);sourcing of features that identify the provenance, genre, etc. of the information; and corroboration to checkinformation across multiple sources. A task that probes these processes is text-integration or synthesis writing, inwhich students construct representations of how multiple sources fit together in relation to a particular task orissue (Goldman, Lawless, & Manning, 2013). As Goldman, Lawless and Manning (2013) highlight, synthesis canoccur in a number of different task contexts, including: Integrating differing genres of texts targeted at a sharedtheme; integrating texts that contain agreements and contradictions on a shared theme; and integrating texts thateach contain pieces of information regarding a particular theme, each contributing a part of the picture.A body of work in this area has explored these abilities to comprehend and integrate information frommultiple sources, specifically viewing such behaviours through the lens of epistemic cognition (see Ferguson,2014, for an overview). In this work, students’ cognition around the certainty, simplicity, source, and justificationof knowledge is seen as a key mediator for how sources are treated and made use of, assessed through knowledgetests or constructed responses. Thus, in text integration tasks, the ways in which sources are drawn on may giveinsight into learning. However, students may not source well, only drawing on limited sources, or failing tointegrate them. Recent work on literacy and epistemic cognition (Anmarkrud, Bråten, & Strømsø, 2014; Bråten,Braasch, Strømsø, & Ferguson, 2014) suggests that students tend not to explicitly source, or to use the full list ofsources available to them.Text integration is receiving increased attention in writing research, as a higher-order learning activityin its own right (Klein & Boscolo, 2016). Alongside this attention, there is increasing recognition of thedisciplinary nature of writing (Klein & Boscolo, 2016). Despite the dual recognition of text integration tasks as ahigher-order learning activity, and of the nature of writing as disciplinary, a feature of text integration tasks thathas been little explored is the nature of disciplinary context. In interdisciplinary contexts, text integration isparticularly interesting, and under-researched. Much of the, limited, research on learning to do interdisciplinaryresearch focuses on ways of collaborating, sharing and translating knowledge from different disciplines in teams.For example, Pennington et al. (2016) highlights the key stages of (1) identification of an appropriate researchquestion; (2) agreement on a shared vocabulary; (3) the co-creation of boundary negotiating objects; (4) tools forvisualizing and combining data, with the aim of (5) producing a new, connected model of understanding. Giventhat a common output for research teams is in written form, whether an article, policy recommendation, or researchproposal, text integration is key to the successful synthesis of disciplinary perspectives and appropriatecommunication to stakeholders.In Bråten et al. (2011) the authors describe some key relationships between a model of multipledocument comprehension, and epistemic cognition. In that piece, they highlight, for example, that we wouldexpect those people who have less adaptive perspectives on the ‘simplicity’ of knowledge to engage with multipledocuments in a way that emphasizes simple over complex sources, and accumulation of facts over integration.Adapting this work to interdisciplinary contexts, we posit that prior work on epistemic cognition and sourcing intext integration tasks can inform our understanding of interdisciplinary synthesis production. Thus,interdisciplinary learning contexts can draw on text-integration literature to develop tasks to probe key epistemicconcerns in interdisciplinary problem solving. These tasks can be developed by providing learners with texts fromICLS 2018 Proceedings1453© ISLSmultiple disciplines, within a particular context in which they must work towards identifying a specific problem,using a shared vocabulary, and set of resources to develop new understanding towards some ends, such as a policyrecommendation or research proposal.Present studyIn the research conducted, 13 graduate students from diverse disciplines completed a text-integration task as partof a wider summer school program on interdisciplinary approaches in the environmental sciences (Thompson etal., 2017). Students were asked to write a synthesis of three articles, on a shared theme (the water-food-energynexus), but each from a different disciplinary context. The students were asked to draft syntheses on day 3, withopportunities to redraft on days 5 and 8, and a final submission at the end of the event. To analyze the syntheses,we identified features of the text that align with the high-level constructs to develop a rubric based on our priorwork investigating a text integration task (Knight, 2016; Knight et al., 2017), intended to be useable by aninstructor or student without the need to undertake a laborious coding of individual sentences or idea units withina given text. The rubric builds on prior work focusing on: the specific content that students include in their texts;their use of explicit and implicit citation; the evaluation of the citations and the content drawn on; and the waysin which that information is synthesized (both within individual texts and across multiple sources). The syntheseswere thus analyzed with respect to their inclusion of topics or themes from the sources, intra- and inter-textualsynthesis, evaluation, and sourcing (which articles were explicitly referred to). Analysis of the texts using thisrubric facilitated the generation of specific feedback designed to address the key features of textual synthesis. Thedevelopment of this task has shown that synthesis writing, and its links to features of epistemic cognition –simplicity, complexity, identifying sources, and justification – provide opportunity for investigating models ofinterdisciplinary learning and collaboration.ReferencesAnmarkrud, Ø., Bråten, I., & Strømsø, H. I. (2014). Multiple-documents literacy: Strategic processing, sourceawareness, and argumentation when reading multiple conflicting documents. Learning and IndividualDifferences, 30, 64–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lindif.2013.01.007Bråten, I., Braasch, J. L. G., Strømsø, H. I., & Ferguson, L. E. (2014). Establishing Trustworthiness when StudentsRead Multiple Documents Containing Conflicting Scientific Evidence. Reading Psychology, 0(0), 1–35.Bråten, I., Britt, M. A., Strømsø, H. I., & Rouet, J.-F. (2011). The role of epistemic beliefs in the comprehensionof multiple expository texts: Toward an integrated model. Educational Psychologist, 46(1), 48–70.Ferguson, L. E. (2014). Epistemic Beliefs and Their Relation to Multiple-Text Comprehension: A NorwegianProgram of Research. Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research, 0(0), 1–22.Goldman, S. R., Lawless, K., & Manning, F. (2013). Research and development of multiple source comprehensionassessment. In M. A. Britt, S. R. Goldman, & J.-F. Rouet (Eds.), Reading: From words to multiple texts.New York: Routledge (pp. 180–199). NY: Routledge.Klein, P. D., & Boscolo, P. (2016). Trends in Research on Writing as a Learning Activity. Journal of WritingResearch, 7(3 (February 2016)), 311–350. https://doi.org/10.17239/jowr-2016.07.03.01Knight, S. (2016). Developing Learning Analytics for Epistemic Commitments in a Collaborative InformationSeeking Environment (PhD). Open University, Milton Keynes, UK.Knight, S., Rienties, B., Littleton, K., Mitsui, M., Tempelaar, D. T., & Shah, C. (2017). The relationship of(perceived) epistemic cognition to interaction with resources on the internet. Computers in HumanBehavior, 73, 507–518. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2017.04.014Pennington, D., Bammer, G., Danielson, A., Gosselin, D., Gouvea, J., Habron, G., … Wei, C. (2016). TheEMBeRS project: employing model-based reasoning in socio-environmental synthesis. Journal ofEnvironmental Studies and Sciences, 6(2), 278–286. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13412-015-0335-8Rouet, J.-F. (2006). The Skills of Document Use: From Text Comprehension to Web-Based Learning (First Editionedition). Mahwah, NJ: Routledge.Thompson, K., Danielson, A., Gosselin, D., Knight, S., Martinez-Maldonado, R., Parnell, R., … Wheeler, P.(2017). Designing the EMBeRS Summer School: Connecting Stakeholders in Learning, Teaching andResearch. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Computers in Education. NewZealand: Asia-Pacific Society for Computers in Education.AcknowledgmentsOur thanks to the researchers and students in the EMBeRS project, supported by National Science FoundationGrant No. NSF DGE-1545404, and Penny Wheeler and David Williamson Shaffer for their helpful conversationson an earlier draft of this work.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1454© ISLS