Tracing Bodies Through Liminal Blends During Play-Based Inquiryin a Mixed-Reality EnvironmentDanielle Keifert, Noel Enyedy, Maggie Dahn, Christine Lee, and Lindsay Lindbergkeifert@ucla.edu, enyedy@gseis.ucla.edu, maggiedahn@gmail.com, clee@labschool.ucla.edu,lindsay.lindberg@ucla.eduUCLAJoshua Danish, University of Indiana, jdanish@indiana.eduAbstract: We demonstrate how a Mixed Reality (MR) environment supported blendingsemiotic resources with embodied representations of water particle motion. Our analysisdemonstrates the importance of a) providing a rich set of resources, b) the centrality of the bodyas a sensemaking resource, c) supporting students in iterative inquiry, and d) helping studentsto transition from unique classroom resources like MR into more normative accounts.IntroductionWe explore iterative cycles of inquiry within a Mixed Reality (MR) learning environment to examine how studentsused their bodies to develop an understanding of water particle behavior relating to states of matter. In progressivesymbolization, learners iteratively refine and re-represent ideas to deepen understanding (Lehrer & Schauble,2006) during which representations gather meaning through use and its relation to other representations (Hall,1995). We traced students’ evolving understanding by documenting how they leveraged multiple resources (thesemiotic ecology; Enyedy, 2005). A blending framework was particularly powerful as it helps map lamination ofvirtual semiotic resources onto material structures like embodied activity to support unique forms of reasoning.We examined the (de)construction of these blends over time to examine the role of the body as representationsare taken up and transformed over inquiry cycles. We claim a) students actively blend semiotic resources togetherto create meaning and b) throughout inquiry cycles and re-representing, material resources may go underground(become no longer materially present; Wertsch & Stone, 1999). However, c) resources that go underground arestill implicated in practice and are recoverable when current representations and practice are not enough.MethodsWe analyze data from the Science through Technology Enhanced Play (STEP) project (Enyedy, Danish, &DeLiema, 2015). STEP is designed to privilege embodied inquiry by using OpenPTrack MR technology (Munaro,Horn, Illum, Burke, & Rusu, 2014) to follow students’ movement and communicate it to a simulation that isprojected (Figure 1, left). The visualization shows students as particles (yellow dots) with colored-ringsdetermined by the state of matter students collectively make (red for gas, blue for liquid, white for solid).We use interaction analysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995) to analyze lessons from one first and secondgrade classroom. We identified a consistent pattern—iterative cycles of inquiry—in students’ interactions as theyexplored out how particles behaved by noticing and proposing potential recipes to explore—verbal directions forhow to move their bodies to produce a particular reaction in the MR visualization—and moved over time towardsproposing the testing of rules (Figure 1, right). We examine how students use bodies to create and refine liminalblends as they develop rules for states of matter during collaborative embodied inquiry?Figure 1. (Left) Student-particles observe the STEP visualization, small frame shows particle states of matter.(Right) Students’ iterative cycles of inquiry.FindingsStudents embodied experience remained important throughout inquiry and after inquiry. Early cycles of inquiryconsisted of proposing and enacting a recipe “move fast,” followed by students’ movement (students running),and students narrating “I’m red” illustrating the lamination of representational forms. During discussion, Cora, aICLS 2018 Proceedings1431© ISLSstudent, drew upon her own and classmates’ bodies to re-enact related rules for red which Ms. Jones inscribed indocumentation as “close to somebody + far from somebody else”. The body no longer played a material role inthis representation, but the phrasing nonetheless was based on prior embodied experience. Thus, while the bodyand the STEP visualization had gone underground, they remained representationally present. In later cycles ofinquiry, students tested and confirmed rules for making gas, once again laminating the STEP visualization’srepresentations (particle, color, attraction lines, state-meter) onto their movement with the explicit purpose ofaffirming their rule for making gas. Cycles of pushing semiotic resources underground (moving from embodiedactivity to gesture to written representation of embodied activity) and resurrecting resources (e.g., making senseof current embodied activity by drawing upon documentation) continued throughout inquiry, and afterwards.During her post-interview, Sarah, a student, struggled to accurately remember how water particles behaved ineach state of matter until she was asked to embody particulate motion herself. Sarah explained her understandingto the researcher in reverse, to stand still to make gas. However, when Sarah was prompted to stand up and showa solid particle with her own body and explain her motion, Sarah quickly revised her response. She explained bydescribing what happened on the screen (“vibrating in place” but “staying in one place”). It was not until Sarahembodied being a particle again and was asked to explain her movement as a particle, that she recovered herunderstanding of solid and gas particles’ motion.DiscussionBy combining students’ embodiment and programmed-rules for making states, the STEP simulation providedfeedback to students that allowed them to engage in iterative cycles of inquiry as they developed ideas or recipesfor making states of matter. Each iterative cycle supported students to articulate rules for particle movements.Because students become particles themselves, they developed an understanding of the rules for states based ontheir own embodied experience. These representational forms, starting with the embodied experience and STEPvisualization of student-particles, were progressively built upon and coordinated with new representational formsthrough inquiry, discussion, and documentation (Enyedy, Danish, & DeLiema 2015). These blends might reappear across several sequential cycles of inquiry before the representational forms and semiotic resources weredeconstructed and blended in new ways. However, the body was central in forming these representationalunderstandings. Thus, even as students moved from embodied to inscribed representations of rules for makingstates of matter, the experience of being water particles and moving like water particles was codified in students’representations. Furthermore, the body was recoverable when words were not enough (Lindberg & Danish, inpreparation); when students struggled to make sense of new ideas or prior experience, their bodies becameresources for conveying understanding.ReferencesEnyedy, N. (2005). Inventing mapping: Creating cultural forms to solve collective problems. Cognition andInstruction, 23(4), 427-466.Enyedy, N., Danish, J. A., & DeLiema, D. (2015). Constructing liminal blends in a collaborative augmentedreality learning environment. International Journal of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning, 10(1), 7-34.Goodwin, C. (2013). The co-operative, transformative organization of humanaction and knowledge. Journal of pragmatics, 46(1), 8-23.Hall, R. (1995). Exploring design oriented mathematical practices in school and work settings. Communicationsof the ACM, 38(9), 62.Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2006). Scientific thinking and science literacy. In R. W. Damon, K. Lerner, A.Renninger, & I. E. Sigel (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology, 6th edition, (vol. 4). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.Lindberg, L., Enyedy, N., Danish, J. (in preparation). When words are not enough: What students gestures andembodied responses tell us about understanding science through dance.Munaro, M., Horn, A., Illum, R., Burke, J., & Rusu, R. (2014). OpenPTrack: People tracking for heterogeneousnetworks of color-depth cameras. In IAS-13 Workshop Proceedings: 1st Intl. Workshop on 3D RobotPerception with Point Cloud Library, Padova, Italy.Wertsch, J. V., & Stone, C. A. (1999). The concept of internalization in Vygotsky’s account of the genesis ofhigher mental functions. Lev Vygotsky: Critical assessments, 1, 363-380.AcknowledgementsWe are immensely grateful to the teachers and students of the UCLA Lab School who engage so joyfully in STEP.We are also thankful for the entire collaborative teams at UCLA REMAP and the STEP teams at UCLA andIndiana University. We also wish to thank the National Science Foundation (grants # IIS-1628918, # IIS1522945).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1432© ISLS