Exploring Relevant Problem-Solving Processes in Learning FromProductive FailureCharleen Brand, Christian Hartmann, and Nikol RummelCharleen.Brand@rub.de, Christian.Hartmann@rub.de, Nikol.Rummel@rub.deRuhr-Universität BochumAbstract: Productive Failure (PF) is an instructional design which uses a problem-solvingphase to support the acquisition of conceptual knowledge from a following instruction phase.By activating prior knowledge and raising awareness of knowledge gaps, the PF problemsolving phase is assumed to help students acquire conceptual knowledge. However, it is stillunclear which specific problem-solving processes prepare learning from the subsequentinstruction. To explore the role of problem-solving behaviours during the initial phase of PF,the process data of 24 participants of a quasi-experimental study were analysed. Wehypothesised that evaluating their own problem-solving during the initial phase of PFfacilitates students’ awareness of their knowledge gaps and, thus, is associated with learningfrom the subsequent instruction. However, our data analyses did not support this hypothesis.Further explorations showed the importance of students achieving some understanding of thegoal state of the problem they solve in the initial phase of PF.Theoretical backgroundPrevious research has already provided a large amount of evidence that the instructional design of productivefailure (PF) facilitates conceptual knowledge acquisition in the mathematical domain (cf. Kapur 2012, Kapur &Bielaczyc, 2012). In order to support learning of previously unknown content, PF uses a problem-solving phaseto prepare the students for a subsequent instruction phase. This paper focuses on the preparatory mechanismsinvolved in the initial problem-solving phase of PF. During the problem-solving phase, students are instructed togenerate as many solutions to a problem as possible (Kapur & Bielaczyc, 2012). It is assumed that by this,students activate relevant prior knowledge (Kapur, 2012; Loibl, Roll & Rummel, 2017). However, as thestudents do not have sufficient prior knowledge for solving the given problem, their solutions are mostly flawedor incomplete (Kapur & Bielaczyc, 2012). Due to the erroneousness of the students’ solutions and their lack ofprior knowledge, students might realise that their solutions were insufficient and become aware of theirknowledge gaps (Loibl et al., 2017). Yet, it is unclear how exactly students become aware of their lack ofknowledge. Loibl et al. (2017) presume that these preparatory mechanisms, the activation of prior knowledgeand an awareness of knowledge gaps, prepare students for learning from the subsequent instruction during theproblem-solving phase. In line with this assumption, a study by Loibl and Rummel (2014) reveals that thesubsequent instruction becomes more effective if the students’ knowledge gaps are addressed by discussingtypical student solutions. Nevertheless, the premises by Loibl et al. (2017) still lack empirical evidence.However, to gain empirical evidence, firstly, it is necessary to acquire further details about specific problemsolving behaviours that are relevant for preparing learning from the subsequent instruction during the PFproblem-solving phase.The work presented in this paper therefore explores the PF problem-solving process to address thequestion what kinds of problem-solving behaviours prepare students for learning from the following instructionphase. For a theoretical foundation, research on problem solving is reconsidered and placed into the context ofPF research. Our aim was to explore the theoretical assumptions by Loibl et al. (2017) in further detail togenerate more insights into the relevance of the problem-solving process in PF.Problem solving is defined as a process in which a problem is solved by finding an operator that canreduce the previously examined gap between the current state of a problem and its expected goal state (Sweller,1998). In PF, the goal state represents the canonical solution of the given mathematical problem. In this study,the mathematical problem deals with the concept of variance, i.e. the reliability of the performance of footballplayers. Therefore, the canonical solution and goal state of this problem is the formula for standard deviation.However, as the students face a completely unknown content (Loibl & Rummel, 2014), they cannot be certainwhich kind of goal state is to be expected, nor can they be sure that the operators they might be able to apply tothe problem are appropriate. Even though students likely come up with a set of intuitive ideas that might guidethe problem-solving process (cf. Jonasson, 2000), this lack of knowledge makes it necessary to rely on furtherstrategies in order to monitor one’s own problem-solving process. Firstly, to reduce the range of possibleoperators, students’ intuitive ideas need to be structured and formed into criteria for the desired goal state, thatICLS 2018 Proceedings1125© ISLSis, what it looks like and how it might be achievable. Based on these criteria, the problem solvers are able toselect the first problem-solving operator and generate the first solution of their set of solutions to the givenproblem during the PF problem-solving phase. Nevertheless, as the students’ prior knowledge is limited, anassessment of the quality of the generated solution is required. For this, the students need to evaluate the currentstate of the problem produced by their selected operator(s). Schoenfeld (1992) emphasised the significance ofevaluating one’s own problem-solving behaviour for successful problem solving. However, in PF, students’problem-solving processes are generally not successful, but rather erroneous and incomplete due to the lack ofprior knowledge and information at hand (Kapur, 2012). For this reason, it is likely that already while facingtheir solutions’ results, students become aware of conflicts in their solutions. This awareness of conflicts mighttrigger a thorough analysis and evaluation of the own problem-solving process and the selected operator(s).Placing these theoretical assumptions into the context of the above discussed preparatory mechanismsthat are assumed to be relevant to PF, leads to hypotheses concerning specific required PF problem-solvingprocesses: Firstly, upon receiving the problem, students might begin with a planning phase. For this, they wouldgenerate intuitive ideas for their solutions by activating relevant prior knowledge. Next, they would need toform criteria for the desired goal state of the problem in order to be able to choose from available problemsolving operators. In a following implementation phase, they would then select an operator and apply it to theproblem. Subsequently, students would evaluate the outcome of their action. At this point, students might detectconflicts in their erroneous solution and possibly engage in an analysis of these. An analysis of conflicts couldraise the students’ awareness of their knowledge gaps and thus play an essential part in the preparation forlearning from the following instruction phase (Roll, Holmes, Day & Bonn, 2012; Loibl et al., 2017). Based onthis theoretical conceptualisation of specific required PF problem-solving processes we formulated threehypotheses. First, we assumed that the more solutions include conclusions drawn from the results, the moreawareness of conflicts is raised and the more analyses of conflicts are performed (hypothesis 1). Secondly, wehypothesized that the higher the amount of solutions with conflict awareness and analyses, the higher thestudents’ awareness of knowledge gaps (hypothesis 2). Lastly, we assumed that the amount of solutionsincluding conflict analyses is associated with the students’ conceptual knowledge at the end of the instructionphase (hypothesis 3).MethodTo investigate our hypotheses, we drew from the data of a quasi-experimental study (Hartmann, Rummel & VanGog, 2017) with 75 10th-graders of two secondary schools in Germany. However, this paper focusses on thedata of 24 students who worked in the PF condition as described above. The study was conducted in a schoolsetting on two different days. On the first day, the participants received a short prior-knowledge test in order toassess their knowledge on different concepts of variance. Subsequently, the students engaged in the initial phaseof the study, the problem-solving phase. In this phase, the students received a task on the concept of standarddeviation, which was so far unknown to them. The task demanded to find the most reliable football playeramongst three players. The students received a list of each of the player’s amount of goals per year over a periodof ten years. They were instructed to work on this problem individually and to find as many solutions to it aspossible. In order to capture the problem-solving process, the students were asked to write their solutions ontablets and to express all of their thoughts out loud. Both students’ thoughts and solutions were recorded. After45 minutes, the participants received a short test in order to measure, among other variables, their awareness ofknowledge gaps by self-report with a 6-point Likert scale. On the second day of the study, the participantscommenced the subsequent phase, in which they received an instruction about the concept of standard deviation.The instruction was built on typical student solutions, picked up common mistakes and misconceptions andcontrasted them with the conceptual features of the canonical solution (see Loibl et al., 2017). After this, a shortpractice phase was implemented before the students engaged in a 40-minute post-test, which measured, besidesother types of knowledge, the students’ conceptual knowledge. The validity of the used tests, as well as theinternal consistency was revised in Loibl and Rummel (2014) and found satisfactory. However, in this study, theinternal consistency slightly decreased for the awareness of knowledge gaps (Cronbach’s alpha = .71) andplummeted for conceptual knowledge (Cronbach’s alpha = .41).As a means to make central cognitive processes visible, we used think-aloud data (Ericsson & Simon,1980) for the following process analysis. The analysis was conducted with the help of a self-constructed codingscheme. The coding scheme divides the problem-solving process into three phases: a planning phase, animplementation and an evaluation phase. Each phase describes different problem-solving behaviours based onthe theoretical outline discussed earlier e.g. criteria for desired goal state (phase 1), drawing conclusions (phase2) and conflict awareness or analysis (phase 3). Students’ problem-solving behaviour was coded dichotomouslyICLS 2018 Proceedings1126© ISLS(1 = present; 0 = non-present). The coding scheme was applied to each solution of each student. As the studentseach generated two to seven solutions, the coding scheme was applied multiple times per person.FindingsThe coded data was analysed in three ways. First, we analysed the data descriptively. Then, for hypothesestesting we ran a series of correlations. Finally, we explored the data in order to gain more insights into theproblem-solving behaviour of PF students. The descriptive analyses of the problem-solving variables revealedthat all students drew conclusions in at least one of their solutions to the problem. Furthermore, for 91.7% of theparticipants, conflict awareness or conflict analyses could be identified in one or more solutions. However,conflict analyses were only implemented by 54.2% of the students.For hypothesis testing, we used the rank correlation coefficient Spearman’s rho, as none of thevariables were normally distributed. The relationship between the variables was calculated by using the sum ofsolutions per person in which a specific problem-solving behaviour could be found. However, we did not findsignificant correlations for our four hypotheses (see Table 1).Table 1: Hypotheses Testing (Spearman’s rho; N=24)Variable 1Variable 2Drawing conclusionsConflict awareness & analysis.105nsConflict awarenessConflict analysisAwareness of knowledge gapsConceptual knowledge-.120.023nsns𝒓𝒓𝒔𝒔pIn the last step of the data analysis, the data was explored beyond the hypotheses of this paper. Our aimwas to examine further problem-solving behaviours that could be relevant for learning in PF. For this, a series ofcorrelation matrices was generated. As in hypothesis testing, we used the sum of solutions per person with aspecific problem-solving behaviour. However, of all variables, none could be associated with awareness ofknowledge gaps and only one with conceptual knowledge. This variable measured the amount of solutions thatincluded criteria for the desired goal state of the problem. Between the variables criteria for the goal state andconceptual knowledge, we found a moderate positive correlation (𝑟𝑟𝑠𝑠 = .462) as well as a moderate negativerelationship between criteria for the desired goal state and the number of solutions (𝑟𝑟𝑠𝑠 = -.446). This means thata higher number of solutions, which include criteria for the desired goal state, goes along with a fewer numberof solutions. On a descriptive level, nine out of 24 participants formulated criteria in at least one solution,whereas 15 out of 24 participants did not name criteria for the desired goal state at all. Thus, this nearly presentsa naturally occurring median split with almost half of the participants showing this behaviour. When comparingthese two groups, it becomes evident that those students who formulated criteria for the desired goal stateperformed almost one point better in the conceptual knowledge test than those who did not use criteria (seeTable 2 for means and standard deviations).Table 2: Descriptive Analysis – Conceptual Knowledge of Students With/Without Criteria for the Desired GoalStateManifestation of the variable ‘criteria fordesired goal state’No criteria for desired goal stateCriteria for desired goal state(in at least one solution)TotalnMSD152.871.3793.831.30243.231.40DiscussionPrior to the discussion of results, some limitations of the study need to be considered. Firstly, as this paper onlyfocused on 24 participants, the small sample size has to be noted. This ultimately reduces the statistical power ofthe study, which may be an explanation why none of the stated hypotheses could be confirmed. Another reasonfor this could be the debatable internal consistency of the scale measuring conceptual knowledge. Furthermore,the gathered think-aloud data needs to be regarded with caution. As Nisbett & Wilson (1997) indicated, it isunclear to what extent students are aware of their cognitive processes and are able to verbalise them sufficiently.Thus, central cognitive processes could remain concealed in the analyses. As it is generally unclear howICLS 2018 Proceedings1127© ISLSbeneficial problem-solving processes might manifest, this ultimately also impedes the validation of theconstructed coding scheme. As this study was a first attempt at taking a closer look at students problem-solvingprocess in PF, the newly constructed coding scheme needs yet to be tested for validity and (interrater) reliabilityin further uses.Even though we did not find significant results in support of our hypotheses, further data explorationpresented valuable insights into the PF problem-solving process that need closer examination. The correlationbetween criteria for the desired goal state and conceptual knowledge as well as the clear descriptiveperformance differences between the participants who did and did not use identified criteria in their solutions,highlight this type of planning behaviour in PF. This finding is in line with the findings of Roll et al. (2012) andSchoenfeld (1992), who stressed the importance of planning in math problem solving. It could be assumed thatthe construction of criteria for the desired goal state has a central function in the problem-solving process as ameans to structure it. A deeper understanding of the desired goal state might help to guide the problem-solvingprocess – and particularly the search of an adequate problem-solving operator – despite the limited amount ofprior knowledge for and information about the given problem. Furthermore, the moderate negative correlationbetween criteria for the desired the goal state and the number of solutions suggest the possible efficiency ofposing criteria. As a high number of solutions with criteria for the desired goal state is associated with a lownumber of solutions but also a high conceptual knowledge score, this gives rise to the assumption that, in astructured problem-solving process, a small number of efficient solutions suffices to prepare learning from thesubsequent instruction phase successfully during the problem-solving phase. This might result from a deeperprocessing and higher awareness of one’s own solutions and their shortcomings when generating only a smallamount of structured solutions, supporting the integration of new knowledge during the instruction. Though thisidea stands out against current research, which presumes that a higher diversity of solutions fosters learning(Kapur & Bielacyzc, 2012), it might allow to deduce fruitful new hypotheses on PF problem solving.Current PF research still largely neglects a thorough analysis of tangible problem-solving behavioursduring the problem-solving phase. This study served as a first exploration into this area. Future research willneed to further investigate the potential relevance of students’ planning behaviour that relates to the problem’sgoal state for the PF problem-solving phase. Even though finding criteria for the desired goal state appeared inour explorative analyses to promote the acquisition of conceptual knowledge, it was not linked to an awarenessof knowledge gaps. As this awareness is, however, assumed to be essential for the preparation for learning fromthe subsequent instruction phase (Loibl et al., 2017), this opens up further questions about the validity of theused instruments and if there might be more suitable ways to operationalise awareness of knowledge gaps. Theresults of this study show that, despite a theoretically founded examination of the PF problem-solving phase, itis difficult to reliably and validly assess specific problem-solving behaviours, and to identify behaviours thatprepare for subsequent learning. This highlights the necessity of further research for a deeper understanding ofessential prerequisites in the problem-solving phase for a successful PF effect.ReferencesEricsson, K. A. & Simon, H. A. (1980). Verbal Reports as Data. Psychological Review 87 (3), 215-251.Hartmann, C., Rummel, N. & Van Gog, T. (2017). Example-based learning in PF – Do students have to doevery mistake by themselves? (written version of contribution at EARLI 2017). Finland: University ofTampere.Jonassen, D. H. (2000). Toward a design theory of problem solving. Educational Technology Research andDevelopment 48 (4), 63-85.Kapur, M. (2012). Productive failure in learning the concept of variance. Instructional Science 40 (4), 651-672.Kapur, M. & Bielaczyc, K. (2012). Designing for Productive Failure. Journal of the Learning Sciences 21 (1),45-83.Loibl, K., Roll, I., & Rummel, N. (2017). Towards a Theory of When and How Problem Solving Followed byInstruction Supports Learning. Educational Psychology Review, 29(4), 693-715.Loibl, K. & Rummel, N. (2014). Knowing what you don’t know makes failure productive. Learning andInstruction 34, 74-85.Nisbett, R. E. & Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling More Than We Can Know: Verbal Reports on Mental Processes.Psychological Review 84 (3), 231-259.Roll, I., Holmes, N. G., Day, J. & Bonn, D. (2012). Evaluating metacognitive scaffolding in Guided InventionActivities. Instructional Science 40 (4), 691-710.Schoenfeld, A. H. (1992). Learning to Think Mathematically: Problem Solving, Metacognition, and SenseMaking in Mathematics. In D. Grouws (Eds.), Handbook for Research on Mathematics Teaching andLearning. New York: Macmillan.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1128© ISLS