Determinants of School Level Success in Design-Based InnovationNetworksNancy Law, Yeung Lee, and Constance Wong-Lokenlaw@hku.hk, yeunglee@hku.hk, constancewongloke@gmail.comUniversity of Hong KongAbstract: Design-based implementation research (DBIR) is a methodological approach thathas emerged in recent years to address the challenge of sustainability and scalability of suchlearning innovations in diverse settings in the educational ecosystem. These efforts are generallyorganized in the form of innovation/implementation networks (DBIN). While the network as awhole can be successful, implementations in individual schools differ, resulting in largevariations in the depth and reach of the changes that take place at the school level. This studyinvestigates two schools in a DBIN that demonstrated similar trajectories of change in the firsttwo years, but very different outcomes at the end of the third year. The findings show that thefine grain details of the architecture for and leadership engagement in within- and cross-schoollearning, and the quality of the school-based learning interactions matter in determining theimplementation outcomes of schools in the same DBIN.IntroductionDesign-based implementation research (DBIR) (Fishman et al., 2013; Penuel & Fishman, 2012) has increasinglybecome a methodology of choice when the goal is to develop sustainable and scalable solutions to significantproblems of practice through the disciplined application of research based theory and knowledge. DBIR needs toengage two layers of theory (Penuel, 2015). The first level theory is about how students learn and focuses onlearning taking place at the classroom level, and design-based research (DBR) has been contributing to ourunderstanding at this level. However, scalable implementation of pedagogical innovation needs to scaffoldlearning beyond the classroom to higher levels of the complex, hierarchically nested layers of the educationecosystem. An important underpinning principle of DBIR is the partnership relationship among the multiplestakeholders involved, usually constituted as an innovation network (DBIN). In this study, we explore the secondlevel of theory from the perspective of school level scalability of innovation and change in a DBIN.It has been shown that organizational and administrative support at the school level such as timetablingand space for co-planning (Gumus, 2013), opportunities for peer observation (DeLuca et al., 2015) are important.(Wenger, 1998) refers to the organizational environment that provide opportunities and supports for collaborativelearning in a community of practice as the “architecture for learning”. Studies in educational change also foundthe architecture for learning, such as organizational routines, team structures and roles to be of critical importanceto the effectiveness of educational change efforts in the classroom (Spillane, Parise, & Sherer, 2011; Stein &Coburn, 2008). The team structure, content, interaction foci, decision-making process and roles of participantsare core elements of an architecture for learning (Law, Yuen, & Lee, 2015) in the context of teacher co-design.This paper is an investigation into what differentiates implementation conditions and strategies betweenschools in the same DBIN that have successfully scaled from those that failed to do so. The study is underpinnedby a model of scalable change as aligned learning at multiple levels, using the framework of architecture forlearning. The context of this study is a DBIN that was funded as a university-school partnership program for threeyears. Two schools with apparently similar initial conditions and trajectories of implementation but widelydifferent outcomes at the end of three years are selected as cases for in-depth analysis for this study.The context of this study is a government funded 3-year university-school partnership program, titled“Self-directed learning in science with e-learning support for learner diversity and smooth primary-secondarytransition” (SDLS), funded by the Education Bureau in Hong Kong. The overarching goal is to nurture anddevelop student’s self-directed learning ability to become confident and capable life-long learners in the 21stcentury. In this paper, we first introduce the nature and design principles of SDLS at the network (DBIN) level.This is followed by a description of the implementation trajectories in both schools over the three years. Finally,we present our analysis of the schools’ architectures for learning and school-level conditions of implementation.Design principles for SDLS as a DBINAs mentioned earlier, DBIR involves two layers of theories: theories about how students learn (classroom andindividual level learning), and theories about organizations in the context of such changes. In the SDLS Project,self-directed learning (SDL) is the underpinning pedagogical theory guiding the design of learning at the studentICLS 2018 Proceedings96© ISLSand teacher levels. For SDL to be implemented in classrooms, it requires deep changes in teachers’ pedagogicalpractice, expertise in learning and assessment design, changes in routines, resource allocation, and other aspectsin the architecture for learning (Wenger, 1998) for the pedagogical innovation to be sustained and scaled.Self-directed learning as the pedagogy of choice for the DBINAs a pedagogical approach, SDL has two key features that are characteristic of learning as collaborative inquiry:(a) it requires students to take personal ownership of their learning (setting learning goals, accepting responsibilityfor their thoughts and actions, and maintaining control for the many learning decisions), and (b) the learningprocess often involve interactions with the teacher as well as with other learners (Brockett & Hiemstra, 1991).Synthesizing the literature on SDL (Candy, 1991); Gibbons, 2003; Tan et al., 2011) and aligning SDL with theprocess of inquiry and problem solving, we have articulated a five-component model of SDL: goal setting, selfplanning, self-monitoring, self-evaluation and revision, as the operational definition SDL for the DBIN. A briefdescription of these five components are presented in Table 1.Table 1: A description of the five SDL componentsSDL componentGoal settingSelf-planningSelf-monitoringSelf-evaluationRevisionDescriptionStudents identify own learning goals, targetsStudents regulate and plan for the detailed decisions and arrangements associated with their ownlearningStudents self‐manage their own time, monitor their own repertoire of learning strategies, and adjusttheir own learning pathways as they progressStudents are aware of the assessment criteria, and apply these for self-evaluationStudents draw on peer and/or teacher feedback to reflect on their own learning, and makeappropriate revisions, and apply learning to new contextsCritical to successful pedagogical change is deep teacher learning, learning that leads to deepening changes inteacher practice. In this DBIR project, SDL also underpins the learning design for teachers. Teachers need toexperience learning as a self-directed learner in collaboration with other teachers: they need to be given the spaceto determine what they consider as appropriate and reasonable for their SDL experimentation in their ownclassrooms, plan, implement, monitor and reflect on the experience for further improvement and experimentation.We take a growth perspective on both student and teacher learning, and do not impose targets on teachers’ practice.Teacher collaboration in teacher design teams provides opportunities for teachers to engage in“professional talk”: reflecting on the curriculum, their practices and goals for students’ learning (Parke & Coble,1997); exploring new pedagogies, including the effective use of technology in teaching and learning (Agyei &Voogt, 2012). Opportunities for co-planning are not adequate to ensure productive teacher learning. The teammembership composition in terms of background and expertise, team size (Handelzalts, 2009), the nature andfocus of team interactions (Ehrlenspiel, Giapoulis & Günther, 1997), and the role of school-based facilitators inthe design and associated decision making process (Huizinga et al., 2014) have been shown to have importantimplications for the learning outcomes of teacher design teams. In our project, we adopt teachers’ collaborativeinquiry centering on the co-design of students’ learning, peer observations and reflective debriefing as the formatfor implementing SDL for teacher learning. The details of this design will be described in a later section.Social technical co-evolution and the multilevel multiscale model of aligned learningfor scalable innovationsPedagogical change and innovation in a classroom does not happen in a vacuum. Classrooms are embedded inschools, communities and education systems and are influenced by intricate interdependencies with local,national, international communities and organizations as well as business enterprises (Davis, Eickelmann & Zaka,2013). There is increasing recognition that the scalability of educational innovations can only be addressed if wecan take account of the complexity of education ecosystems (Sabelli & Dede, 2013). As Law et al. (2016) illustrate(see Figure 1), different parts of the education ecosystem are highly connected and interdependent. For studentsto achieve the desired 21st century learning outcomes such as the 4Cs and digital literacy through collaborativeinquiry and associated pedagogical and assessment innovations, aligned changes at teacher, school and systemlevels are needed. Such changes can be conceptualized as learning at these multiple levels. Hence, scalableinnovation in DBIR is not a one step process, but an iterative process of aligned change through interactions andfeedback across the different sectors and levels of the ecosystem. The second level of theory in DBIR is to addressthe challenge of achieving the necessary aligned learning.Current literature on DBIR has generally taken on a sociocultural perspective in understanding thechallenge associated with achieving alignment in the process of change, in particular, Lave & Wenger's (1991)ICLS 2018 Proceedings97© ISLScommunity of practice (CoP) theory. Members of the same professional practice share the same understanding oftheir enterprise, norms of mutual interaction and repertoire of capabilities. Scaling pedagogical innovationsrequire communication across different communities of practice: teachers, principals, district level subject matterexperts, policy makers, etc. To facilitate boundary crossing (Stein & Coburn, 2008) between different CoPs, thereneeds to be boundary practices (i.e. interactions constituted to bring members of different CoPs together on issuesof common concern) and boundary objects (i.e. artefacts that scaffold boundary crossing). Stein & Coburn (2008)further put forward the concept of architecture for learning, which refers to the conditions conducive to learningacross boundaries, and identified the following as key elements of the architecture: networks/organizations(formal and informal) that connect people within and across CoPs, mechanisms through which people interact,and the artefacts that serve as reifications that embodies a set of ideas or processes for sharing and communicationwithin or across community boundaries.Figure 1. A diagrammatic representation of the interrelationship across factors and parameters at differentlevels. (Source: Law et al., 2016, p. 73)While the architecture of learning provides the environmental conditions for learning, any design for learningneeds to be underpinned by a theory of how learning happens. Based on the idea that deep learning within eachCoP would most likely occur through inquiry learning with peers, Law, Yuen and Lee (2015) propose a multilevelmultiscale (MLMS) model of learning, which argues that an architecture for learning for CoPs at higher levels ofthe education eco-system needs to span larger units of scale. The scale of a design-based innovation network thatcan support learning of a CoP of school leaders would have to engage multiple schools, and the learning of a CoPof district leaders would have to engage multiple districts. An implication of the MLMS model as a DBIR designprinciple is that the architecture for learning needs to scaffold learning within and across units at different levelsof scale as well as across the different levels. In the SDLS Network, the MLMS model of learning serves as adesign principle for the second layer of theory to guide the design-based implementation research.Design of the architecture for learning for the SDLS DBINSDLS conceptualizes four levels of structure in its design: student, teacher, school and network, and the DBIRdesigns architectures for learning at the network level and encourages schools to design its own school-basedlearning architecture. At the network level, we provide a finer grain organizational structure to connect schoolsand teachers in multiple ways for different types of interaction foci and mechanisms to support scaling across thethree years. The network started with 10 primary and 10 secondary schools, organized in two clusters of fiveprimary schools and two clusters of secondary schools as illustrated in Figure 2. Assignment of schools to theseclusters is based on their geographic proximity and are hence referred to as regional clusters. An additional fiveprimary and five secondary schools were added to the network in each subsequent year, and the clusters wererestructured so that there is a mix of old and new schools in each cluster.There are four types of cross-school teacher-level learning activities organized for schools in the network:1. Regional cluster meetings—these cluster meetings are held in one of the five schools within each regionalcluster, and these generally focus on sharing around the day-to-day work of teachers in the design ofcurriculum units, learning and/or assessment tasks, choice and deployment of learning resources/tools(both conventional and digital). These meetings are generally informal and teachers find these to be veryuseful and enjoyable. Teachers in the same cluster often connect outside of the scheduled clustermeetings, usually through electronic means.ICLS 2018 Proceedings98© ISLSFigure 2. Organization of schools in a network of interacting clusters through the three years of the project.2.Primary school level and secondary school level cluster workshops involving all project schools at thesame school level—these school level meetings are generally used to introduce curriculum andpedagogical ideas related to specific curriculum themes/topics of interest to the teachers in the form ofinquiry tasks such that teachers will experience together with their peers in a playful manner the learningtasks as students. Teachers often find that they can pick up useful ideas and snippets for adoption in theirteaching, and at the same time experience firsthand self-directed learning in science as a learner.3. Whole network meetings (four in a year)—these meetings serve three key functions: (1) introducing selfdirected learning as a pedagogical approach and its core features; (2) sharing of SDL learning designsand their implementation in classrooms by project school teachers, often including classroom videos,samples of students’ work, and teachers’ own reflections; and (3) introducing some “advanced topics”such as designing assessment as learning, using virtual reality tools for scientific exploration, etc.4. Open classroom and peer observation of teaching—each school commits to designing and implementingone SDL curriculum unit per semester. University-based project staff are assigned to each of the schoolsand conduct school-based co-planning sessions for each implementation. Each school will select onelesson from one of the two implementations each year for open classroom observations by interestedteachers and principals in the network. A debriefing session involving teachers in the observed schooland the visitors will take place immediately following the observed lesson.Cross-school teacher-level learning activities are scheduled throughout the school year so that eachmonth one of the activities listed under 1 to 3 will be organized. The different meetings are interlaced so thatteachers will have opportunities to engage in different collaborative learning activities that inform and/or supporttheir own school-based collaborative inquiry of SDL implementation, culminating in the implementation of theirown designed SDL units and the open classroom for peers’ observation. Principals of participating schools needto commit to releasing their teachers to participate in the monthly cross-school meetings and workshops.Two of the four whole network meetings include the participation of principals. For these, half of themeeting is designed as opportunities for cross-school, cross-level interactions involving both teachers and schoolleadership (principal and/or vice principal) as it is important in the MLMS model that leadership gets opportunitiesto learn about how other schools implement SDL at classroom and school levels. During this half of the meetings,in addition to teacher sharing of their practices, principals and school project team members are also invited toshare the management and resource allocation provisions and other strategic organizational decisions made at theschool level to address challenges encountered and/or further ways to enhance the innovation implementation intheir schools. This provides an opportunity for teachers and school leadership to understand the innovationimplementation as a multilevel effort within a school. During the other half of these meetings, school principalswill take part in “leadership circle” meetings separate from the teachers so that they can discuss and sharechallenges and solutions at the school level. Principals are also strongly encouraged to participate in at least oneopen classroom observation in another school in each year.MethodologyIn this study, we wish to understand how schools design their own architectures for learning (AfL) to support theirimplementation of SDLS, as well as whether and how features of the AfL relate to different implementationoutcomes. The methodology adopted is comparative case studies of the network schools. We collect quantitativeand qualitative data on (1) the schools’ participation in the various activities organized by the network; (2) theplanning, implementation and post-lesson reflection for each SDL curriculum units designed and implemented ineach semester by each school, through document collection and observations conducted during co-planningmeetings, lesson observations, debriefing meetings, and online curriculum-related activities of the teachers andstudents on iLAP, a customized Moodle platform serving as the project Learning Management System; and (3)each school’s architecture for learning (both formal and informal) through surveys and interviews with theICLS 2018 Proceedings99© ISLSprincipal and project core team members in each school at the beginning of their first year of participation and atthe end of each project school year.In this study, we have selected two primary schools (Schools A and B) that joined the project in Year 1for our investigation. Both are government-funded schools located in public housing estates (government housingfor low-income families). These two schools showed similar trajectories in SDLS implementation during the firsttwo years in the project but differed greatly in scale and depth of implementation by the end of the third year.The trajectory of SDLS development in the schoolsIn Year 1 of the SDLS project, participating primary schools were advised to start their innovation implementationin Grade 5 so that the teacher workshops and cross school teacher collaboration can be focused around topics inthe Grade 5 science curriculum. We required all schools to involve at least two teachers at the same grade levelin the implementation of SDLS so that there can be peer collaboration within schools. Schools were encouragedto engage all GS teachers at the implementation grade levels for sustainable school-based adoption of SDLS.Schools A and B decided in year 1 to involve all the grade 5 classes in their schools (A has three classesat each grade level and B has four). Both also extended the implementation to include all grades 5 and 6 classesin year 2. By the end of Year 2, there were discernible shifts in teachers’ pedagogical and assessment practices inboth schools from teacher-directed practices to more student-centered practices. The teachers were willing to letgo of control and let students take the lead in designing experiments from the beginning to the end. There wasalso a shift from teacher-based assessment to include peer assessment. In School B, students were asked to designtheir own self-assessment rubric. The teachers also reported their own learning gains:“I have lots of questions in making the electric fan. … as I am not a [science] subject specific trainedteacher, in the process of creating a powerful fan, I engaged as a self-directed learner in solving theproblem and learnt some scientific concepts. My scientific knowledge was enhanced. I am moreconfident as I went through what my students will encountered in the learning processes.” (School Ateacher)“Traditionally, we design the worksheet for students to fill in the blanks. Now students need to designtheir own experiments, they need to set their goals, steps and review their results. Sometimes, theyencountered problems and failed. It is good that students have this kinds of experiences ….” (SchoolB teacher)Apparently, these two schools had similar implementation scales and the teachers had similarly found the SDLlearning experience to be beneficial both to their students and themselves. However, the two schools diverged intheir implementation trajectory in the third year. School A kept the same project core team, maintained itsmomentum and expanded the implementation to include all classes in grades 4, 5, and 6. The school further createdmore e-learning courserooms on the iLAP beyond the ones set up by default for each participating class. Some ofthese additional courserooms were for students’ SDL explorations on topics outside of the school curriculum, andsome for teachers who wish to try implementing SDL with e-learning in non-science related subjects. Teachersin School A continued to deepen their understanding of SDL and gave progressively more agency to their students.The teachers observed that when students were interested and given choices to set their own goals, they weremotivated to try different ways to accomplish those goals. At the end of Year 3 interview, one teacher reportedbecoming more self-directed, and that she had learned more from her students, particularly when they askedunexpected questions. Several of the School A teachers felt that the self-directed learning accomplished bystudents in all classes and ability groups exceeded their expectations, even though at the beginning of the yearthey faced the challenge of having students whose cognitive and creative abilities varied greatly.School B on the other hand decided to change the personnel involved in the project, including the teamleader and the scale of the implementation. The original project leader was moved to be in charge of anotherproject, and only 2 classes at Grade 4 were involved in SDLS in this final year. The rationale given for the changein scale was the lack of adequate ICT infrastructure in the school. The SDL practices implemented in the two P.4classes were also more teacher-centered compared to the previous two years. There were essentially no e-learningactivities included in the SDL implementation. The two teachers involved did not have experience with iLAP andthey did not join the training workshops offered for teachers new to the project. At the end of year 3, these teachersfound students’ SDL learning outcomes to be mediocre, and they attributed this to the weaker capacity of P.4students to undertake SDL.Architecture for learning at the school levelICLS 2018 Proceedings100© ISLSWhy did the two schools’ implementation trajectories diverge so drastically in the third year? There was no changein the leadership or staffing at the school level in either A or B. What may be the reasons for the sudden change?In this section, we describe the AfL associated with the implementation of SDLS at each school over the threeyears. We first describe the project implementation team structure, interaction mechanisms, and decisions madeby the two teams. This is followed by a description of the school-based teacher learning organization andmechanisms, and how these connect to the learning opportunities provided by the architecture for learning at theSDLS network level. Finally, we report on the leadership (principal and senior management team) engagement inproject-related learning at the school and network levels.School level project team structure, roles, interaction mechanisms and decisionsProject team structure. The School A project implementation team was led by the PSMCD (a formal, schoolbased curriculum leader role in primary schools) throughout the three years. The School B team was also led byits PSMCD for the first two years, but leadership shifted to the assistant principal in the third year. The PSMCDin both schools had curriculum and pedagogical expertise but did not have a science disciplinary background. TheSchool B assistant principal had a science background. Other members of the School A project team includedboth the Principal and Vice principal, the General Studies (GS, the subject home for science in the primarycurriculum in Hong Kong) panel head and all of the teachers involved in the project implementation during eachof the years. Other School B project team members included the GS panel head and all of the projectimplementation teachers in each of the years. Hence, structurally, school A had top level leadership involvement,whereas School B only had involvement up to the middle management level.Project team participation in activities organized by the network. School A makes provisions for as manyteachers as possible to participate in the various cluster and whole network activities organized by the projectthroughout the three years. For School B, there was also active participation in the activities organized by theSDLS network during the first two years by project team members, except the principal. In year 3 only one or twoteachers participated in the various project activities.Project team leader roles in learning. The roles of the project team leaders differed right from the firstyear, even though the leader was the PSMCD in both schools. Both team leaders played the roles of liaison withthe university-based network team and coordination of within-school project administration. In addition, thePSMCD in A served as the pedagogical mentor in the project and participated in all the school-based co-planningmeetings as well as in all of the activities organized by the SDLS network, helped to resolve difficultiesencountered in the implementation, including communicating issues and needs to the principal and the seniormanagement team. In the third year, the PSMCD was so convinced of SDL as a pedagogy of choice for studentlearning in general that she started implementing SDL in her own Chinese language classes using iLAP. On theother hand, the role played by the PSMCD in B was only administrative, which included also the allocation ofteachers to the implementation classes and arranging tablets for students’ use during classes as needed. In the thirdyear, the new project leader (assistant principal) rarely participated in any of the activities organized for theclusters or the entire network. Hence, the project leader in A engaged fully as a learner and a leader of learningfor the team, while the role of the project leader in B was solely administrative.Project team decisions. As the PSMCD in A was fully involved in all of the learning activities at bothnetwork and school levels, the whole project team was involved in discussing issues, and making or facilitatingdecisions that would support project implementation and teacher learning. These included getting the school’sagreement to remove one curriculum topic to allow more time for student exploration, making arrangements forteachers to attend within-school and cross-school open classroom observations, creating additional courseroomsin iLAP for more SDL focused e-learning activities for students, and creating a WhatsApp group to facilitateefficient communication among team members. In B, the project team did not make any specific decisions orrecommendations to the senior management. The team discussed administrative arrangements to implement theparticipation requirements required by the university-led SDLS project.School-based teacher learning organization and mechanismsBoth schools had grade-level teams involved in the co-design of SDL lessons in selected curriculum units. In A,all involved teachers contribute materials to the co-design work. At the co-planning meeting, which was heldduring the weekly timetabled co-planning period, the teachers discussed with the PSMCD and the GS panel headtheir lesson designs in detail, including the feasibility of the plan, anticipated problems and solutions. Experimentswere tried out many times with different variables. Besides serving as the pedagogical mentor, the PSMCD alsocommunicated to the principal for discussion at the senior management level if there are obstacles encountered inthe implementation process. Teachers felt safe and supported during the implementation process, describing thePSMCD as a ‘pillar’ of support. Frequent informal interactions were facilitated by staff room seating arrangementsICLS 2018 Proceedings101© ISLSand the use of WhatsApp groups. In addition to the formal open classroom observations, all project teachers tookturns to observe each another, provide peer feedback and made iterative revisions to their co-designed lessons.There is no timetabled co-planning period in School B, where co-planning took a more product-orientedapproach. One teacher took the key responsibility of designing the SDL lessons, and sought the inputs of otherGS teachers at the same grade level to refine the plan during co-planning. In Year 2, the co-planning took on astronger learning focus, when GS panel head was also teaching Grade 6. There was a lot of informal discussionsand collaboration between him and the teacher with the key responsibility for SDL lesson design. These intensivecollaborative design interactions brought visible changes in the quality of the designed lessons and the scope forstudent agency in the planned learning activities. It is unfortunate that these quality learning opportunities initiatedautonomously by these two teachers and the ensuing outcomes were unnoticed by the school leadership, andterminated when the school changed the implementation staffing and scale.Leadership engagement in SDLS-related learning at the school and network levelsWhile a school is not led by a single person, the school principal plays a very important role in setting the direction,communicating and implementing the school’s priorities, serving as a role model and a cheer leader. The principalin School A was almost a classic example of a fully supportive school head. He attended all the open classobservations and debriefing sessions held in his own school, participated in some of the co-planning meetings inhis own school, offered his school as the venue for regional cluster meetings and occasionally attended these,observed some open classrooms in other project schools every year, attended every year the two network levelmeetings to which principals were invited, and shared his school’s project implementation experience with otherschools during whole network meetings. The principal in School B attended all the three open classroomobservations in his own school, and only participated in one whole network meeting in Year 1.Innovation implementation often require changes in school routines (Spillane et al., 2011), resourceallocation, as well as curriculum and assessment policy decisions. In A, there are examples of different categoriesof strategic arrangement in support of SDLS implementation in the school. In terms of resource allocation, eachparticipating teacher was given a one lesson reduction in teaching load per week to recognize the extra time theyneed to spend on the project. Technical support staff was allocated to the project to provide e-learning design andon-site classroom support. The physical seating arrangement in the staff room was changed to allow the projectteachers to sit in close proximity so that they can easily have frequent informal interactions. Weekly timetabledco-planning periods were instituted as a school routine to ensure that teachers not only can, but also have theaccountability to engage in collaborative co-planning. School-based peer lesson observations was also institutedas a school routine to scale up teacher learning and to showcase good practices within the school. The school hasalso modified its school-based assessment policy so that 10% of subject scores are allocated for project workperformance. It is clear that there is a conscious policy in A to support teacher learning within and across schools.In school B, resource allocations similar to those in A were made: a one lesson per week reduction inteaching load for participating teachers, and assignment of technical support for e-learning implementation.However, no other provisions were made for the project implementation beyond making arrangements for teachersto attend the minimal number of cross-school open classroom observations stipulated by the project.School-level support for e-learning in SDLSThe iLAP online portal was designed to facilitate student learning, collaboration, self and peer assessment, as wellas making visible the students’ learning process and outcomes to themselves, their peers, teachers and parents.Both schools made use of iLAP in the first two years, with School A making more sophisticated uses to facilitatestudent interactions. In year 3, e-learning use in A escalated, but stalled in B. The school-based provisions for elearning also differed. School A invested in more class sets of tablets, ensured that teachers were trained to useiLAP and the tablets, as well as provided training to students on Chinese character input to ensure that they coulduse their home computers to work on the e-learning tasks on iLAP. In School B, the lack of ICT infrastructurewas given a reason to scale down SDLS implementation in Year 3, and students’ inability to do Chinese characterinput on computers was mentioned by teachers as a hurdle to implement e-learning in the school.DiscussionsIn this paper, we have analyzed the differences in the architecture for learning between the two schools in theirimplementation of SDLS. The DBIN level support were the same for both schools. However, school A had a richand multi-thronged organizational and leadership structure as well as interaction mechanisms and environmentthat allow them to take full advantage of the learning opportunities made available at the network level, which atthe same time fostered a strong collaboration and peer learning culture within the school. School B also providedthe same tangible resources to support the innovation, but did not demonstrate an awareness of the importance ofICLS 2018 Proceedings102© ISLSsupporting within and cross-school learning in the implementation process. In changing the project leader andstaff in the third year, the school has in fact undermined the human and social capital (Hargreaves & Fullan, 2012)that had begun to build up through the project. It is taken for granted that the design principles underpinning thestudent level learning design need to be made explicit to teachers so that they can be intentional collaborationpartners in DBR. We propose here that in DBIR, there is a need for us to also make explicit the second layer ofdesign principles for our collaboration partners, which should also be a focus for the university-school partnership.ReferencesAgyei, D. D., & Voogt, J. (2012). Developing technological pedagogical content knowledge in pre-service mathematicsteachers through collaborative design. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 28(4).Brockett, R. G., & Hiemstra, R. (1991). Self-Direction in Adult Learning: Perspectives on Theory, Research, andPractice. Routledge Series on Theory and Practice of Adult Education in North America: ERIC.Candy, P. C. (1991). Self-direcion For Lifelong Learning. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.Davis, N., Eickelmann, B., & Zaka, P. (2013). Restructuring of educational systems in the digital age from a co‐evolutionary perspective. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 29(5), 438-450.DeLuca, C., Shulha, J., Luhanga, U., Shulha, L. M., Christou, T. M., & Klinger, D. A. (2015). Collaborative inquiry asa professional learning structure for educators: a scoping review. Professional development in education,41(4), 640-670.Ehrlenspiel, K., Giapoulis, A., & Günther, J. (1997). Teamwork and design methodology—Observations aboutteamwork in design education. Research in Engineering Design, 9(2), 61-69.Fishman, B. J., Penuel, W. R., Allen, A. R., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. H. (2013). Design-based implementationresearch: An emerging model for transforming the relationship of research and practice. National Society forthe Study of Education Yearbook, 112(2), 136-156.Geels, F. W., & Kemp, R. (2007). Dynamics in socio-technical systems: Typology of change processes and contrastingcase studies. Technology in society, 29(4), 441-455.Gibbons, M. (2003). The self-directed learning handbook: Challenging adolescent students to excel.John Wiley & Sons.Gumus, S. (2013). The effects of teacher-and school-level factors on teachers' participation in professional developmentactivities: The role of principal leadership. Journal of International Education Research, 9(4), 371.Handelzalts, A. (2009). Collaborative curriculum development in teacher design teams: University of Twente.Hargreaves, A., & Fullan, M. (2012). Professional capital: Transforming teaching in every school: Teachers CollegePress.Huizinga, T., Handelzalts, A., Nieveen, N., & Voogt, J. M. (2014). Teacher involvement in curriculum design: Needfor support to enhance teachers’ design expertise. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 46(1), 33-57.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation: Cambridge Univ Pr.Law, N., Niederhauser, D. S., Christensen, R., & Shear, L. (2016). A Multilevel System of Quality TechnologyEnhanced Learning and Teaching Indicators. Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 19(3), 72-83.Law, N., Yuen, J., & Lee, Y. (2015). Precarious School Level Scalability Amid Network Level Resilience: Insights froma multilevel multiscale model of scalability. Paper presented at the American Education Research AssociationConference 2015, Chicago.Parke, H. M., & Coble, C. R. (1997). Teachers designing curriculum as professional development: A model fortransformational science teaching. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 34(8), 773-789.Penuel, W. R. (2015). Infrastructuring As a Practice for Promoting Transformation and Equity in Design-BasedImplementation Research. Paper presented at the Keynote presented at the International Society for Designand Development in Education (ISDDE) 2015 Conference, Boulder, CO.Penuel, W. R., & Fishman, B. J. (2012). Large‐scale science education intervention research we can use. Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching, 49(3), 281-304.Sabelli, N., & Dede, C. (2013). Empowering design based implementation research: The need for infrastructure.National Society for the Study of Education Yearbook, 112(2), 464-480.Spillane, J. P., Parise, L. M., & Sherer, J. Z. (2011). Organizational Routines as Coupling Mechanisms Policy, SchoolAdministration, and the Technical Core. American Educational Research Journal, 48(3), 586-619.Stein, M. K., & Coburn, C. E. (2008). Architectures for Learning : A Comparative Analysis of Two Urban SchoolDistricts. American Journal of Education, 114, 583-626.Tan, S. C., Divaharan, S., Tan, L., & Cheah, H. M. (2011). Self-Directed Learning with ICT: Theory, Practice andAssessment. Singapore: Singapore MOE.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning as a social system. Systems thinker, 9(5), 1-5.AcknowledgementsNancy Law acknowledges that her contribution to this work is supported by the Hong Kong Research GrantsCommittee Humanities and Social Sciences Prestigious Fellowship Scheme # 37600414.ICLS 2018 Proceedings103© ISLS