Symbiotic Learning Partnerships in Youth Action SportsTy Hollett, The Pennsylvania State University, tyhollett@psu.eduAbstract: Reporting on an ethnographic study of youth media production at an action sportscamp, this paper describes the symbiotic learning partnerships formed between teenskateboarders and teen videographers necessary to collaboratively demonstrate mastery ofboth tricks and video capture/editing. Symbiotic learning partnerships emerge when partnersare, as one participant says, vibing with one another: when they are deeply invested in theproduction of a collaborative media artifact that they will jointly distribute across socialmedia. When vibing with one another, skaters and videographers fall into collaborative,rhythmic cycles. This collaborative mastery is illustrated specifically through a focus on thecycles of reflection and nurture that skaters and videographers enter into when honing theirrespective crafts. This paper advances understanding of youth digital media production in therich, yet understudied, action sports community, drawing out potential implications for thedesign of digital media learning settings, broadly.PurposeAction sports—skateboarding, BMX, snowboarding, etc.—have a long, intimate history, with digital mediaproduction (Hutchins, Meese, & Podkalicka, 2015; Hutchins, 2016). Increasingly, digital technologies andnetworks make both the production and dissemination of authentic videos, photos, and stories possible (Thorpe,2014, p 70). Recording, editing, and publishing “one’s peers ‘in-action,’” Thorpe (2014) writes, “is part of theeveryday experiences of many groups of committed action sports enthusiasts” (p. 70). Still, as youth digitalmedia production research is nascent, much of the literature focuses on individual efforts, especially in out-ofschool settings, as those efforts propel youth down interest-driven pathways (Ito et al., 2013). Through anethnographic study of youth media production in action sports, this paper analyzes the symbiotic partnershipsformed between teen skateboarders and videographers necessary to collaboratively demonstrate mastery of bothtricks and video capture/editing. This collaborative mastery is illustrated through a focus on the cycles ofreflection and nurture that skaters and videographers enter into when honing their respective crafts. In the end,this paper advances understanding of youth digital media production in the rich, yet understudied, action sportscommunity, drawing out potential implications for the design of digital media learning settings that promoteequal educational opportunity for youth, as per the conference theme, through an overt focus on symbioticlearning partnerships.Theoretical orientationThe guiding focus on symbiotic learning partnerships is informed by the interdisciplinary new mobilitiesparadigm (Sheller & Urry, 2007). The new mobilities paradigm offers an entry point to consider the partnershipbetween learning and the moving, sensing body. This entails attention to the corporeal engagement with otherbodies and technologies, practices of movement (i.e. biking, skating), as well as events of movement (i.e.commuting, sitting in traffic)Within the new mobilities paradigm, however, there is an ongoing interest in passengering (Adey,2012). Etymologically, the term passenger dates back to the 15th and 16th centuries where it marked both theperson who travelled, as well as the person, or thing, that enabled the travelling. Within cultural geography, anumber of studies have investigated the experience of the passenger (Laurier et al., 2008; Bissell, 2010; Adey etal., 2012). These studies note that the “bodily experience of the passenger…is not simply one in which [thebody] is an anonymized parcel of flesh...shunted from place to place just like other goods” (Thrift, 2004, p 266).Rather, for one to become a passenger, one is always in the emergent process of “being” or “becoming with”(Bissell, 2010, p. 270). In fact to talk of “‘fellow passengers might gesture to the fraternity of togetherness thatemerges through moving with others” (Adey et al., 2012, p. 171). Passengers are always “becoming with”someone or something—other riders, other drivers, other things.Overall, both the new mobilities paradigm, and the embedded theories of passengering, enable me toconsider the ways in which skaters and videographers “become with” one another through their symbioticpartnership during the experience of digital media production.MethodCSCL 2017 Proceedings601© ISLSThe study of symbiotic learning partnerships was situated at a 12-week long summer action sports camp(hereafter Camp) located in the Northeastern United States. Camp offers opportunities for youth—and adults—to hone skills related to action sports, including skateboarding, BMX, parkour, tumbling, digital media, andmore. Campers choose one focal track for the week (i.e. Skateboarding, digital media), learning alongside peers,teen interns, instructors, and professionals.My analytical interest was drawn to the collaborative partnerships that emerged betweenphotographers/videographers and athletes (i.e. skaters, bikers). This paper hones specifically on the symbioticlearning partnerships that emerged between a camper-turned digital media intern named Erich and askateboarder named Markus. Erich is a 17-year old videographer. Having attended Camp for two years, Erichearned his role as intern by producing a video “edit” that was deemed high quality by his instructors. Because ofhis success, Erich was invited back to Camp as an intern, producing video footage and edits for Camp thatwould be used for marketing and social media purposes. Similarly, Markus, an accomplished 16-year old skater,impressed instructors in previous years, and was thus invited to attend Camp, acting as an informal instructorthroughout the summer for younger campers. Prior to the summer, Erich and Markus did not know one another.Over time, however, they developed a solid partnership that shaped their symbiotic learning together throughoutthe summer as Erich repeatedly shot video of Markus while Markus skated.I observed Erich and Markus shoot/skate together for over ten hours throughout the months of June andJuly—each collaborative session taking roughly an hour as Markus sought to land a specific trick or “line,” apre-planned string of numerous tricks, and Erich sought to capture the line accurately and artistically. Typically,tricks and lines take about one hour to film. Rarely, does the skater land a trick or line on the first try. Rather,there are many starts and stops, falls and scrapes, all of which offer numerous opportunities for the skater andvideographer to communicate as well as to refine their respective approaches.Data collection followed qualitative methods of observation, field notes, and semi-structuredinterviews. Oftentimes, I set up my video camera behind Erich, capturing him capturing Markus. In-betweentricks, I would talk with Erich and Markus, learning more about their respective techniques, their goals for theshot or trick, or about their interactions with one another. I frequently spoke with Erich, Markus, and othersabout my observations and these conversations served as member checks.Analytically, I employed the constant comparative method, beginning with open coding at the outset ofmy data collection, before subsequently refining codes and constructing/refining categories. Importantly, thesecategories were iteratively produced, and dependent upon my full immersion at Camp: hanging out in the staffroom together, going on golf cart rides to ramps and skateparks together, watching skate videos together, andmore.FindingsSymbiotic learning within reflective and nurturing cyclesIn action sports, like skateboarding, symbiotic learning partnerships emerges as skaters and videographers“become with” (Bissell, 2010) one another. Skaters and videographers, enter into this “fraternity oftogetherness” (Adey, 2012) as they each seek to hone their respective skill-sets: Videographers continuouslyalter their technique in order to capture the best possible image; Skaters continuously alter their technique inorder to help produce the best possible image. As one skater put it:If you’re not down with the guy you’re filming with; if you’re not vibingwith the guy you’re filming with; you don’t vibe with the guys you’reshooting photos with; you’re not gonna get the trick…It has to be asymbiotic partnership in the long run. Like, I’m producing for you, but youhelp me with everything that goes on in that situation. It has to be symbiosisat the end of the day.In the following, I explore what it means to “vibe with someone you’re filming with” through an analysis of thesymbiotic partnership between Erich and Markus. Specifically, I explore two facets of this “symbiosis.” First, Ianalyze the reflective cycles that they enter into with one another. Then, I analyze the ways in whichvideographers nurture both the skater and the trick within those reflective cycles.Reflective cycles in symbiotic partnershipsFigure one depicts a common sequence in symbiotic partnerships.CSCL 2017 Proceedings602© ISLSFigure 1. Stages of reflective cycle, including failed attempt at trick (top) and reflection (bottom).Erich halts filming as Markus, having failed at his trick (an alley-oop back lip) on the vert ramp, lays sprawledon the ground. Quickly, though, Markus bounces back up and walks toward Erich. Together, Markus and Erichthen enter into a reflective cycle by watching and discussing approximately 15 seconds of film together,including Markus dropping in and onto the ramp, his first attempt at the trick, and his subsequent fall. They willenter into this cycle nearly 15 times throughout their hour-long skate sessions. A regular conversation such asthe following ensues, as Erich and Markus review the clip:E: What happened there?M: I tried to pull it around, but it didn’t quite work out.E: Ah, yeah, you didn’t get [the board] far enough. I mean, I assume you’regonna land right in front of me right…M: Yeah, sorry about that.E: It’s all good…Erich’s initial question—“What happened there?”—invites Markus both to critique his now-failed trick, as wellas to approach Erich to discuss it. They enter into a reflective cycle. Markus upon watching and viewing hiserror, recognizes that he didn’t turn his board far enough as he was spinning in the air. Erich, while helpingMarkus think through his own trick, also reflects on his own practice as he asks Markus to clarify where he isgoing to land. In doing so, Erich seeks to anticipate where Markus will land so he can ensure he has directed thecamera to the right place at the right moment. Thus, the reflective cycle serves both skater and videographer asthey each seek to hone their respective craft.Nurturing cycles in symbiotic partnershipsThe reflective cycles also open up opportunities for the videographer to nurture the athlete towards success.Skater-videographer partnerships, then, become relatively intimate, especially as the skater struggles toovercome challenges. “Knowing how to approach people,” Erich notes, “is important, especially when they’remad.” Reflective cycles, then, become moments to offer support and guidance for the skater. For example, asMarkus walked over to talk with Erich after one failed trick, Erich worked to build up Markus’ dwindlingenthusiasm, sensing his frustrations: “This line is easy for you, man. It’s like that alleyoop lipslide, like you hadthe other time. I think it’s sick, though, like back to back (from last week).”Furthermore, in “becoming with” one another, skaters and videographers must keep lines ofcommunication open at all times. One skater, for instance, noted that he could no longer shoot photos with aspecific videographer “because he wouldn’t talk to me when I was mad.” Beyond discourse, however, embodiedgestures of support also serve their purpose. When not verbally supporting Markus, for instance, Erich regularlyput a fist out for Markus to fist-bump (Figure 2). The fist-bump, then, both closed off the conversation whilesimultaneously urging Markus toward success in his next attempt at the trick.CSCL 2017 Proceedings603© ISLSFigure 2. Fist bump closing off reflective and nurturing cycle.Overall, it’s a “collaborative process,” one photographer said, in that the skater andphotographer/videographer both want the best for the other. By entering into both reflective and nurturingcycles with one another, then, videographers and skaters generate feelings of camaraderie—of being in thismoment, doing this trick, at this time, together, until fully satisfied with their respective outcomes.SignificanceTo date, digital media production, especially in dynamic informal, out-of-school settings, has predominatelyunderscored individual efforts (Nacu et al., 2016; Halverson, 2013). While collaboration is certainly built intoregular activities, research has not yet explored long-term learning trajectories evidenced in the symbioticpartnerships that dominant action sports, of which Erich and Markus are a micro-sample. Moreover, designedlearning environments often further facilitate individual “pathways” for learning. Such designs, then, arepotentially myopic as they re-instantiate individualistic “imagined geographies of learning” (Leander et al.,2010) that operate in traditional school settings. The action sports community, then, and the powerful symbioticpartnerships that encourage both reflection and nurturing therein, offer new possibilities to continue to reimagine learning settings—both in and out of school—that could potentially promote equal educationalopportunities for all youth.ReferencesAdey, P., Bissell, D., McCormack, D., & Merriman, P. (2012). Profiling the passenger. Cultural Geographies,1474474011428031.Bissell, D. (2010). Micropolitics of Mobility: Public Transport Commuting and Everyday Encounters withForces of Enablement and Constraint. Annals of the American Association of Geographers, 106(2),394–403.Halverson, E. R. (2013). Digital art making as a representational process. Journal of the Learning Sciences,22(1), 121–162.Hutchins, B. (2016). ‘We don’t need no stinking smartphones!’Live stadium sports events, mediatization, andthe non-use of mobile media. Media, Culture & Society, 38(3), 420-436.Podkalicka, A. (2015). Media Sport: Practice, Culture and Innovation. Media International Australia, 155(1),66–69.Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., … Watkins, S. C. (2013). Connectedlearning: An agenda for research and design. Digital Media and Learning Research Hub. Retrievedfrom http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/48114Laurier, E., Lorimer, H., Brown, B., Jones, O., Juhlin, O., Noble, A., … others. (2008). Driving and“passengering”: Notes on the ordinary organization of car travel. Mobilities, 3(1), 1–23.Leander, K. M., Phillips, N. C., & Taylor, K. H. (2010). The changing social spaces of learning: Mapping newmobilities. Review of Research in Education, 34(1), 329–394.Nacu, D., Martin, C. K., Schutzenhofer, M., & Pinkard, N. (2016). Beyond Traditional Metrics: UsingAutomated Log Coding to Understand 21st Century Learning Online. In Proceedings of the Third(2016) ACM Conference on Learning@ Scale (pp. 197–200). ACM. Retrieved fromhttp://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2893413Sheller, M., & Urry, J. (2006). The new mobilities paradigm. Environment and Planning A, 38(2), 207–226.Thorpe, H. (2014). Transnational mobilities in action sport cultures. Springer. Retrieved fromhttp://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1057/9780230390744.pdfThrift, N. (2004). Driving in the City. Theory, Culture & Society, 21(4-5), 41-59.CSCL 2017 Proceedings604© ISLS