Making Uncertainty Work: How Youth Manage Uncertainty to ShapeLearning Trajectories in a School MakerspaceColin G. Dixon, Lee Martin and Sagit Betsercghdixon@ucdavis.edu, leemartin@ucdavis.edu, sbetser@ucdavis.eduUniversity of California, DavisAbstract: In this paper, we use positional, conceptual, and epistemological dimensions ofstudent framing to investigate how youth navigated open-ended work in a school-based makerclub, and how opportunities to pursue personally consequential learning differed acrossparticipants. We identity four ways that uncertainty functioned in interaction.Keywords: uncertainty, youth, making, learning ecology, agency, framing, collaborationIntroductionMaker spaces are typified by fluidity of roles, products, audiences, and values (Sheridan et al., 2014). Such openended, resource-rich spaces hold potential for generative and equitable learning (Bell, Van Horne, & Cheng,2017), but also create challenges as students learn to navigate concerns of technological tools, varied resources,and the power and social dynamics present in all learning environments. Investigating how young people shapedtheir learning opportunities, we analyzed collaborative work on open-ended projects in a high school-based“maker club”. We came to focus on how moments of uncertainty acted as pivot points that young people used toposition themselves within their project group in order to access and build on existing areas of expertise.Theoretical frameworkTo understand how young people navigated collaborative product design, we turn to framing theory, whichallows for analysis across three dimensions: positional, conceptual and epistemological (Van de Sande &Greeno, 2012). Hand, Penuel, and Gutierrez (2012) propose framing theory as a tool for developing equityoriented educational designs, noting that “who gets to define what and when a frame is,” is central to thedistribution of power and opportunity. The question of who defines frames is especially relevant to makingspaces, where familiar, school-like frames have been destabilized. Moments of uncertainty in collaborative workare a productive place for inquiry into this process and into how learning happens (Jordan & McDaniel, 2014).MethodsThis study was part of a larger design-based research project in which we co-developed a “maker club” thatoperated for 3 months at a public charter high school. We acted as participant observers, leading workshops andmentoring youth, while also recording audio and video data, collecting field notes, and debriefing with ourresearch team and the partnering teachers. Fifteen youth, ages 14 to 16, participated in the maker club – 7 boys,7 girls, and 1 gender non-conforming; 5 African-American, 3 Latinx, 3 White, and 4 multiracial. A focal groupcomprised three young women and one young man, and their project type and the problems (both technical andsocial) that arose were similar to those seen in other groups.In this paper, we consider observation data from the third session of Maker Club, when students movedout of skill-building workshops and began work on their project ideas. We transcribed interaction from the fullday (4.5 hours), then coded the transcript for framing at positional, epistemological and conceptual levels. Webegan to notice moments of uncertainty as key sites at which frames were asserted, contested, or reinforced.Using verbal and non-verbal markers of uncertainty, such as questions, hedges, and hypotheticals (Jordan &McDaniel, 2014), we re-analyzed the transcripts, identifying places in the day where uncertainty was raised. Inanalysis of thirteen key moments, we identified themes in how moments of uncertainty functioned in theframing work students were doing. We present four of these themes here.FindingsTheme 1: Solidifying positions, purposes & powerAt moments of uncertainty we saw participants attempting to frame roles and resources in ways that establishedauthority or solidified relationships. For example, in one episode, two participants, Casey and B, sustaineduncertainty around technical details – like the spelling of “laser” – in ways that allowed them to strengthenconnection to each other and reinforce their roles as project leaders. This action simultaneously served toICLS 2018 Proceedings1455© ISLSposition another participant, Deonne, as a social and technical outsider.Theme 2: Pursuing areas or topics of interestsSimply raising areas of uncertainty provided a way for participants to pursue areas of interest by directingattention to desired features. For example, Deonne, asked a disproportionately high number of questions aboutaesthetics and engraving, the aspect of project work that aligned most closely with her expertise and learninggoals for the maker club. Raising uncertainty about a feature allowed participants to make bids for responsibilityof those features by framing their own expertise or interest.Theme 3: Directing activity toward personal resourcesManagement of uncertainty played an important role in students’ ability to bring outside resources – material,conceptual and cultural - to bear, such as when Casey suggested a re-design that would have allowed the groupto work at her house, instead of the school. The move would have helped her access expertise in carpentry, aswell as tools that she had at home. Rather than building personal connections into a project during initialideation, moments of uncertainty across the project allowed participants to frame priorities and direct solutionpaths toward familiar toolsets that allowed them to participate centrally and knowledgeably.Theme 4: Inviting new perspectives, resources, and positionsWhen participants resurfaced issues of uncertainty they had shut down or let drop, they shifted the resources,constraints, and epistemologies that could be brought to bear. Students left some issues unresolved only to reengage when a shift in context directed attention toward new resources, or provided for a new perspective onold resources. For example, when Deonne asked about project dimensions, the group did not address the issue,with Isaiah claiming they were “just prototyping.” When a mentor raised the same question shortly after, hisauthority and knowledge of tool limitations reframed the issue for the group. They began a process ofmeasuring, sketching and debate, but Deonne shifted from the center of discussion to the margins.ImplicationsCollaborating on open-ended work in the maker club was a process of negotiation and compromise; each projectdecision had aesthetic and structural implications, consequences for how each group member was positioned insubsequent work, and consequences for what and how each team member learned through discussion andconstruction. Uncertainty was pervasive and persistent, conceptually and relationally. Resolution was non-linearand often seemed secondary to learner purposes for participation. Learners had to tolerate ambiguity whileselecting where and when to raise questions and concerns.Moments of uncertainty created cracks in the organization of learning situations, opening room forstudent agency. Functioning like pivot points (Calabrese Barton, Tan, & Shin, 2016), these moments wereplaces of flux where young people had opportunity to push on what kinds of resources and knowledge werebrought to bear. Framing work accomplished with introduction of or response to uncertainty had strategic effect,providing opportunities to capitalize on and extend existing expertise and positions of some youth. Conversely,management of uncertainty also served to thwart project features and discussions to the detriment of someinterests, purposes and practices. How young people manage uncertainty plays an important role in STEMtrajectories, critical to whether or not they can leverage identities and build expertise across settings and time.ReferencesBell, P., Van Horne, K., & Cheng, B. H. (2017). Special Issue: Designing Learning Environments for EquitableDisciplinary Identification. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 26(3), 367-375.Calabrese Barton, A., Tan, E., & Shin, M. (2016). Mobilities of Criticality: Space-Making, Identity and Agencyin a Youth-Centered Makerspace Paper presented at the Transforming Learning, EmpoweringLearners: The International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) 2016, Singapore.Hand, V., Penuel, W. R., & Gutiérrez, K. D. (2012). (Re)Framing Educational Possibility: Attending to Powerand Equity in Shaping Access to and within Learning Opportunities H uman Development, 55.Jordan, M. E., & McDaniel, R. R., Jr. (2014). Managing Uncertainty During Collaborative Problem Solving inElementary School Teams: The Role of Peer Influence in Robotics Engineering Activity. Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 23(4).Sheridan, K., Halverson, E., Litts, B. K., Brahms, L., Jacobs-Priebe, L., & Owens, T. (2014). Learning in theMaking: A Comparative Case Study of Three Makerspaces. Harvard Educational Review, 84(4).Van de Sande, C. C., & Greeno, J. G. (2012). Achieving Alignment of Perspectival Framings in ProblemSolving Discourse. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(1), 1-44.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1456© ISLS