Creating a Visual Representation of Expert Strategies to Inform theDesign of Digital Tools for Citizen ScienceJessica Roberts, Carnegie Mellon University, jarobert@andrew.cmu.eduKevin Crowley, University of Pittsburgh, crowleyk@pitt.eduMarti Louw, Carnegie Mellon University, mrlouw@andrew.cmu.eduAbstract: Tools supporting citizen scientists in learning complex observational tasks liketaxonomic identification scaffold expert practice by specifically attending to the aspects ofexpertise relevant to citizen science. This poster describes our process for developing a visualrepresentation that characterizes observational practices and moves entomologists make whenidentifying unknown organisms. We outline how this work is guiding the design of a digitalteaching collection of freshwater insects, macroinvertebrates.org, to support citizen basedwater quality assessment activities.IntroductionCitizen science volunteers engaging in complex data collection tasks such as aquatic macroinvertebrateidentification (ID) for water quality monitoring require a vernacular understanding and associated set ofscientific skills to generate reliable and useful data (Snyder et al., 2017). Volunteers often “fail to see” and havedifficulty recovering from errors in taxonomic work (Nerbonne and Vondracek, 2003). When volunteers areunable to reliably generate accurate data, it can lead to a “taxonomic bottleneck” that limits the impact andeffectiveness of some citizen science projects. We are developing an innovative digital teaching collection basedon explorable, high-resolution annotated images with supplemental multimedia in order to support thedevelopment of citizen science skills such as scientific forms of noticing and associated observational practices.A crucial step in designing this online learning platform is characterizing observational expertise inentomology in order to know what observational practices need to be supported. To inform this effort, wedeveloped a novel visual representation of expert processes depicting how various forms of scientificknowledge and visual practices are put into action to make an accurate identification. We hypothesize that avisually informative representation of observational expertise is a productive way to elucidate key strategies forobservational fluency and highlight the varied use of scientific inscriptions and resources that need to besupported and incorporated into the design of online learning tools and systems.MethodsWe conducted contextual inquiry think-aloud interviews with eight experts in entomology, ranging from earlycareer researchers to professional taxonomists with 20-30 years of experience in aquatic macroinvertebrate ID.When feasible, interviews were conducted at the experts’ work sites to ensure access to the materials and toolsthey would typically use when conducting an ID. The researcher provided participants with three specimens toidentify to the lowest taxonomic level they felt comfortable (typically genus), asking them to describe theirprocess and prompting them with clarifying questions as necessary. Transcriptions were made from audiorecordings, and videos and photographs of the working environment were taken.Analysis and findingsWe sought to characterize how scientific expertise and associated practices shape the ID process. We first codedand distilled a subset of the interviews into a step-by-step listing of the moves made during each ID. A move isdefined as a significant action or recognizable step that drives the identification process toward naming thespecimen at the order, family and genus level. We next created a matrix representation matching the informationgathered during the ID process with the resources used to generate that information. We define resources as anytangible tool (e.g. microscope), external source (e.g. dichotomous key, Internet search), or observational practice(e.g. manipulating specimens or lighting to optimize viewing). These initial representations helped clarifyaspects of expert practice but were not yet a graphically succinct externalization of expertise that could be usedto inform platform design. We therefore created a new representation, which we call Shared Externalization ofExpertise (SEE) because of its potential for facilitating communication across stakeholders.The SEE diagram (Figure 1a) uses an up-down metaphor frequently invoked in taxonomicidentification that refers to progressive taxon levels as “lower,” e.g. “taking it down to genus” and displays stepstaken in the identification process as descending. If the taxonomist were using the same strategy (e.g. directlymatching the characters listed in a couplet to features of the specimen) throughout the ID, the diagram wouldICLS 2018 Proceedings1641© ISLSFigure 1. An example SEE diagram (a), and diagrams of moves by three experts identifying Drunella (b).form a straight line down. However, experts tend to use multiple strategies during the identification process tomake a judgment (e.g. consulting an additional text or image if the initial resource is insufficient), and thesestrategy shifts are displayed as horizontal movements along the x-axis.Such horizontal moves are manifestations of expertise. In a complex activity like taxonomic ID,knowing how to navigate uncertainties is crucial for success, yet non-experts facing uncertainty are less likely tohave the resources and knowledge to work around difficulties (i.e. shift strategies). SEE diagrams show howexperts strategically address uncertainties, for example in our study as several subjects were asked to separatelyidentify the same specimen (Figure 1b). Expert 1 had difficulty confirming characters and had to adjust afterinitially going down the wrong path in the key. By contrast, Expert 2 easily confirmed diagnostic characters andquickly navigated the key, and Expert 3 confirmed the ID by looking for known diagnostic characters withoutthe aid of any text. Experts 2 and 3 didn’t demonstrate uncertainty with this specimen, while Expert 1 struggledyet was still able to work around challenges. Our digital tool is not meant to transform novices into Expert 3, butto support them in persevering through a process like Expert 1’s by providing appropriate resources and support.DiscussionExpert taxonomists have extensive resources for identification, including their own knowledge and experience,a variety of keys and guides, access to informed colleagues, and an understanding of the “tricks” for recognizingdiagnostic characters. Amateur citizen scientists have a much more limited toolbox, meaning that when theirprimary resource (e.g. a regional key) doesn’t contain sufficient guidance, they have few places to turn for help.Our platform, macroinvertebrates.org, is designed as a visual guide to supplement the wide variety of primaryID resources already in use by citizen science groups and to support multiple audiences ranging from novicevolunteers to trainers. Our key challenge is not to present all the entomological knowledge our users could need,but to present the right information in a way users can strategically access it.The process of creating these representations has informed multiple aspects of our ongoing designbased learning research. Certain strategy shifts recurred across multiple SEE diagrams, indicating their value toexperts and suggesting they should be prioritized in our design. These diagrammatic representations have alsobeen used in design meetings to evaluate navigation, interaction, and interface design choices in the expansionand redesign our platform. The representations of expert practice have served to concretize the open-endeddesign space from the general need to support volunteers into specific actionable scaffolds and informationdesign solutions we can provide to our users to make it easier for them to learn to see with an expert eye.ReferencesNerbonne, J. F., & Vondracek, B. (2003). Volunteer macroinvertebrate monitoring: assessing training needsthrough examining error and bias in untrained volunteers. Journal of the North American BenthologicalSociety, 22(1), 152-163.Snyder, J. (2017, February). Vernacular Visualization Practices in a Citizen Science Project. In CSCW (pp.2097-2111).AcknowledgmentsFunded by NSF (AISL #1516149). We would like to thank Lauren Allen and Grace Guo for their contributions.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1642© ISLS