Assessing Young Children’s Cognitionthrough Multi-Modal InterviewsAsmalina Saleh, Indiana University, asmsaleh@indiana.eduJoshua A. Danish, Indiana University, jdanish@indiana.eduNoel Enyedy, University of California, Los Angeles, enyedy@gseis.ucla.eduChristine Lee, University of California, Los Angeles, christine.lee.ucla@gmail.comAbstract: Designs that leverage embodiment argue that embodiment supports students’cognition and learning. However, it is unclear how we might assess the role of embodiment insupporting student learning as compared to other modes of expression, such as verbal orvisual. Furthermore, computer-supported learning activities that rely upon embodiment maybe best evaluated with measures that allow students to continue to embody their knowledgeduring assessments. Our study presents early efforts to understand how embodiment mightsupport or hinder 2nd graders’ expressions of states of matter (N=18). Results indicate thatwhen students are less familiar with content or provided fewer details in other modes ofcommunication, embodiment provides an alternative way to express their understanding.Moreover, the intervention familiarized students with how to use embodiment to expressthemselves which led students to yield responses which were just as nuanced as other modesof communication.Keywords: embodiment, assessments, multi-modality, young children, interviewsIntroduction and backgroundEmbodiment, including both gesture and whole-body activity, plays a critical role in cognition and learning(Goldin-Meadow, 2004; Smith & Gasser, 2005). It is particularly valuable when students are less familiar with atopic (Radford, 2009) and in early elementary classroom contexts where a high level of physical activity isalready commonplace. As a result of these findings and ongoing technical innovation that support embodiedinterfaces, educational technologies are increasingly incorporating embodiment as a central component of theirdesigns (Lindgren & Johnson-Glenberg, 2013). However, it is not yet clear how we might effectively use thesedifferent modes of communication in evaluating young children’s understanding of science content such asstates of matter, where assessment is typically based on students’ drawings and/or talk (cf., Paik, Kim, Cho &Park, 2004; Smith et al, 2006).This paper reports on initial efforts to explore the different ways that 2nd graders expressed theirunderstanding during semi-structured interviews both before and after an intervention, which centered on howembodied modeling with motion-capture technology supports the learning of states of matter (Danish et al,2015). We analyzed how different multimodal opportunities may encourage or hinder students’ articulations andexamined the extent to which embodiment as a mode of communication can support students’ early articulationsof unfamiliar concepts. Given that students were embodying particles in different states of matter, we expectthat students will be better able to ground their ideas or knowledge in the physical space by using their bodies(Alibali & Nathan, 2012). Moreover, given that gestures reflect a child’s readiness to learn and consequentlyimprove learning (Cook, Mitchell, & Goldin-Meadow, 2008), we expect that whole-body activity can encouragestudents who are less familiar with the content to better able to express their ideas and consequently increasetheir use of embodiment to demonstrate their understanding in the post-interviews.MethodsParticipants and data sourcesFour groups of students aged seven to eight (12 males and 6 females) from a mid-western public schoolparticipated in this study. Using motion capture technology, these students worked with two teachers andlearned about the particulate nature of matter and the role of energy as a causal mechanism in state changes(Danish et al, 2015). Over the course of three days, students engaged in role-play involving a narrative centeredon water in various states, embodied particles and modeled how energy would impact these particles (for furtherdetails, please see Danish et al, 2015). These activities leveraged embodiment and dramatic play; encouragingstudents to use their positions and motions in the physical space to depict themselves as particles, which are thenCSCL 2015 Proceedings586© ISLSdisplayed on-screen. Pre-post interview analysis for conceptual understanding indicated that all of the studentsdeveloped a more robust conception of states of matter (ibid). This paper reports on a secondary analysis of thepre-post semi-structured interview video data to understand how different modalities supported students’articulation of the particulate nature of matter and changes of state.Assessing student understandingTo examine student understanding, we analyzed students’ verbal and non-verbal responses, and developed acoding scheme structured around particle behavior and the relationship among energy, particle behavior andstate changes. We began with a priori codes focusing on the underlying principles behind students’characterization of boiling and melting (both state changes) from Paik, Kim, Cho, and Park (2004). After severaliterations of applying our initial codes, two sets of ordered codes were finalized and applied to all pre-postinterviews (see tables 1 and 2). We targeted increasingly nuanced descriptions of matter (from observableproperties to particle behavior) and types of causal mechanisms involved in change of states (from simpledescriptions to articulating the relationship among energy, particles and state changes). Students’ propensity touse embodiment was not assessed, although the teachers commented that students were used to physical and roleplay in both in class and out of class activities.Table 1: Summary of the matter-type codes for conceptions of matterCodesIllustrative examplesMT1: Observable characteristics of matterIt’s just stacked up, ice is hard, water can just sinks down to the bottom butice has to stack.Really it’s the same amount as this picture from that picture, cause it melts.The particles are frozen... on a hot day it melts the particles can't handlethat much coldness.They [water] move a lot, medium fast, not like (makes whizzing-likenoise), that would be gas.MT2: Understand that matter is conservedMT3: Initial discussion of particles(includes incorrect articulations)MT4: Accurate discussion of particles (noincorrect articulations)Table 2: Summary of the change-type codes for causal mechanisms in changes of stateCodesIllustrative examplesCT1: Superficial description of state changeWater changes into ice.CT2: Some mechanism involvedCT3: Energy or temperature as mechanismCT4: Particle behavior as mechanismCT5: Relates energy to particle behaviorand state changeIt [The glass shaking] sorta rocks me around.Energy made me [particle] move faster.Gas [particles] coming together a little bit more [to make liquid].Well, there has to be snow or something like that to get it cooler, and getthe energy not flowing as much, so they [particles] move a little.Examining student responses to different modalitiesThe interview protocol included a series of questions, which differed in the modality of response that theyrequested. This sequence of questions focused on how students explained the behavior of particles in variousstates of matter. Students were first asked a) what particles look like; then b) were asked to embody a particle ina liquid state, and c) directed the interviewer as the interviewer embodied a state transition. The first twoquestions were coded using as matter-types while the last question was coded as a change-type. Given that thecontent was not coded similarly, we inspected the codes to select cases where students initially responded with“I don’t know”, or were not codable in the verbal question, but later provided a more nuanced description whenasked to embody or direct the interviewer. Selecting these cases allowed us to explore how students who do notappear to have initial ideas about the content or seem less familiar with it, respond in the subsequent questions.We also supplemented the analysis of interview data with videos of the intervention to determine how specificembodied activity might have carried over into the post-test. After examining these initial cases, we analyzedthe remaining cases to explore how all the students responded to the three questions.CSCL 2015 Proceedings587© ISLSFindingsUsing embodiment to share nascent ideasFindings indicate that when students are less familiar with the content, embodiment allowed them todemonstrate their understanding. We present an example of a pre-interview with Jonah who initially respondedthat “it (water particles) would turn to ice” when asked about how particles would behave in a liquid state.Excerpt 1: Student’s embodied response to query on how particles behave in liquid state in pre-interviewTranscript1 The little specks ofwaterEmbodiment[makes specks with right hand]2 would turn into…[joins both hands together]3 they would um…[drops left hand down, and thenbrought it back up again]4 they would like[forms hands together again]5 turn into ice[moves hands apart from oneanother in a straight line]6 and make the waterstill[moves hands together and thenapart]Jonah continued to add that the sun played a role in the change from solid to liquid, all the timegesturing while articulating his thinking. When asked to embody what he meant, Jonah’s response was richerand more detailed. At first, he used his right hand to represent particles (line 1), later using both hands to depictmore than one particle (lines 2-4) and then further illustrating how these particles might arrange themselves in astraight line to form ice (lines 5-6). In Jonah’s case, gesturing appears to allow him the time to gather histhoughts and facilitated his attempts to share his ideas. Jonah’s gestures indicate some awareness that particlesarrange themselves in a particular way to form ice, although he may not have the disciplinary sophistication toilluminate his idea further. In his post-interview, Jonah was able to articulate and embody an initialconceptualization of particle movement in a liquid state. He correctly moved around to embody particlemovement and explained that “they (particles) move around pretty fast”. Even though Jonah’s characterizationof particle movement in water is inaccurate (particles move around faster than in solid, but slower than ingaseous state), his gestures were not as hesitant, and more immediate and direct.However, not all students chose to use embodiment to articulate their thinking. Seven students acrossboth pre and post-interviews (four in pre, three in post) opted not to embody when asked to by the interviewer.Out of these, two made initial attempts but then expressed that they did not know how to embody, whereas theothers declined to embody when asked by the interviewer. We contend that this could be due to students’ lack offamiliarity with both content as well as embodied ways of explaining their ideas prior to the intervention.Instead, some students opted to visually represent their ideas when we provided them with this opportunity inthe interview (e.g., drawing a picture), demonstrating that students will default to familiar modes of expression.However, in the post-interviews, students readily used embodiment to explain themselves. 75% of the studentsembodied responses that were just as detailed as their verbal answers, with one student providing all details inhis embodiment since his actions activated his thinking about the movement of particles. In the case of thisstudent, the fact that the intervention supported embodiment as means of expressing one’s understanding wascritical in ensuring that he was able to access what he had previously learned.The value of directing embodimentIn the seven instances where students opted to not embody, they were still willing to direct the interviewer,which then provided more insight into their thinking. Take for instance, Nigel, who initially declined to embodyhis explanation. He had explained that “they (particles) liquefy”, paused and then added “I don’t know” whenasked about how particles behaved in a liquid state. Subsequently, when asked to embody, Nigel shook his headand said no. When the interviewer asked him to direct her actions, Nigel both demonstrated and verballyprovided instructions to the interviewer on how to act like particles behaving in a liquid state (lines 1 and 5).CSCL 2015 Proceedings588© ISLSThe changes in the particle movement were both demonstrated by Nigel first (e.g., lines 1, 9) and theseutterances were mimicked or clarified by the interviewer. Nigel presented how he imagined particles act whenthey liquefy, demonstrating his assumption that particle movement mirrors the macro descriptions of matter(lines 5 and 9). Thus, his conception of particle movement is further nuanced in this sequence. In the postinterview, Nigel began to embody particles with no hesitation, moving around in a circle slowly to indicateparticle movement, indicating that the implementation offered embodiment as more salient means of expressingunderstanding. This example also illustrates that asking students to direct embodiment could be more useful toillustrate student thinking than asking students how to embody when students are less familiar with not only thistype of expression, but also the content.Excerpt 2: Student directing interviewer as particle behaving in liquid to solid in pre-interview1SpeakerNigel:TranscriptUm, you should go like thisEmbodiment[moves from his chair and squats on the floorfacing the interviewer]2Interviewer:Like this?[mimics student and squats on the floor]3Nigel:Yeah.4Interviewer:Uh huh.5Nigel:And then sorta move your arms aroundyou because water is wavy.[sit back down in his chair]6Interviewer:Ok.[waves arms around]7Nigel:And then you’ll change slowly to getless wavy[gets up, hunches over and hangs his hands]8Interviewer:Yeah, less wavy?9Nigel:Less wavy and start slowing down.[droops over]10Interviewer:Slowing down.[mimics drooping over]Conclusions and implicationsOur findings suggest that interviews that incorporate embodiment can offer an alternative way for students toarticulate their thinking, above and beyond what is originally offered in more traditional-interview formats. Thisis especially so when students do not include sufficient details in one mode of expression, are unfamiliar withhow to express new content, and unfamiliar with using embodiment to express understanding. Furthermore, ourresults suggest that experience with embodiment as a form of representation leads to increased use ofembodiment in post-test interviews. This suggests that there is value in teasing out when and how learning withembodied technologies supports transfer into more traditional assessment contexts.ReferencesAlibali, M.W., & Nathan, M. (2012). Embodiment in Mathematics Teaching and Learning: Evidence fromLearner’s and Teachers’ Gestures. Journal of the Learning Sciences. 21(2), 247-286. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10508406.2011.611446Cook, S. W., Mitchell, Z., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2008) Gesturing Makes Learning Last. Cognition. 106(2),1047-1058. doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2007.04.010Goldin-Meadow, S. (2004). Gesture's role in the learning process. Theory into Practice, 43(4), 314-321.Lindgren, R., & Johnson-Glenberg, M. (2013). Emboldened by Embodiment: Six Precepts for Research onEmbodied Learning and Mixed Reality. Educational Researcher, 42(8), 445-452. doi:10.3102/0013189x13511661Paik, S. H., Kim, H. N., Cho, B. K., & Park, J. W. (2004). K-­‐8th grade Korean students' conceptions of changesof state and conditions for changes of state. International Journal of Science Education 26(2): 207-224.Radford, L. (2009). Why do gestures matter? Sensuous cognition and the palpability of mathematical meanings.Educational Studies in Mathematics, 70(2), 111-126.CSCL 2015 Proceedings589© ISLSSmith, L., & Gasser, M. (2005). The development of embodied cognition: Six lessons from babies. ArtificialLife, 11: 13-29.Smith, C. L., Wiser, M., Anderson, C. W., & Krajcik, J. (2006). Implications of Research on Children'sLearning for Standards and Assessment: A Proposed Learning Progression for Matter and the AtomicMolecular Theory. Measurement: Interdisciplinary Research & Perspective, 4(1-2), 1-98.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation (IIS-1323767). We would also like tothank the teachers, students and participating researchers. In addition, we thank Jeffrey Burke, FabianWagmister, UCLA REMAP and Inquirium for all of their support in the design and development of the STEPplatform.CSCL 2015 Proceedings590© ISLS