Leave Some Space to Think:Can Less Guidance Bring More Product?Jinju Lee, Hyun Joo and Dongsik Kimjinju.a.lee@gmail.com, koreaspy21@gmail.com, kimdsik@hanyang.ac.krHanyang UniversityAbstract: The purpose of the study was to develop an optimal form of support during theproblem-solving phase in productive failure for the learners to benefit most from their failingexperience. Learners’ Representation and Solution Methods (“RSM”) and cognitive load wereanalyzed accordingly. The results indicate that there are statistically significant differences inlearners’ RSM diversities based on the types of metacognitive prompt provided to each group,while the effect of the different types of metacognitive prompt on RSM structuredness andcognitive load are not significant.Keywords: Productive failure, metacognitive prompt, representation and solution methodsIntroductionProductive failure is an instructional strategy that encourages learners to directly confront novel, complexproblems through non-content-related support followed by instruction phase afterwards (Kapur, 2016). Throughthis delayed-instruction strategy, learners can be trained to think of their own solutions in a self-determined waywhile using and developing cognitive structures to solve novel problems. The complex problem is aninstructional device to activate prior knowledge (either informal or intuitive), perceive knowledge gap, andgenerate RSM to the problems. The problem-solving process augments learners’ data source and empowers thelearners to transfer skills even if they fail to solve problems. The efficacy of the complex problem can beexplained by solution generation effect which argues that the learners would perform better when they generatemore RSMs (Kapur, 2012).Much effort has been made for the learners to turn their failing experiences to be ‘glorious’. Often, alearner may go through a failure from lacking domain knowledge, not from a condition in which they find itdifficult even to start. To compensate for the lacking domain knowledge and to facilitate RSM generation, thisstudy focused on providing metacognitive prompts during the problem-solving phase. The metacognitioninvolves both knowledge and regulation of cognition and compensates for the lack of relevant domain-specificknowledge. Hence, in the absence of domain-specific and structural knowledge, the metacognition becomescritical for solving ill-structured problems (Wineburg, 1998) as they require both types of knowledge (Ge &Land, 2004). The experiment by Roll et al. (2012) showed that the learners outperformed in invention activitywhen they were provided with metacognitive prompts.Meanwhile, the amount of support should also be considered because offering too much support mayobstruct achieving productive failure, that is, to encourage learners to come up with their own solution. Guidingthe whole process of problem-solving on evaluating and refining their solutions may improve RSMstructuredness, but too much content in the worksheet (or material) would rather increase cognitive load.Concomitantly, drawing learners back repeatedly into situations that they had already skipped because theylacked the relevant knowledge can frustrate and exhaust them.Therefore, it is necessary to devise an optimized prompt that contributes to an affordable failingexperience. Such a prompt may allow a space to generate more RSMs by providing learners with less work thana fully-supporting prompt. Reviewing learners’ RSMs during the problem-solving phase can be both time- andeffort-consuming, and can ultimately become meaningless because the instruction phase provides a chance forlearners to revise and compare their RSMs with a concrete lesson. Optimized prompt can, however, preventcognitive overload from the difficulty and complexity of problems.This study attempted to answer two research questions: (1) In what ways do the different types ofmetacognitive prompt affect learners’ RSMs in terms of diversity (“RSMD”) and structuredness (“RSMS”)? (2)In what ways do the different types of metacognitive prompt affect learners’ cognitive load?MethodThe research questions were tested in a quasi-experimental study on 106 undergraduate students who aremajoring in mechatronics and enrolled in Intro to Mechatronics course in a university in Seoul, Korea. Theparticipants were asked to solve two complex problems with peers and provided with prompts that offered noICLS 2018 Proceedings1547© ISLSsupport, optimized support, or full support. Results based on three measurements were collected throughout thesession; RSMD (Cronbach’s α = .82), RSMS (Cronbach’s α = .86), and cognitive load (Cronbach’s α = .87).ResultsThe dependent variables for research question 1 were RSMD and RSMS. A MANCOVA test was conductedwith different types of metacognitive prompt as the between-subjects factor, and the pretest score as thecovariate. There was a significant multivariate effect of metacognitive prompt on participants’ RMSD andRSMS scores (F(2,102) = 2.589, p = .038, ηₚ²= .048). However, one of the univariate effects of metacognitiveprompt was not significant: RSMD (F(2,102) = 4.954, p = .009, ηₚ²= .089) and RSMS (F(2,102) = 1.583, p =.210, ηₚ²= .030). The result indicates that both the optimized support (mean difference = 1.077, p = .048) andno support group (mean difference = 1.333, p = .014) scored significantly higher on RSMD than the fullysupported group. The difference between the RSMD scores of the optimized support group and no supportgroup was not significant.The dependent variable for research question 2 was the cognitive load. An ANCOVA test wasconducted with different types of metacognitive prompt as the between-subjects factor, and the pretest score asthe covariate. The difference among groups was not significant (F(2,102) = 2.045, p = .135, ηₚ²= .039).DiscussionThis study investigated the effect of different types of metacognitive prompt in association with the diversityand structuredness of learners’ RSMs and cognitive loads. The MANCOVA test revealed that the optimizedsupport and, surprisingly, the no support groups generated more RSMs than the full support group. The nosupport and optimized support groups could have benefitted from having their datasets regulated, leading to thesolution generation effect (Kapur, 2012). This result is linked to the concept of productive failure, which is toproblematize learners without giving guidance. Nonetheless, the findings propose that among different forms ofsupport during the problem-solving phase, non-guided failures allow more opportunity to generate ideas orRSMs than the guided failures.This study focused on the effects of changes in the problem-solving phase, thus, RSMS were measuredto examine whether the fully supported group would generate more structured RSMs than the others. The resultsshow that the differences among the groups’ RSMS scores were not significant. This result can be explained bythe nature of the metacognitive prompt that does not provide cognitive support. It is consistent with the findingsof Kapur (2011), who found that having fewer failures during the problem-solving phase was not beneficial tolearners’ learning outcomes.It was expected that the optimized support would reduce extraneous load hence have more room for thegermane load. However, this study found that there was no statistically significant difference among theexperimental groups’ cognitive loads. This can be attributed to the fact that the learners did not consider theprompt to be a guidance nor they reported cognitive load based on the complexity of the problems instead oftheir own internal states. Measuring cognitive load after failed complex problem-solving experience may notmake sense, as it would result in relatively high cognitive load. This study showed that reducing learners’cognitive loads through prompts is ineffective, therefore suggests future research to consider how to designproductive failure environments that can reduce cognitive load and produce a productive failing experience.ReferencesGe, X., & Land, S. M. (2004). A conceptual framework for scaffolding III-structured problem-solving processesusing question prompts and peer interactions. Educational Technology Research and Development, 52(2), 5-22.Kapur, M. (2011). A further study of productive failure in mathematical problem solving: Unpacking the designcomponents. Instructional Science, 39(4), 561–579.Kapur, M. (2012). Productive failure in learning the concept of variance. Instructional Science, 40(4), 651-672.Kapur, M. (2016). Examining productive failure, productive success, unproductive failure, and unproductivesuccess in learning. Educational Psychologist, 51(2), 289-299.Roll, I., Holmes, N. G., Day, J., & Bonn, D. (2012). Evaluating metacognitive scaffolding in guided inventionactivities. Instructional science, 40(4), 691-710.Wineburg, S. (1998). Reading Abraham Lincoln: An expert study in the interpretation of historicaltexts. Cognitive Science, 22(3), 319-346.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1548© ISLS