The Effects of Coaching on the Teaching and Learning of Englishin Indian Government SchoolsHarini Raval, Center for Learning Resources, hariniraval@gmail.comChittaranjan Kaul, Center for Learning Resources, chittaranjan.kaul@gmail.comSusan McKenney, University of Twente, susan.mckenney@utwente.nlAbstract: Although English is mandatorily introduced as a second language early in majorityof government primary schools in India, its quality remains dismal due to lack of appropriatecurricula, poor ESL teacher competencies and weak professional development opportunities. Inan effort to promote the adoption of an innovative ESL program in urban government schools,coaching was introduced to support teacher and implementation of the new program. Throughclassroom observations, structured interviews and learner pre/post tests, the impact of coachingon teacher practices, teacher beliefs and student outcomes were studied and compared withthose of teachers who were not coached. The powerful results found in the coached-teacherclassrooms build a strong case for reviewing the current professional development policieswithin Indian schools, both for English and in general. Implications for research, policy andpractice are discussed.Keywords: ESL, teachers, coaching, student learningIntroductionThis paper presents a study investigating the role of coaching support for primary school teachers while adoptingan innovative bilingual approach to teaching English as a second language (ESL). An interactive ESL programwas implemented in 250 regional medium government schools in an urban Indian city across grades three andfour. In grade three, the program aimed at building English reading skills (Let’s Read and Write – LRW), and ingrade four, it focused on developing basic speaking and comprehension skills (We Learn English – WLE). Thiswidely tested program, created by a non-government resource agency, was designed to aid teachers with little tono ESL competencies and habituated to rote-based teaching methods. Extensive real-time bilingual audio-inputwas used in the program to introduce new English content and guide teachers in the use of new interactive teachingstrategies. Under a directive by the school administration, all the teachers participated in an experiential workshopwhich oriented them towards the principles of the pedagogical approach in the program, while offering anopportunity to observe and practice the teaching strategies through demonstrations and micro-teaching sessions,respectively. The school administration planned to launch this initiative merely on the basis of these workshops,in a manner characteristic of the broader Indian education system where professional development is synonymouswith one shot trainings without any ongoing guidance and supervision (Ramchandran, Pal, Jain, Shekar, &Sharma, 2005; Tyagi, 2010). The resource agency, in order to build a case for creating on-going support criticalfor adoption of reforms, suggested that coaching support be introduced to 30 schools as a pilot. A study wascommissioned to examine the impact of coaching support on the 30 schools. This paper describes the nature ofthis impact in terms of practices and beliefs of teachers who were coached and differences in the student outcomesrelated to the coached (C) and uncoached (uC) teachers.Theoretical underpinningsCoaching, as a form of support for professional growth, has been widely endorsed for its potential to impactteachers practice positively, by helping them integrate newly learned skills into their ongoing practice and inimproving their efficacy (Cantrell & Hughes, 2008; Joyce & Showers, 1982; Poglinco, et al., 2003). Accordingto Joyce and Showers (1982) a coach’s role is to provide support to teachers in their new endeavor throughprovision of companionship, technical feedback, analysis of application, adaptation to the students and personalfacilitation. Coaching support is provided on an individual basis or in a group. In this program, the coachingsupport was individual in nature, in which a skilled peer would visit a teacher’s ESL class and provide support.This support comprised of activities like, co-teaching, modelling, debriefing the challenges of implementation,observation and feedback on enactment (Raval, Mckenney, & Pieters, 2010; Gibbons & Cobb). It was aimed athelping teachers adapt the program realistically to their dynamic classroom challenges (Putnam & Borko, 2000),involving students who had no background to English or to the new learning approach that involved audiotechnology and extensive interaction.ICLS 2016 Proceedings506© ISLSClarke & Hollingsworth (2002) emphasize the importance of understanding the process by whichteachers grow in order to facilitate their professional development effectively. Since the purpose of this study wasto draw attention of administrators and decision makers towards the significance of ongoing professional supportfor teachers especially during the early stages of a reform, it sought to examine both the changes in different kindsof professional outcomes of teachers, as well as how these changes took place. The model of professionaldevelopment advocated by Clarke and Hollingsworth, aided the study’s intentions well, as it (a) highlights theprinciple domains of the teacher’s world in which change occurs as a result of professional development, and (b)unpacks the processes that mediate this change. Their model features four domains: (a) the external domainrepresents an external source of information and in this study refers to the coaching intervention; (b) the personaldomain represents the teachers’ knowledge, beliefs and attitudes, which in this context would include ideasincluding but not limited to general pedagogical knowledge, pedagogical content knowledge, and motivation, (c)the domain of practice represents professional experimentation which specifically refers to the implementation ofthe ESL program and, (d) the domain of consequences represents salient outcomes that pertain to ESLcompetencies of students in this study.The interaction between these domains happens as a result of two processes that teachers undertake:enactment and reflection. Enactment refers to the conscious putting into action of a(n) (new) idea or practice, andplays a critical role in transferring change from one domain to another domain. For instance, when a teacherdevelops an interest or conviction in a new approach (the personal domain), it would lead to enactment of theapproach and hence influence the domain of practice. Reflection takes place not just on student outcomes but alsoon other perceived consequences of their actions during enactment. Similar two-way reflective links connectteachers’ practice, the interpretation of outcomes (consequences of the practice) and revision of knowledge orbeliefs.MethodsThe aim of this study was to assess if and how coaching support influenced the teaching of ESL through thebilingual interactive program in the primary schools. Based on the Clarke and Hollingsworth (2002) domains, theresearch was guided by the following three questions:1. What changes in the practice and personal domains were exhibited by coached teachers?2. According to them, what engendered the changes?3. What were the consequences for WLE and LWR learners of coached and uncoached teachers?Data collection proceduresDomain of practice: Professional experimentationChanges in the domain of professional experimentation, that is, the implementation of WLE and LRW by teachers,were determined by analyzing the structured classroom observations conducted by the coaches for grades threeand four. The coaches collected this data as a part of their ongoing responsibility for a period of six months. 256classroom observations covering 64 teachers were conducted for LRW at the grade three level. Therefore eachteacher received about four visits from a coach in the six months. For grade four, 140 classroom observations ofWLE from 35 teachers were analyzed. Again, each teacher received about 4 coaching visits in the six-monthperiod. Additionally, 10 supervisors of teachers were interviewed to understand what changes they had perceivedin the teachers’ ESL teaching practices.Personal domain: Knowledge, beliefs and attitudesThe changes in the personal domain were examined through semi-structured personal interviews with 20 teachersfrom C-schools. Teachers were asked to reflect on what specific changes they experienced as a result of thecoaching support. Each interview lasted 20 to 30 minutes. The teachers were selected through conveniencesampling, based on time available for participating in the interview.Perceptions regarding causes of changeThe perceptions about engendered changes were examined through interviews with the same 20 teachersmentioned above. The teachers were asked to reflect and elaborate on if and how changes that they experiencedwere influenced by the coaching support.ICLS 2016 Proceedings507© ISLSDomain of consequence: Salient outcomesThe domain of consequence was examined through a pre/post test assessing ESL outcomes of students of gradethree and four. Approximately 20 percent of both coached (C) and un-coached (uC) schools were randomlyselected (10 out of the 40 C-schools, and 35 of the remaining uC-schools). Within each selected school, 10students of grade three and of grade four were randomly selected for the pre-test. The students from grade three(n-C=100, n-uC=344) took the LRW post-test, whereas those from grade four (n-C=166, N=uC=343) took theWLE post-test.InstrumentsClassroom observationClassroom observations were conducted with the help of a curriculum profile. Curriculum profiles are sets ofstatements about activities and intended behaviors of teachers during the observed lessons (Ottevanger, 2001; vanden Akker & Voogt, 1994). The extent to which teachers realize these intentions is established by crediting scoresbased on classroom observations, which results in the actual practice profile of the teacher. Three curriculumprofiles were used to develop a profile of the quality of implementation of the LRW program in grade three, andthe WLE program in grade four. For each item the observer could provide a score of A, B, C or D wherein ‘A’refereed to ‘Throughout the lesson/always; ‘B’ referred to ‘Often, ‘C’ referred to sometimes, and ‘D’ asNever/Not attempted. Both tools had items which represented strategies needed to implement the Englishlanguage materials.The grade three observation tool had three main dimensions, (1) general pedagogical skills required touse the materials well, (2) ESL pedagogical content skills and (3) learner responses. Each of these parameters hadother sub-items. Together, the tool comprised 17 items divided across these three parameters. The grade 4 toolcontained 16 items as the WLE program was far more structured and simple to execute as compared to the LRWprogram. These items were divided across three parameters: general pedagogical skills, pedagogical content skillsand learner responses. The items for both curriculum profiles are shown in Tables 1 and 2, respectively. Observerspracticed completing observation profiles in non-sampled classrooms until acceptable levels of inter-raterreliability were met. (Cohen’s kappa of .7 or higher).Teacher and supervisor interviewsSupervisor interviews were semi-structured, focusing on: their perceptions of the benefits of the coach, changesin teaching strategies perceived in the C- and uC schools, changes in the responses of learners between C- and uCschools. Similarly teacher interviews were also semi-structured and focused on: nature of support received fromthe coach, benefits or dis-benefits to their teaching and learner behavior as a result of the coaching interventionand perceptions about how the change took place.ESL pre/post-testThe grade three test assessed the impact of LRW by measuring reading and writing skills. The test administeredin grade four aimed at assessing impact of WLE by measuring speaking and comprehension skills. The specificskills tested are reflected in Tables 3 and 4, respectively.Data analysisData on classroom observation was analysed by examining the teachers’ transition from lower to higher levels(from D to A) within the six months. The positions recorded for September and February were compared. Thepercentage of teachers who had progressed by one level, two levels and three levels across various parameters inthe curriculum profile between September and February was calculated. Differences between the pre and post testscores for the C-schools and the uC-schools were calculated. Effect sizes were determined to indicate the strengthof the learning gain for both types of schools. Interview data was analysed based on the interconnected model ofteacher growth. Specifically, to answer the question on changes initiated by the coaching support, the reflectionsby teachers indicating a change were categorized into domains of practice, consequence or personal using Atlasti. Once domains of change were identified, causal relationships and interactions across domains were sought inthe teacher-given descriptions.ICLS 2016 Proceedings508© ISLSFindingsDomain of practiceData on professional experimentation obtained by classroom observation from class 3 (Table 1) revealed thatthere was a general improvement amongst teachers over the six months. The average percentage of teachers whomoved up by one level, two and three levels in the general pedagogical skills was 32.3 percent, 10.6 and 4.3percent respectively. In all, 47.2 percent of teachers reflected progress in the general pedagogical skills. Similarly,for the pedagogical content skills, 38.7 percent teachers moved up by one level, 9.8 percent teachers moved upby two levels and 5.8 percent teachers moved up by three levels. This totaled 54.9 percent teachers who hadprogressed at least by one level. Finally in the learner responses, the average percent of teachers who moved upby one level was 34.3 percent, those who moved up by two levels was 10.9 percent, and those who moved up bythree levels was 1.6 percent. In all 46.6 percent teachers reflected a progress in the quality of learner response.Table 1: Teachers in grade 3 whose classroom practice moved up by 1, 2, 3 or 4 categoriesItemsGeneral Pedagogical SkillsTeacher is prepared (has read instructions, ready with teaching aids)Teacher gives clear instructions when introducing and conducting activitiesTeacher uses teaching aidsTeacher asks questions to students.Teacher gives students time to answerAveragePedagogical content skillsTeacher teaches phonemic sounds appropriatelyTeacher teaches oral vocabulary appropriatelyTeacher teaches sight vocabulary appropriatelyTeacher helps students read/write by giving them contextual clues toanswer/understandTeacher helps children decode when reading/writingTeacher clarifies meanings of unfamiliar or new words and sentencesTeacher uses a bilingual approachAverageLearner ResponseStudents are able to make letter sound associationStudents are able to decodeStudents are able to read sight vocabularyStudents read with understandingStudents ask questions.AverageNo of categories12320.7% 10.3% 6.9%34.5% 10.3% 3.4%30.8% 11.5% 7.7%35.7% 10.7% 0.0%40.0% 10.0% 3.3%32.3% 10.6% 4.3%40.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%Total46.4%25.0%40.0%7.1%8.3%13.3%3.6%8.3%13.3%0.0%0.0%0.0%57.1%41.6%66.6%42.3%28.6%59.1%29.6%38.7%3.8%10.7%18.2%7.4%9.8%3.8%0.0%4.5%7.4%5.8%0.0%3.6%0.0%0.0%0.5%49.9%42.9%81.8%44.4%54.9%31.0%33.3%38.1%40.0%27.6%34.0%6.9%18.5%14.3%8.0%6.9%10.9%3.4%0.0%4.8%0.0%0.0%1.6%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%41.3%51.8%57.2%48.0%34.5%46.6%37.9%48.2%50.0%46.4%53.3%47.2%Data on professional experimentation obtained by classroom observation from grade 4 (Table 2) also revealed ageneral improvement amongst teachers over the six months. The average percentage of teachers who moved upby one level, and two levels in the general pedagogical skills was 41.7 percent and 4.1 percent respectively. In all,45.7 percent of teachers reflected a progress in the general pedagogical skills. Similarly, for the pedagogicalcontent skills, 36.2 percent of teachers moved up by one level and 4.7 percent of teachers moved up by two levels.This totaled to 40.9 teachers who had progressed at least by one level. Finally in the learner responses the averagepercent of teachers who moved up by one level was 43.0 percent and those who moved up by two levels was 6.9percent. In all 49.9 percent of teachers reflected a progress in the quality of learner response.Table 2: Teachers in grade 4 whose classroom practice moved up by 1, 2, 3 or 4 categoriesItemsGeneral Pedagogical SkillsTeacher gives prior instructions and introduces the lessonTeacher is listening attentivelyStudents are listening attentivelyTeacher provides interaction opportunities as directedICLS 2016 ProceedingsNo of categories1233.3%0.0%43.5%0.0%43.5%8.7%35.3%5.9%50930.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%40.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%Total33.3%43.5%52.2%41.2%© ISLSTeacher synchronizes time with the audioTeacher engages all studentsAveragePedagogical content skillsTeacher uses English as classroom languageTeachers pronounces clearlyTeacher creates time for practicing listening and speakingTeacher clarifies meaning of new wordsTeacher ensures that they respond with understandingAverageLearner ResponseChildren answer with confidenceChildren answer with understandingChildren answer accuratelyChildren ask questions/give instructions confidentlyWhen a child is answering, other children listen attentivelyAverage57.9%36.4%41.7%5.3%4.5%4.1%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%63.2%28.6%36.4%42.1%38.9%35.0%36.2%4.8%13.6%5.3%0.0%0.0%4.7%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%33.4%50.0%47.4%38.9%35.0%40.9%42.9%57.1%33.3%31.6%50.0%43.0%4.8%4.8%9.5%10.5%5.0%6.9%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%47.7%61.9%42.8%40.9%45.7%42.1%55.0%49.9%From external domain to personal domain to domain of practiceDuring interviews, fifty percent of the participants shared that regular monitoring of their work, the sense ofsomeone watching over, was a motivator towards regular implementation of the program, in absence of whichthey succumbed to the pressure of administrative tasks. Teachers shared sentiments like, “When she comes, thenI remembered that I have to teach, because otherwise I would be busy with various (administrative) routines.”and, “Because of the her presence I would remember that someone is coming and I have to undertake thisprogram; I would feel someone is watching my progress and that kept up my motivation to teach regularly.”From external domain to domain of professional practiceForty percent of the teachers shared examples of direct changes in their professional practice as a result of thesupport provided by the external stimulus - the coach. One teacher shared, “As a result of the coach’s intervention,we started using English words in the class while teaching.” While another quoted, “There was a question in theradio lesson about the occupation of the parents. I did not know the name of several occupations in English. Sothe coach suggested that sometimes I may not know the English word, in which case I can retain the Marathiword for the specific occupation, but I should encourage the use of the English sentence structure. I took thissuggestion and asked the children to use the Marathi word for their parent’s occupation.” Speaking about theLRW experience, yet another respondent expressed, “She explained to me how to teach letter sound associationusing the picture cards. She first demonstrated how to use the materials, and after that I began to use thematerial.”Personal domainChanges in the personal domain and perceptions about how they were engendered were understood throughinterviews with the teachers. They shared that they had experienced personal changes in terms of greater regularityin teaching, a greater sense of motivation and confidence, sense of learning and support, new knowledge andbeliefs about ESL as well as general pedagogical strategies.From external domain to personal domainEighty percent of the teachers expressed the availability of the coach gave them access to new ideas, and newknowledge which was unavailable earlier. For instance, one teacher shared that she viewed the coach as someonewho helped her become more aware of the gaps in her teaching, and offered alternatives. Another teacherexpressed how the coach exposed her to new ESL concepts: “When the coach used to come they would give usnew ideas, tell us how to teach the lesson, they would talk about what children should learn in English.”Several teachers gave examples of how, with the help of demonstrations, the coach helped them clarifyhow to use the material effectively. One of them described that, “She would also demonstrate how to teach. Whenchildren had to listen to the radio lesson, if children did not understand something, we would pause the radio,and she would guide me: explain why a particular question is answered in a particular way. For e.g., if thequestion was what is your name in the first lesson. If children did not understand the question, she would pausethe question, then she would explain what this question means and instruct the child that you must give your nameto this question. She would also clarify that you are not to simply give your name, but you must answer: My nameis….”ICLS 2016 Proceedings510© ISLSFrom external domain to domain of professional practice to (reflective link) personal domainFifty percent of the teachers talked about a change in their personal domain, in terms of an increase in theirknowledge and confidence about teaching ESL after trying it out with the coach’s help. Many teachers expressedsimilar sentiments as this one who expressed that, “Because of the coach’s presence we learnt to teach in the waywe were trained. My confidence has increased as a result of teaching the children.”From external domain to domain of professional practice to domain of consequence to personal domainFifty percent of the teachers who were interviewed, referred to personal changes on account of the positive effectsof their professional experimentation on children. The following excerpts from two different teachers reflects aconfidence developing in the new approach of teaching ESL, which is grounded in actual changes in student ESLoutcomes after trying the new approach. Both teachers ascribe changes to the coach’s role in helping them try outthe material in the first place. One of them explained, “I used to teach according to the old method, where I usedto talk and children used to listen; but as a result of the coach’s help I have been able to use the new materialwell, and therefore I see a definite change in children’s learning.” While the other shared, “The coach helped meto encourage students to speak various sentence forms (tense, singular-plural). For e.g., I am playing, I amcooking etc. She also encouraged me to do likewise with is, are, am etc. Even today students are able to recognizetense, and speak in the correct tense. I have not seen this in 17 years of teaching, but I have seen such differencein the last two years.” Another teacher reveals a growing belief in the merits of the new approach which she trialedwith the coach’s help, which improved responsiveness in her students in this reflection, “The coach helped me touse the material correctly. With the right use material, there were many changes in my teaching style. Earlier Iused to be the only one speaking, and I would not get a response from the children. I was myself confused whetherthe children understand me or not. I would make them write the same word repeatedly. Sometimes I used to forcea response out of children, and they responded with fear. But as I used this material correctly, I got an enthusiasticresponse from across the classroom. Those children who did not participate at all, now take an interest in thesubject. Their fear of English has disappeared. I have also learnt to try out various ways of eliciting student’sparticipation.”From external domain to domain of consequence to personal domainTen percent of the teachers indicated that the indicated an impact on their personal domain as a result of thecoach’s interaction with the students. “They would come and ask questions, and when children were able torespond, I would feel satisfied that someone from outside has come, and children are able to respond. I wouldfeel very encouraged when they would appreciate how my children are progressing.”During interviews supervisors of teachers also commented on the differences they perceived betweencoached and un-coached schools. They unanimously stated that the learning outcomes coached schools were betterthan in in non-coached schools. For instance, several of them found that the children in the coached school spokeEnglish with a clearer pronunciation of words. Some of them also discussed the relative difference of interest andengagement level amongst students towards the subject. For instance, a supervisor shared, “Children in coachedschools love English, and those in non-coached schools have lower levels of interest in English.” Another addedthat, “the confidence of children in coached schools has risen, and their fear of using English has reduced. A thirdsupervisor shared his observation stating that, “Children in non-coached schools do not respond to questions asquickly as from coached schools.”Domain of consequencePre and post-test scores of students’ ESL outcomes were collected. Effect sizes reflected the comparative learninggains between the students from coached and un-coached schools (Table 3). Class 3 scores for LRW outcomes,reflect substantial difference between the learning gains of the coached (C) versus un-coached (uC) schoolstudents. The effect size scores for the un-coached schools are small, which reflect a poor learning gain betweenthe pre and the post-test scores. Whereas the effect sizes of the coached-schools are moderate in the first two skillsof understanding capital and small letters, and large in the remaining skills, which indicates an impressive learninggain.Table 3: Learning gains of students for the LRW program conducted in Grade 3ESL itemsQuestionsBaselineMeanSDMeanPost-CSDPost-uCMeanSDGain-CCohen's dGain-uCCohen's dIdentifying Capital Letters3.301.193.940.243.670.790.660.39Identifying Small Letters3.081.253.790.503.041.350.670.03ICLS 2016 Proceedings511© ISLSIdentifying First Letters1.801.473.120.912.551.431.010.13Identifying Last Letters1.731.443.231.112.411.571.120.32Identifying Middle Letters1.001.132.421.191.751.461.240.36Identifying Correct Word1.401.142.920.992.281.251.390.46Matching Picture with Word1.921.233.191.242.291.501.030.35Matching Picture with Sentence1.311.122.701.222.031.461.200.30Similarly, the outcomes for the WLE program (Table 4) indicate that the learning gains of the coached (C) andun-coached (uC) schools are negligible for the question on listening skills. This is likely due to a ceiling effect, asthe pre-test scores for this skill were high. However, in the more complex skills for production, which includeanswering the question in a partially correct, and fully grammatically correct form, the learning gains of thecoached skills are visibly better as reflected in the large effect size.Table 4: Learning gains of students for the WLE program conducted in Grade 4SkillsBaselineMeanSDListening Skill7.51Speaking: Full sentencesPost-CGain-CGain-uC2.500.02-0.041.461.780.770.111.391.931.610.760.371.813.662.50-0.470.02MeanSD2.397.951.271.53Speaking: Broken sentences1.30Speaking: Single words3.62Post-uCMeanSD2.497.412.702.141.762.512.742.53Cohen's dCohen's dFrom external domain to domain of practice to domain of consequenceForty percent of the teachers expressed that the coach had inspired them to adopt the new method and that had ledto various improvements in student learning. Teachers voiced feelings such as, “I had a student who learnt howto spell words phonetically, she could read the long passages from the LRW book. This was because the coachguided me about how to teach those lessons, and even corrected the limitations in the way I was teaching thelesson.” A commonly echoed sentiment was, “With their help our teaching skill has improved and children‘sEnglish (has improved).”From external domain to domain of consequenceForty percent of the teachers expressed that their students experienced direct benefits as a result of the coach’svisit. Teachers shared vividly how they saw this happen by explaining that, “They ask children questions, andchildren feel enthused by the fact that someone from outside is coming and asking questions.” And, “Whenchildren took lead in participating during the coach’s visit, it encouraged other children, for e.g. some childrengo up and read from the book, then those children who were slow in reading also got encouraged to do so andthey felt that I should also know how to read and get appreciation from a visitor. The coach once appreciatedfour students and that got 8 other kids motivated.” Some more teachers expressed similar experience expressedin this reflection, “As a result of the coach’s visits, because she used to conduct good demonstrations, childrenreally got interested in the language.”Conclusion and implicationsThis paper presents powerful evidence of how coaching support elevated the quality of ESL practices andoutcomes within a short period of six months. A substantial number of teachers in the coached schools adopteddesirable pedagogical practices with the help of the coaching support and also exhibited more engaged learnerresponses over a period of time. Learner outcomes in the coached schools, especially in the more complex skillswere better than those in the un-coached school. Teachers’ perceptions not only validate this direct evidence butalso help nuance it further by explicating how coaching as the external stimulus triggered a variety of interactionsacross the various domains, and resulted in an experience of growth and learning. They candidly admitted that thecoach motivated them to direct their focus from administrative tasks to teaching ESL regularly. It is important tonote that in a context such as Indian schools where teacher absenteeism and inactive teaching time are pervasive(Kremer, Murlidharan, Nazmul, Hammer, & Rogers, 2005), an intervention like coaching may have a substantialcontribution to make towards regularizing teaching. Further, where teachers themselves do not speak English, theICLS 2016 Proceedings512© ISLSchallenges of implementing an innovative ESL program are multiplied. While on one hand they themselves donot speak the language, they are faced with the challenge of fostering interaction in the classroom sensitively, sothat students can develop the language skills necessary for confident expression (Kapur, 2013). The teachers inthis study illustrate how coaches helped them meet these challenges in real time, which eventually led to improvedESL outcomes of students. Such a situated instructional focus is considered an important attribute of good qualityprofessional development (Raval, Mckenney, & Pieters, 2010; Putnam & Borko, 2000). Finally the study alsoillustrates that besides offering tangible knowledge and skills to teachers, coaching also has the potential to supportthe development of their efficacy while they are implementing the new program (Cantrell & Hughes, 2008). Evenmore noteworthy are teachers’ reflections about how, by experimenting with new teaching methods andencountering varied student learning, teachers start believing in new ways of teaching ESL. Consistent with thedescription of Clarke & Hollingsworth (2002), teachers shared vivid examples of exploring a new teachingstrategy, reflecting on the consequences of that exploration and identifying notable outcomes, in turn beginningto believe in the value of that strategy.Evidence on the effects of coaching is relevant for Indian schools (and other under-resourced countries)as they confront the paradox of declining educational outcomes, low teacher attendance and efficacy in spite oflarge investments in infrastructure and teacher training. While resolving this stalemate will involve paradigmshifts in terms of pedagogy and governance (Murlidharan, 2013), this paper highlights the contribution ofprofessional support solutions like coaching which offer situated learning opportunities for teachers, and thus, notonly have motivational value, but also lead to enhanced teaching and learning. Much of the existing research baseon Indian primary education focuses on the current gaps in policies and practices. This paper emphasizes the needfor more widespread research on promising professional development interventions, their benefits, the manner inwhich they are implemented and the challenges that they encounter.ReferencesCantrell, S. H., & Hughes, H. K. (2008). Teacher Efficacy and Content Literacy Implementation: An Explorationof the Effects of Extended Professional Development with Coaching. Journal of Literacy Research, 40,95–127.Clarke, D., & Hollingsworh, H. (2002). Elaborating a model of teacher professional growth. Teaching andTeacher Education, 947–967.Gibbons, L. K., & Cobb, P. (n.d.). "Content-Focused Coaching Practices Implicated in Designing PotentiallyProductive Coaching Activities to Support Teachers’ Learning."Joyce, B., & Showers, B. (1982). The Coaching of Teaching. Educational Leadership, 40, 4–16.Kapur, K. (2013). The Role of Mentoring in Developing Reflective Practices for CPD. In R. Bolitho, & P. Amol(Eds.), Continuing Professional Development: Lessons from India (pp. 96-107). New Delhi, India:British Council.Kremer, M., Murlidharan, K., Nazmul, C., Hammer, J., & Rogers, H. F. (2005). Teacher Absence in India: Asnapshot. Journal of the European Economic Association, 3(2–3), 658–667.Muralidharan, K. (2013, April). Priorities for primary education policy in India’s 12th five-year plan. In IndiaPolicy Forum (Vol. 9, pp. 1-46).Ottevanger, W. J. W. (2001). Teacher support materials as a catalyst for science curriculumPoglinco, S., Bach, A., H. K., Rosenblum, S., Saunders, M., & Supovitz, J. (2003). The heart of the matter: Thecoaching model in America’s Choice schools. Consortium for Policy Research in Education, Universityof Pennsylvania Graduate School of Education.Putnam, R., & Borko, H. (2000). What do new ways of research and thinking have to say about research on teacherlearning ? Educational Researcher, 29(1), 4-15.Ramchandran, V., Pal, M., Jain, S., Shekar, S., & Sharma, J. (2005). Teacher Motivation in India. London: DFID.Raval, H., Mckenney, S., & Pieters, J. (2010). A conceptual model for supporting para-teacher learning in anIndian nongovernmental organization. Studies in Continuing Education, 32(3), 217-234.Tyagi, R. S. (2010). School based instructional supervision and the effective professional development of teachers.Compare: A Journal of Comparative and International Education, 40(1), 111-125.van den Akker, J., & Voogt, J. (1994). The use of innovation and practice profiles in the evaluation of curriculumimplementation. Studies in Educational Evaluation, 20(4), 503-512.AcknowledgmentsWe thank participating teachers and students. This work was funded by Michael and Susan Dell Foundation.Grant #999-888-1111.ICLS 2016 Proceedings513© ISLS