Mobility, Diversity, and Openness: Design Principles for EquitableMakerspacesKylie Peppler, Anna Keune, and Justin Whitingkpeppler@indiana.edu, akeune@indiana.edu, juswhiti@indiana.eduIndiana UniversityAbstract: As makerspaces become ubiquitous, they need to remain equitable environmentsfor teaching and learning. Building on inquiry of diverse makerspaces, we identified threedesign principles of equitable environments (i.e., mobility, diversity, and openness) andleveraged them for one of the first university school of education makerspaces. We present thedesign principles, their application, and implications for the design of future makerspaces,particularly those that support pre-service teacher education.Keywords: makerspace, school of education, design principles, pre-service teachersRoots of making and a pedagogy for teacher educationEmbodying the do-it-yourself ethos and celebrating technological innovation, makerspaces have surged over thepast decade, rapidly spreading in schools, libraries, museums, and after-school centers (Peppler, Halverson, &Kafai 2016). This surge may be too brisk to keep pace with innovative educational design needs, as there isunderdeveloped certainty about how these spaces can avoid repeating prior inequities in STEM-basedenvironments. Higher-education-based makerspaces are important because they present opportunities to modelhigh-quality educational practice for future teachers placed in a multitude of schools and afterschool programs.Makerspaces promise a real opportunity for more inclusive teaching and learning, provided we build them usingappropriate design principles, humble theories that guide affordances toward improved learning (Rook, Choi, &McDonald, 2015). Makerspaces have been aligned with principles of constructionism (Resnick & Rosenbaum,2013), an approach to learning in which learners come to know the world through design as they createpersonally meaningful projects that can be publicly shared (Papert, 1993). As makerspaces move into schoolsand teachers facilitate content knowledge through maker activities (Peppler, Halverson, & Kafai, 2016), there isa need for pre-service education that supports future teachers to explore constructionist learning before enteringthe profession. Aspects of successful preparation of future teachers and professional development opportunitiesof in-service teachers include the creation of contexts that are conducive for reflecting on practice anddeveloping new approaches to teaching and learning (Vescio, Ross, & Adams, 2008). Despite the urgency forteachers to be able to use emergent technologies and the promise of makerspaces to support this exploration, thedesign of learning environments in pre-service teacher education remains under researched.Methodological approachOur makerspace design approach builds on design-based research, a methodology in which researchers andpractitioners collaborate to iteratively analyze, design, develop, and implement learning experiences in realworld settings (Wang and Hannafin, 2005). One pillar of design-based research is the distillation of designprinciples, localized guiding theories that improve learning (Rook et al., 2015). This poster focuses on designprinciples to guide the development of new makerspaces that promote equity through a two-phase process.Phase 1 adopts a qualitative contextual inquiry. We surveyed 51 and observed 10 makerspaces thatencourage equity through educational practices and materials and serve diverse demographics. Based onqualitative observations and in-depth interviews with mentors and youth, we distilled design principles througha reversed conjecture mapping process (Sandoval, 2014). Phase 2 is comprised of testing and refining the designprinciples through research-based design (Leinonen et al., 2008). We analyzed how the design principles andtheir form impacted pre-service education throughout the first year in which the makerspace was open.Design principles and development of the makerspaceThe makerspaces we observed included a wide range of materials and exhibited a range of youth projects. Allmakerspaces were situated inside of open studio spaces where youth could see what others were engaged with.Ceiling electricity, mobile tables, and concrete floors supported the setup of workstations that flexiblyaccommodated project needs presupposed that makerspaces change over time as projects evolved and newmaterials entered the space. Based on these commonalities, we distilled three guiding principles: (1) Mobility toarrange workstations according to learning needs, (2) diversity of materials to support a broad range ofICLS 2018 Proceedings1519© ISLSapproaches to making, and (3) openness of access to materials for youth of all ages. To test the designprinciples, we used them to guide the spatial arrangement of the university makerspace as a way to sparkpossibilities particularly for pre-service teachers for modelling community-based and open-ended learning.To support mobility, we ordered height-adjustable tables, custom storage units that tucked undercounters or generated work surfaces, exposed the concrete floor to move furniture with less friction, andinstalled metal pegboard along walls for continuous space rearrangement. To invite diverse approaches tomaking, we made the space wheelchair accessible. We engaged material historicity (Buchholz et al., 2014) byconsidering participants’ gender and age, stocking the space with a range of materials, and established facultygrants that included allocations for material purchase. As architectural plans were created, we focused onopenness to make materials, projects, and practices visible and accessible for people both familiar with andunfamiliar with making. This led us to tearing down walls and instantiating an open door policy.Once the space opened, design continued. People created projects, moved furniture, and asked foradditional materials. We observed how the design principles and their material implementation acted within theinstitutional space of the school of education. Against our expectations, the mingling of materials did not happenas frequently. For instance, most 3D printed models remained on the right side of the space while most laser cutprojects were displayed on the left side. Assumptions about learning that were embedded into the institutionalsetting, such as working on individual projects in designated seats and all classrooms to be of similar sizes andshapes, were challenged through new maker materials that called to move across the space and to share workopenly with others. The variety of materials visibly accessible at the makerspace invited people to try new toolsand techniques, resulting in a variety of projects, including laser-cut dinosaur puzzles, a 3D model for teachingTai Chi, and art and science education tools. Faculty grants broadened material diversity, as projects brought intoys and gluten-free playdough. The makerspace was rearranged frequently, as people shifted the tables andstorage carts across the room to create unique workspaces. The ceiling-mounted electrical cords were pulledtowards workspaces to maintain and break existing setups, underscoring the mobility of space, and allowing forcontinued adjustment. The design principles allowed for the space to take shape quickly while being open forrearrangement in the future. Removing the pre-existing wall and built in cabinets, adding countertops, affixingpegboard, and installing glass walls produced an open rectangular space that passersby could peek into.DiscussionThe design principles of mobility, diversity, and openness guided the makerspace setup and facilitatedadaptability. The principles have utility to the design of new learning spaces, including schools, libraries, andmuseums. They can help recognize possible inaccessibility, obstruction, immobility. and homogeneity throughsmall and big changes, such as adding wheels to a cart. We envision spaces all across learning settings that areopen and accessible at odd hours, that value a diversity of approaches, and that allow for spatial arrangement tobe part of the creative learning process. This has implications for how we conceive of design of educationalsettings that are established in existing institutional settings as a longer-term process in which materials take onan active role in the shaping of continuous learning possibilities. This calls for practical consequences fortracking continued material design and tensions when contending assumptions of learning meet.ReferencesLeinonen, T., Toikkanen, T., & Silfvast, K. (2008, October). Software as hypothesis: research-based designmethodology. In Proceedings of the tenth anniversary conference on participatory design 2008 (pp.61-70). Indiana University.Papert, S. (1993). The children's machine: Rethinking school in the age of the computer. New York: BasicBooks.Peppler, K., Halverson, E., & Kafai, Y. B. (Eds.). (2016). Makeology: Makerspaces as learning environments(Vol. 1). New York: Routledge.Resnick, M., & Rosenbaum, E. (2013). Designing for tinkerability. M. Honey & D. Kanter (Eds.) Design, make,play: Growing the next generation of STEM innovators, 163-181. New York: Routledge.Rook, M. M., Choi, K., & McDonald, S. P. (2015). Learning theory expertise in the design of learning spaces:Who needs a seat at the table?. Journal of learning spaces, 4(1).Sandoval, W. (2014). Conjecture mapping: An approach to systematic educational design research. Journal ofthe learning sciences, 23(1), 18-36.Vescio, V., Ross, D., & Adams, A. (2008). A review of research on the impact of professional learningcommunities on teaching practice and student learning. Teaching and teacher education, 24(1), 80-91.Wang, F., & Hannafin, M. J. (2005). Design-based research and technology-enhanced learning environments.Educational technology research and development, 53(4), 5-23.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1520© ISLS