Co-Framing Shared Epistemic Objects of Inquiry to SupportKnowledge Building Over a Whole School YearDan Tao, University at Albany, State University of New York, dtao@albany.eduJianwei Zhang, University at Albany, State University of New York, jzhang1@albany.eduDandan Gao, East China Normal University, ddgao@deit.ecnu.edu.cnAbstract: This study explores how fifth graders and their teacher co-constructed sharedepistemic objects as collective directions of inquiry to sustain knowledge building about thehuman body system with Knowledge Forum over a whole school year. Qualitative analyses ofobservation notes, classroom videos, teacher reflective journal, and student artifacts elaboratedthe reflective processes and interactive roles of the teacher and her students to co-frame shareddirections of inquiry as the knowledge building unfolded. Qualitative and quantitative analysisof students’ survey, interview, research journeys, and online discourse showed how thereflective structuration of epistemic objects helped to sustain and deepen their inquiry overtime. These results, together with findings from our previous studies, shed light on agencydriven reflective structuration as a self-sustaining mechanism to guide and sustain principlebased knowledge building practices without extensive pre-scripting.IntroductionOver the past two decades, major advances have been made to elaborate the socio-cultural and cognitiveprocesses of collaborative inquiry and knowledge building (e.g. Bell & Linn, 2000; Edelson & Reiser, 2006;Hakkarainen, 2003; Hmelo-Silver, 2004; Järvelä & Hadwin, 2013; Roschelle, 1992; Zhang et al., 2007). Despitethe conceptual and technological advances, we, as a field, still face the challenge of bringing sustainedcollaborative inquiry and knowledge building into classrooms to transform educational practices. Underlyingthis practice gap is a conceptual challenge about how student-driven collaborative inquiry should be organizedand supported. This challenge is even more significant for collaborative inquiry programs that require studentsto enact high-level agency and responsibilities. Research to support collaborative learning and knowledgebuilding has led to a core debate between scripted versus non-scripted approaches (Bereiter et al., 2017) andbetween procedure-oriented versus principle-based open-ended designs (Zhang et al., 2011). A scriptedapproach to collaborative inquiry guides and scaffolds learners using carefully designed scripts of collaborationand inquiry for students to use and internalize (Fischer et al., 2013). Such scripts specify, sequence, anddistribute various task operations and activity procedures among learners in order to guide them to engage ineffective interactions (Kirschner & Erkens, 2013). A non-scripted approach to inquiry, such as the KnowledgeBuilding pedagogy (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014), adopts an open-ended, principle-based (as opposed toprocedure-based) framework by which teachers and students dynamically co-construct the classroom flow ofinquiry as their work proceeds, guided by a set of core principles. At the heart of this debate is an oftenpolarized tension: At one end is the critical need of guiding structures for inquiry to be effective, and at the otherend is the importance of student epistemic agency in creative work and dynamic collaboration.While the principle-based approach to knowledge building holds promise for enhancing student highlevel agency in creative work and collaboration, implementing knowledge building in broad classrooms stillfaces the challenge of how the fluid, open, and agency-driven processes of inquiry becomes socially organizedand pedagogically supported. Reconciling the tension between student agency and structures, we identifiedreflective structuration as a self-sustaining mechanism through rich analyses of productive knowledge buildingcommunities (Zhang, 2013; Tao & Zhang, 2017; Tao et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2011). Knowledge buildingcommunities engage in dual-layer construction: As students engage in deep inquiry and discourse to advancecontent-focused questions and ideas, they also work with their teacher to generate and adapt collective structuresof inquiry to guide and support their collaboration and contribution. These structures provide shared expansiveframes—reified using various classroom resources and artifacts—of the unfolding directions of inquiry andways in which the community should operate. The co-constructed structures are further used by the communityto guide individual and collaborative actions, leading to further structural elaboration and adaptation of theinquiry-based practices.A key aspect of the agency-driven structuration process is to structure what the community shouldinvestigate: collective foci, goals, and directions for sustained inquiry. Drawing upon sociologist Knorr-Cetina(2001), we refer to the things of investigation as “epistemic objects,” which “are at the center of a researchprocess and in the process of being materially defined” (p. 181), signifying the lacks, needs, and insufficienciesICLS 2018 Proceedings784© ISLSof knowledge that lead to unfolding strands of knowledge practices. Knowledge workers direct and sustain theirknowledge practices by continually identifying new epistemic objects and projecting possible epistemic movesupon them. It is a critical challenge to understand the processes by which a community frame shared objects andunfolding directions of inquiry to sustain long-term inquiry, without extensive pre-scripting from their teacher.Drawing upon our previous studies (Tao & Zhang., in press; Tao et al., 2015), the current study aims toprovide a more detailed account of how members of a Grade 5 science classroom (the teacher and her students)worked together to frame/re-frame a connected set of epistemic objects as the focus of knowledge buildingabout human body systems over a whole school year. Our research questions ask: How did the communityidentify and frame the objects of inquiry to sustain its knowledge building over time? How did students use thestructures to support their participation, with what impact on their knowledge building practices?MethodClassroom contextsThis study was conducted in a Grade 5 classroom at a public elementary school, with 21 students who werearound 10-to-11-year old. Students investigated the human body systems as the focal theme of their sciencecurriculum, with two hours’ science lesson each week. The teacher had two years of experience with theknowledge building pedagogy. Instead of following specific inquiry themes, questions or procedures preparedby the teacher, students were expected to work with their teacher’s facilitation to co-identify problems of inquiryand conduct spontaneous actions to address the problems as their inquiry proceeded. The inquiry processunfolded as an open and dynamic process based on student-generated questions, which gave rise to emergentshared directions for further inquiry. Knowledge building in the classroom integrated individual and small groupreading, whole class discussions, individual and small group modeling and demonstrations, and student-directedpresentations. Major ideas, questions, and findings generated through face to face knowledge building activitieswere contributed to Knowledge Forum (KF) (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014), an online collaborative knowledgecreation platform, for continual discourse.Data sources and analysisAnalyses of classroom observations, videos, and the teacher’s reflective journalsTo answer the first research question, we conducted qualitative analyses of rich classroom data. The first authorobserved each science lesson, took detailed observation notes as well as pictures of important artefacts createdby both the students and teacher, and video-recorded major classroom activities over the school year. Afterscrutinizing the classroom records, we zoomed into the specific episodes when the classroom generated a mapof inquiry objects as documented in the classroom artefacts and videos. Videos related to the co-generation ofthe objects of inquiry were transcribed and analyzed using a narrative approach to video analysis (Derry et al.,2010). This analysis was further supported by the teacher’s weekly reflection journals.Analyses of students’ survey and interview about their use of the inquiry objects mapTo understand how the collective objects map support students’ further inquiry, we conducted a student surveyin mid-March and a student interview at the end of the school year. The student survey was made up of twoopen-ended questions: 1) How did the collective mapping processes help your science inquiry? and 2) In whatways can you use the collective objects map to support your further science learning? The student interviewfocused on the specific ways that students actually used the map to guide their subsequent inquiry. Weconducted qualitative analyses of these two sources of data together using an open coding method (Charmaz,2006).Analyses of the students’ research journey reflection and their online knowledge building discourseTo examine the impact of reflective structuration of collective epistemic objects in driving sustained inquiry, wecollected the following data from different sources and analyzed them with a content analysis method (Chi,1997): 1) students’ individual reflection on their research journey aided by the collective objects map about theepistemic objects each of them had investigated and learned from their peers in late April; and 2) students’online knowledge building discourse in KF. We coded students’ posts over the school year with a five-categorycoding scheme, which captures productive discourse patterns (1= questioning, 2= theorizing, 3= evidence,4=referring resources, and 5=connecting and integrating) (Zhang et al., 2011). Two raters independently code20% of the notes to assess interrater reliability, which was 93.64% (Cronbach’s Alpha = .95). For those postswhich were coded as “theorizing”, a further content analysis was conducted to assess scientific sophistication of“theories/explanations” developed by students based on a 4-point scale (1=pre-scientific, 2=hybrid, 3=basicallyICLS 2018 Proceedings785© ISLSscientific, and 4= scientific), which was verified in our previous research (Zhang et al., 2007). Two ratersindependently 20% of the notes labelled as “theorizing”, resulting in an inter-rater agreement of 91.43%(Cronbach’s Alpha =.92).ResultsHow did the community identify and frame the objects of inquiry to sustain itsknowledge building over time?Qualitative analysis of rich data identified the reflective processes the community worked together to cogenerate shared epistemic objects (see Fig. 1). These include (a) co-formulating collective wonderings (e.g. howdoes the brain work) based on students’ individual questions; (b) re-framing, adapting and updating existing bigwonderings to include new objects of inquiry; (c) deep search, framing, and collective mapping of interrelatedepistemic objects as the shared focus of the community’s unfolding inquiry and discourse; (d) individual andsmall-group reflection and planning for specialized inquiry aided by the collective objects map. Table 1summarizes the major actions of the teacher and students, and the collective structures co-generated andadapted. Details of the reflective processes as well as the major actions of the teacher and her students aredescribed below.Figure 1. The reflective structuration processes that the community co-frame shared directions of inquiry.(a) Co-formulating collective wonderings based on students’ individual questions. Prior to thebeginning of the school year, the teacher identified the human body systems as the focal topic of the schoolbased on their school district’s curriculum. The inquiry began with ten out-door games designed by the teacherand another Grade 5 science teacher, aiming to engage students in various activities related to different humanbody systems. These activities triggered students’ initial interests. When they returned to the classroom, theteacher organized a whole class conversation to share their experiences. After that, each student wrote down thequestion they were most interested in on a sticky note. They also decided together to “think about theirquestions and find books that related to their questions to read”. When they met again to share the progress,each student brought one book about their question. The teacher suggested each student to prepare a post-itsticker and write down the following information on it: “Name”, “My question”, and “Body parts (I’m workingon)”. Then students pasted the sticky note on the book they chose, searched for the students who were workingon related questions about the same body parts. In this way, students were automatically “grouped” into sixsmall groups. These small groups then worked together to co-frame a bigger question to include each member’squestion. In late September, the initial six big questions were identified and hanging on the classroom wall.Corresponding separate spaces were set up in KF, too.Table 1: Processes by which the community co-generated collective objects about what they should investigateICLS 2018 Proceedings786© ISLS(b) Re-framing, adapting and updating existing big wonderings to include new objects of inquiry.Students continued their inquiry from October to December. The teacher, with support from our research team,designed various reflection templates for individuals and small groups to reflect on where they were in theirinquiry, new knowledge gained, and where they should go next. When small groups felt they were done withtheir research about one topic, they asked their teacher for a time slot to hold a whole class meeting to sharetheir knowledge progress and emergent questions of inquiry with peers. New epistemic objects of inquiry weregenerated based on new questions from ongoing inquiry. During these three months, initial small groupsfinished the work on their original focal objects disbanded and re-formed to work on new unfolding bigquestions (See Fig. 1b). New emergent groups formed accordingly to continue their research. Correspondingnew spaces were set up in KF for their online knowledge building discourse, too. In late January, all studentsmoved onto new objects of inquiry.(c) Deep search, framing, and collective mapping of interrelated epistemic objects. In February, smallgroups reflected on knowledge progress in new inquiry areas. As more and more new questions were proposed,the community decided to reflect on all the objects they’d investigated so far. Supported by an incomplete list ofepistemic objects identified by the teacher, each student started a review of individual inquiry. Based on thisindividual reflection, the whole class conducted two collective conversations to identify collective epistemicobjects and the connections among them. Meanwhile, emergent objects that were missing in the initial preparedlist and new objects that no one in the community had worked on before were identified (see Fig. 1c). Theteacher hung the collective objects map on the classroom wall for students to refer to for further inquiry.(d) Individual and small-group reflection and planning for specialized inquiry aided by the collectiveobjects map. After the co-generation of the collective objects map, students continued their work to prepare for ascience symposium as a way to share all their knowledge gain with their peers, parents, and students from otherGrade 5 classrooms. As a product for the symposium, each kid wrote an individual journey of thinking about allthe objects they investigated and the objects they plan to research soon (see Fig. 1d). Finally, their collectivereflection on where to go next led collective inquiry to more specialized objects. Some kids began to work onICLS 2018 Proceedings787© ISLSthe objects that were missing on the collective map, like “kidney”. Some other kids moved onto other objectsthat was researched by their peer but they had not investigated yet because they wanted to know more about thehuman body.While using the collective map of the inquiry objects to guide knowledge building, the communityremained open and reflective about new possible directions and connections. A whole classroom conversationwas held to review how the various lines of inquiry were connected. Before the collective reflection, the teacherworked with our research team to identify an incomplete list of objects investigated by all students based ontheir face-to-face and online knowledge building discourse. One student noticed that almost every object ofinquiry connected to brain. That led to the whole class discussion with the brain as an object in the center. Otherobjects were added one by one based on the connections among them proposed by students. During this process,three new major objects (see the pink stars in Fig. 1c) were added/adapted (genetics, immune systems, and 5senses was promoted); seven new small objects (see green circles in Fig. 1c) were identified (O.C.D., A.D.D.,red blood cells, white blood cells, pain, nails, and virus); 25 new connections were made; as well as one “notyet” object (kidney) was recognized. Below is how they identified the object “kidney” together through thewhole class discussion.T:S1:T:S1:T:S2:T:S2:T:S2:T:S2:T:S1:T:…does anybody feel like there are small concept, that green circle missing …?Did somebody already say kidneys?What?Did anybody say kidneys?Did anybody make anything about kidneys? You are studying it? Does anybody studythe Kidney?I did the digestive system.You did the digestive system?That goes with the digestive system, but…But, but…are the kidneys part of the digestive system?Actually they are part of the excretory system.But who is studying it? I didn’t see anything about that on Knowledge Forum.Nobody! But the digestive system is the cause of the excretory system.I will write down Kidney. But I really want this map to represent things we’ve studiedand things we know. And I’m going to leave it clipped up until it’s explored…I will study it!You will study it? That’s awesome!Nobody in the community studied kidney before. But as students mapped out all the objects related tohuman body systems, Student 1 (S1) noticed kidney was missing. When she proposed the object, her peerimmediately made connections with his previous research. Even though kidney was postponed, this discussionsuccessfully brought it into the community’s attention. And later on in May, when S1 requested for a Kidneyspace on KF to share her research, it was officially added to the collective map as an object of inquiry.Before the collective conversations, small groups worked on isolated objects identified by each groupas their focus of inquiry, without realizing the connections among them. When kids reviewed their individualresearch trajectory, they realized there were some connections between the objects in their own inquiry. Thecollective conversation provided a chance for them to see that even though different groups were working ondifferent objects, they were actually very “connected”. See the excerpt below.S3:T:S3:T:S3:…okay, the bone connects to the bone marrow. And the bone marrow connects to theblood. [Make connections between epistemic objects of the bone, bone marrow, andthe blood]Tell us more…why?Because the bone marrow is located in the bone. And bone marrowmakes…[Inaudible]And the bone marrow does what?The bone marrow makes blood.ICLS 2018 Proceedings788© ISLSS4:S3:S4:T:Crazy! It makes blood cells…???!!!Yes!Just blood cells!Okay! Great.S3 was a member in the bones group that had emerged. During their research, he found the connections amongbone, bone marrow, and blood (cells). So he began his research on blood after working on bones. In the abovediscussion, he shared the connections with peers. S4, who had been working on the heart and blood, was reallysurprised to know that the work on heart and blood was actually connected to the bone research. Through thiscollective reflection, all the objects of inquiry investigated were connected. With this connected objects map, itis easier to monitor how different lines of inquiry connect to understand how the human body systems worktogether.How did students use the structures to support their participation in knowledgebuilding?As summarized in Table 2, the students commented that the collective map of inquiry objects supported theirscience learning in two ways: 1) to position their work; and 2) to understand connections among the differentlines of inquiry focusing on different human body systems. For instance, several students commented on thesame point: “…there’s a lot I need to learn. I have to catch up…” Almost every student noted the connectionsamong different objects and human body systems: “…basically everything is connected…” Studentscommented that they planned to use the collective objects map to guide their work and decide where to go next,to add something the community was missing to make the map more complete, and to know whom to interactwith to share and connect the new knowledge gained. For example, one student wrote, “…some of the stuffs noware not researched yet…”Table 2: Qualitative analysis of students’ survey and interview about the collective objects mapAll the 12 students interviewed at the end of the school year suggested that the collective mappingreflection was helpful in supporting their ongoing inquiry. The epistemic object map reminded them that all thehuman body systems work together and all body parts are connected, “you can see all is connected…all isconnected”. Other students emphasized that the visualization of epistemic objects helped to show what theyalready had worked on, what wasn’t researched by the whole classroom yet, as well as what they should workon next based on the connections among them. As some students have commented, “… (with the map), I get tosee if I have studied the ‘blood’, ‘heart’, and ‘cells’… stuffs like that. And I can see if I can study other stuffs.With this map, I can see what I didn’t study. So in the future I can go on to them…move on to study them”,“…you can find other things to research…you can see why there are connections…”. The rest students thoughtthe collective map of epistemic objects not only supported their own decision about what they should investigatebut also who they should connect with as well as where to share their ideas in KF to help others. One studentmentioned, “…it gives me an idea of what else I can look at…and helps me to learn my topic. And it helps meknow where to post in KF… it could help people who work on that topic”In what ways did the students engaged in productive knowledge building with thesupport of the collective structure?ICLS 2018 Proceedings789© ISLSThe number of epistemic objects each student investigated/learnedIn total, there were 50 epistemic objects identified by the community according to the collective epistemicobjects co-generated by March. Analysis of students’ individual research journey in which they summarizedtheir overarching process of inquiry revealed that each student investigated about 10 objects (20% of the totalobjects) and additionally learned about 17 objects from their classmates (34% of the total objects). In total, eachstudent gained knowledge about 27 objects (54% of the total objects) from September to March. The studentsfocused on several specific objects for specialized inquiry with small group members or individually and at thesame time developed a reflective sense of the community’s inquiry in other areas for mutual learning andconnection.Content analysis of student online knowledge building discourseFirst, we coded the Knowledge Forum notes based on patterns of student contributions (see Table 3). Among allthe 607 notes posted by students over the school year, more than one fourth of them (26.85%) involvedquestions. They also theorized their initial ideas into explanations (46.29%). In the later part of their inquiry,when they identified new objects of inquiry they had little knowledge about, they tended to contributed somerelevant information from websites or books about the object first (21.09%), which helped them go deeper ininvestigating that object.Table 3: Student contributions in KF over the school yearTypesNotesPercentageQuestioning16326.85%Theorizing28146.29%Evidence243.95%Reference12821.09%Integrating111.82%The understanding of each focal object were further coded based on scientific sophistication to examinethe extent to which students’ explanations align with a scientific framework of human body systems (see Fig. 2).Specifically, the rating of ideas about all the focal objects were between “3 – basically scientific” and “4 scientific” (M=3.09; SD=0.52). Compared with the initial notes they wrote in September and October aboutvarious epistemic objects (M=1.6; SD=0.55), which was between “1 – pre-scientific” and “2 – hybrid”, students’knowledge about focal objects of inquiry were deepened significantly.Figure 2. Rating of students’ online discourse about the various objects of inquiry based on scientificsophistication.DiscussionThis study investigated the process of reflective structuration to co-frame shared epistemic objects of inquiry asa way to guide and sustain the knowledge building in a Grade 5 science classrooms. First, we documented thereflective processes by which the teacher and students worked together to frame their shared directions ofinquiry over time. The collective structures emerged and evolved through several reflective cycles with theinteractive input from students and their teacher, including: (a) appropriating existing structures (e.g. curriculumtopic) from the school contexts and prior practices and teacher “seeding” of potential directions through inquiryactivities and resources; (b) generating and reviewing diverse individual interests and questions to construct aninitial list of six overarching questions; (c) using the wondering questions to guide initial personal and groupresearch and expanding the wonderings accordingly, (d) using updated structure to guide further research, andco-reviewing and mapping epistemic objects emerged from the inquiry, and (e) further using the map ofepistemic objects to plan and guide specialized inquiry. Analyses of student’ survey and interviews howstudents used the collective structure to support their science learning with purpose. Content analyses of studentsurvey, interview, and online knowledge discourse revealed how reflective structuration of epistemic objectscontributed to students’ sustained deepening knowledge building practices. Deeper analysis of student interviewis underway to examine the processes of how small groups and individuals identify each focal epistemic objectsof inquiry that contributes to the collective structures of inquiry. These results enrich findings from our previousstudies, elaborating reflective structuration as a self-sustaining mechanism to guide and sustain principle-basedICLS 2018 Proceedings790© ISLSknowledge building practices without extensive pre-scripting. Based on the reflective structuration framework,we have created an upgraded design of the Idea Thread Mapper software that works with Knowledge Forum tohelp knowledge building communities co-structure their inquiry processes over time for connected and sustainedknowledge building (Zhang et al., 2018).ReferencesBell, P., & Linn, M. C. (2000). Scientific arguments as learning artifacts: Designing for learning from the webwith KIE. International Journal of Science Education, 22(8), 797–817.Bereiter, C., Cress, U., Fischner, F., Hakkarainen, K., Scardamalia, M., & Vogel, F. (2017). Scripted andunscripted aspects of creative work with knowledge. In B. Smith, M. Borege, M. Mercier, & K. Y. Lim(Eds.), Making a difference: Prioritizing equity and access in CSCL (pp.751-757). Philadelphia, PA:International Society of the Learning Sciences.Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative analysis. ThousandOaks, CA: SAGE Publications.Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analysis of verbal data: A practical guide. Journal of the LearningSciences, 6, 271-315.Derry, S. J., Pea, R. D., Barron, B., Engle, R.A., Erickson, F. Goldman, R., et al. (2010). Conducting videoresearch in the learning sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19, 3–53.Edelson, D. C., Gordin, D. N., & Pea, R. D. (1999). Addressing the challenges of inquiry-based learningthrough technology and curriculum design. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15, 121-151.Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Stegmann, K., & Wecker, C. (2013). Toward a script theory of guidance in computersupported collaborative learning. Educational Psychologist, 48(1), 56-66.Hakkarainen, K. (2003). Progressive inquiry in a computer-supported biology class. Journal of Research inScience Teaching, 40(10), 1072-1088.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Pfeffer, M. G. (2004). Comparing expert and novice understanding of a complex systemfrom the perspective of structures, behaviors, and functions. Cognitive Science, 28, 127–138.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Barrows, H. S. (2006). Goals and strategies of a problem-based learning facilitator.Interdisciplinary Journal of Problem-based Learning, 1, 21-39.Järvelä, S., & Hadwin, A. F. (2013). New frontiers: regulating learning in CSCL. Educational Psychologist,48(1), 25-39.Knorr Cetina, K. (2001). Objectual practice. In T. R. Schatzki, K. Knorr Cetina & E. Savigny (eds.), Thepractice turn in contemporary theory (pp.175-188). London: Routledge.Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. Journal of the LearningSciences, 2, 235–276.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, andtechnology. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (2nd Ed, pp. 397417). New York: Cambridge University Press.Tao, D., & Zhang, J. (in press). Forming shared inquiry structures to support knowledge building in a Grade 5community. Instructional Science.Tao, D., Zhang, J., & Huang, Y. (2015). How did a grade 5 community formulate progressive, collective goalsto sustain knowledge building over a whole school year? In O. Lindwall & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.),Exploring the material conditions of learning: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference onComputer Supported Collaborative Learning (Vol. 1). Gothenburg, Sweden: International Society ofthe Learning Sciences.Zhang, J. (2013). Foster a self-sustained, collective trajectory of inquiry through adaptive collaboration. Paperpresented at the Annual Meeting of American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA.Zhang, J., Hong, H.-Y., Scardamalia, M., Teo, C., & Morley, E. (2011). Sustaining knowledge building as aprinciple-based innovation at an elementary school. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20, 262–307.Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Lamon, M., Messina, R., & Reeve, R. (2007). Socio-cognitive dynamics ofknowledge building in the work of nine- and ten-year-olds. Educational Technology Research andDevelopment, 55, 117–145.Zhang, J., Tao, D., Chen, M. –H., Sun, Y., Judson, D. & Naqvi, S. (2018). Co-organizing the collective journeyof inquiry with ITM. Journal of the Learning Sciences, DOI:10.1080/10508406.2018.1444992.AcknowledgementsThis research was sponsored by the National Science Foundation (IIS#1441479).ICLS 2018 Proceedings791© ISLS