Agent-Based Models to Support Bioscience Learning in NursingEducationIlana Dubovi, Utah State University, ilana.dubovi@usu.eduVictor R. Lee, Utah State University, victor.lee@usu.eduAbstract: This paper reports on a project to support bioscience learning of pharmacology in theundergraduate nursing curriculum. We designed an agent-based learning environment thatrepresents the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic processes in pharmacology. To evaluatenursing students learning with the proposed agent-based environment, we conducted a quasiexperimental study. The results revealed that nursing students who learned with the agent-basedenvironment gained significantly higher conceptual knowledge within the key concepts ofpharmacology comparing to students who learned via lecture-based curriculum. These findingssuggest an advantage with implementing explanatory agent-based models that point out theessential mechanisms underlying pharmacological phenomena in nursing education.IntroductionBioscience understanding has been widely recognized in the literature as fundamental to competent nursing care(Fell et al., 2016). However, in the 1980s, bioscience education was deemphasized in the nursing curriculumleading to the current ‘bioscience problem’ where nurses are not adequately learning key concepts needed fortheir work (McVicar, et al., 2015). To promote increased bioscience education in nursing, we demonstrate thelearnability of pharmacology, a cornerstone of nursing biosciences education, through the use of an agent-basedmodel learning environment.Pharmacology knowledge is essential for effective nursing practice because nurses administer andoversee prescribed drug therapies. Nurses spend as much as 40% of their work time on drug-related administrationand oversight activities, often serving as the final intermediary between a patient and their drug therapy once ithas been prescribed (Westbrook, Duffield, Li & Creswick, 2011). Considering the important and continuing rolenurses play in the implementation of drug therapies, this project proposes a new strategy in undergraduate nursingeducation to enhance nurses’ knowledge of fundamental bioscience ideas. More specifically, our approach hasbeen to develop activities and agent-based modeling simulation tools that could be used with nursing students toproduce more desirable learning outcomes in the area of pharmacology.Pharmacology educationPharmacology is typically taught in nursing education through lectures that emphasize a set of core contentincluding: 1) knowledge of specific drugs and their classes, 2) specific indications of use, dosages and side effects,and 3) some pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic processes. Pharmacokinetics describe how chemicals areprocessed in the body, including absorption into the circulatory system, distribution to various tissues, and tworoutes of drug elimination – metabolization and excretion. For instance, pharmacokinetics would address howdifferent means of drug administration (e.g., oral, intravenous, subcutaneous) would lead to different rates of drugdistribution throughout the body. Pharmacodynamics describe how the drug affects the body, including withinspecific macromolecular components in tissues. For instance, pharmacodynamics would address types of drugreceptor interactions.There are thousands of drugs available for use, and it is unrealistic for a nursing student to memorize allof the individual differences among drug classes. Understanding key concepts of pharmacokinetics andpharmacodynamics can help nurses apply their knowledge across most drugs types and predict with greateraccuracy the therapeutic or toxic effects, which is vital for safe medication management. Although nursingstudents generally find pharmacology to be interesting, it is difficult and they report that their pharmacology skillsare low, especially in pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. This is in part because they find the information“appear[s] as list of unconnected facts and labels” (Logan, 2011, pp. 408). These findings highlight the need fornew teaching approaches, such as agent-based modeling, to promote comprehension of basic pharmacologicalconcepts.Agent-based modeling environmentAgent-based modeling (ABM) is a computational modeling paradigm that encodes the behavior of individualagents in simple rules so that a learner can observe the results of these agents’ interactions. NetLogo is one suchmodeling environment (Wilensky, 1999) and was used to construct the Pharmacokinetic and PharmacodynamicsICLS 2018 Proceedings1057© ISLS(PkPd) learning environment (Dubovi et al., 2018). Exploration of agent-based models encourages causal thinkingin connecting individual behaviors with systemic patterns (Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006). Learning through ABMfocuses on entities and their actions (also called micro-level of the system) and global flows (also called macrolevel of the system), which allows students to comprehend parallel processes by which emergent phenomena form(Wilensky & Resnick, 1999). Since pharmacological processes are about nonlinear simultaneous interaction ofdifferent molecules with one another, with drug molecules (pharmacodynamics processes), and with normal bodyprocesses (pharmacokinetic processes), the current study aimed to promote learnability of these concepts throughan agent-based modeling paradigm, the PkPd learning environment.The PkPd learning environment includes several computerized models. One of these models represents thebody as comprised of several compartments and was designed especially for the current study. This “compartmentmodel” is a well-established representation in pharmacological textbooks and pharmacokinetics science (Hull,1979). Within the ABM instantiation of the compartment model, each compartment and their interconnectionsrepresent possible pathways for drug molecules: absorption from the digestive system; the bloodstream;distribution and drug molecules distribution to different tissues (e.g., adipose tissue), and drug elimination. Whilelearning with the PkPd model, students can choose the route of drug administration (enteral/topical/parenteral),change the dosage concentration, and manipulate parameters of distribution and elimination processes (amount ofmuscle and adipose tissue mass). In addition to the representation of compartments, the PkPd environmentincludes time plots and monitors which show the amounts of drug global actual count (macro-level) that can beeasily related by students to what is viewed as happening in the different compartments (micro-level; Figure 1).a.b.Figure1. The screenshot of PkPd learning environment. a. The compartment model, which schematicallyrepresents different spaces in the human body, enables exploration of molecules possible pathways forcomprehension of pharmacokinetic processes. b. Five screen snapshots showing the spotlight effect, whichallows students to pay attention to one molecule’s path and relate it to global patterns of absorption, distributionand elimination.Learning with the PkPd environment models was guided by worksheets that provided learning activities.The activities were anchored into different parameters of the system—the micro-level, the macro-level, and thelink between them. For example, to enhance understanding of the micro-level, students were asked to choose onemolecule in the agent-based model and then follow it while it goes through the absorption, distribution andelimination processes (Figure 1b). Then, we asked students to follow three other molecules and compare theirpathways. Since the molecules pathways in the model are random and parallel, we expected that this activitywould support causal understanding of the system and link between the different pharmacokinetics concepts (e.g.distribution and elimination), which are interdependent and occur simultaneously.MethodsResearch design, participants and procedureThis study employed a quasi-experimental, controlled pretest–intervention–posttest design with quantitativeanalysis. Participants included sophomore nursing students who were attending the traditional, lecture-basedpharmacological course during the fall semester in the Nursing Department at a university in Israel. The studywas comprised of two groups of students: (1) an experimental group (n=89), who learned via the PkPd computermodels for approximately 3 to 4 hours; and (2) a comparison group (n=51), who learned via the lecture-basedcurriculum. The live lectures were presented by two pharmacology experts for a total of 4 hours. The main topicswere similar to topics that were emphasized at PkPd environment (i.e., pharmacokinetics parameters such asabsorption, distribution and elimination; pharmacodynamics parameters such as drug-receptor interactions). Thelecturers used PowerPoint presentations for demonstrations of written material, pictures related to the phenomena,and were based on mathematical formulas. This was typical of lecture-based instruction in undergraduate nursingeducation at the institution.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1058© ISLSData collection instrument and data analysisPharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics (PkPd) questionnaireTo assess students’ understanding of pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics principles, we developed a PkPdquestionnaire consisting of 10 questions (8 multiple-choice, 2 open-ended). The items were reviewed byexperienced pharmacology lecturers in a university nursing department to ensure appropriate alignment of contextand content and that responses could reflect a suitable level of expertise. The questionnaire evaluates theconceptual pharmacology knowledge which is divided into two subscales of pharmacology key concepts: (1)Pharmacokinetics concepts such as absorption, distribution; and elimination; (2) Pharmacodynamics conceptssuch as drug-receptor interactions affinity and maximum effect. Analysis of the PkPD questionnaire usingCronbach’s alpha yielded an internal consistency score of 0.75.Responses to the PkPd questionnaire were coded as correct or incorrect, and the total score was calculatedas the percentage of correct answers. The pre- and post-test results were analyzed with descriptive statistics (Mean,SD). Learning gains were calculated for each student as post-test score minus pre-test score. Then, descriptivestatistics for learning gains (Mean, SD) were calculated for the experimental and the comparison groups. Learninggain scores were compared using a Mann–Whitney U test for non-parametric data with an effect size as r (Fritzet al., 2012).ResultsThe students’ pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics understanding was assessed with the PkPd questionnaire.Descriptive and inferential statistics for the PkPd pre- and posttest questionnaires are presented in table 1. Overall,the learning gains for the experimental (PkPd) group were significantly higher than those of the comparison groupwith a medium-to-large effect size. When broken down by subscale, results show that the highest learning gainwas found for the two pharmacokinetics subscales—absorption and elimination.Table 1: Comparisons of pre-test and post-test Questionnaire results: Scores and learning gains for the twostudent nursing groups (N = 140)*Pre-test scoresPost-test scoresLearning gain†Statistical testsExp.Comp.(n = 89) (n = 51)Exp.Comp.(n = 89) (n = 51)Exp.Comp.Mann– Effect(n = 89) (n = 51) Whitney U size, rPharmacokinetics 39 ± 19 42 ± 1575 ± 12 48 ± 2436± 24 6 ± 30Mdn.=38 Mdn.=4976***0.48Pharmacokinetics Subscales30± 3034± 3373 ± 2643± 4143± 37 9 ± 48Mdn.=50 Mdn.=01664***Distribution 39± 2743± 2565 ± 24 48 ± 2926 ± 37 5± 35Mdn.=33 Mdn.=01522***0.28Elimination 47 ± 40 48 ± 3692 ± 18 51 ± 4145 ± 45 3± 57Mdn.=50 Mdn.=01337***0.3585 ± 2537 ± 38 0 ± 40Mdn.=33 Mdn.=01124***0.47AbsorptionPharmacodynamics 46 ± 29 55 ± 3355± 270.36Exp., experimental group; Comp., comparison group.Data are presented in percentage mean ± SD, Median=Mdn, Range 0–100.†Learning gain was computed to compensate for differences in prior knowledge of PDM questionnaire(postscore – prescore).*** p < .001*DiscussionRobust understanding of the basic concepts of pharmacology—pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics—maysupport nurses’ clinical decisions related to medication management. Our findings show that students who learnedICLS 2018 Proceedings1059© ISLSwith PkPd environment gained significantly higher scores for all scales of the PkPd questionnaire than thecomparison group who learned with a traditional, lecture-based curriculum. This study adds to a growing body ofresearch showing that agent-based modeling supports learning of many different topics for middle-and high schoolstudents (e.g., in physics: Sengupta & Wilensky, 2009). This study suggests that undergraduate students can alsostrongly benefit from learning with agent-based models. The main difference in students’ learning outcomes withthe PkPd versus the lecture-based curriculum involved understanding the two pharmacokinetic subscales—absorption and elimination. Drug absorption and elimination are tightly linked to the daily nursing practice ofdrug administration. Better understanding of these concepts could help nurses more effectively manage theongoing process of assessment, identify possible complications, and adjust the treatment to patient’s individualpathophysiology characteristics.This study’s findings point to the particular advantage of learning with explanatory ABM simulations,which is that they can make visible the essential micro-level mechanisms underlying a phenomenon. Agent-basedmodels enable examination of the different attributes and mechanisms of a system and experimentation withmodifications of particular parameters and how they affect the overall macro-behavior of the system. Varying thedifferent attributes and observing their effect on the behavior of the system, can function as a proof of the systemmechanism and, hence, build deeper understandings of fundamental content (Wilensky & Rand, 2015).Future work will expand on the current findings to better articulate the features and affordances of thePkPd that facilitates knowedge integration (Linn, 2005) using qualitative data analysis. Beyond that, we suggestthat future work should be comparing learning processes and gains with agent-based models not just with lecturebased education but with other simulated approaches and tools and different manners of deploying agent-basedmodeling.ReferencesDubovi, I., Dagan, E., Sader-Mazbar, O., Nasar, L., & Levy, S.T. (2018). Nursing Students Learning withComplexity-Based Computerized Models the Pharmacology of Diabetes Mellitus: A QuasiExperimental Study. Nurse Education Today, 61, 175-181.Fell, P. L., Dobbins, K., & Dee, P. (2016). Bioscience learning in clinical placement: the experiences of pre‐registration nursing students. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 25(17-18), 2694-2705.Hull, C. J. (1979). Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. BJA: British Journal of Anaesthesia, 51, 579-594.Jacobson, M. J., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educational importanceand implications for the learning sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(1), 11-34.Linn, M. C. (2005). The knowledge integration perspective on learning and instruction. In Sawyer, R. K. (Ed.),The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 243-264). Washington: Cambridge Univ. Press.Logan, P. A., & Angel, L. (2011). Nursing as a scientific undertaking and the intersection with science inundergraduate studies: Implications for nursing management. Journal of Nursing Management, 19(3),407-417.McVicar, A., Andrew, S., & Kemble, R. (2015). The ‘bioscience problem’ for nursing students: an integrativereview of published evaluations of Year 1 bioscience, and proposed directions for curriculumdevelopment. Nurse education today, 35(3), 500-509.Sengupta, P., & Wilensky, U. (2009). Learning electricity with NIELS: Thinking with electrons and thinking inlevels. International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 14(1), 21-50.Westbrook, J.I., Duffield, C., Li, L., & Creswick, N.J. (2011). How much time do nurses have for patients? Alongitudinal study quantifying hospital nurses’ patterns of task time distribution and interactions withhealth professionals. BMC Health Services Resecrch,11, 319-331.Wilensky, U., 1999. NetLogo. Center for Connected Learning and Computer-Based Modeling, NorthwesternUniversity, Evanston, IL.Wilensky, U., & Rand, W. (2015). An introduction to agent-based modeling: modeling natural, social, andengineered complex systems with NetLogo. MIT Press.Wilensky, U., & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in levels: A dynamic systems approach to making sense of theworld. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 8(1), 3-19.AcknowledgementWe are especially grateful to the nursing students who voluntarily participated in our research and whose insightshelped to improve the environment. We thank Mr. Joel Drake for his careful language editing.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1060© ISLS