What Kind of World Do You Want to Live In? PositiveInterdependence and Collaborative Processes in the TangibleTabletop Land-Use Planning Game YoutopiaAlyssa Friend Wise, Alissa Nicole Antle, Jillian Warren, Aaron May, Min Fan and Anna Macaranasafw3@sfu.ca, aantle@sfu.ca, jlw29@sfu.ca, amay@sfu.ca minf@sfu.ca, amacaran@sfu.caSimon Fraser UniversityAbstract: Twenty pairs of 5th grade children used a tangible tabletop sustainability game tocreate a world they would want to live in to share with the rest of the class. Half of the pairswere assigned particular roles with associated game controls (positive interdependencecondition) while the other half were not (control condition). Results showed that pairs in theassigned roles/controls condition gave more in-depth explanations to their partners about whatthey wanted to do in the game, but did not negotiate with each other more frequently thancontrol pairs. They also had fewer but longer instances of jointly resolved conflict. Contrary tosome previous findings, all pairs in both conditions were found to work together (rather thanin parallel / competitively) the entire time. The general finding is a somewhat limited, butconsistent, positive effect of the assigned roles/tools manipulation on collaborative processes.Keywords: Tangible systems, emergent dialogue, student roles, positive interdependenceCollaborative learning with interactive tabletopsInteractive tabletops are horizontally oriented digital surfaces that allow for direct physical interaction by users(Higgins et al., 2011). They have been highlighted as a technology particularly suited to supportingcollaborative learning interactions as they are designed for more than one user, hands-on activities and multiplemodes of communication (Dillenbourg & Evans, 2011). Specifically, they have been suggested to haveparticular affordances for facilitating joint attention and creating a shared transaction space for reference,negotiation, and action (Fernaeus & Tholander, 2006). Of course, opportunities for collaboration aren’t alwaystaken up by learners and other interaction patterns are possible such as domination by one child, independentparallel play, and competition (Marshall et al., 2009). Thus two central challenges in designing interactivetabletop applications for collaborative learning are finding ways to distribute control across a group and gettinggroup members to engage with each other constructively (Higgins et al., 2011). One way to do this is bystructuring positive interdependence into the activity design in technological and/or social ways (Dillenbourg &Evans, 2011). There are many CSCL scripts designed towards this end such as assignment of roles, distributionof information, or designation of tools to particular learners (Järvelä et al., 2004). The aim of creating positiveinterdependence is to encourage learners to work together (as opposed to independently, in parallel or divideand-conquer mode), animate greater negotiation of decisions taken as part of the collaborative task, and fosterthe resolution of conflict jointly (rather than via unilateral action).Positive interdependence and tangiblesAn important characteristic of interactive tabletops that distinguishes them from many CSCL technologies isthat they support co-located face-to-face synchronous collaboration (Dillenbourg & Evans, 2011). This allowsfor the integration of tangibles: digitally augmented physical objects that are recognized by and can affect / beaffected by the tabletop system (Ullmer & Ishii, 2000). Tangibles offer particular affordances for creatingpositive interdependence as they allow for the physical embodiment of distributed control, tapping into socialnorms around object ownership and use (Speelpenning et al, 2011). Such technological interdependence can beemployed on its own (e.g. using colors to designate tangram pieces for use by different group members;Dillenbourg & Evans, 2011) or in concert with social interdependence (i.e. tools are distributed in alignmentwith particular duties). The latter strategy is particularly attractive as a way to address the challenge of gettinglearners to actually adopt the distinct rights and responsibilities of the role they are assigned (Wise et al., 2012).Previously we have described the design of Youtopia, a tangible and multi-touch tabletop activity aboutsustainable land-use planning (Antle et al., 2013). The game’s design includes co-dependent access points wheremore than one input action must be taken sequentially in order to create a successful system response. This aimof this design strategy is to encourage exploration of the game space and the content relations about sustainableland-use embedded within it (Fan et al., 2014). In this work we investigate whether adding scripted roles withCSCL 2015 Proceedings236© ISLSassociated tools (social/technological interdependence) to the existing contingencies of tangible use (describedbelow) affects the quantity and quality of collaboration processes. Notably, we do so in a study of children in anauthentic school environment, addressing recent critiques that interactive tabletop research has been overlyfocused on tool development rather than in-vivo studies of collaborative learning (Higgins et al., 2011).The Youtopia systemYoutopia is a hybrid tangible and multi-touch tabletop application about sustainable land-use planning. Theactivity was designed for pairs of elementary school children and aligned with the learning objectives forenvironmental and sustainability topics outlined in the B.C. Prescribed Learning Outcomes (Grade 5) and theU.S. National Science Education Standards (K-4). Using Youtopia, children have the opportunity to design theirown world, exploring how different land-use decisions affect the amount of food, housing and energy providedto the population; and the impact these decisions have on the level of pollution in the environment. Followingthe principles of Emergent Design (Antle et al., 2014), our interaction goals were for children to explore therelationships between different land-use decisions, see their effects on the world, discuss the inherent tradeoffswith their partner, and through this make informed decisions to create a world they would want to live in. Tofoster the need to explore relationships and discuss trade-offs, the activity was calibrated to make itdifficult/impossible (depending on the game mode) to satisfy human needs without some pollution.Children begin with one of four digital maps of an undeveloped valley with different types of terrain:mountains, grasslands, forest and a river. The primary method of interaction with the tabletop is through twokinds of physical stamps that children use to designate different land-use types on the map (see Figure 1a):natural resource stamps (indicated with a tree icon); and human development stamps (indicated with a wrenchicon) [see Table 1]. Each stamp also has a picture and a label describing the specific land-use type, and color isused to indicate land-uses that relate to the same human need (see Figure 1b). In this way children are supportedin seeing two kinds of relationships between land-uses: first, which ones are used to meet the same human need(e.g. energy, food, housing – coded by color); and second, the interrelations of natural resources and humandevelopments within a color category (e.g. a coal mine (tree) is a direct use of a natural resource, while a coalplant (wrench) is human development based on that resource; both are required to produce coal-based energy).(a)(b)Figure 1. (a) Using a stamp to designate a land-use (b) Colored tags identify groups of related stampsLand-use types have predefined relationships to each other and to the terrain designed to reflect realworld relations (see Table 1). For example, a farm can only be built on grasslands (not on a mountain) andrequires irrigation connecting it to a water source (the river). Thus different inputs to the system arecodependent: while each stamp is used individually, to successfully build anything requires two or more stampsplaced in sequence. Children are able to discover the underlying logic of the system in several ways. If a childstamps a ‘legal’ land-use (in an allowed location; required resources are met), a digital version of the land-usepicture on the stamp appears on the map. If a child stamps a land-use that doesn’t meet these conditions, anexplanation tab focused on describing land-use relationships (e.g. “Houses need lumber from the forest to beconstructed”) will appear and can be enlarged and rotated (Figure 2a). When a land-use is successfully placed,any resources it requires are greyed out so that children can see the effects of using land in this way and whatresources are still available. Children can also learn about how each of the land-use types work using the inforing, an open circular tangible that can be placed on the table with stamps inside it (Figure 2b). When a stamp isplaced in the info ring the system displays information about what resources the land-use requires and producesas well as geographic constraints on its usage. Finally, the impact stamp provides a way for children to assessthe state of their world in terms of what proportion of the population has shelter, food and energy, as well ashow polluted the world is (see Figure 2c). In keeping with the principles of Emergent Design, no judgment ofCSCL 2015 Proceedings237© ISLSthe world state as good or bad is provided; however an image of a pig asks “Is this a world you want to live in?”with the goal of eliciting a discussion of values. Use of the info ring or impact tool freezes the interaction in thesystem to give children time for reflection (Antle & Wise, 2013). The system was implemented on a MicrosoftPixelSense digital tabletop. Usability testing to ensure basic standards were met was conducted prior to runningthe study. A short video of functionality is available at www.youtube.com/watch?v=o7CsEICA8nQ.Table 1: Types of Youtopia land-use stampsArea of Human NeedFood (green labels)Shelter (pink labels)Energy (yellow labels)*Natural Resource StampsGarden, FarmHarvest LumberCoal MineEnvironment (orange labels)**Forest, River & Mountain ReservesHuman Development StampsIrrigationHouses, Town Houses, ApartmentsCoal PlantHydro PlantNotes: Arrows indicate which land-uses create resources required for other land-uses. *Energy land-uses increase thepollution in the world to different extents. **Environment land-uses reduce the pollution in the world to different extents(a)(b)Figure 2. Youtopia (a) error tabs (b) info ring (c) impact tool(c)Research questionsAs described above, in this study we sought to investigate whether assigning children roles and distributingassociated controls across the TUI learning environment affected the quantity and quality of children’scollaborative processes, hypothesizing that it would promote more collaborative behaviors than unscripted useof the system. In future work we will also examine effects on the outcomes of the collaborative activity.Research Question: Does assigning children interdependent roles/ tools in Youtopia lead to increases in (a)working together? (b) talking in-depth about the sustainability domain? (c) resolving conflicts jointly ratherthan unilaterally?MethodsResearch designThe study employed a post-test only experimental design. The independent variable was whether or not pairsusing Youtopia were assigned particular roles with associated controls to use while they engaged in the activity.Because collaborative activity was our focus (and thus we expect learning partners to influence each other ratherthan be independent) pairs of children were taken as the unit of analysis. Dependent variables included measuresof children’s collaborative processes coded from video data and reported by children in a post-activity survey.Participants and learning environmentForty 5th grade children (ages 10-11, 18 boys / 22 girls) from two classrooms participated in the study in pairs(N=20). Pairs were assigned by the teachers to match children based on three criteria: one, children work welltogether; two, children of high ability are distributed across pairs; and three, pairs do not have one individualwho is verbally dominant over the other. In addition, teachers were asked to make mixed-gender pairings toavoid differences in boy-boy and girl-girl pairs; however the class gender ratio necessitated was one girl-girlpair in each class. Pairs were randomly assigned (by the researchers) to the roles or no-roles condition, with therestriction of equal representation in each condition across the two classes. Children were mostly regular usersof technology, though there were some exceptions. Due to the culture of the classrooms (and overall school) allCSCL 2015 Proceedings238© ISLSchildren had extensive prior experience collaborating. In addition all children had participated in a class unit onsustainability issues four months earlier, thus prior knowledge on the topic was generally high. The use ofYoutopia was introduced as a review of the sustainability unit in which children would have the opportunity toengage in the land-use planning activity and then share and explain their final world with the class at the end.Data collectionVideoTwo installations of Youtopia (tabletop system, tangible objects, and associated software) were set up inseparate rooms apart from the regular classroom to create a distraction-free environment. Each room wasequipped with a high-definition digital video camera capturing a landscape view of the children users (and anoblique view of the tabletop surface). Video of twenty sessions of approximately a half-hour each was collected.SurveyAt the end of their time using Youtopia, children completed a short survey that asked them for: demographicinformation (age and gender); the frequency with which they used certain technologies at home; and their selfreports of (a) the process of working with their partner; (b) what they learned from the Youtopia activity; and (c)the importance / difficulty of making land-use decisions to create a world they want to live in. Full text ofquestions is included in the results section. For each, children indicated on whether a statement wastrue/important/difficult on a five point scale ranging from “not at all” to “very.”ProcedureThree research team members administered each session of Youtopia; classroom teachers were not present.Pairs were told they would have up to 25 minutes to engage in the activity. The facilitator began by introducingthe children to Youtopia and giving them a basic tutorial of system functionality. Children were then invited touse the Youtopia system to create a “world they would want to live in.” Specifically they were told to worktogether to make housing, food, energy and nature reserves and that they could change and rebuild their worlduntil they were happy with it. No instructions were given as to what the created world should look like. Childrenwere also made aware that after all pairs had completed their Youtopia sessions, they would be asked to share aprinted-out version of their final world map and impact display with the rest of their class.In the roles condition, one child was assigned to be the “manager of natural resources” and given all the“tree” stamps associated with this role (lumber, garden, farm, coal mine, nature reserve, river reserve, mountainreserve); the other child was assigned to be the “manager of human development” and given the “wrench”stamps associated with this role (irrigation, house, townhouse, apartment, coal plant, hydro dam). Roles wereassigned randomly to children by the researchers, balancing across gender in the overall sample. Tools notassociated with a particular role (impact tool, information ring, eraser tool) were placed at the end of tablebetween the children. In the no-roles condition the pair was simply given access to all of the stamps / toolsplaced at the end of the table equidistant between them and grouped by color related to particular human needs(see Figure 1b and Table 1). Youtopia activity sessions were spread across the course of a week.Data codingVideo data was coded to index two aspects of children’s collaborative processes: first, the degree and type oftheir in-depth talk about the sustainability domain; and second, the degree of conflict they had around thesustainability domain and how it was resolved. We had initially also planned to code a more generalcollaboration measure of “working together” (time in which both children worked on a common element of thetask); however, since all pairs in the study were seen to work together all the time, this measure was discardedand working together was indexed simply by the total time the children engaged with Youtopia.In-Depth Events were identified as periods of Youtopia use in which one or both children explainedtheir thinking / reasoning related to decisions about what resources and developments to use in the activity. Forexample “Let’s build houses, not apartments-they use less lumber so we can make more nature reserves” wouldbe coded as In-Depth, but “I think we should have houses not trees” would not. Occasions in which only onechild explained their thinking or reasoning were coded as Solo In-Depth Events, while episodes in which bothchildren explained their thinking were coded as Together In-Depth Events.Conflict Events were identified as periods of Youtopia use in which children expressed verbal and/orphysical disagreement with the other’s actions or utterances related to the sustainability domain. For example ifone child started to stamp a Garden and the other said “No, let’s make a Farm,” or one child wordlessly grabbedanother’s stamp it would be coded as conflict. However, if one child presented options and the other decided,CSCL 2015 Proceedings239© ISLS(e.g. “We could make a Garden or a Farm…” “Farm!”) it was not considered conflict. Each conflict event wascoded as being Resolved Unilaterally (one child takes action without other’s consent), Resolved Jointly(agreement is reached before action is taken), or Not Resolved (the conflict was abandoned).Three researchers were involved in coding the video data, marking all In-Depth and Conflict Events ofthe types described above with both a start and end time. These were used to calculate variables for both thefrequency (number of occurrences) and average duration of each kind of event. Because the presence or absenceof assigned roles was apparent in the videos, coders were not blind to condition. Before proceeding with theactual coding, the three researchers first used a training video to practice and refine the indicators and examplesfor each category. For inter-rater reliability Cohen’s kappa was calculated based on the overlap of time segmentscoded as In-Depth or Conflict, permitting a 5 second tolerance at the start and end of events. Thirty percent(six) of the videos were double coded, three at the start of the analysis (κIn-Depth = .63; κConflict= .81), and three atthe midpoint (κIn-Depth = .65; κConflict= .92). All differences in coding were reconciled.ResultsYoutopia gameplay sessions lasted between 14 and 30 min, with an average length of 23 min (SD=4.4).Examining the data set for outliers, there was one pair (roles condition) with no in-depth or conflict events ofany kind throughout their entire session. Review of the video for this pair revealed that they were notably quietcompared to all other pairs and appeared to be relatively disengaged from the task throughout the session. Thedata from this pair was thus removed from the analysis. For the remaining 19 pairs, the data below is presentedfirst descriptively across the entire sample and then compared across conditions. Due to the small sample sizeand a clearly identified hypothesized direction of effects, one-tailed tests were used.Working togetherAll pairs reported high levels of working together (this was also indicated by initial viewing of the videos thatled to the elimination of the working together coding); no differences were seen between the two conditions (seeTable 2). The amount of time spent working together (indexed by duration of Youtopia use) was 3 min longeron average for pairs in the roles condition; however the difference failed to reach significance (Table 2).Table 2. Mean and standard deviation of working together variables by condition“I worked a lot with my partner while I wasdoing the activity” †“I worked mostly on my own while I wasdoing the activity” †Duration of Youtopia use (min)†No-Roles (N=10)Roles (N=9)tp††4.35 (0.41)4.28 (0.36)-0.40(.336)1.48 (0.45)1.56 (0.52)0.36(.361)21.85 (4.55)24.99 (3.43)1.69.055The survey scale ran 1 to 5, with a higher number indicating a greater level of agreement with the statementp values given are for one-tailed tests, parentheses indicate if the difference was not in the predicted direction††Talking in-depth about sustainabilityOverall, pairs reported moderate levels of talking with their partner about the kind of world they wanted to livein and the degree to which they knew the kind of world that their partner wanted to live in after engaging withYoutopia (see Table 3). Counter to expectations, pairs in the no-roles condition reported somewhat higher levelsof knowing the kind of world that their partner wanted to live in by the end of the activity; however even if thisdifference had been in the in the hypothesized direction, the effect would not have reached significance.The total number of in-depth events per pair ranged between 2 and 19, with an average of 10 persession, accounting for ~5% of children’s total play time. Looking at patterns in individual versus collaborativein-depth talk across all pairs, on average there was a greater frequency of solo in-depth events (M=7.26,SD=3.90) than together in-depth events (M=2.95, SD=2.32) [t18 = 6.31, p < .001]. However, when theyoccurred, the together in-depth events had longer average durations (M=10.37 sec, SD=4.37) than the solo indepth events (M=4.33 sec, SD=1.09) [t16 = 5.39, p < .001]. (Note that these are comparisons between event typesacross all pairs and thus different from the comparisons across condition shown in Table 3). Comparing role andno-role conditions, the number, but not length of solo in-depth events was greater for pairs in the rolescondition. However, no differences were seen in the number or length of together in-depth events (see Table 3).CSCL 2015 Proceedings240© ISLSTable 3. Mean and standard deviation of talking about sustainability variables by condition“My partner and I talked a lot about the kind ofworld we want to live in” †“After playing the game together, I know whatkind of world my partner wants to live in” †Solo In-Depth Events - Frequency (number)Solo In-Depth Events - Average Length (sec)Together In-Depth Events - Frequency (number)Together In-Depth Events - Average Length (sec)No-Roles(N=10)Roles(N=9)Tp††3.58 (0.87)3.39 (0.65)-0.52(.303)4.20 (0.48)3.81 (0.68)-1.47(.080)8.89 (4.40)4.37 (1.12)3.33 (2.60)9.78 (3.58) †††1.830.060.680.51.042.957.254.6195.80 (2.86)4.35 (1.05)2.60 (2.12)10.89 (5.14) ††††The survey scale ran 1 to 5, with a higher number indicating a greater level of agreement with the statementp values given are for one-tailed tests, parentheses indicate if the difference was not in the predicted direction†††N in this cell was reduced by one, after removing a pair that did not have any In-Depth Together Events††Engaging in and resolving conflictThe data distribution for conflict was heavily skewed and kurtotic due to a substantial number of pairs withoutany conflict events; thus assumptions of normality were considered to be violated and non-parametric tests wereused. The predicted increased frequency in unilaterally resolved conflict events for the no-roles condition wasobserved (see Table 4). However unexpectedly results showed the no-roles condition also had a greaterfrequency of jointly resolved conflict events; had our hypothesis for this variable been in the opposite direction,the difference would have been significant. There were few unresolved conflict events in either condition. Asthere was only one instance of unilaterally resolved conflict in all roles pairs, it was not possible to meaningfullycompare duration. The same was true for unresolved conflict events. However jointly resolved conflict in theroles condition lasted significantly longer than jointly resolved conflict in the no-roles condition.Table 4. Median frequency and duration of conflict event variables by conditionNo-Roles (N=10)MedianMaxUnilaterally Resolved Conflict EventsFrequency (number)Av Length (sec)Jointly Resolved Conflict EventsFrequency (number)Av length (sec)Unresolved Conflict EventsFrequency (number)Average Length (sec)Roles (N=9)MedianMaxMann-Whitney p(one-tailed)0.56.67†412.504.4††14.4.030-19.32†††822.7032.73††††350.5(.029).031012.61†††††123.06036.39††236.39.350-Notes: Removing pairs that did not have any conflict events resolved in the indicated way, left the following cell sizes:N=5, ††N=1, †††N=8, ††††N=4, †††††N=2, Mann-Whitney test was not run if combined N across cells <10†DiscussionSummary of resultsPairs of children reported generally high levels of working together and moderate levels of talking with theirpartner about the kind of world they want to live in, with no differences between conditions. Pairs in the rolescondition spent a few minutes longer engaging with Youtopia and pairs in the non-roles condition describedslightly higher levels of knowing the kind of world that their partner wanted to live in; however both differencesfailed to reach significance. Overall, events in which children talked in-depth about sustainability issuesrepresented a small portion (5%) of their total session time, with solo in-depth talk occurring twice as frequentlyas together talk; however the together in-depth talk lasted twice as long. On average pairs assigned roles had oneand a half times as many solo in-depth events than those who did not have roles. No differences were seen forthe length of these events or the length or frequency of together in-depth events. Pairs without roles assignedCSCL 2015 Proceedings241© ISLShad more unilaterally and jointly resolved conflict events than pairs who were assigned roles; however whenpairs with roles engaged in jointly resolved conflict it lasted approximately three times as long.Overall collaborative patternsBefore comparing the roles and no-roles conditions, it is useful to examine some of the overall collaborativepatterns observed. First, pairs in both conditions worked together for the entire time of the activity. This is apositive finding amidst concerns about parallel independent play and competitive behaviors (Marshall et al.,2009). This may be a result of the game design, the classroom culture of collaboration set up by the teachers(Hakkarainen et al., 2002), the pairing of kids who worked well together by teachers or other factors. However,the proportion of the time working together that was identified as “in-depth” talk about the sustainability domainwas only 5%. This may be in part because the bar for identification of in-depth events was set quite high,requiring children to talk about tradeoffs in the game and reasons for tradeoffs that involve environmentalvalues (thus when this talk did occur it was very rich). In future work it may be necessary to relax theserequirements to include a larger swath of relevant talk; however this also highlights an important point aboutCSCL analyses—that the “golden moments” in collaborative learning we aspire to (and see highlighted in theresearch) are often farther and fewer between than we would like to think. Interestingly, there is some indicationin this study that the children themselves were aware of this difference, reporting high levels of working withtheir partner but only moderate levels of talking with their partner about the kind of world they want to live in.Overall there was a lack of conflict in this study with a substantial number of pairs having no conflict events atall. This may again be due to the classroom culture and/or pairing strategy used. Still, it is of potential concernsince the negotiation and integration of differing perspectives is at the conceptual core of collaborative learning(e.g. Andriessen et al., 2003). Finally, solo in-depth events outnumbers together in-depth events two to one,suggesting an overall prevalence of explanation over negotiation. This is discussed further below.The effects of assigning interdependent roles and toolsOne effect of the interdependent roles and tool assignment was that pairs in the roles condition had more solo(but not together) in-depth events than pairs in the no-roles condition. This is an interesting and somewhatsurprising finding since it was expected that the interdependent roles/tools would support children in discussingthe sustainability tradeoffs and decisions they needed to make together. Instead, it seems that the role/toolassignment led the children to explain what they were doing to each other more often, but not necessarilynegotiate it (note that an in-depth statement about a choice to be made in the environment that received a simplyaffirmative reply like “okay, good idea” would have been coded as a solo in-depth event because even thoughboth children spoke, the second comment was not in-depth). In some sense then this is a positive finding sincesimply getting children to externalize their thinking and rationale may have benefits for reflective processes,collaboration, and learning (Price et al., 2003). However, we are curious as to why in-depth statements aboutsustainability and game choices did not consistently lead to substantive replies. One possibility is that childrenwere too willing to agree with their partner (or unwilling to question them) in an effort to maintain harmony.Challenges in getting learners to disagree have been reported in CSCL environments previously (De Wever etal. 2008). However, that issue does not speak to why children didn’t build on their partner’s ideas. Again thismay relate to the particular classroom culture of collaboration or perhaps that the game dynamics promotedtaking (and seeing the effects of) decisions one step at a time, delaying the moment at which it is appropriate tobuild-upon a partner’s idea until after the first decision has been enacted. We also note that this reflects a largertrend of solo over together in-depth events across the sample more broadly. Further investigation of the issuethrough examination of sequences of turn-taking is an interesting area for future research.	  A second effect of the interdependent roles and tool assignment was that children without rolesassigned had both more unilaterally resolved conflict events and jointly resolved conflict events. The greaternumber of unilaterally resolved conflicts was expected; in the absence of interdependent roles with associatedtools, either child could make and enact a decision on the game board without gaining their partner’s agreement.However the greater number of jointly resolved conflicts was not predicted; in fact it was expected that thepositive interdependence of the roles condition would lead to more jointly resolved conflict. The cause of thiseffect remains unknown; it may be that in the absence of being assigned a particular perspective, each child wasable to consider both sides of an issue of conflict and thus more easily detach themselves from their originalview to come to a joint agreement. In the no roles condition both children could also undo or redo a game actionat any time, making the cost of agreement relatively low. This hypothesis is supported by the additionalevidence that when jointly resolved conflicts did occur in the roles condition, they lasted significantly longer.This may be because children given a role with responsibilities and tool ownership were more attached to theirpositions, thus it took longer for them to reach a resolution satisfactory to both parties. Whether this extendedCSCL 2015 Proceedings242© ISLSperiod of dialogue involved a deeper negotiation around values that benefited their learning about sustainabilityis an important area for investigation. Follow-up work is currently underway to investigate this through both aqualitative examination of the dialogue episodes and a quantitative assessment of changes in understanding.LimitationsThere were several limitations to this study relating to the relatively small sample size, children with atypicallyhigh prior knowledge and experience collaborating, and the high bar of coding criteria for in-depth events.Future work should expand the number and diversity of children studied with an updated coding protocol.ConclusionThis paper presented an in-vivo experimental study of the effects of assigning children roles with associatedtools in a sustainable land-use planning game. Contrary to some previous findings, all pairs in both conditionswere found to work together (rather than in parallel / competitively) the entire time. Results showed that pairsgiven specific roles/tools gave more in-depth explanations to their partners about what they wanted to do in thegame than pairs not assigned roles and tools, but did not negotiate with each other in-depth more frequently.This reflects a trend of explanation over negotiation in the sample more broadly. Pairs assigned roles also hadfewer but longer instances of jointly resolved conflict. Thus our general finding is a somewhat limited, butconsistent, positive effect of the assigned roles/tools manipulation on collaborative processes.ReferencesAndriessen, J., Baker, M. & Suthers, D. (Eds.) (2003). Arguing to learn: Confronting cognitions in computersupported collaborative learning environments. Springer.Antle, A.N., Tanenbaum, J., Macaranas, A. and Robinson, J. (2014) Games for change: Looking at models ofpersuasion through the lens of design. In A. Nijholt, (Ed.) Playful user interfaces: Interfaces that invitesocial and physical interaction (pp. 163-184). Springer.Antle, A.N. & Wise, A.F. (2014) Getting down to details: Using theories of cognition and learning to informtangible user interface design, Interacting with Computers, 25(1), 1-20.Antle, A.N., Wise, A.F., Willis, A., Tan, P. Nowroozi, S., Eckerssley, R., Fan, M. & Warren, J. (2013).Youtopia: A collaborative, tangible, multi-touch, sustainability learning activity. In J. P. Hourcade, N.Sawhney & E. Reardon (Eds). Proceedings of IDC 2013 (pp. 565-568). ACM.De Wever, B., Schellens, T., Van Keer, H., & Valcke, M. (2008). Structuring asynchronous discussion groupsby introducing roles: Do students act up to the assigned roles? Small Group Research, 39, 770–794.Dillenbourg, P., & Evans, M. (2011). Interactive tabletops in education. ijCSCL, 6(4), 491-514.Fan, M., Antle, A. N., Neustaedter, C. & Wise, A. F. (2014). Exploring how a co-dependent tangible tool designsupports collaboration in a tabletop activity. In Proceedings of GROUP 2014. ACM.Fernaeus, Y. & Tholander, J. (2006). Finding design qualities in a tangible programming space. In Proceedingsof the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 447–456). ACM.Hakkarainen, K., Lipponen, L., & Järvelä, S. (2002) Epistemology of inquiry and computer-supportedcollaborative learning. In CSCL 2: Carrying forward the conversation (pp 129-156). Erlbaum.Higgins, S. E., Mercier, E., Burd, E., & Hatch, A. (2011). Multi-touch tables and the relationship withcollaborative classroom pedagogies: A synthetic review. ijCSCL, 6(4), 515-538.Järvelä, S., Häkkinen, P., Arvaja, M. & Leinonen, P. (2004) Instructional Support in CSCL. In What we knowabout CSCL and implementing it in higher education (pp. 115–139). Springer.Marshall, P., Fleck, R., Harris, A., Rick, J., Hornecker, E., Rogers, Y., & Dalton, N. S. (2009). Fighting forcontrol: Children's embodied interactions when using physical and digital representations. InProceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 2149-2152). ACM.Price, S., Rogers, Y., Stanton, D., & Smith, H. (2003). A new conceptual framework for CSCL. In Designing forchange in networked learning environments (pp. 513-522). Springer.Speelpenning, T., Antle, A. N., Doering, T., & Van Den Hoven, E. (2011). Exploring how tangible tools enablecollaboration in a multi-touch tabletop game. In HCI–INTERACT 2011 (pp. 605-621). Springer.Ullmer, B. & Ishii, H. (2000). Emerging frameworks for tangible user interfaces. IBM Sys. Journal 39, 915–931.Wise, A. F., Saghafian, M. & Padmanabhan, P. (2012). Towards more precise design guidance: Specifying andtesting the functions of assigned student roles in online discussions. ETR&D 60(1), 55-82.AcknowledgementsWe gratefully acknowledge the support of NSERC, SSHRC, and GRAND NCE in making this project possible.CSCL 2015 Proceedings243© ISLS