Developing Productive Discourse among Low Achievers in aKnowledge Building EnvironmentYuyao Tong, Carol K.K. Chan, and Jan van Aalsttongyuyao2016@gmail.com, ckkchan@hku.hk, vanaalst@hku.hkThe University of Hong KongAbstract: This study investigates how an understanding of and engagement with productivediscourse can be developed among low-achieving students in a knowledge building (KB)environment supported by Knowledge Forum®(KF). Participants were two classes of 9thGrade students in a Hong Kong secondary school. The design involves students engaging inproductive discourse, talking about what constitute good discussion, and explicit reflection ontheir discourse using KB principles. Quantitative analysis shows that students improved moreon their understanding of discourse than comparison student and engaged in discourse thatbecome more productive over time. Qualitative analyses reveal how the low-achievingstudents engage in the classroom meta-talk to deepen their understanding of progressive viewsof discourse and knowledge building.IntroductionDeveloping students’ productive discourse has been the focus of recent research on learning, specifically in thelearning sciences (Sawyer, 2014). Traditional teacher-student discourse, structured as initiate-response-feedback(IRF), has been the most frequent discourse pattern in the classroom (McNeili & Pimentel, 2010). However,under this rubric, students lack the opportunity to work collaboratively and to build-on each other’s ideas forsustained inquiry and knowledge building. Consequently, there has been a growing interest in dialogicalteaching in classroom discourse and teacher mostly as facilitator in developing a rich dialogic discourse (Chen,Clarke & Resnick, 2014; Hennessy et al., 2016). As discourse is epistemic in nature and central to knowledgedevelopment, how educators can help students develop a productive discourse and how knowledge-buildingdiscourse in classroom is manifested needs to be examined. Knowledge building (KB) is an educational modeland pedagogy that has been examined in various domains and across grade levels, but relatively little work hasfocused specifically on low achieving students. Discourse development is often thought to be particularlychallenging for low achieving students, as they tend to be perceived as unable to engage in high-level inquiryand thinking (Zohar, Degani, & Vaaknin, 2001). If the facilitation of classroom discourse is important forstudents to develop a complex, epistemic understanding of their inquiry and discourse, then a focus on enablinglow-achieving students to engage in KB is even more pressing. How low-achieving students experience andperform in KB work in both classroom and online settings are thus important to examine. The purpose of thepresent study is to investigate the role of design in enhancing students’ discourse understanding and to examinehow productive discourse can be developed among low achievers.Theoretical perspectiveThis study is based on the knowledge building (KB) educational model and pedagogy (Scardamalia & Bereiter,2014). KB calls for the pursuit of idea improvement and collective responsibility. In the KB community,students engage in progressive discourse supported by Knowledge Forum® (KF), an online communityplatform. Students advance their community knowledge through sustained progressive inquiry using theembedded metacognitive scaffolds; (for instance, “I need to understand”). Ideas are regarded as a social productof the community (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014). However, students often engaged in disconnected and shortthreaded discourse instead of productive discourse in their online discussion (Zhang & Chen, 2013). Just asdiscourse is central to researchers’ and scientists’ advancement of knowledge, students need to engage inpurposeful discussion and explanation-inquiry driven discourse (Kuhn et al, 2011; Sandoval & Reiser, 2004).An increasing number of studies have been conducted to investigate students’ discourse development and itsrole in learning, with many considering the role of discourse in students’ understanding of science and studentsare scaffold to talk like scientists in interpreting data and relate data to theoretical claims (Sandoval, 2003).From the perspective of KB, discourse is about progressive inquiry processes, understood to be acentral epistemic practice in knowledge creation. As such, it is important for students not only to engage indiscourse and inquiry, but also to understand why and how such discourse is important. KB proposed a set of 12principles that are seen to be core to KB communities (Scardamalia, 2002), epistemic agency, collectiveresponsibility, which together, provides epistemic criteria for students to better understand the development ofICLS 2018 Proceedings879© ISLSdiscourse. Engaging with discourse reflexively is seen to help students advance their epistemic understanding,to acknowledge that knowledge itself is evolving and extendable, and that it can be created collectively.While helping students to understand productive discourse for epistemic growth and metdiscourseengagement are important (Yang, Chan, van Aalst, & Tian, 2016), it should not be assumed that students willspontaneously develop productive discourse, even in inquiry-learning environments (van Aalst, 2009). Inscience education, explicit reflection on the epistemic criteria of scientific model can help students to engage inthe scientific inquiry and understand the nature of science (Pluta, Chinn, & Duncan, 2011). This is similar to theKB principles, in that it is important to help students and particularly low-achieving students to explicitly reflecton their discourse, rather than merely engaging in collective inquiry. Students need to engage in meta-discourseto reflect on their online talk and to identify deeper questions for further inquiry (Zhang & Chen, 2013).Crucially, KB and other inquiry experiences are considered difficult for low-achieving students, whooften have literacy problems and learning difficulties (Shen et al., 2007). They are perceived as being limited tolow-level metacognitive strategies and unable to engage high-level strategies, making it difficult for them toplan, monitor, and reflect on their tasks and learning process and to highlight essential insights (Azevedo,Cromley, & Seibert, 2004; van Aalst, 2009). As such, it becomes particular important to help low-achievingstudents to develop productive discourse engagement using KB principles as epistemic criteria to monitor andevaluate their discussions. Earlier research provides some evidence of KB for low achievers (Yang et al., 2016),but the dynamics of classroom discourse and students’ conceptions of discourse have not been investigated.Overall, the goal of the present study was to design a KB environment that is focused on specificallyon discourse development, reflection, and understanding for low-achieving students to help those studentsengage in productive discourse, and to examine the role of the KB environment on students’ epistemicunderstanding, KF discourse development, and classroom productive discourse. Specifically, three researchquestions were addressed: (1) What characterize students’ understanding of discourse, and how did they changeafter instruction? (2) What was the nature of KB discourse and to what extend did students engage in KFdiscourse? (3) How did students engage in the classroom discourse to reflect on their online talk?MethodsResearch context and participantsTwo classes of 9th Grade students enrolled in a visual arts class at a Hong Kong Band-3 secondary schoolparticipated in the study. Secondary school are organized into three groups, from Band 1 (highest-achieving) toBand 3 (lowest-achieving) based on students’ public examination results, and students in the present study arethus institutionally recognized as low-achieving students. The study was conducted in a classroom with studentsengaged in a KB environment augmented with explicit reflection (n= 31). A comparison class, engaged in aregular KB learning without reflection and discourse design, was also included to provide additional data (n=32).Pedagogical designIn this study, we designed a KB environment with an emphasize on understanding of discourse and explicitreflection to support student’ production of knowledge and progressive productive discourse (Figure 1). Anexplicit reflection cycle was developed and implemented in the KB pedagogy (Chan, 2011).Figure 1. Pedagogical design.(1) Creating a collaborative classroom culture with group work and ideas made public through aKnowledge Building Wall (KB Wall) (Figure 2) (Week 1-4). In developing a collaborative classroom culture,students first worked in groups to develop collective ideas through mind map and then presented ideas to thewhole class; this was followed by creating a KB Wall to generate questions and build-on others’ ideas in theICLS 2018 Proceedings880© ISLScommunity; (2) Starting and developing progressive inquiry in KF with questions and ideas generated, as well,good KF notes identifying under teacher’s scaffolding (Week 5-7). Students generated meaningful questionsfrom the KB Wall to continue to inquiry on KF. After a period of discussion on KF, students were also asked toidentify good notes based on their KB Wall and KF discussion; (3) Scaffolding understanding of discourse in anexplicit way and deepening productive discourse moves with KB principles discussion and KF discoursereflection and comparison (Week 8-16). KF discussion and classroom talk were intertwined. The teacher startedto help students to review on what they had learned, monitor their learning process, identifying core problemsfor further inquiry, and reflect on their KF discussion. The comparison class also went through the phase 1 to 2.But whereas the intervention group had KB Talk on discourse understanding and reflection of KF discoursemoves, while the comparison group only continued to work in KF without intervention.Figure 2. An example of students’ mind map and KB Wall.Data collectionOver a four-month period, students in both of the two groups inquired and discussed the topic of what is art andarts appreciation. Through this period, various data were collected including: (1) Pretest-posttest on discourseunderstanding. We collected and analyzed students’ pre-posttests on their understanding of discourse with awritten questionnaire to examine “what do you think is a good discourse?” (2) KF engagement. Students’ onlineparticipation was examined Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer (KBDeX) (Oshima, Oshima, &Matsuzawa, 2012); (3) KB discourse. We conducted content analysis to examine students’ written in KF andused individual notes as the unit of analysis; (4) Classroom discourse. We video recorded all of the lessons andfocused on the classroom discussion of discourse understanding and reflection in this paper.Data analysis and resultsCharacterizing students’ understanding of discourse and changeStudents’ responses were analyzed to characterize their epistemic understanding of discourse aligned with KBperspective. As Table 1 shows, students’ understanding of discourse move towards to more sophisticated viewsin the enriched KB group in the posttest, such as “putting ideas together to make our knowledge rise-above…”and “to continued build-on…” For the comparison group, even though students’ discourse understanding alsoappeared to have developed in the posttest, such as “…argumentation…obtain an agreement…”, they still didnot engage in a sophisticated view of discourse understanding while students’ discourse understanding in theenriched KB group corresponding more to the KB principles, which are the key themes of KB theory.Students’ responses were coded using a 3-point scheme ranged from simple to more sophisticatedviews of discourse. A second rater independently coded 30% of the data, with Cohen’s Kappa calculated,K=.873, p<.001, indicating a good inter-rater reliability. Significant change was obtained from pretest to posttestfor the enriched KB group, t (30) =4.224, p<.001. The significance of which is corroborated by baseline analysissuggesting no significant difference for pretests between the two groups while an independent sample t-testindicated significant difference for the posttests between the two groups, t (61) = 2.063, p<.05.Table 1: Students’ responses about their understanding of discourseEnriched KB GroupPretestPosttestCYR: “A good discourse need to CYR: “… everyone express their ideas,have a fruitful discussion with then putting our ideas together to makeeveryone participate in”.our knowledge rise-above…”FRM: “a good discourse is FRM: “… we need to have diversecollaboratively working…”ideas…from different perspectives…”LQW: “a good discourse need to … LQW: “… continued build-on anddevelop a harmonious discussion questions asking for sustained inquiry,which help us to improve our ideas…”environment”.ICLS 2018 Proceedings881Comparison GroupPosttestGWF: “A good discourse…haveargumentationand…obtainanagreement.”GBY: “…focus on the conceptualtopic…identify the dis/advantages…”LTY: “for good discourse…havegroup discussion first, then summarizeour ideas to present in the community”© ISLSHow did students engage in KB discourse and sustain the discussion?Students’ online engagement and discourse networkThe second research question examined how students contributed to and engaged in online discussion and howthey sustained their inquiry through the discussion in KF. We conducted KBDeX analysis to explore how thediscourse networks of students’ KF notes changed over time between the enriched KB and comparison group.Students’ KF notes were exported into KBDeX and it produced a network analysis of students, discourse, andkeywords. In this paper, we examined the discourse network only. As Figure 3 shows, the discourse networkchanged from segmented to coherent over time in the two groups. However, in each phase (phase 1 – notes 1 to30 and phase 2 – notes 1 to 100), the discourse network was more connected with fewer fragmented notesindicating a more cohesive discussion in the enriched KB group. In phase 1, only two separate notes(highlighted in red) remained outside the main cluster in the enriched KB group, while for the comparison group,the discourse network was segmented, with many separated notes. In phase 2, the discourse network was stillsegmented in the comparison group with eight fragmented notes, while for the enriched KB group, the discoursenetwork was integrated in one cluster without any fragmented notes. This suggests that over the discussion,students in the enriched KB group engaged in a more cohesive and progressive discussion than in thecomparison group.Figure 3. KF Discourse Network Change over time between enriched KB and comparison group.Inquiry thread analysis of online productive discourseStudents’ notes in KF were analyzed to examine their productive discourse engagement. All KF notes wereclassified into 10 threads (thread 1-art and life; 2-artist; 3-re-creation; 4-purpose of art; 5-definition of art; 6-artsrepresentation; 7-plagiarism of art; 8-difficulties solving by art; 9-how to read art; and 10-arts appreciation)adapted from the notion of inquiry thread with students addressing a conceptual problem (Zhang et al., 2009).Table 2: Coding scheme for analyzing KF discourse in inquiry threadsCodesQuestioningandIdentifyingGapsSub-codesFact-seekingExplanationseekingSustainedinquiryTheorizingandImprovableIdeasSimple claimProposing anexplanationSupporting anexplanationImproving anexplanationMetadiscourseConnectionRise-aboveICLS 2018 ProceedingsDescriptionQuestions on seeking factual informationQuestions on seeking open-endedresponses with explanationAsking further questions based onprevious notes or ideas and make thediscussion deeperSimple (dis)agree or repeat a statementProposing a theory that explain certainphenomena for the first timeSupporting an already existing theoryproposed by another student andproviding a justificationImproving an already existing theorythrough elaboration, specifying detailsand using new evidenceReference to their own or others’ notes,or quoting extra sources to advanceunderstandingStudents refer back to previousdiscussion by asking a metacognitivequestion for monitoring the inquiryprocess and further discussion, orgenerating an explanation or evaluation882ExamplesWhat is visual elements?How can we use visual elements to appreciatean art piece?Art is innovative…but how can art representemotion? (a further question asked based onprevious notes)Art can be free designed (repeat previous note)Art include various elements and combinesdifferent color and shapeDifferent color can represent different meaningand give people different feeling, bluerepresents melancholy…You mentioned that people think that art isuseless, but art is an indispensable element inour life…the clothing were designed by art…"arts not equal to pictures”, arts representmany forms… photographing…(reference to astudent’s note and quote extra sources)Everyone are artists? You said that “artists?A special existence”, artists refers to peoplewho design projects…, I am wondering thateveryone can be artists as long as they drawingor designing projects…Are we artists?© ISLSto appraise their own or other’ notesWithin each inquiry thread, individual notes were coded. The coding framework includes three maincategories of questioning, theorizing, and meta-discourse, all of which correspond with sub-codes. Thedevelopment of the coding scheme (Table 2) was based on a theory- and data-driven approach, in which severaltheoretical frameworks were integrated including questioning and explanation (Hakkarainen, 2003), ways ofcontributing (Chuy et al., 2011), and the social dynamics of KB (Yang et al., 2016). A second rater coded 30%of data, K=.830, p<.001, indicating a good inter-rater reliability. As Table 3 shows, the results from our analysissuggested that students’ questions were primarily explanation-seeking, moreover, asking sustained questions forfurther inquiry; in addition, students focused on generating a theory and providing a detailed explanation tosupport the theory. Overall, results showed that students were engaged in productive discourse with high-levelresponsibility taken for knowledge building.Table 3: Number of different categories of epistemic questioning, theorizing, and community in inquiry threadsThread#1#2#3#4#5#6#7#8#9#10TotalMeanSDQuestioning and Identify GapsFactseeking011120000050.50.71Explanation-seeking12418220320434.35.95Sustaininquiry1211663511272.72.16Theorizing and Improvable IdeasSimpleclaim10511041403292.93.07Proposing3753189109717888.85.18Meta-discourseSupportingImprovingConnectionRise-above2131261323242.41.51200010023080.81.14021020001170.70.821110301450161.61.78To understand how students’ productive discourse changes, we divided KF notes into two periods(before and after the intervention on discourse understanding and reflection). In the comparative analysis, weanalyzed the frequency of high-level discourse moves (Table 4), which suggested that patterns in students’ KFdiscourse changed to a more explanation-oriented inquiry and discourse over time.Table 4: Frequency of notes within each inquiry thread in period 1 and period 2Explanation-seeking questionSustained inquiryProposing a theorySupporting a theoryImproving a theoryConnectionRise-abovePeriod 1 (week 1 to 7)1911456034Period 2 (week 8 to 16)241643188412In addition to analyzing the notes within each thread, Figure 4 provides a holistic picture of students’thread discussion development. In Figure 4, the numbers in parentheses represents the number of notes createdand the number of authors in each thread, respectively. Dotted lines across threads represent notes that wereincluded in more than one inquiry thread indicating that one idea was discussed among different conceptualtopics. As Figure 4 shows, even among low-achieving students, discussion was able to be sustained over alength period of time on key conceptual issues. These threads also lasted from the beginning of the semester tothe end, suggesting that students were more engaged in these topics and even inquired further by askingsustained questions, proposing and improving explanations.Additional quantitative analyses indicated that these productive discourse moves correlated withstudents’ epistemic understanding of discourse. For questioning (r=.556, p<.01), theorizing (r=.471, p<.01), anda reasonable correlation in metadiscourse (r=.349, p=.054). The findings suggested that students with deeperunderstanding of discourse were more likely to be engaged in productive discourse.ICLS 2018 Proceedings883© ISLSFigure 4. Network of inquiry threads in KF.Meta-Talk about KF discourse and knowledge building principlesThe third research question examined how low-achieving students were engaged in productive classroomdiscourse in developing their knowledge building work. Three themes were identified.For low-achieving students, one of the scaffold is to have them engage in drawing and visualizing theirwork. Figure 5 shows the drawings that students made to illustrate their understanding of discourse and engagedin explicit reflection to compare KF discourse across two classrooms. Low-achieving students reflect on theirown discourse albeit by more with limited ways of drawing and language, followed by classroom meta-talk.Figure 5. Examples of students’ discourse understanding and KF discourse structures compsrison mind map.Theme 1: Explicit reflection and discussion on discourse comparisonIn the following excerpt, the students explained the difference between their own and another class KF notesstructures. The teacher (T) asked students to identify and explain the notes structures difference. Student 1 (S1)then proposed that the reason for their “straight line” was due to the focus on a single question, S2 made asupplementary point that their ideas are explained directly, then S1 synthesizing the ideas by reflecting on theirKF discussion. This excerpt shows how the teacher scaffold students’ meta-discourse, to engage deeper thinkingabout their discourse shapes and why their discourse moves were stopped by comparing with another betterdiscourse moves.TS1S2ICLS 2018 ProceedingsBased on our discussion, what do you think a good discourse type shouldlook like? Can anyone explain the differences of the KF structures?We only focused on one question, and we did not think and discuss fromdifferent perspectives.Our ideas followed by another ideas directly.…884© ISLSTS1So our class KF discussion stop at this point, meaning we cannot move to anew stage. The “octopus-shape”, can you explain the reasons for this byreflecting on your KF discussion?In the beginning, our initial idea had four build-on notes, but later, ourbuild-on notes become a line and one followed by one directly. However,the other class, they had two build-on notes for the initial note, and later,they had another two build-on notes in response to the above different notes,and continue to rise-above for inquiry, then, a new question was emerged.In our case, we only have one question, all the build-on notes respond to thisquestion directly, and we did not inquiry further.Theme 2: Reviewing and reflecting on the state of knowledge and understandingThe teacher started to help students engaged in meta-talk by reflecting on what they had learned, the teacherinitiated a question on “can you reflect on what you learned from these KB lessons?”T (Teacher)S1TS2S3TS1Can you reflect on what you learned from these KB lessons?What I had learned is how to set goals, and how to think about a problemtowards setting goals.Any more ideas or build-on?I think we needed to have diverse ideas, means that we need to think about aproblem from various perspectives.We discussed the knowledge building principle of collective responsibility,as we are doing now, we listen to others’ ideas, then work collaborativelyand discuss together for further problem solving.Any ideas?What we had learned is…how to build ideas and knowledge. We arelearning a thinking model that is taking collective responsibility advancecommunity knowledge…we also learned that we need to put our ideastogether, to rise-above further through continued idea improvement.As shown in this excerpt, the students tried to review what they had learned. This meta-talk showedreflection on the state of their knowledge and understanding and how students reflect on their epistemic goalsand collectively building on each other’s ideas for discourse understanding. Students were able to illuminatetheir understanding of KB principles and their emphasis on being able to “…listen to others’ ideas…discusstogether for further problem solving…” and “put our ideas together…continued idea improvement”.Theme 3: Identifying deeper focus and core problemsIn another excerpt, discussion demonstrates how low-achieving students were able to gradually developunderstanding of KB concepts and principles, as they apply discourse insights to their own work in visual arts.TS8S9S1Can anyone explain how can we use this learning model we discussed invisual arts learning?We can find materials…take a note, as what we did in knowledge building.We can write down our questions, then our classmates can read ourideas…which can help us to generate new questions for further inquiry.… when you have an idea, you will generate new problems or ideas basedon the initial one……In the first lesson, we discussed that visual art is a representation ofcreativity…Similar to KB, we can learn and develop from others’ ideasfrom different directions. When you get ideas from others, your art workswill become diversified. So art is an integration ideas...the similar of KB.In the above excerpt, students started to bridge the KB and their visual arts learning. For example,student 8 responded the application of what they did in KB to arts learning, “…find materials…taking notes”,followed by student 9 emphasized on generated new problems based on the initial one. Through the discussion,ICLS 2018 Proceedings885© ISLSstudent 1 tried to apply KB into arts learning by proposing an idea about the connections between KB andcreativity learning and explain the similarities between them.Conclusions and ImplicationsThe study examined productive discourse developing including both online and classroom discourse to supportlow-achieving students in their KB work and understanding of discourse. We characterized students’ epistemicunderstanding of discourse aligned with productive discourse engagement. Analysis of discourse on the KFusing KBDeX indicated how discourse began to cohere and change over time. Through the KB lessons, studentsbegan to engage in discourse in productive ways, including attempts to use meta-discourse to regulate, monitorand advance their knowledge inquiry. There was also sustained inquiry over time. Classroom discourse suggestshow low-achieving students can be engaged in meta-talk about their KF discourse supported by explicitreflection. Excerpts from classroom discussions also showed how students were able to talk about KB principlesin relation to their own KB work. There have been many studies on pedagogical approaches based on theprinciples of KB, however, this study showed how students reflect on and talk about KB principles explicitlyintegrate with understanding of discourse. In sum, this study is particularly important as very little research hasfocused on how low-achieving students engage in KB work and meta-talk on discourse itself with KB principles.ReferencesAzevedo, R., Cromley, J.G., & Seibert, D. (2004). Does adaptive scaffolding facilitate students’ ability toregulate their learning with hypermedia? Contemporary Educational Psychology, 29, 344-370.Chan, C.K.K. (2011). Bridging research and practice: Implementing and sustaining knowledge building in HongKong classrooms. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6(2),147-186.Chen, G., Clarke, S.N., & Resnick, L.B. (2014). An analytic tool for supporting teachers’ reflection onclassroom talk. In Learning and becoming in practice: The International Conference of the LearningSciences (Vol.1, pp.583-590).Hakkarainen, K. (2003). Emergence of progressive-inquiry culture in computer-supported collaborativelearning. Learning Environments Research, 6(2), 199-220.Hennessy, S., Drummond, S.R., Higham, R., Marquez, A.M., Maine, F., Rios, R.M., Carrion, R.G., Torreblanca,O., & Barrera, M.I. (2016). Developing a coding scheme for analyzing classroom dialogue acrosseducational contexts. Learning, Culture and Social Interaction, 9, 16-44.McNeill, K.L., & Pimentel, D.S. (2010). Scientific discourse in three urban classrooms: The role of the teacherin engaging high school students in argumentation. Science Education, 94(2), 203-229.Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Matsuzawa, Y. (2012). Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer: a social networkanalysis application for knowledge building discourse. Educational Technology Research andDevelopment, 60(5), 903-921.Pluta, W.J., Chinn, C.A., & Duncan, R.G. (2011). Learners’ epistemic criteria for good scientific models.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 48(5), 486-511.Sandoval, W.A. (2003). Conceptual and epistemic aspects of students’ scientific explanations. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 12(1), 5-51.Sandoval, W.A., Reiser, B.J. (2004). Explanation-driven inquiry: Integrating conceptual and epistemic scaffoldsfor scientific inquiry. Science Education, 88(3), 345-372.Sawyer, R.K. (2014). The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. NY, NY: Cambridge Univ. Press.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, andtechnology. In R. K. Sawyer (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (2nd ed.,pp.397-417). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.van Aalst, J. (2009). Distinguishing knowledge sharing, construction, and creation discourses. InternationalJournal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(3), 259-288.Yang, Y., van Aalst, J., Chan, C.K.K., & Tian, W. (2016). Reflective assessment in knowledge building bystudents with low academic achievement. International Journal of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning, 11(3), 281-311.Zhang, J., & Chen, M-H. (2013). Foster sustained, collaborative knowledge building with Idea Thread Mapper.Paper presented at AERA2013, San Francisco, CA.Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Lamon, M., Messina, R., & Reeve, R. (2009). Socio-cognitive dynamics ofknowledge building in the work of 9- and 10-year-olds. Educational Technology Research andDevelopment, 55, 117-145.Zohar, A., Degani, A., Vakknin, E. (2001). Teachers’ belief about low-achieving students and higher orderthinking. Teaching and Teacher Education, 17, 469-485.ICLS 2018 Proceedings886© ISLS