Knowledge Integration in the Digital Age: Trajectories,Opportunities and Future DirectionsMarcia C. Linn (co-chair), University of California at Berkeley, mclinn@berkeley.eduBat-Sheva Eylon (co-chair), Weizmann Institute, bat-sheva.eylon@weizmann.ac.ilAdi Kidron (organizer), University of California at Berkeley, ady.kidron@berkeley.eduLibby Gerard, University of California at Berkeley, libbygerard@berkeley.eduEmily Toutkoushian, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, toutkous@live.unc.eduKihyun “Kelly” Ryoo, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, khryoo@email.unc.eduKristin Bedell, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, kdbedell@live.unc.eduAmanda Swearingen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, aks11@live.unc.eduDouglas B. Clark, University of Calgary, douglas.clark@ucalgary.caSatyugjit Virk, Methinks Technologies Inc., sat@methinks.ioJackie Barnes, Children's Museum of Pittsburgh, jacqbarn@gmail.comDeanne Adams, Vanderbilt University, deanne.adams@gmail.comAlisa Acosta, University of Toronto, alisa.acosta@utoronto.caJim Slotta, Boston College, slotta@bc.eduCamillia Matuk, New York University, cmatuk@nyu.eduChristopher Hovey, New York University, chris.hovey@nyu.eduTalia Hurwich, New York University, th1425@nyu.eduJuan Pablo Sarmiento, New York University, jps651@nyu.eduJennifer L. Chiu, University of Virginia, jlchiu@virginia.eduJim Bywater, University of Virginia, jpb6qx@virginia.eduJames Hong, University of Virginia, jh7ub@virginia.eduHava Ben-Horin, University of Haifa, LINKS I-CORE, hava.abramsky@gmail.comYael Kali, University of Haifa, LINKS I-CORE, yael.kali@edtech.haifa.ac.ilOrnit Sagy, University of Haifa, LINKS I-CORE, ornit.sagy@gmail.comTali Tal, Technion Institute of Technology, rtal@ed.technion.ac.ilJonathan Osborne (discussant), Stanford University, osbornej@stanford.eduDianna Laurillard (discussant), UCL Institute of Education, d.laurillard@ucl.ac.ukAbstract: Researchers from around the world have shaped knowledge integration (KI), aframework that captures the processes learners use to build on their multiple ideas and refinetheir understanding. KI emerged 25 years ago from syntheses of experimental, longitudinal,and meta-analytic studies of learning and instruction. Advances in KI have resulted frompartnerships that combine expertise in learning, instruction, classroom teaching, assessment,technology, and the disciplines. This structured poster session includes partnerships that haveadvanced design of instruction, assessment, professional development, learning technologies,and research methodologies. Participants report on new technologies, including games, tostrengthen KI; instructional designs that take advantage of collaboration to support KI; andextensions of KI to integrate science with other disciplines. They summarize exciting resultsand identify promising opportunities for advancing STEM instruction to promote intentional,life-long learners in the digital age.IntroductionThis structured poster session brings together partnerships using the knowledge integration (KI) framework toadvance their research programs. Over the past 25 years, KI research has documented how learners grapple withmultiple, conflicting, and often confusing, ideas about scientific phenomena and led to the identification of designprinciples (Kali, 2006) and learning processes (Linn & Eylon, 2011) that promote coherent understanding (Kali,Linn & Roseman, 2009). KI design principles have been refined in designs of instruction, assessment, professionaldevelopment, and technologies. For example, the Web-based Inquiry Science Environment (WISE), used in manyof the works presented in this session, supports authoring and customization of instruction, logging of studentinteractions with simulations or virtual experiments, and random assignment of students to conditions withinclasses (see Study 1, 2, 7, 8).Researchers studying KI have identified four interrelated reasoning processes that students use to integrateand make sense of their ideas. The posters address ways to use and strengthen all these processes:ICLS 2018 Proceedings1259© ISLS•Elicit ideas. Prompting students to articulate and explicate their existing ideas (e.g., making predictionsor brainstorming initial ideas) ensures that new ideas can be considered alongside pre-existing ones forinspection and refinement (see example in Study 5).• Add ideas. Through carefully designed guided activities and representations (Parnafes & diSessa, 2004)students can encounter new scientific ideas to add and connect to existing repertoire (Study 3, 4, 6, 8).• Distinguish ideas. Learners need support in developing coherent ways to evaluate the scientific ideasthey encounter. Designed instructional activities featuring critique, informative data displays, or tradeoffs can help students to develop criteria for distinguishing useful, relevant ideas from unproductive andirrelevant ones (Kidron & Kali 2015; see Study 1, 2, 4, 6, 7).• Reflect and integrate ideas. Students reflect on their repertoire of ideas by applying criteria to evidence,making note of contradictions and identifying instances where additional information can help to resolveweaknesses, gaps or inconsistencies in understanding. In doing so, students reformulate both their criteriaand their accounts of scientific phenomena (see examples in Study 1,3).This structured poster session includes partnerships that have advanced design of instruction, assessment,learning technologies, and research methodologies. The studies represented in the posters explore KI in a varietyof age levels and contexts: middle schools, high schools, and university courses. Participants report on newtechnologies, including adaptive guidance to support students’ use of science practices to strengthen disciplinaryexplanations (studies 1, 2, 3). Studies report on instructional designs that strengthen socio-cultural aspects oflearning (studies 4, 5) by supporting collaborative interactions and a culture of interdependence among students.Further innovations extend KI beyond science to guide and assess student reasoning in complex, multidisciplinary,real-world challenges (studies 6, 7, 8). Taken together, the use of KI across research programs expands ourunderstanding of learning in the digital age and provides a shared framework for advancing STEM instruction topromote intentional, life-long learners.The Chairs will set the context of the poster session by discussing how KI is building robust learningsciences findings that have powerful practical implications for education. Each of the eight partnerships willhave two-minutes to introduce their poster. Attendees will visit each poster to discuss research findings, theimpacts, and research implications. Posters will be clustered around: new technologies, including games, tostrengthen KI; instructional designs that improve collaborative learning; and innovations that take advantage ofcultural and disciplinary diversity to support KI. Diana Laurillard, London Knowledge Lab (LKL) and JonathanOsborne, Stanford, will synthesize emergent themes across posters. The session will end with audience discussion.Study 1. Teacher customization of automated guidance to strengthen revisionfor knowledge integrationMarcia C. Linn and Libby GerardIn this study, we combined teacher guidance with automated guidance to strengthen the frequency and quality ofstudent KI essay revision in inquiry science units. The NGSS have shifted the focus of science instruction fromrecall of factual information to the integration of science practices, disciplinary core ideas, and crosscuttingconcepts. Revising KI essays aligned with NGSS involves an iterative, recursive process of constructingunderstanding while revising ideas (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 1999; Osborne, 2014). Advanced naturallanguage processing (NLP) techniques, enabled us to design adaptive KI guidance for student written essaysembedded in inquiry units to encourage students to revise. Across multiple studies, the adaptive KI guidanceproved to be more effective in improving learning than other types of guidance typically assigned in a middleschool classroom (Gerard, Matuk, McElhaney & Linn, 2015). Yet, we noticed a troubling pattern: studentsstruggled to use guidance to revise their essays. Across 5 studies, 27% of students on average made no revision;only 42% made productive revisions that integrated or linked relevant pieces of evidence together. The remaining30% tacked on a disconnected idea to the end of their initial response.We partnered with a 6th grade teacher implementing the WISE Plate Tectonics unit with her 201 students(53% non-White; 34% receive a free/reduced price lunch) to customize the automated guidance system to promoterevision among her students. To establish goals, the system assigned a score for each essay revision. To providestruggling students just in time support, the teacher set alerts to notify her in real-time if a student scored a 2 orlower (out of 5), after their first revision. The teacher set the expectation that all students should achieve a topscore through revision. To support them, she required students to check-in with her after they received automatedguidance and made a revision, and before they submitted their essay a second time.Analysis of 37 audio recordings of teacher-student guidance interactions, suggest that the teacher usedthe automated KI guidance as a starting point to strengthen students’ essay revisions. First, the teacher had theICLS 2018 Proceedings1260© ISLSstudent read the guidance they received aloud. Then she probed for elaboration (e.g. You said the blob goes upbecause it is hot. Well if it is hot, is it more dense or less dense?). If the student needed further assistance, theteacher directed the student back to the model and focused their attention on a particular piece of evidence. Afterthe conversation the teacher guided the student to express how they planned to revise their essay (e.g. Youmentioned some great ideas. What are those to include [as you revise])? The teacher’s customization increasedthe number of students who revised their essays (96%) and the quality of their revisions (N= 100 pairs,Mgain(revised-initial)=.48 SD=.81, t(99)=5.93, p<.001).Engaging teachers in customizing an automated guidance system can improve student revision of essaysfor KI. Customizing encouraged the teacher to take ownership for the revision process, generating criteria forsuccessful essay revision and developing strategies to help students engage in a successful revision process. Futureresearch should explore extending teacher customization beyond the automated guidance and into the use ofaggregate analyses of automatically scored student essays to inform customizations that address the class’sevolving ideas.Study 2. Leveraging log data from simulations to understand students’knowledge integration processesEmily Toutkoushian, Kihyun “Kelly” Ryoo, Kristin Bedell, Marcia C. Linn, and Amanda SwearingenSimulations can provide students with opportunities to engage in science practices by allowing them to manipulatevariables, plan and conduct virtual investigations, and collect and analyze data to deepen their understanding ofcomplex scientific phenomena (NGSS Lead States, 2013). Advances in new technologies enable the automaticcollection of massive amounts of data while students are interacting with simulations, including time-stampedlogs of students’ clicks, variable manipulations, and use of evidence to answer reflection questions (Rupp, Nugent,& Nelson, 2012). Such log data can provide powerful insights into how students engage in science and inform thedesign of effective automated feedback to help students’ learning with simulations (e.g., Gobert et al., 2013).However, interpreting log data so that it is useful for educational purposes can be difficult and needs to be guidedby relevant learning theories. KI offers a theoretical framework for how students develop an integratedunderstanding of scientific phenomena through eliciting initial ideas, adding new ideas, distinguishing amongideas, and sorting ideas into a coherent framework (Linn & Eylon, 2011).This study explores whether and how log data from simulations can be utilized to delineate therelationships between student actions and the four KI processes. The study involved 148 students from 11 eighthgrade science classrooms at two low-income, linguistically diverse schools. Student pairs completed twosimulations focusing on states of matter and chemical reactions at the molecular level during two weeks of webbased inquiry instruction. Both simulations were scaffolded by prediction questions, a data table, and reflectionquestions. We use cluster analysis to group students based on similarities across variables from the interactiondata, data table, and embedded questions and then find the characteristic learning patterns of those clusters ofstudents. Our preliminary findings illustrate how students at different levels in the KI process demonstrateddistinctive, characteristic patterns while interacting with simulations. For instance, students who had a low KIscore on the reflection questions, indicating that they were mainly “adding” ideas in the simulations, tended toengage in more actions related to procedures (i.e., resetting or saving the simulation) than directly manipulatingvariables within the simulations (i.e., changing the amount of thermal energy). By contrast, students with thehighest score on the reflection questions, indicating that they were “sorting” ideas, had the fewest total actionscompared to other students and tended to engage mostly in directly manipulating variables or interacting with thegraph displaying the simulation results. These interaction patterns can be leveraged to provide adaptive, automatedguidance to help students move between KI levels as they investigate a simulation, This study providesimplications for making decisions about the design features and automated guidance for simulations to supportstudents’ KI learning processes.Study 3. Scaffolding KI in a digital game through adaptive self-explanationDouglas B. Clark, Satyugjit Virk, Jacqueline Barnes, and Deanne AdamsPrompting students to engage in self-explanation can enhance KI by encouraging students to engage in metacognitive activities to monitor what they do and do not understand (Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser 1989;Roy & Chi, 2005; Chi & VanLehn, 1991). Such meta-cognitive activity is highly beneficial to KI (Clark & Linn,2013). Research suggests that self-explanation functionality can effectively support KI in the context of digitalgames. Research also highlights challenges, however, in balancing and integrating the demands and abstractionof self-explanation functionality with the demands and structure of the game. These challenges are particularlyICLS 2018 Proceedings1261© ISLStrue for games that are, themselves, cognitively more complex. The current study presents an approach that adaptsthe abstraction of self-explanation prompts based on a player's performance.The current study was conducted with 210 students in the 7th grade classrooms of two teachers in twodifferent middle schools in the southeastern United States. In the navigation-only condition, players programmedtheir trajectories without any self-explanation prompts. In the navigation+abstract condition, these navigationalchallenges are paired with a self-explanation prompt that focuses on abstract connections between the navigationalchallenges and Newtonian relationships. In the navigation+adaptive condition, the navigational challenges arepaired with self-explanation prompts that adaptively increase from low abstraction (in which the prompts focusconcretely on navigational moves) to high abstraction (in which the prompts focus more abstractly on thenavigational challenges in terms of overarching Newtonian relationships).The results demonstrate that students in this condition (a) scored significantly higher on the post-testthan students whose self-explanation prompts were not adaptively adjusted and were always abstract and (b)scored higher, but not significantly so, than students who did not receive the self-explanation functionality.Analyses of gameplay metrics suggest that trade-offs in terms of progress through the game may explain someaspects of these posttest comparisons. Analyses also demonstrate that both self-explanation conditionssignificantly outperformed the navigation-only comparison condition on a gameplay metric that suggests deepermodel-based thinking and KI. These hypothesized differences parallel the distinctions between model-basedreasoning and constraint-based thinking reported by Parnafes and diSessa (2004). Future research should exploreextending the adaptive self-explanation functionality beyond the current platform into a broader range of digitalplatforms targeting KI.Study 4. Orchestration supports for knowledge integration in a blendedlearning community curriculum for Grade 12 BiologyAlisa Acosta and Jim SlottaOur work is grounded in a pedagogical model of learning communities called Knowledge Community and Inquiry(KCI; Slotta, 2014), wherein students work as individuals, small groups and a whole class to generate a sharedcommunity knowledge base and to use that knowledge base as a resource for subsequent inquiry activities. Animportant aspect of KCI is the design of curricular scripts (Fischer, Kollar, Stegmann, & Wecker, 2013) whichspecify the activity sequences, materials, student groupings, and technology elements that serve to guide theinquiry toward particular learning goals. Orchestration refers to the enactment of the script, binding it to the localcontext of learners, classrooms, curriculum, and instructor, and giving it concrete form in terms of materials,activities and interactions amongst participants (Tchounikine, 2013).In collaboration with a high school biology teacher, we co-designed and implemented a KCI curriculumand corresponding technology environment called CKBiology within two sections of a Grade 12 Biologycourse. Students contributed to a shared community knowledge base in three ways: 1) By providing writtenexplanations for various terms or concepts, 2) by identifying relationships between pairs of terms or concepts, and3) by peer-reviewing explanations that had been written by other students. The concepts were presented in aconcept map, with links representing the identified relationships, and concepts with completed explanationsappearing in blue, uncompleted explanations in grey, and 'incomplete' or 'incorrect' explanations (as a result ofpeer review) containing a yellow dot. This knowledge base captured the KI processes of adding anddistinguishing ideas, and was projected at the front of the classroom as students were working, serving as anorchestration support for both students and the teacher. This allowed gaps or disagreements in the knowledgebase to become visually prominent, leading to impromptu class discussions, negotiations, and improvement.Through these activities, we argue that the teacher led the students to develop collective KI within the overallknowledge base.The knowledge base then served as a resource for subsequent "review challenge" activities. In the firstreview challenge activity, students chose an area of specialization (i.e. immunology, endocrinology, nephrology,neurology) and worked within these specialist groups to solve a series of challenge problems. For each student,we generated a recommendation score based on the quantity (i.e. # of explanations written) and quality (i.e. # ofnegative peer reviews received) of their contributions to the knowledge base for each area of specialization. In thesecond review challenge activity, students formed jigsaw groups containing one representative from eachspecialization. Playing the role of medical practitioners, the groups integrated their diverse expertise in order todiagnose a virtual patient with ambiguous symptoms. Students were guided through this activity via a series ofquestions in the CKBiology platform, which included ordering the appropriate lab tests, negotiating andexplaining the reasoning behind their diagnoses, and identifying possible treatment options—thereby integratingICLS 2018 Proceedings1262© ISLSthe knowledge they had acquired over the course of the unit. The poster will illustrate how KCI builds on KI tostrengthen community learning.Study 5. Cognitive processes and collaborative supports for knowledgeintegration among youth designing games for science learningCamillia Matuk, Christopher Hovey, Talia Hurwich, and Juan Pablo SarmientoWe explore youth’s learning through their design of educational science games. Such games are unique learningopportunities because they require designers to integrate diverse areas of knowledge, including experience withgames, an understanding of science, knowledge of effective pedagogical strategies, and a facility with the designprocess (c.f., Khaled et al., 2014). As with other complex, real-world problems, this task is best accomplished bya team of interdependent collaborators with distributed expertise, rather than through the equal roles typicallyassigned to students in traditional classroom settings. But what roles do learners take on in such situations? Whatis learned, and by whom? How is that learning supported by, and made visible in the game design process? Weinvestigate these questions through our design and enactment of a youth workshop for designing games for sciencelearning.Our participants were eleven 7th grade youth from a public middle school in a large urban city in theeastern United States. Up to 4 facilitators were present on any given day, as well as two teachers from the students’school. In our 5-day long elective workshop, we tasked students with creating games to teach players about themeasles virus. Their games were intended to accompany the comic book, Carnival of Contagion(worldofviruses.unl.edu, Diamond et al., 2012), which touches on the pathology and cultural history of the measlesvirus, and frames vaccination as a social responsibility. The first four days of the workshop took place at auniversity-based game studies center. Activities guided students in brainstorming design ideas from their readingof the comic, developing and play-testing prototypes, and refining their designs. On the final day, studentsexhibited their games and hosted a game jam for their peers at school.Our workshop was informed by research suggesting that dispositions toward STEM develop best duringplayful, social interactions in which learners can express their ideas, goals, interests, and curiosities; engage inactivities driven by shared purpose; and have opportunities to realize the personal relevance of STEM (e.g., Clegg& Kolodner, 2013). We also draw on principles for encouraging disciplinary engagement (Engle & Conant, 2002.Following these principles, we gave students interdependent roles (science wizard, play engineer, and conceptartist) intended to help them express agency in their individual responsibilities, as well as to appreciate their peers’unique contributions to their shared goal (cf. Jiang, Shen & Smith, 2016). We also created end-of-day deliverableto encourage student accomplishment of key milestones in the design process. Finally, we created activities thataddressed individual expert responsibilities, as well as ideas that crosscut roles and that addressed science gamedesign (e.g., how to align learner and player mechanics), the design process (e.g., how to move from idea toprototype), and the social aspects necessary for productive collaboration (icebreakers, teambuilders).Our data include field note observations, audio recordings of design activities, student interviews,facilitator reflections, iterations on students’ game design artifacts, and responses to surveys. By drawingillustrative examples from our analyses, we describe how students learned to integrate their understanding ofscience and games throughout their design process. We document the challenge of facilitating this process givenstudents’ diverse starting points in their understanding of science, design, games, and pedagogy. Further wedescribe how different teams approached their interdependent roles, sometime successfully and sometimes not.The teams illuminate the challenges of building a culture of interdependence among learners who are used toschool’s traditional power structures.This work adds to the larger program of research on KI by examining how interdependent collaborativelearners make connections among their ideas and the contributions of others concerning science discipline ideasand game design. Future work might explore what aspects of KI are useful in such settings, and which might needto be elaborated or adapted.Study 6. Extending the knowledge integration rubric to assessinterdisciplinary understandingAdi Kidron and Yael KaliWe expanded the KI rubric (Liu, Lee, Hofstetter, & Linn, 2008) to assess interdisciplinary understanding forundergraduate students studying a semester-long interdisciplinary course. The course was based on the BoundaryBreaking for Interdisciplinary Learning (BBIL) model (Kidron & Kali, 2015). We used different learningtechnologies to design features (e.g., video-recorded lectures, collaborative documents, structured feedbackICLS 2018 Proceedings1263© ISLSactivities) that embodied our BBIL design principles: break boundaries between disciplines with aninterdisciplinary curriculum and a cross-cutting theme, and between learners by using a learning communityapproach (Bielaczyc& Collins, 1999).We refer to interdisciplinary understanding as a synthesis of ideas, data, information, methods, tools,concepts or theories from two or more disciplines (Boix-Mansilla, 2010). Therefore, to assess interdisciplinaryunderstanding we combined KI (Linn 2006, Linn & Eylon, 2011) and interdisciplinary learning as a pragmaticconstructionist view (ILPCV) (Boix-Mansilla, 2010). Both frameworks focus on integration processes to promotecognitive advancement. We created a rubric that enabled us to code the different dimensions of interdisciplinaryunderstanding, as conceptualized in ILPCV, and systematically quantify different idea connections, as practicedin KI. In the context of interdisciplinary understanding, the definition of ‘connection’ was broadened to include:links between ideas within the same discipline (referred to the rubric as ‘disciplinary grounding’); links betweenideas from different disciplines (referred to as ‘idea connection’); links between disciplinary ideas and the crosscutting theme (referred to as ‘disciplinary analysis through integrative lens’); and links between ideas from severaldisciplines and the cross-cutting theme (referred to as ‘synthesis’).We used the BBIL rubric to diagnose the quality of students’ interdisciplinary understanding in twodifferent contexts: within a course and between courses. Our data for assessing interdisciplinary understandingwere 1,000-word essays students wrote twice during the interdisciplinary course. The essays asked students tointegrate different disciplinary perspectives taught in the course to address a novel question.In the first case (Kidron & Kali, 2015), we found that students’ interdisciplinary understanding improvedsignificantly between the essay they wrote for the mid-course assignment (M=67.2, SD=29.4) and the essay theywrote for the final assignment (M=82.5, SD=22.0) [t(31)=2.96, p<0.01, d=0.59]. In the second case (Kidron &Kali, forthcoming) the rubric enabled us to find a significant difference [t(45) =1.85, p =0.04] between studentsof two parallel courses: the quality of the interdisciplinary synthesis was higher for students who learned in anonline learning community (M= 1.85, SD= 1.09) compared with students who learned the same contentsindividually (M=1.30, SD=0.95).These findings illustrate the potential of KI to support design for and understanding of interdisciplinarythinking processes. It illustrates a way to analyze student reasoning about complex interdisciplinary problems. Bydoing so, it bridges traditional boundaries between disciplinary and interdisciplinarity reasoning. In an era thatposes complex challenges to humankind (e.g., climate change, mass immigration), bridging these boundaries anddeveloping new ways to assess interdisciplinarity are a key goal to the learning sciences.Study 7. Using a knowledge integration perspective to explore connectionsamong science, mathematics, and engineering modeling practicesJennifer L. Chiu, Jim Bywater, and James HongNational standards in the United States emphasize instruction where students participate in and use science andmathematical practices (e.g., Common Core Standards Initiative, 2010; NGSS Lead States, 2013). Engagingstudents in disciplinary practices can help students understand the nature and development of mathematical andscientific knowledge, create motivation and interest in learning, and make mathematical and scientific conceptsmore meaningful (e.g., Osborne, 2014). However, students often hold fragmented and even contradictory ideasacross science, math, and engineering contexts and struggle to connect disciplinary ideas and practices to everydaycontexts.This poster explores how a KI perspective (Linn & Eylon, 2011) can be used to promote the practice ofmodeling across science, mathematics, and engineering (e.g., Weintrop et al., 2016). We examine the similaritiesin national standards by exploring the mathematical practices, such as model with mathematics; science andengineering practices, such as developing and using models and using mathematics and computational thinking;and engineering design strategies, such as representing ideas and conducting experiments (Common CoreStandards, 2010; Crismond & Adams 2012; NGSS Lead States, 2013). In the context of an engineering designproject implemented in a mathematics classroom we explore how KI design principles in WISE help studentsengage in modeling practices. Students (n = 44) from two middle-school geometry classes participated in a projectwith the goal of designing ice cream cones, which included interactive geometry models as well as hands-onprototype building and testing. Using a variety of data sources (e.g., pre/posttests, embedded assessments, logfiles, video recordings), we found that computer-based, scaffolded engineering design helped students engage inmodeling practices to learn targeted content. We discuss how KI principles supported students to makeinterdisciplinary connections. This work shows that WISE can be extended to mathematics and engineering todistinguish modeling practices across disciplines, and how integrating those practices to develop targetedconceptual understanding.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1264© ISLSStudy 8. Elaboration of KI processes in a WISE module in order to support thedevelopment of socioscientific reasoningHava Ben Horin, Yael Kali, Tali Tal, and Ornit SagyResearch has shown that instruction based on the KI framework, using WISE, improves the integration andtransfer of scientific knowledge among communities of students (Chiu & Linn, 2011; Roseman, Linn & Koppal,2008). WISE authoring tools enable designers to embed digital scaffolds and epistemological prompts thatpromote student understanding of the nature of science (Linn, Clark & Slotta, 2002). We design and refine WISEinstruction to develop students’ socio-scientific reasoning and ability to resolve socio-scientific issues (Sadler,Barab & Scott, 2007). Socio-scientific reasoning includes practices needed for negotiation and resolution ofcontroversial, science-related, socio-scientific issues (SSIs). Socio-scientific reasoning involves (a) recognizingthe inherent complexity of SSIs, (b) analyzing SSIs from multiple perspectives, (c) appreciating the need forongoing inquiry into SSIs, and (d) taking a skeptical stance toward potentially biased information. To developsocio-scientific reasoning, students need to integrate scientific, practical, and contemporary knowledge usingepistemic thinking (Romine, Sadler & Kinslow, 2016).In this research, we expanded the KI opportunities in an existing WISE module that addresses a SSIconcerning environmental impacts on asthma (Tate et al., 2008). We added scaffolds to support the integration ofscientific, contemporary, and epistemic knowledge. For example, a google map was used as a collectiveknowledge base (Lui & Slota, 2014), allowing students to continuously add and evaluate evidence about thedistribution of irritants. We implemented the changes during three iterations of design based research with four8th grade classes. Data came from observations, interviews, and assessments. We compared pretest and posttestperformance on: (a) students’ integrated scientific understanding and (b) their socio-scientific reasoning.Findings revealed improvement of students' integrated scientific knowledge from pretest to posttest.Refinement of the instruction across iterations appears to improve outcomes. The potential of the KI processes tosupport students’ development of particular aspects of socio-scientific reasoning is reflected in the studentresponses, student interviews, and class observations. Our poster will discuss the elaboration of how each of thefour KI processes strengthened students’ socio-scientific reasoning. This research suggests refinements to KIsupports for the development of socio-scientific reasoning. Moreover, this research points to ways to strengthenthe KI framework to support the process of epistemic knowledge development.ReferencesBielaczyc, K., & Collins, A. (1999). Learning communities in classrooms: A reconceptualization of educationalpractice. In C. M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional design theories and models (pp. 269-292). LawrenceErlbaum Associates.Boix-Mansilla, V. (2010). Learning to synthesize: The development of interdisciplinary understanding. In R.Frodeman, J. Thompson-Klein, C. Mitcham & J. B. Holbrook (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook ofInterdisciplinarity (pp. 288-306). Oxford: Oxford University Press.Bransford, J. D., Brown, A., & Cocking, R. (1999). How people learn: Mind, brain, experience, and school.Washington, DC: National Research Council.Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How studentsstudy and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13(2), 145–182.Chi, M. T. H., & VanLehn, K. A. (1991). The content of physics self-explanations. Journal of the LearningSciences, 1(1), 69-105.Chiu, J. L., & Linn, M. C. (2011). Knowledge integration and WISE engineering. Journal of Pre-CollegeEngineering Education Research (J-PEER), 1(1), 2.Clark, D. B., & Linn, M. C. (2013). The knowledge integration perspective: Connections across research andeducation. In S. Vosniadou (Ed.), International handbook of research on conceptual change (2ndEdition) (pp. 520-538). New York: Routledge.Clegg, T., & Kolodner, J. (2014). Scientizing and cooking: Helping middle‐school learners develop scientificdispositions. Science Education, 98(1), 36–63.Crismond, D. P., & Adams, R. S. (2012). The informed design teaching and learning matrix. Journal ofEngineering Education, 101(4), 738-797.Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction,20(4), 399-483.Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Stegmann, K., & Wecker, C. (2013). Toward a script theory of guidance in computersupported collaborative learning. Educational Psychologist, 48(1), 56–66.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1265© ISLSGerard, L. F., Matuk, C. F., McElhaney, K. W., & Linn, M. C. (2015). Automated, adaptive guidance for K-12education. Educational Research Review, 15, 41-58.Gobert, J. D., Sao Pedro, M., Raziuddin, J., & Baker, R. S. (2013). From log files to assessment metrics:Measuring students' science inquiry skills using educational data mining. Journal of the LearningSciences, 22(4), 521-563.Jiang, S., Shen, J., & Smith, B. E. (2016). Integrating science and writing in multimedia science fictions:Investigating student interactions in role-taking. Singapore: Intl. Society of the Learning Sciences.Khaled, R., Vanden Abeele, V., Van Mechelen, M., & Vasalou, A. (2014, October). Participatory design forserious game design: truth and lies. In Proceedings of the first ACM SIGCHI annual symposium onComputer-human interaction in play (pp. 457-460). ACM.Kidron, A., & Kali, Y. (2015). Boundary breaking for interdisciplinary learning. Research in LearningTechnology, 23. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.3402/rlt.v23.26496.Kidron, A., & Kali, Y. (forthcoming). Online learning communities as a pedagogical approach for promotinginterdisciplinary understanding through knowledge integration.Linn, M. C., Clark, D., & Slotta, J. D. (2003). WISE design for knowledge integration. Science Ed., 87, 517–538.Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B.-S. (2011). Science learning and instruction: Taking advantage of technology to promoteknowledge integration. New York: Routledge.Liu, O. L., Lee, H., Hofstetter, C., & Linn, M. C. (2008). Assessing knowledge integration in science: Construct,measures, and evidence. Educational Assessment, 13(1), 33-55.Lui, M., & Slotta, J. D. (2014). Immersive simulations for smart classrooms: Exploring evolutionary concepts insecondary science. Technology, Pedagogy and Education, 23(1), 57-80.National Governors Association Center for Best Practices, Council of Chief State School Officers (2010).Common Core State Standards for Mathematics. National Governors Association Center for BestPractices, Council of Chief State School Officers, Washington D.C.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For states, by states. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Osborne, J. (2014). Scientific practices and inquiry in the science classroom. In Norman G. Lederman & SandraK. Abell (Eds.), Handbook of research on science education. Abingdon: Routledge.Parnafes, O., & disessa, A. (2004). Relations between types of reasoning and computational representations.International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 9(3), 251-280.Romine, W. L., Sadler, T. D., & Kinslow, A. T. (2016). Assessment of scientific literacy: Development andvalidation of the Quantitative Assessment of Socio-Scientific Reasoning (QuASSR). Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching. doi:10.1002/tea.21368.Roseman, J. E., Linn, M. C., & Koppal, M. (2008). Characterizing curriculum coherence. In Y. Kali, M.C. Linn,& J.E. Roseman (Eds.), Designing coherent science education: Implications for curriculum, instruction,and policy (pp. 13-36). New York: Teachers' College Press.Roy, M., & Chi, M. T. H. (2005). The self-explanation principle in multimedia learning. In R. E. Mayer (Ed.),The Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning (pp. 271-286). NY: Cambridge University Press.Rupp, A. A., Nugent, R., & Nelson, B. (2012). Evidence-centered design for diagnostic assessment within digitallearning environments: Integrating modern psychometrics and educational data mining. Journal ofEducational Data Mining, 4(1), 1-10.Sadler, T.D., Barab, S.A., & Scott, B. (2007). What do students gain by engaging in socioscientific inquiry?Research in Science Education, 37, 371 –391.Salen, K. (2007). Gaming literacies: A game design study in action. Journal of Educational Multimedia andHypermedia, 16(3), 301.Slotta, J.D. (2014). Knowledge Community and Inquiry. Paper presented at the Network of Associated Programsin the Learning Sciences (NAPLES).Slotta, J. D., & Linn, M. C. (2009). WISE Science: Web-based inquiry in the classroom. NY: Teachers CollegePress.Tate, E.D., Clark, D., Gallagher, J., & McLaughlin, D. (2008). Designing science instruction for diverse learners.In Y. Kali, M.C. Linn, & J.E. Roseman (Eds.), Designing coherent science education: Implications forcurriculum, instruction, and policy (pp. 65-93). New York: Teachers' College Press.Tchounikine, P. (2013). Clarifying design for orchestration: Orchestration and orchestrable technology, scriptingand conducting. Computers & Education, 69, 500–503.Weintrop, D., Beheshti, E., Horn, M., Orton, K., Jona, K., Trouille, L., & Wilensky, U. (2016). Definingcomputational thinking for mathematics and science classrooms. Journal of Science Education andTechnology, 25(1), 127-147.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1266© ISLS