How Groups Regulate Their Learning: The Influence ofAchievement Goals on Self-, Co- And Shared Regulation StrategiesMartin Greisel, Nadine Melzner, Ingo Kollar, and Markus Dreselmartin.greisel@phil.uni-augsburg.de, nadine.melzner@phil.uni-augsburg.de, ingo.kollar@phil.uni-augsburg.de,markus.dresel@phil.uni-augsburg.deUniversität AugsburgAbstract: Study groups need to regulate learning on three levels: the self-, the co- and thesocially shared level. We investigated how students’ achievement goals are associated withregulation processes within groups. N = 277 students were asked to imagine being part of agroup with low prior knowledge and low study motivation and to name regulation strategiesthey would apply. Results indicated that mastery and performance-approach goals played apositive role in predicting regulatory effort.Keywords: collaborative learning, self-regulated learning, achievement goals, socially sharedregulationIntroductionAt university, students often deliberately choose to study in groups, especially when it comes to exampreparation. When they do so, problems like differences in personal priorities, styles of working andcommunication often arise (Järvenoja, Volet, & Järvelä, 2013). Thus, failure of collaborative learning can atleast partially be attributed to a group’s inability to regulate its learning process. Järvelä and Hadwin (2013)suggest that to make collaborative learning a successful endeavour, learners need to engage in regulationprocesses at three social levels: self, co, and socially shared. First, learners can self-regulate for the sake of theirown learning success and apply strategies to regulate their own learning (such as monitoring their ownunderstanding; self-level). Second, they can guide other group members or be supported by them (co-level).Third, they can jointly develop an understanding of the topic and solve learning problems through mutualengagement, e.g. by jointly discussing ways to approach or solve the task (shared-level). Quite some researchhas taken up this differentiation over the past few years (Panadero & Järvelä, 2015). Yet, little is known aboutwhether and how learners’ individual achievement motivation influences regulatory processes within groups.As a major aspect of achievement motivation, achievement goals determine how a person is motivatedin academic contexts. An important distinction is the differentiation between mastery and performance goalswhich are further divided into approach and avoidance performance goals: Students exhibiting a mastery goalare oriented towards developing and improving skills, competence or knowledge. Learners with performanceapproach goals strive to demonstrate their superior competence to others, whereas learners with performanceavoidance goals strive to avoid performance situations in order to hide their (actual or assumed) incompetence(Elliot & Harackiewicz, 1996). Prior research has demonstrated that the activation of different achievementgoals correlates with a number of processes learners engage in during studying (e.g., Cellar et al., 2011).Mastery goals consistently correlate well with different indicators of self-regulation over a large number ofstudies, while performance-avoidance goals exhibited consistently negative connections with self-regulation andpositive correlations with maladaptive regulation strategies. Performance-approach goals, however, often haveno or mixed connections with self-regulation.Research question and hypothesesOur research question was: How do different achievement goals relate to students‘ engagement in regulationstrategies at the three social levels proposed by Järvelä and Hadwin (2013)? We set up the followinghypotheses:(1) Mastery goals have a positive relationship with regulation engagement on all three regulation levels.(2) Performance-approach goals stand in a relationship with regulation engagement at all three levels.(3) Performance-avoidance goals are negatively related to regulatory effort at all three levels.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1561© ISLSMethodN = 277 undergraduates (M = 21.5 years old, SD = 2.6) read a case vignette that described that their study group(which is preparing for an exam) is exhibiting both knowledge and motivation problems towards dealing withthe subject matter. The vignette was followed by three open-answer questions on what the participants would do(sample question: “Do you personally do anything in this situation to ensure a high quality of your ownlearning?”). Each of the three questions focused on one of the three levels of regulation: self (“your ownlearning”), co (“learning of individual others”) and socially shared (“learning of the group as a whole”). Trainedcoders categorized the reported strategies (Cohen's κ = .70) which then were counted as dependent variable. Tomeasure academic achievement goals, the Scales for the Assessment of Learning and Performance Motivation(SELLMO; (Spinath, Stiensmeier-Pelster, Schöne, & Dickhäuser, 2012) were used (α ≥ .84).ResultsWe used structural equation modelling to test our hypotheses (see Fig. 1). (1) Mastery goals positively predictedregulation on all three levels as hypothesized. (2) Performance-approach goals predicted regulation on two ofthree levels (self- and shared-level) as expected, whereas (3) performance-avoidance goals did not predictregulation at all, contrary to our expectations.Figure 1. Achievement goals predicting regulation on self-, co- and socially shared level.DiscussionAs supposed, achievement goals were associated with students’ reports of regulation activities whilecollaboratively preparing for an exam. Learners with mastery goals seem to be especially interested in theregulation of challenges that appear in their study groups which mirrors the pattern established by literature forindividual regulation (e.g., Cellar et al., 2011). Performance-approach goals also predicted regulation on mostregulatory levels positively. We suppose that a study group is a context very suitable to demonstrate ability.Thus, the effect on regulation might be more positive in study groups than the literature on individual regulation(e.g., Cellar et al., 2011) predicted. The missing (negative) effect of performance-avoidance goals could beexplained as follows: Maybe, group members do not arouse fear of a deficit in competence being revealedbecause they are well-known and of equal status. Yet, these findings might be, at least in part, due to thespecific context of (a) studying for an upcoming exam and (b) of the presence of low motivation to learn andlow prior knowledge. Even though the study certainly has limitations (e.g., the lack of data from real groupprocesses), our results emphasize the importance of achievement goals for regulation processes within groups.ReferencesCellar, D. F., Stuhlmacher, A. F., Young, S. K., Fisher, D. M., Adair, C. K., Haynes, S., … Riester, D. (2011).Trait Goal Orientation, Self-Regulation, and Performance: A Meta-Analysis. Journal of Business andPsychology, 26(4), 467–483. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10869-010-9201-6Elliot, A. J., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (1996). Approach and avoidance achievement goals and intrinsicmotivation: A mediational analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70(3), 461–475.Järvelä, S., & Hadwin, A. F. (2013). New Frontiers: Regulating Learning in CSCL. Educational Psychologist,48(1), 25–39. https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2012.748006Järvenoja, H., Volet, S., & Järvelä, S. (2013). Regulation of emotions in socially challenging learning situations:an instrument to measure the adaptive and social nature of the regulation process. EducationalPsychology, 33(1), 31–58. https://doi.org/10.1080/01443410.2012.742334Panadero, E., & Järvelä, S. (2015). Socially Shared Regulation of Learning: A Review. European Psychologist,20(3), 190–203. https://doi.org/10.1027/1016-9040/a000226ICLS 2018 Proceedings1562© ISLS