Networks in Small-Group and Whole-class Structures in LargeKnowledge Building CommunitiesXueqi Feng, The University of Hong Kong, fengxueqi@hotmail.comJan van Aalst, The University of Hong Kong, vanaalst@hku.hkCarol K.K. Chan, The University of Hong Kong, ckkchan@hku.hkYuqin Yang, Central China Normal University, yuqinyang0904@gmail.comAbstract: This study compared small-group and whole-class structures in two largeknowledge building communities. We analyzed students’ online notes on Knowledge Forumby KBDex (Oshima, Oshima, & Matsuzawa, 2012). Results found that students in thesmall-group structure showed better community knowledge advancement. However, theunbalanced distribution of expertise in the small-group class was also observed.IntroductionKnowledge building is a community-oriented approach emphasizing knowledge creation (Scardamalia, 2002).Research on collaborative knowledge building showed that small-group practices could contribute productivecommunity-level interaction (Resendes, Scardamalia, Bereiter, Chen, & Halewood, 2015; Yang, van Aalst,Chan, & Tian, 2016). The small-group social configuration within a community is an attractive option for myresearch program, which aims to investigate knowledge building in large community with more than 50students. To this end, we used KBDex to compare the advancement of community knowledge between the twosocial configurations, and to visualize different groups’ contributions to the community knowledge.MethodThis study was carried out in two Grade Four classrooms from a primary school in Mainland China, with 54students in Class A and 53 in Class B. The two classes investigated the topic of Force & Motion with thesupport of KF for about 9 weeks. In Class A, students discussed face-to-face in groups before the wholecommunity online interaction. As a comparison, Class B conducted Knowledge Forum (KF) activities withoutsuch group discussions. 463 online notes from Class A and 356 from Class B were collected on KF.Data analysis and findingsWe first compared the advancement of collective knowledge between two classes through visual inspection ofsemantic relationships from KBDex. We selected three different phases (five notes created, 200 notes createdand the final one created) of the word network to trace students’ online activities in these two classes. Figure 1shows that in the beginning of the discussion, words were less concentrated as three separate parts in Class A.However, due to constantly combination, all the words were combined in the end. Conversely, Class B shows atrend of decentration. Overall, students in Class A spontaneously formed cross-group interactions that facilitatecommunity knowledge.Figure 1. Snapshots of the network of word through time (Class A).Figure 2. Snapshots of the network of word through time (Class B).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1737© ISLSTo explore different contributions within groups of the better knowledge advancement class (Class A), wecompared groups’ word networks through KBDex. We chose three groups according to the number of keywords they used: low/ medium/ high active groups. Then we compared their word networks through KBDex. InFigure 3, all the balls represent key words of the whole community, while red ones indicate which words wereused by the selected groups. Results illustrates unbalanced distribution of expertise: (1) different groups focusedon different areas; (2) high active groups could focus on the center of the whole community, as well asmarginalized areas; (3) even the low active group can also rise bridging words, such as stride and frequency ofwalking; (4) even the high active group could not cover all the key words of the community; (5) large learninggaps existed among all the three-level groups.Figure 3. Social network of words in low/medium/high active groups.ConclusionsBy analyzing students’ word networks of the two social configurations, we can see that the small-group classshowed higher socio-dynamics of community knowledge advancement. However, groups in the small-groupclass showed different degree of contribution to the whole community. Substantial future work is needed toexplore new tools to visualize the comparation of contributions among groups as well as the comparation ofgroups with the whole community. Furthermore, future instructional design should focus on deeper cross-groupinteractions to achieve the transformation from group knowledge to community knowledge.ReferencesOshima, J., Oshima, R., & Matsuzawa, Y. (2012). Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer: a social networkanalysis application for knowledge building discourse. Educational technology research anddevelopment, 60(5), 903-921.Resendes, M., Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., Chen, B., & Halewood, C. (2015). Group-level formative feedbackand metadiscourse. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 10(3), 309336.Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. Liberaleducation in a knowledge society, 97, 67-98.Yang, Y., van Aalst, J., Chan, C. K., & Tian, W. (2016). Reflective assessment in knowledge building bystudents with low academic achievement. International Journal of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning, 11(3), 281-311.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1738© ISLS