Networked by Design: Interventions for Teachers to Develop SocialCapitalSusan A. Yoon (chair), University of Pennsylvania, yoonsa@upenn.eduCharles W. Anderson, Michigan State University, andya@msu.eduKira Baker-Doyle, Arcadia University, bakerdoylek@arcadia.eduMaarten de Laat, University of Wollongong, maarten_de_laat@uow.edu.auElizabeth de los Santos, University of Nevada Reno, xdelossantos@unr.eduKenneth A. Frank, Michigan State University, kenfrank@msu.eduMegan Hopkins, University of California, San Diego, mbhopkins@ucsd.eduQinyun Lin, Michigan State University, linqinyun1001@gmail.comStefanie Marshall, Michigan State University, marsh413@msu.eduKatie Miller, Arcadia University, katiem1410@gmail.comFemke Nijland, Open University of the Netherlands, Femke.Nijland@ou.nlWilliam Penuel, University of Colorado Boulder, William.Penuel@colorado.eduMatthew Shirrell, George Washington University, mshirrell@gwu.eduRafi Santo, New York University, rafi.santo@nyu.eduBieke Schreurs, PXL University College, Bieke.Schreurs@PXL.BEJames Spillane, Northwestern University, j-spillane@northwestern.eduDaniël van Amersfoort, University of Glasgow, VanAmersfoort@glasgow.ac.ukLatricia Whitfield, Arcadia University, lcwhitfield1908@gmail.comAbstract: Previous research on the use of social network analysis in education hasdemonstrated how the methodology can reveal patterns of interactions that enable the sharingof resources. For more than a decade, we have read about the promise that building networkscan bring in terms of enacting instructional improvement. However, few studies have aimed atreporting on the designs and enactments of intentional structures for building teachers’ socialcapital through the development of social networks. Even fewer have discussed the deliberatemechanisms and methodologies used in the interventions. In this structured poster symposium,we present six current efforts in building teachers’ social capital with an emphasis on what thiswork is and how it is done. This group of researchers work with a variety of teacher populationsboth in formal and informal environments to solve important issues in the building ofeducational and teaching capacities.IntroductionIn 1975, Lortie provided an in-depth picture of teaching as an isolated, technical job in his seminal book, SchoolTeacher. Since then, the concept of teaching has shifted where collaboration and inquiry are celebrated andworking alongside fellow professionals in professional development activities is a central goal (Blandford, 2012;Lieberman & Mace, 2008). In addition to acquiring human capital, teachers are expected to develop their socialcapital via participation in communities of practice and networking (Lovett & Cameron, 2011). Social capital,defined as capacities developed through direct and indirect relationships in social networks (Coleman, 1988), hasbeen a focus of scholarship in understanding educational change, particularly through studies of social networks.The concept of social capital has provided educational researchers and practitioners with valuable perspectiveson patterns in social interaction and relationships that impact productivity, resource management, communitybuilding, organizational trust, and intervention dissemination (Bryk & Schneider, 2002; Penuel et al., 2013). Overthe last decade and a half, Social capital and social network research in education has risen steadily. For example,between 2005 and 2010, the number of studies on social networks in schools increased ten-fold (Daly, 2010).Mainly through survey and interview data, social network studies in education have revealed insightsabout how teachers access expertise, the efficacy of leadership structures, how advice, professional, and personalnetworks support teaching, and why and how school reforms spread through districts (De Laat & Schreurs, 2013;Leana & Pil, 2006; Spillane & Hopkins, 2015; Yoon et al., 2017). This critical mass of research on the potentialfor social capital and social networks to impact educational contexts has encouraged scholars and school leadersto move toward researching and designing interventions informed by this research. However, few studies existabout these interventions, how they have been implemented, what mechanisms promote change, and importantly,how the interventions have improved teaching and learning. We need to have clear models and strategies of thoseinterventions that work. In this presentation, we aim to provide a range of specific, real-world examples of socialICLS 2018 Proceedings1235© ISLScapital and social network professional development interventions and their outcomes from macro-level (e.g.,district-wide) to micro-level (e.g., communities of practice) interventions.Symposium organizationThe participants in this symposium have been intentionally selected for the range of research in social networkand social capital interventions so that audience members can witness the broad applicability and impactful natureof these theories in multiple teacher education contexts. The content of the presentations vary along researchcharacteristics such as population size and scale (e.g., multi-state cross-school networks to case studies of apreservice course), knowledge domains (e.g., complex systems to mathematics content), and formal and informalsettings (e.g., elementary school teaching to afterschool digital learning). They also vary in terms of themechanisms used to construct social ties and capital such as intentional rewiring, working in the open, andintegrating instructional coaches. However, they are all similar in working from the underlying assumptions thatsocial network and social capital interventions provide access to expertise, resources, trust, common instructionalgoals, common language, and a moral purpose for improving the status quo. The goal of this structured postersymposium is for audience members to walk away with a tangible set of strategies they can immediately put intoplace with the macro or micro-level populations that they work with. The following session organization will beused:1. Welcome and introduction by session chair (3 min)2. Two-minute summaries of individual poster presentations in the large group (12 min)3. Small group poster rotations (50 min)4. Large group panel discussion (25 min)In the large group discussion, we will address questions from the audience and then move to discussing thecommon affordances and challenges of doing social network and social capital research in various contexts andat various scales.Symposium participants and study summariesBuilding networks to support effective use of science curriculum materials in theCarbon TIME ProjectWilliam R. Penuel, University of Colorado Boulder; Elizabeth de los Santos, University of Colorado Boulder;Qinyun Lin, University of Colorado Boulder; Stefanie Marshall, Michigan State University; Charles W.Anderson, Michigan State University; and Kenneth A. Frank, Michigan State UniversityAn enduring challenge in science education is how best to support effective use of curriculum materials. Thepotential of high-quality curriculum materials to support student learning in science is well documented (Furtak,Seidel, Iverson, & Briggs; 2012). Curriculum materials provide a “toolkit” that teachers use to support classroominstruction (Remillard, 2005). Teachers and students use these tools in different ways that are consequential forthe quality of student learning. Some adaptations may enhance learning when they result in curricular experiencesthat are a better fit to student needs and local policy contexts (e.g., Penuel, Gallagher, & Moorthy, 2011). Otheradaptations may diminish the potential of curriculum materials (e.g., Lynch, Szesze, Pyke, & Kuipers, 2007). Acentral challenge for the field is to support teachers in making adaptations to materials to fit their local contextsbetter, while still maintaining integrity to the principles that underlie the design of coherent science curriculummaterials (DeBarger, Choppin, Beauvineau, & Moorthy, 2013). Developers of such materials, for their part, alsoneed ways that teacher feedback and adaptations can inform subsequent revisions to make them more usable in awider range of contexts.This presentation explores one set of strategies for supporting such adaptations: building and supportingsocial networks comprised of teachers, curriculum developers, and researchers, some of whom are experts withknowledge of both curriculum and local contexts. The project that is the context for the presentation is focusedon supporting effective use of a set of science curriculum materials called Carbon: Transformations in Matterand Energy, or Carbon TIME. A team led at Michigan State University developed the materials to support studentdevelopment along a set of empirically validated learning progressions for carbon cycling and energy flow insocio-ecological systems (Jin & Anderson, 2012; Mohan, Chen, & Anderson, 2009). In the current NationalScience Foundation-funded project, which is organized as a DBIR project focused on the effective use of thematerials, the network structure consists of cross-school networks in three states, led and facilitated by researchers,ICLS 2018 Proceedings1236© ISLScurriculum developers, and professional development staff at multiple universities. These networks are designedto promote interactions between teachers and provide opportunities for teacher participants to interact with peoplewith significant expertise in the curriculum materials. The aim is to directly influence how teachers use thecurriculum materials in their classrooms through network activities, which in turn reshapes a third network,namely that of students and teacher(s) in the classroom.In this presentation, we discuss the theoretical framework we are using in our project. Then, we describehow these theories have informed the design of network activities and our research. In the concluding part of thepresentation, we present some initial high-level findings from the first two years of our research.Open source culture as inspiration for design of educator learning networksRafi Santo, New York UniversityOpen source culture and the notion of ‘open networks’ has led to important shifts in the ways that learning,collaboration and invention occur in fields ranging from science (Nielson, 2012) to journalism (Gillmor, 2004) tobusiness (Chesbrough, 2006). However, there is limited work that has explored how education might leverageideas of open networks and associated open work practices. While the movement to promote development ofOpen Educational Resources (OECD, 2007) has drawn on open source culture to argue for more extensible andavailable educational materials, it’s conception of ‘open’ has focused on the ‘content’ of education - curricula,assessments, syllabi - but has not actively looked at the practices of open learning and design by collectives ofeducators. Such exploration is worthwhile, especially given the increasing downwards pressure on teachers in theage of accountability, associated deprofessionalization and decreasing valuation of educator creativity andcollaboration. The open work practices described in this presentation provide a needed contrast to these trends inthe professional life of educators.This presentation explores how a designed organizational network of over 70 informal learningorganizations, Mozilla Hive NYC Learning Network, drew on open source cultural practices as a means topromote socially driven collaborative learning among its educators. Hive NYC includes major cultural institutionssuch as Carnegie Hall and the American Museum of Natural History, the city’s library systems and parksdepartment, grassroots community-based organizations such as Dreamyard and the Brooklyn College CommunityPartnership and other youth-serving nonprofits that focus on particular pedagogical approaches and specialtieslike the Institute of Play, Global Action Project, the LAMP, Beam Center, and Iridescent. Member organizationsdevelop learning initiatives around web and game design, film and music production, informal science, “maker”education, journalism, youth organizing, media and digital literacies, coding and electronics, and other emergingdigital technologies. At the same time, they share a common interest in promoting youth pathways withtechnology and exploring new pedagogies enabled by technology.I advance the notion of “Working in the Open” (Santo, Ching, Peppler & Hoadley, 2014; 2016), a set ofwork practices that value transparency, an experimental stance and open contribution, and I argue that it representsa departure from existing industrial influences of scientific management and Taylorism in education. I’ll discussfive core practices associated with “working open” - (1) Public Storytelling and Context Setting, (2) RapidPrototyping “in the Wild”, (3) Enabling Community Contribution, (4) Public Reflection and Documentation and,lastly, (5) Creating Remixable Work Products, and will share how these practices are distinctive in their emphasison promoting open participation in learning and design activities within networks of educators. Following this,I’ll share how Hive NYC stewards supported educators in the network to engage in working open practices boththrough enculturation and modeling these practices and through providing a consistent ‘platform’ of participationstructures where educators could work openly with one another.Designing Educational Infrastructures for Improvement: Instructional coaching andprofessional learning communitiesJames P. Spillane, Northwestern University Megan Hopkins, University of California, San Diego; and MatthewShirrell, George Washington UniversityThe US education system is at a crossroads in its efforts to facilitate teacher professional learning that supportsinstructional improvement. Given that teacher quality is the greatest predictor of student achievement, federalaccountability policy as well as state and local teacher evaluation policies over at least the last decade have focusedmuch attention on measuring teachers’ performance. Pressure to improve individual teacher performance has beenparticularly acute in schools deemed underperforming as measured by students’ scores on standardized tests ofachievement (e.g., Diamond & Spillane, 2004). In response, many reform efforts have concentrated on supportingICLS 2018 Proceedings1237© ISLSteachers’ professional learning via “sit and get” professional development or one-on-one coaching, in the hopesthat, over time, these reforms will foster improvement on a larger scale (e.g., Mangin & Dunsmore, 2015).Such efforts, however, overlook an essential component of teacher professional learning—socialrelationships, or what sociologists refer to as social capital; that is, the resources for action that reside in therelations among people (Coleman, 1988). Social relationships afford access to resources like information, advice,expertise, materials, and trust that can facilitate positive change in teachers’ beliefs and practices (e.g., Daly,Moolenaar, Bolivar, & Burke, 2010; Penuel, Frank, Sun, Kim, & Singleton, 2013), and support valued schoolprocesses and outcomes like teacher commitment and student achievement (Goddard, Goddard, & TschannenMoran, 2007; Leana & Pil, 2006). Given that supporting social capital development is related to positive outcomesfor both individual teachers and schools, it is critical that school and system leaders attend to and support teachers’social relationships as they undertake the complex work of teaching.A growing body of scholarship seeks to identify the mechanisms that facilitate social relationshipsbetween teachers, pointing to various features of the educational infrastructure that support social capitaldevelopment in schools, such as grade-level assignment and formal leadership positions (Spillane, Hopkins, &Sweet, 2015). Nonetheless, normative dimensions are also critical for facilitating social relationships (Hopkins &Spillane, 2015), where teachers in schools with shared norms such as trust and collective responsibility are morelikely to interact about instruction in ways that enable its improvement (Bryk & Schnieder, 2002). Yet to be fullyunderstood, however, is how these features of the educational infrastructure facilitate change in teachers’practices, both the work practices they engage in as they interact with one another about instruction as well astheir classroom practices, especially in contexts where teachers are under pressure to improve.In this presentation, we explore one school district’s intentional efforts to design an educationalinfrastructure that fostered collaboration among teachers in its lowest performing elementary schools at a time ofmathematics curricular reform, and examine the ways in which this infrastructure shaped teachers’ interactionsand classroom practices. We will show how the integration of instructional coaches and the redesign of anorganizational routine focused on teacher collaboration (i.e., Professional Learning Communities, or PLCs)worked in tandem to facilitate teachers’ interactions around the implementation of an inquiry-orientedmathematics curriculum. We also show how these features of the district’s infrastructure facilitated changes inteachers’ practices over time, such that their work practices as well as their reported classroom practices came toapproximate those in the highest performing schools in the district.Stimulating teachers’ learning in networks: Awareness, ability, and appreciationFemke Nijland, Open University of The Netherlands; Daniël van Amersfoort, University of Glasgow; BiekeSchreurs, PXL University College; and Maarten de Laat, University of WollongongLearning in networks is receiving increased attention in Dutch primary education. It is perceived as a way tostimulate teachers professional development (Vaessen, Beemt, & De Laat, 2014) and to provide teachers with theopportunity to regulate their own professional development in line with their professional needs (De Laat &Schreurs, 2013). In education, such alignment is particularly important since teachers often perceive theirprofessional development as unrelated to their classroom practice (Lieberman & Pointer Mace, 2008). In addition,learning in networks is believed to lead to a more efficient flow of complex knowledge and routine informationwithin the organization (Coburn, Mata, & Choi, 2013), stimulate innovative behavior (Coburn et al., 2013;Moolenaar, Daly, & Sleegers, 2010) and result in a higher job satisfaction (Lovett & Cameron, 2011). In thisrespect learning in networks can be perceived as an effective approach to for both professional and organizationaldevelopment.In this presentation, we report on a three-phased mode 2 research (Nowotny, Scott, & Gibbons, 2003)intervention for stimulating teachers’ learning in face-to-face learning networks at a between school level. Theintervention was informed by insights from literature on what works in learning in networks, and was developedin close cooperation with the participating teachers and principals. The main aim of the project was to study howlearning networks could emerge, building upon the informal social networks already in place within theorganization. We did so by creating awareness of learning in networks, by offering tools for the development ofnetworking abilities that facilitate learning in networks, and by providing insight in the usefulness of theseactivities for the appreciation of their value creation. Our intention was to accompany participating teachers andprincipals on a journey into the what, the how and the why of learning in networks. The main question answeredin this project is: How does stimulating awareness, developing networking ability and offering insight into theoutcomes of learning in learning networks, contribute to learning in social networks for professional developmentwithin an organization for primary education?ICLS 2018 Proceedings1238© ISLSWe report on eight learning networks that were established between five schools, resulting in morelearning ties between teachers, new perspectives for participating teachers on the nature of learning and an overallgreater recognition of the emancipatory role of networked learning.Mechanisms that couple intentional network rewiring and teacher learning to developteachers’ social capital for implementing computer-supported complex systemscurriculaSusan A. Yoon, University of PennsylvaniaComplex systems can be found in structures and behaviors in all aspects of our world—from nanoscale networksto cities, ecosystems, and climates. Scientists have focused on investigating and managing issues related tocomplex systems that impact our lives, such as the spread of disease, power grid robustness, and biospheresustainability (National Academies, 2009). Likewise, the recent Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS)highlight crosscutting concepts that reflect important aspects of complex systems (e.g., scale, structure andfunction, stability and change). Classroom interventions based on software that model complex systems, such asStarLogo and NetLogo (Klopfer et al., 2009; Wilensky & Rand, 2015), have also been created along withaccompanying curricula that can be implemented in the science classroom (Yoon et al., 2016). This heightenedemphasis on complex systems in educational policy and resources raises challenges for educators who must teachto the NGSS. In a review of the educational literature (Yoon, Goh, & Park, in press), we found a dearth of studieson both teacher learning about complex systems and how best to support teachers in professional development(PD). Furthermore, we know that the success of the NGSS is contingent on the quality of teaching, yet thesestandards require substantial shifts in teaching practice (Wilson, 2013). And it is widely known that the lack ofhigh-quality PD opportunities make adopting reforms challenging (Blandford, 2012). We need more informationabout how to develop pedagogical content knowledge and curricula with respect to complex systems in PDactivities that are aligned with teacher learning and classroom practice (Yoon et al., 2015).For several years our research team has focused on addressing this major gap in complex systemsresearch. Initial efforts in PD were predominantly aimed at developing teachers’ knowledge and skills ofcomputational modeling, complex systems, and scientific practices to support curricular integration (Yoon et al.,2017a). Such efforts in building knowledge and skills in individuals can be considered developing human capital(i.e., increasing personal capabilities that enable people to act in new ways; Coleman, 1988). Due to the complexnature of teacher learning and instructional orchestration, however, we came to understand the necessity ofbuilding opportunities for teachers to interact about problems of practice and to share implementation strategiesas they emerged. Thus, our emphasis shifted in later PD activities to building teachers’ social capital (i.e.,capacities developed through direct and indirect relationships in social networks; Coleman, 1988).In this presentation, we discuss a 2-year design and development study that was part of a project calledBioGraph: Graphical Programming for Constructing Complex Systems Understanding in Biology, funded by theU.S. National Science Foundation from 2010 to 2015. The goal of the project was to create teaching and learningresources for high school classrooms centered on the use and construction of computational agent-based modelsof biological systems. We will begin with highlighting differences in human capital and social capital foci betweenthe first and second years of PD and implementation. We will then describe our theory of change based onstrategies of intentional rewiring (Valente, 2012) that are tightly coupled with theories of teacher learning–thesestrategies are: seeding interactions to improve tie quality; birds of a feather to improve depth of interactions;targeted problems of practice to improve trust and motivation to share; and expertise transparency to improveaccess to expert practice. We conclude with details about improvements in teachers’ confidence levels that wereprimarily influenced by their network activities in the second year.Translating the Connected Learning framework for teacher educators: Lessons fromthe fieldKira Baker-Doyle, Latricia Whitfield, and Katie Miller, Arcadia UniversityIn the last 20 years, global digital connectivity has given rise to a “networked era,” (Castells, 1996), in whichindividuals can connect easily across distances, sharing news, stories, and ideas. As such it has changed our abilityto access resources and information in social networks, and, some would argue, has mediated cultural practicesof communication (Jenkins, 2006; Wesch, 2009). Connected Learning is a relatively new framework for learningthat aims to broaden educational opportunities and equity during this era through fostering socially embedded,interest-driven networks of learning in and outside of the classroom. (Ito et al., 2013). The framework wasICLS 2018 Proceedings1239© ISLSdeveloped by a team of researchers and practitioners at the Digital Media Learning Lab at MIT between 20102013, and has proliferated mainly through grant-funded educational programs for out-of-school youth. The coreprinciples of Connected Learning focus on developing learners’ social capital to gain greater equity andopportunity in education.Recent social network studies in education have shown that teachers benefit from strategically buildingprofessional support networks (Moolenaar, Sleegers, & Daly, 2012; Van Waes, Van den Bossche, Moolenaar, DeMaeyer, & Van Petegem, 2015), therefore, Connected Learning has the potential to serve as an importantframework for teaching pre-service teachers how to build professional networks of support and improve theirpractice. Yet, since its inception the Connected Learning framework has mainly been studied in out-of-schoollearning organizations, such as the Digital Youth Network, which applied the framework to design an effort tofoster connections between STEM afterschool programs across Chicago, IL (Barron, Gomez, Martin, & Pinkard,2014). As such, there in a crucial gap in research on how the Connected Learning framework can be (or has been)used to design teacher education (Baker-Doyle, Mirra, Trust & Lohnes-Watulak, 2017). To address this gap, weexamined the experiences of graduate education students (pre-service and in-service teachers) in a course that wasdesigned on the principles of Connected Learning, and also taught the graduate students about how to use theConnected Learning principles to design their own future classrooms. This presentation reports on findings fromYear 1 of a three-year longitudinal study.The Connected Learning framework consists of three learning principles and three design principles(which we elaborate upon in the literature review). We decided to examine one design principle of ConnectedLearning in our analysis of Year 1 data: engagement in “production-centered” or “making” activities. We soughtto study the participants primarily as learners, in how they used and made sense of activities and practices basedon this principle of production-centered learning. Furthermore, since the core focus of Connected Learning is onbuilding social capital, we wanted to know how these activities might serve to foster social capital. Ultimately,this study provides insight into how a teacher education program can teach strategic social networking, and howthe Connected Learning framework in particular supports this aim.Thus, our research questions were: What does engagement in “production-centered” learning activitieslook like in a teacher education course? How do learners’ participation in these practices change over time? And,what are recurrent themes relating to social capital development that emerge through production-centered learningexperiences? In this presentation, we discuss lessons for teacher educators that seek to translate the ConnectedLearning framework into their practice and curricula to promote strategic social networking for professionalgrowth.ReferencesBaker-Doyle, K.J., Mirra, N., Trust, T., & Lohnes-Watulak, S. (2017, October) Preparing teachers for ConnectedLearning. Panel discussion at the Digital Media & Learning Conference, Irvine, CA.Barron, B., Gomez, K., Martin, C. K., & Pinkard, N. (2014). The digital youth network: Cultivating digital mediacitizenship in urban communities. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Blandford, S. (2012). Managing professional development in schools. New York: Routledge.Bryk, A., & Schneider, B. (2002). Trust in schools: A core resource for improvement. Russell Sage Foundation.Castells, M. (1996). Rise of The Network Society (Vol. 1). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.Chesbrough, H. W. (2006). Open innovation: the new imperative for creating and profiting from technology.Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business Press.Coburn, C. E., Mata, W. S., & Choi, L. (2013). The embeddedness of teachers’ social networks: Evidence from astudy of mathematics reform. Sociology of Education, 86, 311–342.Coleman, J. S. (1988). Sociology and economic approaches to the analysis of social structure. The AmericanJournal of Sociology, 94, S95–S120.Daly, A. J. (2010). Social network theory and educational change. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press.Daly, A. J., Moolenaar, N. M., Bolivar, M., & Burke, P. (2010). Relationships in reform: The role of teachers'social networks. Journal of Educational Administration, 48(3), 359-391.DeBarger, A. H., Choppin, J. M., Beauvineau, Y., & Moorthy, S. (2013). Designing for productive adaptations ofcurriculum interventions. In B. J. Fishman, W. R. Penuel, A.-R. Allen, & B. H. Cheng (Eds). Designbased implementation research. National Society for the Study of Education Yearbook, 112(2), 298-319.De Laat, M., & Schreurs, B. (2013). Visualizing informal professional development networks: Building a case forlearning analytics in the workplace. American Behavioral Scientist, 57, 1421–1438.Diamond, J. B., & Spillane, J. P. (2004). High stakes accountability in urban elementary schools: challenging orreproducing inequality? Teachers College Record, 106(6), 1145-1176.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1240© ISLSFurtak, E. M., Seidel, T., Iverson, H., & Briggs, D. C. (2012). Experimental and quasi-experimental studies ofinquiry-based science teaching: A meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 82(3), 300-329.Gillmor D. (2004). We the media: Grassroots journalism, by the people, for the people. Accessed:http://www.authorama.com/we-the-media-1.htmlGoddard, Y., Goddard, R., & Tschannen-Moran, M. (2007). A theoretical and empirical investigation of teachercollaboration for school improvement and student achievement in public elementary schools. TheTeachers College Record, 109(4), 877-896.Hopkins, M., & Spillane, J. P. (2015). Conceptualizing relations between instructional guidance infrastructure(IGI) and teachers’ beliefs about mathematics instruction: Regulative, normative, and cultural-cognitiveconsiderations. Journal of Educational Change, 16(4), 421-450.Ito, M. Gutierrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, W., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., Schor, J., Sefton-Green, J, & Watkins,S.G. (2013) Connected Learning: An agenda for research and design. Report for the Digital Researchand Learning Research Hub, MIT University.Jenkins, H. (2006). Confronting the Challenges of Participatory Culture: Media Education for the 21st Century.An Occasional Paper on Digital Media and Learning. John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation.Jenkins, H. (2009). Confronting the challenges of participatory culture: Media education for the 21st century.Mit Press.Jin, H., & Anderson, C. W. (2012). A learning progression for energy in socio-ecological systems. Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching, 49(9), 1149-1180.Klopfer, E., Scheintaub, H., Huang, W., Wendel, D., & Roque, R. (2009). The simulation cycle - combininggames, simulations, engineering and science using StarLogo TNG. Journal of E-Learning and DigitalMedia, 6(1), 71–96.Leana, C. R., & Pil, F. K. (2006). Social capital and organizational performance: Evidence from urban publicschools. Organization Science, 17(3), 353-366.Lieberman, A., & Pointer Mace, D. H. (2008). Teacher learning: The key to educational reform. Journal ofTeacher Education, 59, 226–234.Lortie, D. (1975). School teacher. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.Lovett, S., & Cameron, M. (2011). Schools as professional learning communities for early‐career teachers: howdo early‐career teachers rate them? Teacher Development, 15, 87–104.Lynch, S. J., Szesze, M., Pyke, C., & Kuipers, J. (2007). Scaling up highly-rated science curriculum units fordiverse student populations: Features that affect collaborative research and vice versa. In B. Schneider& S.-K. McDonald (Eds.), Scale-up in education: Issues in practice (Volume II) (pp. 91-122). Lanham:Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.Mangin, M. M., & Dunsmore, K. (2015). How the framing of instructional coaching as a lever for systemic orindividual reform influences the enactment of coaching. Educational Administration Quarterly, 51(2),179-213.Mohan, L., Chen, J., & Anderson, C. W. (2009). Developing a multi-year learning progression for carbon-cyclingin socio-ecological systems. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(6), 675-698.Moolenaar, N. M., Daly, a. J., & Sleegers, P. J. C. (2010). Occupying the Principal Position: ExaminingRelationships Between Transformational Leadership, Social Network Position, and Schools’ InnovativeClimate. Educational Administration Quarterly, 46, 623–670.Moolenaar, N. M., Sleegers, P. J., & Daly, A. J. (2012). Teaming up: Linking collaboration networks, collectiveefficacy, and student achievement. Teaching and Teacher Education, 28(2), 251–262.National Academies. (2009). Keck Futures Initiative: Complex Systems: Task Group Summaries. Washington,D.C.: The National Academies Press.Nielsen, M. (2012). Reinventing discovery: The new era of networked science. Princeton, NJ: Princeton UniversityPress.Nowotny, H., Scott, P., & Gibbons, M. (2003). Introduction: Mode 2'Revisited: The New Production ofKnowledge. Minerva, 41(3), 179-194.OECD (2007). Giving knowledge for free: The emergence of open educational resources. Paris: OECD. RetrievedMay 25, 2007 from http://213.253.134.43/oecd/pdfs/browseit/9607041E.pdfPenuel, W. R., Frank, K. A., Sun, M., Kim, C. M., & Singleton, C. A. (2013). The organization as a filter ofinstitutional diffusion. Teachers College Record, 115(1), 1-33.Penuel, W. R., Gallagher, L. P., & Moorthy, S. (2011). Preparing teachers to design sequences of instruction inEarth science: A comparison of three professional development programs. American EducationalResearch Journal, 48(4), 996-1025.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1241© ISLSRemillard, J. T. (2005). Examining key concepts in research on teachers’ use of mathematics curricula. Review ofEducational Research, 75(2), 211-246.Santo, R., Ching, D., Hoadley, C. M., & Peppler, K. A. (2014). What does it mean to “Work Open” in Hive NYC?A vision for collective organizational learning. New York, NY: Hive Research Lab. Accessed:https://hiveresearchlab.files.wordpress.com/2014/12/what-does-it-mean-to-work-open-in-hive-nychive-research-lab-october-2014.pdfSanto, R., Ching, D., Hoadley, C. M., & Peppler, K. A. (2016). Working in the open: Lessons from open sourceon building innovation networks in education. On the Horizon, 24(3),280-295Spillane, J. P., Hopkins, M., & Sweet, T. (2015). Intra- and inter-school interactions about instruction: Exploringthe conditions for social capital development. American Journal of Education, 122(1), 71-110.Valente, T. W. Network interventions. Science, 337, 49–53.Van Waes, S., Van den Bossche, P., Moolenaar, N. M., De Maeyer, S., & Van Petegem, P. (2015). Know-who?Linking faculty’s networks to stages of instructional development. Higher Education, 70(5), 807-826.Vaessen, M., Beemt, A. Van Den, & De Laat, M. F. (2014). Networked professional learning: relating the formaland the informal. Frontline Learning Research, 2, 56–71.Wesch, M. (2009). Mediated culture/mediated education. In “In Dreams Begins Responsibility” - Choice,Evidence, and Change. Manchester, UK: Association for Learning Technology.Wilensky, U., & Rand, W. (2015). An introduction to agent-based modeling: Modeling natural, social, andengineered complex systems with NetLogo. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Wilson, S. M. (2013). Professional development for science teachers. Science, 340, 310-313.Yoon, S., Anderson, E., Koehler-Yom, Evans, C., Park, M., J., Sheldon, J., Schoenfeld, I., Wendel, D., Scheintaub,H., & Klopfer, E. (2017a). Teaching about complex systems is not simple matter: Building effectiveprofessional development for computer-supported complex systems instruction. Instructional Science,45(1), 99–121.Yoon, S., Goh, S., Park, M. (in press). Teaching and learning about complex systems in K–12 science education:A review of empirical studies 1995–2015. Review of Educational Research.Yoon, S., Klopfer, E., Anderson, E., Koehler-Yom, J., Sheldon, J., Schoenfeld, I., Wendel, D., Scheintaub, H.,Oztok, M., Evans, C., & Goh, S. (2016). Designing computer-supported complex systems curricula forthe Next Generation Science Standards in high school science classrooms. Systems, 4(38), 1–18.http://www.mdpi.com/2079-8954/4/4/38/htmlYoon, S., Koehler-Yom, J., Anderson, E., Lin, J., & Klopfer, E. (2015). Using an adaptive expertise lens tounderstand the quality of teachers’ classroom implementation of computer-supported complex systemscurricula in high school science. Research in Science and Technology Education, 33(2), 237-251.Yoon, S., Koehler-Yom, J., & Yang, Z. (2017). The effects of teachers’ social and human capital on urban sciencereform initiatives: Considerations for professional development. Teachers College Record, 119(4), 1–32.AcknowledgmentsThe authors wish to acknowledge the following institutional support: From the US National Science Foundation:Penuel (DRL–1440988); Spillane (DUE-0831835, REC–9873583, EHR–0412510); Yoon (DRL–1019228). ForNijland (Welten Institute of the Open University of The Netherlands). Any opinions, findings, and conclusionsexpressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the granting agencies.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1242© ISLS