Collaborative or Individual Learning within Productive Failure:Does the Social Form of Learning Make a Difference?Claudia Mazziotti, Institute of Educational Research, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, claudia.mazziotti@rub.deKatharina Loibl, Institute of Mathematics Education, University of Education Freiburg,katharina.loibl@ph-freiburg.deNikol Rummel, Institute of Educational Research, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, nikol.rummel@rub.deAbstract: Productive Failure (PF) – comprising initial problem solving and delayedinstruction – has been proven effective for learning when compared to Direct Instruction (DI)in multiple studies with high school and university students. Although the problem-solvingphase is usually implemented in a collaborative setting, the role of collaboration for theeffectiveness of PF remains unclear. In two quasi-experimental studies we investigatedwhether collaborative as compared to individual learning in PF leads to more learning. Wealso tested whether the beneficial PF effect could be replicated with much younger students,namely 4th and 5th graders, than previous studies. Only our first study replicated the PF effect.While the first study did not reveal differences between collaborative and individual learning,in the second study individual learners even outperformed their collaborative counterparts inboth PF and DI conditions. Against these findings, we discuss possible prerequisites for PFand propose an agenda for follow-up CSCL research.Keywords: collaborative learning, productive failure, instructional designIntroductionLearning approaches in which instruction is delayed, such as Productive Failure (PF; e.g., Kapur, 2012), enablestudents to explore the underlying concepts and procedures of new learning material on their own beforereceiving explicit instruction. In the first phase of PF, students try to solve a yet unfamiliar problem, usually insmall groups. In the second, so-called instruction phase, the teacher builds upon students’ initial solutions tointroduce the canonical solution (e.g., Loibl & Rummel, 2014). Multiple studies showed advantages of PF overso-called direct instruction conditions (DI), particularly on the acquisition of conceptual knowledge or transfer(e.g., Kapur, 2012). While the term “direct instruction” is used vaguely in the literature, here we refer to directinstruction as a teacher-lead activity of comparing and contrasting students’ erroneous solution attempts with thecanonical solution preceding students problem solving (cf. Loibl & Rummel, 2014).While the effects of delaying instruction are well studied (e.g., Kapur, 2012; Loibl & Rummel, 2014),the role of collaboration within PF has not yet been investigated intensively. As collaborative learning is knownto elicit elaborative processes (e.g., Teasley, 1995), it can be hypothesized that collaborating during theproblem-solving phase of PF will lead to higher learning outcomes than individual learning. This assumption isalso supported by Chi’s ICAP-framework (2009) which predicts a superiority of collaborative-interactivelearning activities over individual-constructive learning activities. However, research on collaborative learning(e.g., Fischer et al., 2010) has also revealed that collaborating students need to be supported (e.g., byimplementing a group goal and/or a role script; cf. Slavin, 1996; King, 2007) in order to ensure fruitfulcollaborative processes. Against this background, we hypothesized that supported collaborative learning leads tohigher learning outcomes than individual learning during the problem-solving phase of PF (hypothesis 1).Our second focus was on replicating the PF effect with younger students: While most PF studies wereconducted with high school students (e.g., Kapur 2012; Loibl & Rummel, 2014), we were wondering whetheryounger students would similarly benefit from PF. This question is of relevance, because the German standardsfor teaching mathematics highlight the importance of facilitating students’ self-determined problem-solvingcompetencies already in primary school (Kultusministerkonferenz, 2004). However, as the findings ofKroneberger and Souvignier (2005) suggest, younger students may be limited in their ability to elaborate deeplyon new concepts. Therefore, the beneficial effect of PF found with high school students may not necessarilyhold true for younger students. Nevertheless, we hypothesize that the PF effect can be replicated with 4th and 5thgraders (hypothesis 2), because so far the beneficial effect of PF was stable across different domains andpopulations (i.e., students with different ability profiles).CSCL 2015 Proceedings570© ISLSMethodWe tested our hypotheses in two quasi-experimental studies. Our initial study (N = 52 4th graders) comparedstudents who worked collaboratively (PF-Coll) or individually (PF-Ind) (cf. hypothesis 1) on an equivalentfraction problem and then received instructions. In order to test hypothesis 2 we additionally implemented a DIColl condition, in which students first received instruction and then solved a similar equivalent fraction problem.For our second study, we recruited a larger sample (N=228 5th graders). In this study, we varied the two factorssocial form of learning (collaborative vs. individual) and the timing of instructions (PF vs. DI) in a 2x2 design,resulting in four experimental conditions (PF-Coll, PF-Ind, DI-Coll, and DI-Ind). Note that across both studiesall participants learned during two learning phases: a problem-solving phase and an instruction phase which willbe described below.Problem-solving phaseIn the PF conditions, students were challenged with a typical PF problem during the initial problem-solvingphase. A PF problem has to address at least two design requirements (cf. Kapur & Bielazcyc, 2012). First, atypical PF problem should allow students to find multiple solution approaches and to elaborate on their (oftenerroneous) solution ideas. Second, typical PF problems are complex problems which should neither over- norunder challenge the students. The complexity of a problem is based on the interaction between students’ priorknowledge and the problem itself. The two requirements were met as follows: The equivalent fraction problemrequired students to equally divide two “groups” of pizzas for two groups of children (4 pizza Salami orderedfor 6 boys and 2 pizza Hawaii ordered for 3 girls) and asks them whether a single boy or girl receives a greaterproportion of pizza. This problem can either be solved by calculating a solution, making use of a graphicalrepresentation (i.e. circle), drawing various solution ideas or by logical reasoning. Across both our studies,students have not yet been formally introduced into the concept of equivalence nor the procedure to findequivalences (i.e., reducing or expanding fractions) but have already developed a pre-concept of fractionalnumbers (i.e., numbers smaller than 1). The complexity of the to-be-solved problem was further ensured byincluding more than a single problem-solving step (i.e., three problem-solving steps): Students had to identifythe number and the size of pizza slices each boy or girl receives, and then they had to compare the proportionsby expanding or reducing the given fractions.In the DI condition, students worked on an isomorphic problem during the problem-solving phase.However, as the problem-solving phase only took place after the instruction, they were not expected to generatemultiple (erroneous) solutions.During the problem-solving phase, students either worked alone (PF-Ind and DI-Ind) or in pairs (PFColl and DI-Coll). As fruitful collaborative interaction needs to be supported, we introduced a role script and agroup goal within the PF-Coll and the DI-Coll condition (cf. Slavin, 1996; King, 2007). The goal of the rolescript was to support the collaborative interaction between learning partners and not to cognitively support theproblem-solving process (cf. Westermann & Rummel, 2012) The role script consisted of two roles. While thestudent in the role of the thinker was asked to explain his or her problem-solving ideas to her or his learningpartner, the student in the role of the asker was prompted to pose hint-questions and questions of clarification.During collaborative problem solving students were provided with role cards displaying either the role of thethinker or asker and were asked to switch roles (at least once). Thus, students were prompted to collaboratefollowing the role script, but were not forced to do so. We implemented the role script in this way in order toprevent a motivational loss due to over-scripting. By additionally implementing a group goal we aimed to setstudents a motivational incentive to indeed engage in team work and mutual support. Thus, the experimenterhold out the prospect to win a prize (i.e., chocolate bars) for the dyad who best collaborates.Instruction phaseThe instruction phase was designed as a class discussion and was managed by the experimenter in allconditions. As a starting point students were asked an estimation question whether a single girl or a boy willreceive exactly, more or less than an entire pizza (cf. last problem-solving step), because the Rational NumberProject (e.g., Cramer, Post & del Mas, 2002) showed that including estimation questions prior to operating withfractions facilitates learning.In line with the design requirements described in Kapur and Bielaczyc (2012) and with findings ofLoibl and Rummel (2014) the instruction built upon “typical” erroneous and incomplete students’ solutionswhich were previously collected in a pilot study (N= 25). By referring to “typical” incomplete students’solutions and not to the very solutions of these students, we ensured to keep the instruction constant across allconditions (of both studies). The experimenter helped students to compare and contrast the typical solutionswith the canonical solution for each problem-solving step and explained why the typical solutions are erroneous.CSCL 2015 Proceedings571© ISLSFor example, the first problem-solving step implied to identify the number and size of pizza each boy shouldreceive when there are four pizzas but six boys. When equally divided each boy should receive 4/6 (= canonicalsolution). As one “typical” erroneous student solution was to partition the four pizzas in quarters (instead ofsixths) the experimenter can build upon this solution attempt by also dividing four pizzas into quarters, countingthe number of slices and dividing the total number of slices by six (16 : 6 = 2 rest 4). According to this solutionattempt two boys will receive only two slices of pizza but four boys will receive three slices of pizza. Bydrawing students’ attention to the fact that the pizzas are not yet equally and fairly divided, the experimenter canoptimally prepare students for the canonical solution. To further support students understanding about fractions(e.g., Cramer Post & del Mas, 2002) we additionally included working with graphical representations (i.e.circles) as most of students solution attempts also included circles.Instruments and measuresAcross both studies, students were asked to complete a pre- and a posttest. The pretest measured students’mathematical prerequisites such as naming fractions when differently represented and dividing with rest. Bymeasuring students’ prerequisites we additionally prevented to prompt all students to generate solution ideasabout the target concepts and procedures in the pretest as this would reduce the difference between ourexperimental conditions (i.e. also students from the DI conditions would be prompted to generate solution ideasprior to instruction) (cf. Kapur, 2012; Loibl & Rummel, 2014). To measure students’ learning about the conceptof equivalence and the procedures for finding equivalence, for the first study we administered a posttest with sixitems (including a total of 18 subtasks with a maximum total score of 26 points). Based on the results of the firststudy, we adapted the degree of difficulty of the posttest for the second study. The posttest again included sixitems (this time including a total of 12 subtasks with a maximum total score of 17 points). In addition to the preand posttests in both studies we collected collaborative process data in order to be able to investigate interactionprocesses. The analysis of the process data is, however, not in the scope of the current paper.ProcedureIn both studies, all participants answered the pretest (circa 10-15 minutes) in the mathematics lesson precedingthe respective study. At the beginning of both studies, all students first received a 10-15 minutes introductionabout the background and procedure of the study. Students in the PF-Coll and DI-Coll conditions furtherreceived explanations about the group goal and a brief role play in order to learn how to make use of the rolescript. While students in the PF-Coll and PF-Ind conditions started with the problem-solving phase and thenreceived instruction, students of the DI-Coll and DI-Ind conditions first received instruction and then solved anisomorphic problem. The problem-solving phase took 30 minutes and the instruction phase 45 minutes. Afterboth learning phases students had 45 minutes time to work on the posttest.ResultsTo assess differences in learning outcomes between the three experimental conditions of the first study, wecalculated an ANCOVA with the factor condition, the covariate pretest score, and students’ posttest scores asdependent variable. Means and standard deviation of the pretest and posttest scores of the three conditions aredisplayed in Table 1. We defined two a priori contrasts in line with our hypotheses. One a priori contrastcompared PF-Coll and PF-Ind to test the effect of collaboration. Contrary to our first hypothesis, this a prioricontrast did not reveal significant differences between PF-Coll and PF-Ind (F[1,48]=0.4, p=.84). In light of theaforementioned literature not finding a difference between collaborative and individual learning within PF wasunexpected. The second a priori contrast compared both PF conditions to the DI condition to test if the PF effectcould be replicated with young children (hypothesis 2). Indeed, our results revealed a significant advantage ofPF over DI on the learning outcome (F[1,48]=4.6, p =.03,ɳp² = .09).Table 1: Means and standard deviation of pretest and posttest scores (study 1)PF-CollPF-IndDI-CollPretestM4.55.125.68SD2.631.91.29PosttestMSD7.885.437.713.295.263.91N161719For the second study we calculated a two-factorial MANCOVA with the two factors social form oflearning (collaborative vs. individual) and the timing of instructions (PF vs. DI), with students’ pretest scores asCSCL 2015 Proceedings572© ISLScovariate, and students’ posttest scores as dependent variable. Means and standard deviations of the secondstudy are displayed in Table 2. We found a significant main effect of the social form of learning (F[1,223]=3.95, p=.048, ɳp²= .02): overall students learning individually outperformed students learningcollaboratively. In testing our second hypothesis we did not find a significant difference between the PFconditions and the DI conditions (F[1,223]=0.74, p=.392,). Also, the interaction between the two factors was notsignificant (F[1, 223]=0.21, p=.651).Table 2: Means and standard deviation of pretest and posttest scores (study 2)PretestTiming ofinstructionPFDITotalSocial form oflearningindividualcollaborativetotalindividualcollaborativetotalindividualcollaborativetotalM4.04.194.114.44.744.584.24.434.33PosttestSD2.042.482.312.462.252.342.252.392.33M10.8010.3110.5111.2810.5010.8611.0410.4010.67SD2.412.452.442.152.732.502.292.572.47N4974123485710597131228Conclusion and discussionIn conclusion, our two quasi-experimental studies revealed divergent findings: While we were able to replicatethe beneficial effect of PF for a younger age group in the first study, we were not in the second study. Inaddition, we did not find a superiority of collaborative learning during the problem-solving phase in PF overindividual learning on the posttest scores. Against the background of the literature on collaborative learning(e.g., Chi, 2009; Teasley, 1995), this result is surprising. In the following, we discuss three possibleexplanations.Quality of collaborationAs mentioned earlier, collaboration does not automatically lead to fruitful interactions between students.Possibly, despite the collaborative setting, students did not collaborate well enough and may for instance havemostly engaged in individual-constructive learning activities (e.g., one partner generating ideas withoutconsidering his partner’s understanding) in our collaborative conditions. This activity pattern was possible,because the implemented role script was optional. While the role script intended to facilitate collaborativeinteractive activities, students could still engage in merely individual-constructive learning activities. Thisexplanation can be investigated by intensive process data analysis and by comparing whether students who actedstrictly in their roles reached higher posttest scores than those who did not. In addition, it is also possible thatour participants were not sufficiently familiar with applying the role script in particular and with collaborativelearning practices in general as such practices are often not well established in German classrooms andmathematics lessons at this young age. However, as the educational standards of mathematical education(Kultusministerkonferenz, 2004) point out that even at this young age students should be able to collaborate andcommunicate their mathematical reasoning, this finding underlines the need to pay particular attention to thisapparent deficit. However, considering that our first study failed to find a superiority of collaborative learningand the second study even showed a superiority of individual learning it may be useful in moving forward toalso discuss our results from another possible angle:Production blockingTo some extent the problem-solving phase of PF resembles a brainstorming activity, as students try to come upwith as many solution ideas as possible for a problem they don’t know how to solve yet. The brainstormingliterature predicts a superiority of individual over collaborative brainstorming (Stroebe & Nijstad, 2004),because during collaborative brainstorming the generation of associated solution ideas is blocked by turn taking:one partner needs to wait until it is his or her turn before being able to propose a solution idea (cf. productionblocking). In order to shed more light on the brainstorming hypothesis an intensive analysis and comparison ofthe quantity and quality of students’ solution attempts in both PF-conditions is needed.CSCL 2015 Proceedings573© ISLSPrerequisites. An additional goal of our studies was to investigate whether the beneficial PF effect alsoholds true for students of a younger age group. While the results of our initial study confirmed this hypothesis,we were not able to replicate the PF effect that has consistently been found in many previous studies (e.g.,Kapur, 2012; Loibl & Rummel, 2014) in our second study. Our divergent findings emphasize the need todiscuss in more detail the prerequisites for effective PF. In this context, prior knowledge activation has beendiscussed as one effective learning mechanism underlying PF (e.g., Loibl & Rummel, 2014). Our participantsmay not have had enough prior domain knowledge to generate different solution ideas on their own, and may incontrast to older students also not have had enough prior knowledge about metacognitive and motivationallearning strategies for adapting to the specific challenges of the PF problem-solving phase. Thus, our resultssupport the notion that the delineation of productive and unproductive failure is a narrow line that one mustwalk carefully.In order to shed light on the above considerations we intensify our effort to analyze the process data ofthe collaborative conditions as well as to analyze students’ solution attempts in both PF conditions.OutlookIn parallel to further analyzing the data of the two presented studies, we plan a follow-up study which will beembedded in a CSCL setting. In particular, we propose to introduce an exploratory learning environment (ELE)when students are confronted with an equivalent fraction problem in the problem-solving phase of PF (followedby instructions in a regular classroom setting). Within an ELE students are enabled to explore the targetconcepts on their own by inspecting and manipulating, for instance, different representations of fractions andtheir relationships (e.g., Hoyles, 1993). As collaborating students will work simultaneously from two differentcomputers and will interact via a chat tool with each other, we will be able to address the three core issues raisedin the discussion: the quality of collaboration, the danger of blocking ideas (cf. brainstorming research), and thepotential influence of students’ prior knowledge about metacognitive and motivational strategies.First, we concluded that the collaboration itself and the collaboration support that was provided (i.e.,role script and group goal) may not have developed their full potential, because students were not familiar withcollaborative practices and the use of a role script. Apart from enabling students to practice good collaborationprior to the problem-solving phase of PF (e.g., by introducing a pre-training), implementing the collaborativeproblem-solving phase in an ELE allows for a more adaptive approach: based on students’ log data and chatdata, we can deliver collaboration support prompts when needed. For instance, when students do no chat witheach other for a certain amount of time the intelligent component of the ELE could provide students with aprompt encouraging them to think-aloud and exchange their problem-solving ideas or asking them a thoughtprovoking question (King, 2007). Furthermore, if only one student talks or interacts with the ELE the studentcan be prompted to help his learning partner and to engage him in the problem-solving process. On a processlevel, this adaptive support should facilitate interactive learning activities (Chi, 2009) or transactivity(Berkowitz & Gibbs, 1983).Second, we argued that the problem-solving phase of PF resembles a brainstorming activity. Theresearch on brainstorming suggests that in a collaborative setting the generation of associated solution ideas isblocked by turn takings and waiting time (cf. production blocking, Stroebe & Nijstad, 2004). Thus, collaborativebrainstorming as compared to individual brainstorming is less beneficial for developing solution ideas withinPF. However, if we can prevent students from production blocking by letting them generate solutionssimultaneously instead of waiting for their turns, brainstorming in a collaborative setting may still havebeneficial effects on the quantity and quality of solution ideas as learning partners cause mutual cognitivestimulation. In our ELE students should be able type in their solution ideas in the chat tool whenever they want.In consequence, students would not have to wait until it is their turn to bring in their solution ideas withoutproduction blocking. Thus, collaborative learning in such a computer-supported setting would also address theline of brainstorming research.Third, we assumed that our young participants may not have had enough prior knowledge aboutmetacognitive and motivational learning strategies in order to deal with the specific challenges of the PFproblem-solving phase. For instance, within the problem-solving phase of PF students are asked to generate asmany problem-solving ideas as possible for a problem type they do not know yet. Due to the lack of domainknowledge, they may reach a dead end (of problem-solving) several times and are thus confronted with theirown failure. Based on research on self-regulated learning and motivation (e.g., Kuhl, 1987) students need toapply at least four strategies in order to address this failure: control of motivation, control of attention, copingwith failure, emotional control. As young learners might still have to improve the application of theaforementioned learning strategies again the intelligent component of the envisioned ELE could help them bydelivering prompts facilitating those learning strategies just in time (i.e., when they reach an impasse and stopCSCL 2015 Proceedings574© ISLSworking on the problem). These prompts may include hints on the aforementioned strategies as well asemotional boosts (cf. Grawemeyer et al., 2015).In conclusion, transferring the collaborative problem-solving phase of PF from a face-to-face setting toa computer-supported setting (by implementing it in an ELE) will allow to flexibly react and adapt to the youngstudents needs which, in turn, should facilitate the acquisition of conceptual knowledge.ReferencesBerkowitz, W. M. & Gibbs, J. C. (1983). Measuring the Developmental Features of Moral Discussion. MerrilPalmer Quarterly, 29 (4), 399-410.Chi, M.T.H. (2009) Active-constructive-interactive: a conceptual framework for differentiating learningactivities. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1, 73-105.Collins, A. (2012). What is the most effective way to teach problem solving? A commentary on productivefailure as a method of teaching. Instructional Science, 40, 731-735.Cramer, K., Post, T., & delMas, R. (2002). Initial Fraction Learning by Fourth- and Fifth-Grade Students: AComparison of the Efffects of Using Commercial Curricula With the Effects of Using the RationalNumber Project Curriculum. Journal for Research in Mathematics Educations, 33(2), 111-144.Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Stegmann, K., Wecker, C., Zottmann, J., & Weinberger, A. (2010). Collaboration scriptsin computer-supported collaborative learning. In C. E. Hmelo-Silver, A. O'Donnell, C. A. Chinn & C.Chan (Eds.), The international handbook of collaborative learning. New York, NY: Routledge.Grawemeyer, B., Holmes, W., Gutierrez-Santos, S., Hansen, A., Loibl, K., Mavrikis, M.(2015). Light-BulbMoment? Towards adaptive presentation of feedback based on students’ affective state. Paper will bepresented at 2015 Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, Atlanta, United States.Hoyles, C. (1993). Microworlds/schoolworlds: The transformation of an innovation. In C. Keitel & K. Ruthven(Eds.), Learning from Computers: Mathematics Education and Technology (pp. 1-17). Berlin:Springer-Verlag.Kapur, M. (2012). Productive failure in learning the concept of variance. Instructional Science, 40(4), 651-672.Kapur, M., & Bielaczyz, K. (2012). Designing for Productive Failure. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(1),45-83.King, A. (2007). Scripting collaborative learning processes: A cognitive perspective. In F. Fischer, I. Kollar, H.Mandl &, J. Haake, Scripting computer-supported communication of knowledge. Cognitive,computational, and educational perspectives (pp. 13-37). New York: Springer.Kuhl, J. (1987). Motivation und Handlungskontrolle: Ohne guten Willen geht es nicht. [Motivation and actioncontrol] In H. Heckhausen, P. M. Gollwitzer & F. E. Weinert (Hrsg.), Jenseits des Rubikon: Der Willein den Humanwissenschaften (S. 101-120). Berlin: Springer.Kronenberger, J. & Souvignier, E. (2005). Fragen und Erklärungen beim kooperativen Lernen inGrundschulklassen. Zeitschrift für Entwicklungspsychologie und Pädagogische Psychologie, 37(2), 91100.Kultusministerkonferenz (2004). Bildungsstandards im Fach Mathematik für den Primarbereich. [Learningstandards for mathematics for primary education] (Beschluss vom 15.10.2004). Neuwied, Luchterhand.Loibl, K. & Rummel, N. (2014). Knowing what you don't know makes failure productive. Learning andInstruction, 34, 74-85.Slavin, R. E. (1996). Research on Cooperative Learning and Achievement: What we know, what we need toknow. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 21(1), 43-69.Stroebe, W. & Nijstad, B. A. (2004). Warum Brainstorming in Gruppen Kreativität vermindert: Eine kognitiveTheorie der Leistungsverluste beim Brainstorming [Why collaborative brainstorming reducescreativitiy: a cogntivie theory on performances loses in brainstorming]. Psychologische Rundschau, 54,2-10.Teasley, S. D. (1995). Communication and collaboration: The role of talk in children’s peer interactions.Developmental Psychology, 31(2), 207-220.Westermann, K., & Rummel, N. (2012). Delaying instruction: Evidence from a study in a university relearningsetting. Instructional Science,40(4),673-689.AcknowledgmentsThe research leading to these results has partly received funding from the European Union Seventh FrameworkProgramme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement n° 318051 - iTalk2Learn project. This publicationreflects only the author’s views and Union is not liable for any use that may be made of the informationcontained therein. Special thanks goes to Sebastian Strauss, Gina Krüger and Nadja Roeder.CSCL 2015 Proceedings575© ISLS