Game-Talk: Media-Based Mentoring as a Process of ReframingRelationships and Reframing PerspectivesDeena L. Gould, Arizona State University, deena.gould@asu.eduPriyanka Parekh, Arizona State University, priyanka.parekh@asu.eduAbstract: In this study, we used a unified discourse lens and the constant comparativeapproach to develop an emergent framework about media-based mentoring in the context ofan academic social network and a science video game. In this framework, media-basedmentoring is characterized as a process of reframing person-to-person relationships, reframingperson-to-game relationships, and reframing person-to-world relationships.IntroductionIn this paper, we provide an analysis of media-based mentoring as enacted in conversations around a sciencevideo game. We used methods of unified discourse analysis (Gee, 2015) and grounded theory (Charmaz, 2006)to characterize a form of productive talk among middle school students and college student mentors in a digitalspace built around a science video game. We characterize this media-based mentoring as a process of reframingrelationships and reframing perspectives. Specifically, participants reframed relationships with each other,reframed relationships with the science game, and reframed relationships with real and future worlds.MethodParticipants and settingWe collected data for this study from a process of mentoring that linked 28 middle school students with 16science-affiliated college student mentors. The school was in a rural community located sixty miles from thenearest city. The middle school students in our study identified as 79% Hispanic, 17% Caucasian, and 4%mixed-race. 91% of the students at the school qualified for free or reduced lunch. The 16 volunteer mentorswere undergraduate students affiliated with a science or engineering course at a large university.DesignDigital media was central to the process of media-based mentoring we examined and report on in this study.Digital media provided the information and tools to support collaborative inquiry, a platform forcommunication, and a virtual world for media-based interactions and scientific inquiry (Gould & Parekh, 2017).We employed group mentoring (O’Neill, 2004) using the media of the Mystery of Taiga River video game(Barab & Arici, 2014) and the academic social networking platform, Ed Modo. Groups of three or four middleschool students interacted with two or three mentors over a period of twenty class sessions.Research approachTo analyze the discourse, we examined the online discussion logs for each of eight groups. We also examinedthe sixteen Mystery of Taiga River video game plays. The discussion logs were composed of 2845 lines ofinteractive discourse. The game plays were composed of actions, decisions, and written arguments as enactedcollaboratively in the virtual world. These game plays were composed of unique interactions and affordancesused to test out and make things happen in the game world. In other words, the way the game responded waspart of the enactment and part of the discourse that we analyzed (Gee, 2015). We initially coded transcripts ofthe discussions, observations, enactments, and interactions line-by-line to compare, conceptualize, andcategorize (Charmaz, 2006). After this initial coding, we used a unified discourse lens to refine and elaboratepatterns among the categories (Gee, 2015).Findings and emerging frameworkBased on our analysis of the transcripts and the video game plays, three forms of reframing emerged. 1)Participants reframed their roles and relationships with each other from strangers to acquaintances and friends.2) Participants reframed their roles and relationships with the science game. 3) Participants reframed their rolesand relationships with the broader world beyond the game. An example of each of these forms of reframing isshown in Table 1.1771Table 1: Framework for a theory of media-based mentoringForm of reframingReframe roles andrelationships with each otherReframe roles andrelationships with the videogameReframe roles andrelationships with the videogameReframe roles andrelationships with real andfuture worlds.ExampleMentee: What do you mentors do?Mentor: Just like all of you, I am playing the Taiga River game. If you haveany questions as you try to solve the fish problem, let me know and I willdo my best to help? Even more, if you have any questions about STEM orcollege, please feel free to ask.Mentee: My claim was that factories are causing acid rain but the claimfailed.Mentor: That’s okay, just make sure you write why the factories are notcausing the fish to die in your report. Keep investigating! What hypothesisare you going to try next?Mentee: We are in the future checking to see if our new rules have workedout.Mentor: That’s good! Did the rules work?Mentee: That is so cool! Glowing jellyfish! I never thought about that untilnow!Mentee: That is really cool. I want to take that class when I go to college!Mentor: You both could take that class in college! There are lots of coolconcepts in science so if you have any questions about them, let me knowand we can talk about them!Discussion and implicationsOur findings illustrate the emergence of a media-based mentoring process characterized by a central theme ofreframing relationships and reframing perspectives. Through collaborative reflection, participants reframed theirperceptions of roles with each other and reframed their perceptions of roles with science and the video game.The dialogue wasn’t just about content. It was about relationships to that content and what participants could dowith those relationships. They could test out a hypothesis, think about a novel idea, build an argument, or planfor their futures. For example, as the middle school youth and their mentors interacted around an acid rainhypothesis, they stepped back from the action in order to perceive their action and potential actions fromdifferent viewpoints. They discussed their relationship with the game when they talked about going to thefuture “to see if our new rules have worked out.” Throughout the mentoring process, participants discussed whatthey could do with the content or with the game and what they could do with their relationship with the content.The process of media-based mentoring impacted the ways our participants talked about and viewed their realand future worlds. In alignment with unified discourse theory, we found that the language of mentoringfunctioned not only as a vehicle for conveying information, but also as a means for building things and doingthings in the world. The language of media-based mentoring functioned to enact changes in relationships andchanges in perspectives for the participants in our study.ReferencesBarab, S.A., & Arici, A. (2014, April 4). Game-infused science curriculum: From transformational play to realworld impact. Paper presented at the 2014 annual meeting of the American Educational ResearchAssociation. Retrieved July 1, 2015, from the AERA Online Paper Repository.Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative analysis. Los Angles,CA: Sage.Gee, J.P. (2015). Unified discourse analysis: Language, reality, virtual worlds, and video games. New York,NY: Routledge.Gould, D. & Parekh, P. (2017). Mentoring and argumentation in a game-infused science curriculum. Journal ofScience Education and Technology. doi:10.1007/s10956-017-9717-x.O’Neill, D.K. (2004). Building social capital in a knowledge-building community: Telementoring as a catalyst.Interactive Learning Environmnents 12(3), 179-208.1772