Examining the Real and Perceived Impacts of a Public IdeaRepository on Literacy and Science InquiryCamillia Matuk, New York University, cmatuk@nyu.eduMarcia C. Linn, University of California, Berkeley, mclinn@berkeley.eduAbstract: Public idea repositories can facilitate beneficial interactions among students. Theymoreover offer contexts for developing inquiry and literacy skills, as they position students aswriters, and not just reviewers of science. Access to peers’ ideas can diversify students’thinking, but also reinforce existing understanding. We investigate the real and perceivedimpacts of different prompts for students’ use of peers’ ideas. 144 middle school students usedan online tool to exchange ideas during a science inquiry unit. Students prompted to seek ideasdifferent from their own perceived their peers as having greater impact on their thinking thanstudents prompted to seek ideas that reinforced their own. Although students’ revisions afterexchanging ideas showed no actual change, students who diversified their ideas later showedsignificantly greater pre to post test gains. These findings suggest ways that technologies canbe designed to best support students in taking advantage of peers as learning resources.Keywords: public idea repositories, science inquiry, literacy, middle school, collaborative web-basedcurriculum tools, design experimentIntroductionA principle in designing collaborative learning is to encourage exposure to others’ ideas (Scardamalia, 2002). Incomparing and contrasting different points of view, students strengthen their own understanding. Whereas it canbe difficult for teachers to coordinate and track face-to-face interactions among their many students, technologycan relieve some of this logistic burden, and promote students’ exposure to others’ ideas in ways that bothimprove and motivate science learning (e.g., Looki, Chen & Ng, 2009).Public knowledge repositories, through which students can exchange ideas, offer authentic contexts fordeveloping collaborative inquiry skills. Importantly, participating in the construction of a public knowledgerepository positions students as writers, and not just reviewers of science (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1993). Itchallenges them to articulate their understanding and as well as to select, evaluate, organize, synthesize, andinterpret new ideas in relation to existing ones. This can help develop students’ broader information literacy,which includes, among other things, an understanding of authority as constructed and contextual; of informationas having value and of its creation as being a process; and of scholarship as being a conversation (ACRL, 2015).Standards in information literacy emphasize the ability to use both divergent and convergent searchstrategies, but also to seek multiple perspectives when gathering and assessing information (ACRL, 2015).Whereas it is generally assumed that exposure to peers’ ideas is valuable because it help diversify students’ ownideas and expand their thinking, this exposure can also help refine and reinforce their existing understanding.For example, in a previous study, we examined the ideas students drew from their peers during a science inquiryunit, and the effects these had on their later written scientific explanations (Matuk & Linn, 2014). We found thatstudents who sought peers’ ideas that were redundant to their own were more likely to produce better qualityexplanations than students who sought ideas that diverged from their own. It was hypothesized that seekingredundant information amounted to refining one’s own thinking, and imparted the benefit of learning by selfexplanation (Roy & Chi, 2005). Meanwhile, other students may have sought diverse ideas because they werestill exploring possibilities, and had not yet determined the key ideas necessary for a normative explanation.Thus, being drawn to divergent ideas may have been a red flag for students who required more conceptualguidance. These findings suggest there is more to know about which learners benefit from one strategy over theother, and when.Two questions are pertinent, both for their relevance in designing and understanding the role oftechnology in supporting collaborative science inquiry, and in understanding the role of public knowledgerepositories in general information literacy. One question is: What is the benefit of seeking divergent vs.convergent ideas on students’ understanding? The impacts of each approach will gauge students’ abilities toselect and apply relevant information to a task. A second question is: What benefit do students perceive inexchanging ideas with peers? Their perceptions will gauge students’ abilities to value others’ ideas, as well as torecognize the need to evaluate others’ contributions, which will vary in usefulness and relevance according toCSCL 2015 Proceedings150© ISLSthe task. Both questions address students’ awareness of their participation in an information-sharing community,and of the responsibilities this entails with respect to handling information.Research questionsIn this study, we ask what explicit instruction to seek contrasting vs. confirming points of view might revealabout the value of each approach. We investigate the impact on students’ understanding when they are promptedto draw upon their peers to either diversify or reinforce their own ideas. Specifically: (1) How do students viewthe impact of their peers’ ideas on their own understanding? (2) How do students revise their answers inresponse to their peers’ ideas? and (3) How does diversifying vs. reinforcing ideas impact students’ generalconceptual understanding of a given topic?WISE and the Idea ManagerWe investigated these questions in the context of the Web-based Inquiry Science Environment (WISE). WISE isan open-source learning environment that offers a platform for authoring multimedia-rich units, and formonitoring, grading, and giving feedback on student work (Slotta & Linn, 2009). A library of adaptableclassroom-tested middle and high school science inquiry units is available at wise.berkeley.edu.This study uses the Idea Manager, a tool within WISE designed to promote the collaborative exchangeof ideas during online science inquiry units (Matuk & Linn, 2014). Based upon the Knowledge Integration (KI)pattern of instruction, the Idea Manager guides students in integrating their prior fragmented ideas into acoherent understanding, first eliciting students’ existing ideas, and then iteratively guiding them in organizing,distinguishing, and reflecting upon those ideas (Linn & Eylon, 2011). The tool thus emphasizes the developmentof information literacy by encouraging students to meaningfully organize and synthesize information fromvarious sources, to monitor gaps in understanding, and to draw conclusions based on the interpretation ofinformation gathered (ARCL, 2015). The Idea Manager scaffolds this process by breaking it down intomanageable steps, providing a persistent space within which students can document their prior and existingideas (Figure 1, left), share them with their classmates (Figure 1, right), and organize them as they prepare towrite an explanation (Figure 2). WISE meanwhile logs the content of students’ ideas; when these were added,shared, revised, or deleted; and with whom they were exchanged. Thus, in addition to scaffolding students’collaborative inquiry, the tool also provides a record with which researchers can examine students’ developingunderstanding (Matuk & King Chen, 2011), including the role of peers.Figure 1. Left: Interface from Mitosis for adding ideas to the Private Basket. Right: Interface from Mitosis forselecting ideas from the Public BasketCSCL 2015 Proceedings151© ISLSFigure 2. Interface from Mitosis for sorting ideas before recommending an effective cancer medicineMethodsParticipantsParticipants were the 144 students across five class periods taught by one Grade 7 science teacher. The schoolwas located on the west coast of the United States, and served a diverse but affluent student population. Theteacher had more than 6 years of experience teaching with WISE, including previous versions of Mitosis.The Mitosis unitWe integrated the Idea Manager into a middle school life sciences unit freely available at wise.berkeley.edu. InWhat makes a good cancer medicine?: Observing mitosis and cell processes (aka, Mitosis), students worked inpairs to explore videos, animations, and microscopic imagery of dividing cells as they learn about cancer and thephases of cell division. Throughout the unit, students used the Idea Manager to collect their observations,exchange ideas with peers, and sort ideas by dragging and dropping them into categories to prepare their writtenrecommendations (Matuk & Linn, 2013). As a culminating activity, students examined separate animations ofthree dividing cells, each treated with a different plant-derived cancer treatment, and compared these to normalcell division. Students then refined an argument for the most effective cancer medicine based on theirobservations. For whichever option they chose (neither one being more or less correct), students were asked towrite recommendations that integrated ideas about the roles of cell structures in the phases of cell division, themechanism of cancer, and the action of an effective cancer medication (i.e., to stop cell division).Study designThe study design is as follows (Figure 3). All students spent eight consecutive school days working in pairs tocomplete the Mitosis unit while their teacher and a researcher circulated the classroom to offer assistance asneeded. The teacher also led whole class discussions each day to provide conceptual and logistic guidance.Throughout Mitosis, all student pairs collected ideas in their Private Baskets, and organized and usedthese to support written recommendations for which of three plants would make the most effective cancermedicine. Students were then encouraged to contribute the ideas they used in their recommendations to a PublicBasket, which was visible to their classmates. Students were then asked to visit the Public Basket and to select atleast one of their peers’ ideas to add to their Private Baskets.Students were divided by class period into two groups. (Although this produced an uneven number ofstudents in each group, we favored this approach because it made the job of grading students’ work easier forthe teacher.) Students in the Diversify group (Periods 2 and 5, N=59) were prompted to select ideas they did notalready have. Students in the Reinforce group (Periods 1, 3, and 7, N=85) were prompted to select ideas thatsupported their existing ideas. All students were then encouraged to revise their initial recommendations basedon these newly added ideas. Before advancing through the unit, students were asked to compare and contrast thenew ideas with their existing ideas, to articulate what they modified on revising their recommendations, and toexplain how their peers’ ideas helped improve those recommendations.Students spent an additional two days—one before and one after the unit—to individually complete apre and posttest. Items on these tests were designed to measure conceptual understanding of the mechanisms of,and the relationship between cancer and cell division. Students were asked to order images and explain theCSCL 2015 Proceedings152© ISLSimportance of specific phases of the cell cycle, and to propose and explain the effect of an effective drug basedon their understanding of cancer and mitosis. One item was designed to capture students’ abilities to evaluatenew vs. existing ideas when constructing scientific explanations. This item asked students to select from a rangeof given ideas, one that they would add to an existing repertoire of ideas that would help create a completeexplanation for the role of spindle fibers in cell division.In addition to the written responses to the embedded items and pre and posttest assessments, we alsoasked for students’ impressions of the unit upon their completion of it. In an online survey, we specificallyasked students what they liked best about the unit, and what they felt could be improved.Add ideas to the Private Idea BasketWrite initial recommendationVisit the Public Idea BasketDiversify groupselects different ideasReinforce group selectssimilar ideasRevise initial recommendationFigure 3. Study design, showing the sequence of activities throughout the Mitosis unitData and analysesMeasuring the perceived and actual impact of peers’ ideasTo measure students’ perceptions of the impact of their peers’ ideas on their thinking, we scored the embeddeditems, in which students reported what they changed in their initial recommendations, and how they felt theirpeers’ ideas helped improve their responses. Our scoring rubric had four levels, which ranged from reports of noeffect of their peers’ ideas, to a reinforcement of existing ideas, to reports that peers’ ideas encouragedelaboration of existing ideas, to reports that peers’ ideas entirely changed students’ initial points of view (Table1). We used a similar rubric to measure the actual impact of peers’ ideas on students’ understanding. Based onthe differences between the initial and revised recommendations, scores ranged from peers ideas having noimpact (i.e., students made no revisions to their recommendations), to having changed students’ initial thinking(Table 2).Table 1: Rubric for measuring the perceived impact of peers’ ideas on students’ revisionsScore1234DescriptionNo change. Students report making nochanges to the content and wording oftheir initial recommendation.Increased confidence in existingideas. Students report altering thewording without changing the contentof their recommendation.Detail added. Students reportincluding new information thatelaborates without changing thecontent of their recommendation.Major changes. Students reportchanging their initial point of view.CSCL 2015 ProceedingsExamplewe did not change our recommendation it stayed the sameWe didnt change our opinion about plant A being the bestmedicine but looking at the other ideas we grew more surebecause it increased our knowledge of the plant.the thing that we changed about our recomendation based onthe ideas we got from the public idea basket is that we gotmore information to explain what happened to the cell when itwas treated with plant bWe changed our guess o(f) which plant to use. We saw others'ideas and thought that they made more sense. Plant Bsuddenly felt better than Plant A.153© ISLSTable 2: Rubric for measuring the actual impact of peers’ ideas on students’ revisionsScore1234DescriptionNo change. Therevision maintainsthe content andwording of the initialrecommendation.Some initial detailmay be lost onrevision.Reworded. Therevision restates thecontent in differentwords but maintainsthe same level ofdetail in the contentDetail added. Therevision elaborateswithout changing thecontent of the initialrecommendation.Major changes. Therevision reflects adifferent point ofview from the initialrecommendation.ExampleInitial: C-both of the cells die. We chose this one even though there is achance of other cells dies. On the A plant, the cell become useless. On plant b,one cell dies, the other is still alive.Revised: We want plant C because it kills the cell, so it cant multiply any moreInitial: I think its B because having no chromosomes is not as bad as notreproducing, or chromosomes non stop growing.Revised: we still think that plant b is most effective because the cell stillreproduces even though it has no chromosomesInitial: We think that Plant A will solve cancer because it stops the spindlefibers from creating the two new cells. Therefore, mitosis is stopped and cellswon't divide as much. Because of that cancer will slow down and might finallybe cured. But, there is also a possibility that Plant A will stop cell divisionforever. Also, Plants B and C still let the cells divide, but the medicine stillaffects the cell.Revised: We think that Plant A will solve cancer because it stops the spindlefibers from creating the two new cells. Therefore, mitosis is stopped and cellswon't divide as much. Because of that cancer will slow down and might finallybe cured. But, there is also a possibility that Plant A will stop cell divisionforever. Also, Plant B still creates new cells although one of the cells doesn'thave a chromosome. Plant C also creates more cells even though they both gettheir nuclei bigger.Initial: We would use the plant A because it stops mitosis earlier than theother, because it doesn't mess up the cell with its normal function. we wouldnot chose plant B because it doesn't stop cell division it like mess the normaldivision and that can makes a worse problem. We didn't chose plant C becauseit stops mitosis to late, it mess around the process and it make's it worse andbecause they would be two different cells but without a nuclear membrane, andthat is bad.Revised: We think that plant B is the best medical treatment because inAnaphase one of the cells will not have chromosomes and that will kill one ofthe cells because every cell needs chromosomes to survive. Another reason isthat after that happens the cell that doesn't have the chromosomes will die andwe will keep with only one cell, then that cell will divide and it is better thatonly one cell divides than if the two divide, because you will get less cells aftercell division so that medicine will control the cancer.We didn't chose plant A because plant A stops cell division so then the cellwill not do mitosis again. It stops the spindle fibers from lining up thechromosomes, and that stopped mitosis,and if the cell does mitosis the sameeach time it does it, that will make the cell never do mitosis again. That will bebad for the body to function, because will wouldn't have cells to function.We didn't chose plant C because it does it very slow and it mess up the cell.It doesn't make Telophase and that is important for the cell to work in order. Itwill make that one cell have a nuclear membrane and the other one not and thatis not good for the cell. The one that doesn't have the nuclear membrane itexpands through the cell, and then it will function messily.That is why we chose plant B, it will be more effective and will not damagethe cell.Measuring pre and posttest gainsWe used unique Knowledge Integration rubrics to score each item of the pre and posttests. These 4-point rubricscredit responses that correctly link key ideas. One item, for example, asked students to “Explain the effect yourdrug would have on the different parts of the cell in that phase, and how this would help keep cancer growthCSCL 2015 Proceedings154© ISLSunder control.” For complete normative responses, we sought at least three key ideas, including anunderstanding that an effective medicine would stop cell division, a mention of the organelles affected, and anexplanation of how the medicine would disrupt the normal actions of those organelles. Responses that correctlylinked these three ideas received full marks, while those that linked fewer ideas received fewer marks. Weaveraged the KI scores across all items to obtain overall pre and posttest scores for each student.Findings and discussionPerceived and actual impact of peers’ ideas4Actual impact ofpeers’ ideasPerceived impact ofpeers’ ideasThere was an overall significant difference between conditions in the perceived impact of peers’ ideas (t=2.794,df=60.485, p=.007) (Figure 4, left). Specifically, students prompted to choose ideas different from their ownwere more likely to report these ideas as having helped them add details or modify their thinking (M=3.17).Meanwhile, students prompted to choose ideas similar to their own were more likely to report these ideas ashaving merely increased their confidence in their existing ideas, or as having had no impact on their thinking atall (M=2.65).In measuring the actual impact of peers’ ideas on students’ revisions, it appeared that students whosought to reinforce their ideas also tended to view their revisions as simple rewordings or additions of detail totheir initial recommendations compared to students who sought to diversify their ideas (Figure 5, right).However, this trend was not significant. That is, in spite of their perceived impacts, there did not appear to beany real impact on students’ revisions between the Diversify (M=3.22) and Reinforce (M=3.13) conditions(t=0.388, df=47.425, p=.700) (Figure 5).Together, these results suggest that peers’ ideas had a bigger perceived than actual impact on students’thinking.3.172.65321043.223.13DiversifyReinforce3210DiversifyReinforceFrequencyFigure 4. The perceived (left) and actual (right) impact of peers’ ideas on students’ written recommendations16141210864201515158633DiversifyReinforce1No changeRewordedAdded Detail Changed IdeasKind of revisionFigure 5. Frequencies of the kinds of revisions made by conditionPre and post test gainsThere were significant differences in pre to post test gains between conditions (t=2.136, df=122.948, p=0.03).Students who drew on their peers to diversify their ideas performed better on the posttest (M=1.19) thanCSCL 2015 Proceedings155© ISLSstudents who drew on their peers to reinforce their existing ideas (M=0.911). Thus, whereas the earlier resultssuggest there may not be any immediate or direct impact, prompting students to diversify as opposed toreinforce their ideas with those of their peers can ultimately promote more general conceptual understanding ofthe topic.Other impacts of technology for sharing ideasCollaborative tools such as the Idea Manager support a process of science inquiry that is more authentic thantypical classroom science instruction. Such tools also have important motivational qualities. Indeed, studentsappeared to enjoy the ability to exchange ideas with their peers. As they commented in the survey at the end ofthe unit: “i liked how i could make an idea and share it with my class” and “I liked working together to combineour ideas.”For some students, the benefit of being able to access their peers’ ideas appeared to extend beyondmere perception to actually encouraging revisiting and reconsideration of evidence in the unit, skills that areintegral to science inquiry. As these students describe the impact of their peers: “they helped us see somemistakes , that the treated cells made, that we didnt see. Such as how in the plant C treated cell the chromosomesexpanded and got bigger.”	  At the same time, access to a public repository of ideas also made it possible for students to be swayedby popular opinion. This student pair, who revised their response to recommend Plant B over Plant A, explains:“We saw more people that said the same thing about Plant B. They all were talking about one pair ofchromosomes being killed. This felt better than A, which was the spindle fibers retracting. There were morePlant B than A explanations.”Conclusions and implicationsThis study investigated different ways of prompting the use of a collaborative tool to help students takeadvantage of their peers’ ideas. In offering a public repository for ideas within an online science inquiry unit, wefound that students perceived their peers as having greater impact on their thinking when encouraged to draw ontheir peers to diversify as opposed to reinforce their own ideas. In spite of students’ perceptions, there were noimpacts seen in students’ actual revisions.This finding may indicate an inability for students to realize the influence of new information on theirunderstanding. Alternatively, it may be an artifact of the task design. Recall that an explicit prompt for studentsto either diversify or to reinforce their ideas was followed by a prompt to detail the impact of their actions. Theformal context of this task may have led students to respond in a way that demonstrated that they followed theinstructions, rather than to express recognition of real the impacts of their peers. Meanwhile, the fact thatstudents who sought to diversify their ideas during the unit later showed greater pre to posttest gains thanstudents who sought to reinforce their ideas, may indicate a real learning benefit in the diversification of ideas,at least among this group of students.With more data, we might verify whether evening out the numbers of participants in each group wouldaffect the significance of our findings. With more data, we might also quantify the observations made in thecases selected for our analysis. Nevertheless, our results suggest that explicit prompts to draw on a range ofpeers’ ideas may encourage students to reconsider evidence and revise their own thinking. These are importantpractices to cultivate in developing science inquiry skills. Although these effects may not be immediate, theyappear to have longer-term, and more general advantages. At the same time, there is evidence that some studentsare prone to be persuaded by the majority opinion rather than to objectively weigh peers’ ideas. Theimplications of such behaviors over time, possibly in contributing to an increasingly homogenous publicknowledge repository, deserve further investigation. What is clear is that the use of such repositories is thus notwithout caveats, and students may benefit from support in evaluating new information as they are exposed totheir peers’ ideas.Further analyses will examine how the content of students’ recommendations may have improved as aresult of exposure to their peers’ ideas, and what may have been the relative benefits of the kinds of revisionsmade as a result of diversifying vs. reinforcing ideas. Questions that remain for future investigation include:When in the inquiry process is it more helpful to diversify vs. reinforce one’s ideas, and for which kinds ofstudents (e.g., low vs. high prior knowledge)? How important is the perceived source of new information (e.g.,classmates, teachers, or authoritative text)? Finally, what might be the teacher’s role in moderating students’interactions within these public online spaces?In all, this study reveals more about how tools such as the Idea Manager can help students draw on theknowledge of their peers to make sense of scientific ideas; improve literacy in general, as well as literacy inCSCL 2015 Proceedings156© ISLSscience; and help students recognize the responsibility associated with being part of a community of knowledgebuilders.ReferencesAssociation of College & Research Libraries (ACRL). (2015, February 2). Framework for Information Literacyfor Higher Education. Retrieved February 13, 2015, fromhttp://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/ilframework.Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B. S. (2011). Science learning and instruction: Taking advantage of technology topromote knowledge integration. New York: Routledge.Looi, C. K., Chen, W., & Ng, F. K. (2010). Collaborative activities enabled by GroupScribbles (GS): Anexploratory study of learning effectiveness. Computers & Education, 54(1), 14-26.Matuk, C. & Linn, M. C. (2014). Exploring a digital tool for exchanging ideas during science inquiry. InICLS'14: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference for the Learning Sciences, Boulder:International Society of the Learning Sciences.Matuk, C. F. & Linn, M. C. (2013, April 27 - May 1). Technology Integration to Scaffold and Assess StudentsUse of Visual Evidence In Science Inquiry. Paper presented at the American Educational ResearchAssociation Meeting (AERA2013): Education and Poverty: Theory, Research, Policy and Praxis, SanFrancisco, CA, USA.Matuk, C., & King Chen, J. (2011, March). WISE Ideas: A technology-enhanced curriculum to scaffoldstudents' generating data, managing evidence, and reasoning about the seasons. Teacher design focusgroup presented at the Cyberlearning Tools for STEM Education Conference. Berkeley, CA.Roy, M., & Chi, M. T. (2005). The self-explanation principle in multimedia learning. The Cambridge handbookof multimedia learning, 271-286.Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith(Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67–98). Chicago: Open Court.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1993). Technologies for knowledge-building discourse. Communications of theACM, 36(5), 37-41.Slotta, J. D., & Linn, M. C. (2009). WISE science: Web-based inquiry in the classroom. Teachers College Press.AcknowledgmentsWe thank participating teachers and students, and funding from NSF (Award #1119670) to the ContinuousLearning and Automated Scoring in Science (CLASS) project.CSCL 2015 Proceedings157© ISLS