Architectures for Learning and Successive Processes of ScalingPakon Ko, The University of Hong Kong, kopakon@hku.hkKhe Foon Hew, The University of Hong Kong, kfhew@hku.hkAbstract: This study examines how school-level learning architectures affect the scalability ofan innovation by conceptualizing scalability as successive scaling-up processes from the scaleup of teacher reform capacity to the result of spread. A longitudinal qualitative two-case studywas conducted at two different schools, in the context of developing self-directed learningpractice. The results showed how components of learning architectures affected successivescaling-up processes. These are components to be monitored at the school level for innovationat scale.Keywords: architectures for learning, scaling up, self-directed learning, teacher reform capacityIntroduction and backgroundPrevious research studies suggest that scalability is affected by the design of an intervention (Clarke & Dede,2009) and the construction of teacher community networks (Glennan & Resnick, 2004). Relatively less researchhas been conducted to examine what and how school contextual factors can significantly hinder scalability whenschools have tried to enact reform initiatives.This study examines the effect of school contextual factors on a school’s scale-up progress within theperiod of project intervention, drawing on the concept of learning architectures (Wenger, 1998, Law, et al., 2015).It is in the context of a three-year government-funded project in Hong Kong to promote self-directed learning(SDL) in science education from 2014-2017. SDL presented an innovative practice as science teachers in HongKong have traditionally adopted the teacher-directed lecture approach.Conceptual frameworkFigure 2. The successive scaling-up processesFigure 1. The successive scale-up modelThis study develops a successive scale-up model (figure 1) to hypothesize the relationship between componentsof learning architectures at the school level with the scaling-up processes. In the model, scalability of an innovationis conceptualized as successive scaling-up processes (figure 2) from the scale-up of teacher reform capacity to thescale-up of the number of participating entities in the quality reform, building on Coburn’s (2003) four dimensionsin scalability: depth, shift in reform ownership, sustainability and spread. Teacher reform capacity is defined asthe abilities of school teachers to accomplish a certain task, such as leading a school-innovation effort (e.g.,adopting a SDL approach in primary and secondary school science education as is the case in the present study),embodying depth of reform knowledge, belief and ownership (Bandura, 1977; Gibbons, 2003). Law, et al. (2015)have proposed components for analyzing learning architectures. Building on their work, this study proposes fourICLS 2018 Proceedings1533© ISLSmajor components of learning architectures for school level analysis: (a) organizational supports; (b) external andfocused interaction mechanisms among key reform teachers; (c) artifacts and enacted outcomes as a result ofteacher learning through external and focused interactions; and (d) internal interaction mechanism for growingteacher capacity beyond the project team.MethodsA qualitative case study approach was adopted to understand each unit of analysis with an interpretation of data.Two schools A and B were sampled (table 1) because they showed significant differences in the progress ofadopting SDL in science even though they joined the project in the same period for two years, working with thesame university consultant, who is one of the authors. Data sources in the project included principal and teacherinterviews, lesson observations, lesson artifacts, and student focus groups. Information and perspectives providedby different sources were compared. Data analysis was guided by the six components in the conceptual framework(figure 1).Table 1: Information about the two selected schoolsSchoolJoined theproject atthe sameyear?ABYesYesWorkedwith thesameUniversityconsultant?YesYesNo. of teachersenacting SDL in science1st year2nd year231↓5↑The grade-level with SDL inscience1st year2nd yearGrade 8Grade 7Grade 7Grades 7 and 8 ↑Findings and conclusionCompared with school B, project teachers in school A had relatively weak organizational supports and sparseinteraction mechanisms. Subsequently insufficient teacher reform capacity was developed and the scaling-upprocesses in school A broke down. The organizational supports in school B facilitated strong focused internalmechanism among project teachers for creating artifacts to perpetuate ideas. Hence, teacher reform capacity wasbuilt. Intense internal mechanism between project teachers and non-project teachers were strategically arrangedfor growing more reform-capable teachers and spreading SDL to more science classrooms. The two-case analysiswith the successive scale-up model attests the impact of components of school-level learning architectures on thescaling-up processes. Schools are suggested to monitor these components for succeeding in building capacity tospread innovative practice.With limited space, this study does not expand the focus to investigate how leadership affects the strengthof components of learning architectures in the model. Principals and teacher leaders might be the architects,contributors and advisors of the school-level learning architectures, while at the same time they are also under theinfluence of it. Further research is needed to see whether the stronger components in school B is attributed to theinvolvement of the principal and the two teacher leaders in the team.ReferencesBandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. Psychological review, 84(2),191.Clarke, J., & Dede, C. (2009). Design for scalability: A case study of the River City curriculum. Journal of ScienceEducation and Technology, 18(4), 353-365.Coburn, C. E. (2003). Rethinking scale: Moving beyond numbers to deep and lasting change. Educationalresearcher, 32(6), 3-12.Gibbons, M. (2003). The self-directed learning handbook: Challenging adolescent students to excel. John Wiley& Sons.Glennan Jr, T. K., & Resnick, L. B. (2004). School districts as learning organizations: A strategy for scalingeducation reform. Expanding the reach of educational reforms: Perspectives from leaders in the scaleup of educational interventions, 517-563.Law, N. W. Y., Yuen, J. K. L., & Lee, Y. (2015). Precarious school level scalability amid network level resilience:insights from a multilevel multiscale model of scalability. In Annual Meeting of the AmericanEducational Research Association, AERA 2015. Chicago, IL.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge university press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1534© ISLS