Designing Technology as a Cultural Broker for Young Children:Challenges and OpportunitiesYanghee Kim, Northern Illinois University, ykim9@niu.eduSherry Marx, Utah State University, sherry.marx@usu.eduHung Pham, The University of Wateroo, hv.pham.2704@gmail.comTung T. Nguyen, Auburn University, tungisu@gmail.comAbstract: This study developed a socio-technical learning community of a humanoid robot,one child from a native-English-speaking background, and one child from a Spanish-speakingbackground, both living in the U.S. Grounded in pedagogical and communication theories, thebilingual robot mediated the two children’s interaction activities to invite both children toparticipate equitably. Core research questions included i) What are the challenges in designinga robot to mediate equitable, collaborative interactions among young children? and ii) Whatthemes arise in children's interactions with the robot and each other? We adopted a designresearch approach to developing interaction episodes and the robot's mediating utterances,where our designs were continuously revised as we observed triadic interactions in a naturalkindergarten setting. This paper discusses our design experiences, as well as themes thatemerged from ethnographic observations over a four-month period.The major issue addressedRecent National Assessment of Educational Progress test results in the U.S. indicate an achievement gap and avery flat trajectory for lower-performing students, especially language and cultural minority students (McFarland,et al., 2017). More problematically, deficit thinking and marginalization prevalent in the classroom have taken atoll on both the learning and the identity of these students. Minority children are often viewed by educators andclassmates as having deficits in language and culture that prevent them from successfully contributing to theclassroom community (Valencia, 2010). Over time, children can adopt these messages and learn to identifythemselves with marginalized communities. This identification with marginalization can start as early aspreschool and become more entrenched as children grow older (Van Ausdale & Feagin, 2001). Once they developa negative learner identity, children are less likely to recognize mainstream paths to success through schooling(Nasir, 2002). The high dropout rates for minority students in U.S. schools are tied to this marginalization fromthe mainstream learning communities of schools and classrooms (Gándara, 2010). Even though many studentsreach proficiency levels in English language as they move through their school years, their academic achievementoften times does not improve. Rather, the dropout rates of language minority students increase as they age (Boone,2013).In reality, children coming from diverse backgrounds can enrich the mainstream school culture with theirunique cultural and linguistic assets if they are only given the chance to do so (Vasquez et al., 2011). It is verywarranted to provide an inclusive learning community, where every student is valued and welcome. In such acommunity, all children are encouraged to build on their prior experiences (Donovan & Bransford, 2005) toparticipate actively and make progress toward academic success. While coordinating educator training and effortsto overcome unconstructive deficit thinking is imperative, such processes can be quite time consuming anddifficult to achieve as educator beliefs about children are often subconscious and difficult to change (Borg, 2009).As an alternative, the authors explore ways to provide an inclusive and equitable learning community for diversechildren quickly, with the help of an unbiased, embodied technology, in this case a humanoid robot.In our research introduced in this paper, we sought to develop a socio-technical, inclusive learningcommunity of a robot and children, where the robot might facilitate equitable collaborative interactions amongchildren coming from different backgrounds. We first developed the theoretical model for robot-mediatedcollaborative interactions, grounded in theories of child development, multicultural education, and interculturalcommunication. This model was implemented in human-mediated and robot-mediated interaction activitiessequentially with kindergarten children. The robot’s mediating utterances and the interaction activities wererefined in an iterative cycle as we ethnographically observed the interactive sessions in a classroom setting.Potential significance of the workAs the student population becomes increasingly diverse worldwide, designing inclusive school learningenvironments that embrace linguistic and cultural diversity has been a constant challenge. Also, being able tocollaborate and appreciate differences are essential skills children need to master as they grow inside and outsideICLS 2018 Proceedings88© ISLSschools. However, these skills are not always addressed in regular school curricula. This study explored using ahumanoid robot to help close this gap, creating an inclusive socio-technical community where children learn towork together equitably regardless of their backgrounds. As we observed children’s interactions with each otherand with the robot in a natural setting at their school, we were better able to identify children’s needs and learnwhat worked well and what was lacking in our designs. Here, we discuss our design challenges and lessonslearned, which could be useful to other researchers designing for young children.Research in learning sciences has traditionally treated cognition and affect as distinct constructs andexplained the processes and roles of cognition and emotions for learning separately. However, recentneuroscientific research informs us that our thinking, feeling, and context are by nature invariably intertwined(Immordino-Yang, 2016). That is, children’s emotions and cultural contexts serve as an inseparable rudder tosteer their learning and intellectual development. In designing programs, therefore, learners' holistic experiencesas intellectual, social, and cultural beings should be taken into account in order to bring successful learning in thelong term. Likewise, the development of positive learner identities through positive learning experiences isequally as important as academic skill development since positive identity is foundational for persistence inlearning difficult topics, resilience to failure, and academic success. Our design approach to a supportive sociotechnical learning community aims to reinforce positive social and emotional experiences as children developacademically.Technologically, we have a long way to go to be able to implement natural dialogue between a robot andchildren. In general, research on designing for young children has not been as popular as designing for upper agegroups. Speech and voice technology, particularly, is quite limited in recognizing young children’s speech. Thereis a great need for children’s interaction data to help build analytic models to advance this area of research. Acorpus of speech data sets generated by this study can be a resource for researchers in natural language processing,who are interested in designing tools for young children.Theoretical BackgroundDevelopmentally appropriate, multicultural pedagogyAccording to child development research, kindergarten-aged children improve in fine and gross motor skills(Radesky, Schumacher, & Zuckerman, 2015) and like to engage in fantasy play (Giménez-Dasí, Pons, &Bender, 2014). They are rarely able to sit quietly for long periods and like to spend much of their time with peers.They become aware of themselves in relation to peers and begin comparing their performance to that of theirpeers, recognizing that the needs of others are often different from their own. Their family and culturalbackgrounds have a great influence on their developmental characteristics. Not surprisingly, large individualdifferences are observed in motor agility, temperament, sociability, and academic performance amongkindergarteners. For this age group, therefore, developmentally appropriate pedagogy may involve i)accommodating diversity in interests, background knowledge, and talents; ii) allowing children’s play andautonomy; iii) encouraging children to explore fantasy worlds; iv) providing the opportunity to practice new skills;and v) guiding children in ways to successfully interact with peers (e.g., in resolving conflict and playing incollaboration).Multicultural pedagogy acknowledges children as cultural beings and fosters an egalitarian view of diverselanguages and cultures (Paris, 2012; Ladson-Billings, 2009). This pedagogy seeks to make use of children's priorlinguistic and cultural heritage in the design of curricular materials and learning activities. In a culturallysustaining learning community, a child’s home language and culture are respected as assets rather than deficits.These assets, or funds of knowledge (González, Moll, & Amanti, 2009), help children maintain a positive identityand transfer knowledge and skills from home to school (Moll, Amanti, Neff, & Gonzalez, 1992). Children areinvited to share their cultural experiences and have an opportunity to become fully-engaged participants in thedesign of learning activities. In such a supportive community, all children may develop intellectually, socially,and culturally in an equitable way.Intercultural communicationCommunication is a process through which individuals or groups share information to develop understanding ofeach other and the world in which they live. Effective communication involves not only explicit verbal and nonverbal exchanges but also the interlocutors’ social, affective, and cultural characteristics, largely influenced bythe context where the communication takes place (Carter & Fuller, 2016).Identity is not only personal but also social and cultural since how we view ourselves is moulded throughinteraction with others (Harré & Moghaddam, 2003). When involved in a dialogue, we maintain our own uniquesense of individual identity and build a common base of understanding (Bakhtin, 1987). By telling our personalICLS 2018 Proceedings89© ISLSstories, we get closer, bond, and disclose things about ourselves. Empathy and listening with unconditionalpositive regard for one another are key to meaningful communication since these actions create a supportivepsychological climate where the interlocutors will be willing to tell their stories (Littlejohn & Foss, 2011).An opportunity to participate repeatedly in communicative contexts with empathy and positive regardare especially important for interlocutors coming from different cultures. Newcomers to a community learn themeanings shared in the community and participate in communal conversation, through which they negotiatebetween individual self-concept and community membership. Through prolonged exposure to the new culture,newcomers come to transcend their original culture and gradually build up new cultural schemas. Culturalschemas are sets of knowledge about appropriate behaviors and roles in specific situations in a particular culture.They are created from repeated participation in interactions with people who share common cultures in the samesituation (Nishida, 2005).A model of cultural mediationFrom the review of educational and communication literature, we have derived three core approaches to the robot'scultural brokering actions: invitation, opportunity, and empathy. Invitation is necessary to welcome children intoa learning community where they will be positioned as contributing, integral members. Opportunity is a set ofcircumstances that is frequently under-supplied in many formal education settings. With the robot, children willbe given ample opportunity to initiate their interactions, practice conversation topics repeatedly, and participatein creative, challenging activities. Empathy requires that children be treated with respect and understanding; it isclosely linked to relationship building that supports social and intellectual growth (Gudykunst, 2005; Littlejohn& Foss, 2011).In addition, robot mediation aims to help children achieve three communicative goals (building commonground, building an equitable partnership, and building a co-cultural schema), which offer optimal conditionsfor equitable, inter-cultural communication. The first step for enabling children to work together is buildingcommon ground. Children need to feel comfortable with each other and share their personal stories in order toestablish a minimum level of common experience and trust. Equitable partnerships emphasize that another’sautonomy and identity are as important as one’s own. This respect is developed through careful listening, opennessto new experience, and collaborative interactions. Cultural schemas are built up through repetitive experiences incultural situations. While they engage in interactive, imaginative activities in the robot-mediated learningcommunity, children co-construct meaning, understanding, and identity in the unique activities they share.Guided by this mediation model, we have instantiated a socio-technical interactive triad of two culturallyand linguistically diverse children and a bilingual robot as an interaction mediator. Our design research took agrounded-theory approach and started with two foundational questions: i) What are the challenges in designing arobot to mediate equitable, collaborative interactions among young children? ii) What themes arise in children'sinteractions with the robot and each other?Methodological approaches pursuedOver a span of one semester, we conducted design research, where we crafted initial designs for triadic interactionsand refined them as we reflected upon our own designs and ethnographically observed children’s reactions to therobot and their interactions with each other in a natural kindergarten setting. For given the technologicallimitations in implementing natural interactions between the robot and children, we employed a Wizard of Ozmethod (Riek, 2012), where a researcher, hidden behind the scene, controlled the robot’s utterances responsive tochildren’s talks.The robot systemThe robot Skusie, robot controller, main controller, and server. Skusie is combined with a mobile phone andcontrolled by Android apps via Bluetooth technology. The phone is cradled on the robot’s head, acting as therobot’s visible brain. The body is equipped with sensors and mobility, accompanied by a wand with an embeddedoptical sensor and microphone. We employed a voice synthesizer that allows Skusie to speak in both English andSpanish. In the interaction sessions with children, the researcher (acting as a wizard and controlling the MainController) can manually provide speech utterances for Skusie, or select them from canned utterances in theinteraction scenarios. The researcher can also control the Skusie’s motions.Participants and contextParticipants were twenty-four kindergarten children in a public elementary school in a mountain-west state of theUnited States. The school has a high rate of families living near or below the poverty line. School children werepredominantly white English-speaking and Latino Spanish- and English-speaking. All participants were identifiedICLS 2018 Proceedings90© ISLSas low performing by the school and attended a supplemental class that provided additional practice with languageand academic skills for an hour around lunchtime. For the study, children were divided into twelve pairs, with anintent to form cross-cultural, cross-linguistic (English and Spanish) partnerships. The number of two languagegroups were not balanced. While all children participated in the interactive activities, the research team studiednine culturally diverse pairs.Design of interaction episodesIn the design of interaction episodes, we applied the aforementioned developmentally appropriate andmulticultural communicative approaches. We personified the robot, Skusie, as a new friend who just arrived fromanother planet (an imaginary world) and did not know much about life on earth. In this learning community,Skusie needed children's help in order to learn about everything including human language and culture, throughwhich we sought to stimulate children’s sense of agency and autonomy as they helped the robot. Skusie spokeboth Spanish and English but its speech in either language was not always perfect, just like the children. Soeveryone here was not judging but understanding. Children were asked to work together to teach Skusie, and theymade use of their own knowledge and interest. Through this context, children were invited to help, given anopportunity to participate using what they already knew, and not judged but appreciated by their contribution. Forthe topics of interaction, the research team reviewed children's books in schools and libraries and chose four verypopular topics for conversation: animals, birthdays, school, and family.Referring to our mediation model, the design team drafted mediating utterances, which were used by abilingual research assistant who acted as the mediator for the first six weeks. Based on these human-mediatorsessions, we crafted the robot’s utterances and flows (called scenarios) for each episode, which were deployedlater in robot/children triads. Simultaneously, the developers worked on software and hardware systems for robotmediated sessions. During robot-children interaction sessions, another bilingual research assistant sat behindSkusie as a moderator to clarify instructions or intervene for smooth flow when necessary. When her interventionwas needed, we recorded her utterances and added to the robot's utterances in the following sessions. By doingso, the moderator's intervention became minimal and later not necessary at all as robot interactions improved.Weekly, the research team met in full to review digital recordings and assess the strengths and weaknesses of thetested episodes and robot functioning. Improvements were suggested, honed, and then deployed the followinginteraction sessions. Overall, the robots' utterances and the flows for each of the four topics were drafted, tested,and refined over the entire four-month period.Data collection and analysisResearchers and assistants visited the same, supplemental kindergarten class two days a week from mid-Februarythrough mid-May, 2017. For the first six weeks, a bilingual research assistant acted as the cultural broker aftershe was educated about the robot mediation approaches. Adopting the approaches, the research assistant led a 15minute activity with each pair of children. Children were presented a conversation topic and encouraged to interactwith one another to engage with the topic through a loosely structured flow. Being bilingual, the research assistantwas able to adjust the activity as necessary. During the second six weeks, we deployed the robot to interact withthe pairs of children, using a Wizard of Oz technique. In this method, a researcher acting as a wizard controlledthe robot while sitting unobtrusively in the corner of the room. The wizard controlled the timing and content ofthe robot’s utterances. The robot met with pairs of children on the floor of a media center in the school. Allinteraction sessions were video-recorded and later typed into English- and Spanish-language transcriptions. Aresearcher also took ethnographic field notes of each activity, recording them in a researcher journal.Forty-three 15-minute sessions with a research assistant or a robot interacting with pairs of children weredigitally recorded and then transformed into detailed typed transcriptions. These transcriptions were analyzed inconcert with the researcher’s journal, which included field notes from all classroom interactions and weeklyresearch team meetings. Given the iterative nature of the design processes and the constant improvement of thescenarios, researchers looked for evidence of improvement in the four tested scenarios, using the framework ofbuilding common ground, building equitable partnerships, and building a co-cultural schema as markers of highquality interactions. Additionally, researchers used traditional ethnographic methods to constantly comparephenomena that occurred across scenarios and children to ascertain additional findings.Findings and implicationsDesign challenges and our solutionsOur first question asked, What are the challenges in designing a robot to mediate young children’s equitable,collaborative interactions? As we reviewed the market and the literature on developing advanced technologiesICLS 2018 Proceedings91© ISLSfor young children, we identified four issues that might challenge the implementation of robot meditation. First,compared to adults, kindergarteners are still developing their language skills so often use words that approximatethe meaning they intend. Their syntax is still developing; their pronunciation is often not clear. Speech-recognitionsoftware that can reliably understand kindergarten language does not yet exist. To resolve this, we used a humancontroller who acted as a wizard behind the scene to talk to the children through the robot. The strength of thisarrangement was that the controller could hear what children said and input an appropriate reply. Limitationsincluded an occasional delay between controller’s input and the robot’s utterances. This often resulted in Skusienot responding for several seconds, and then responding with too many utterances at once, interrupting thechildren’s interactions While some children simply laughed at Skusie’s “hiccups”, other, shier children oftenbecame quiet as the following example of two girls, one Latina and one white, illustrates.ROBOT: Tell me more about animals. What do you do with animals?GWAV: [Starts to say something.]ROBOT: Explícame mas sobre los animales. (Tell me more about animals.)GWAV: [Starts to say something again.]ROBOT: Que haces con los animales? (What do you do with animals?)Our second focus was to design a robot that could speak in a kind, casual, yet direct manner, repeatedlyinviting them to talk. To do this, we first had Skusie greet children with their names. Hearing their own namesfrom Skusie was disarming and also engaging for children. At first, they could not believe the robot was talkingdirectly to them. After repeated interactions, many children responded to Skusie naturally.ROBOT: Hello BLED and BWLA. Good to see youagain.BLED and BWLA: [Laugh and sit down.][robot moves closer to them.]BLED: Uh oh.ROBOT: Hello BLED and BWLA.BLED and BWLA: [Laugh]ROBOT: Hello.GWAV: Hello.GLGL: Hello.ROBOT: Good to see you again.GWAV: [Whispers to GLGL.]ROBOT: I’m learning about school. Can you helpme again today?GLGL and GWAV: Yes.Designing a conversation flow that was appropriate for children took some experimentation. Designers addedquestions to Skusie’s utterances so it could give children an opportunity to speak more: questions included,“Why?” “Why not?” and “Tell me more.” We also added the statement, “I’m confused,” which successfully gotchildren back on topic if they digressed or spoke in a manner the wizard could not understand. Tricky was someexclamation sounds, such as “aww” or “ah,” which were meant to convey understanding with emotions, fell flatwhen the text-to-speech engine in the robot pronounced them phonetically. As this happened, we removed suchsounds from the robot’s utterances.Our third design focus was triggered by the fact that children were divergent thinkers and actors, andtheir responses were very often unpredictable. First of all, we did not want to limit their thinking, rather weimagined what children would do or say in a particular event, but our imaginations were limited by our own adultexperiences. Thus, our development process considered this unpredictability in our design scheme. First, as ateam, we crafted a 15-minute long activity, creating utterances for Skusie to spark the children’s conversation andthen imagining how children would respond. After observing triad interactions, the design team met, examinedthe video recording, and made adjustments to the scenario for the following sessions. In the example below, thechildren could not agree when asked to choose a birthday present for Skusie’s friend. The children repeated theirown choices and were not able to reach an agreement by the end of the triad session.ROBOT: Will you help me choose a birthday present for my friend? [both children leanforward to look at the picture]BLJE: Un biciclo, un coche, unos jugetes- (A bike, a car, some toys-)ROBOT: ¿BLJE- Cual debo darle a mi amigo? (BLJE, which should I give my friend?)BLJE: Si es de tu tamaño, escoge un coche. (If it’s your size, choose the car.)GWVI: You could get her a doll. The Barbie, with the dressBLJE: Que? (What?)GWVI: With the dress.ICLS 2018 Proceedings92© ISLS…[The children went on and on, repeating their different choices]As a result, the design team added statements to Skusie’s utterances in the following sessions to promotecooperation between children: "Can you two talk first and choose one for me?" and “Can you two choosetogether?” This simple invitational addition encouraged children to talk with each other to reach an agreement.Our fourth design challenge was that children have short attention spans in general. It was very beneficialfor the robot to call on children, ask questions, or repeat instructions. In the example A below, Skusie was able toget a child’s attention by calling his name and moving toward him. Having Skusie call on the child it wanted toinvite into the conversation worked very well, especially for shy children and our bilingual pair. Skusie’sinvitation led the children to take turns in their response. Also, Skusie expressed confusion and showed imageson its smartphone brain to draw children’s attention. During the first part of the triad, GLAL, a Latina girl, wasquiet and not overtly engaged. However, when Skusie showed pictures of her school on its smartphone brain,GLAL was immediately engaged as in the example B.ABWTY: [Whispering to Moderator] How did he gethere?Moderator: He came to visit me.BWTY: [Still whispering] How?Moderator: From far, far away.ROBOT: BWTY.GNSA: [Whispering] BWTY. Your turn.ROBOT: Would you like to have pets?BWTY: Uh, yeah.BROBOT: I saw lots of things on my way here. [Therobot rolls forward and shows an image of thechildren’s school.]GLAL: That’s the gym!ROBOT: What is this place?GLAL: A gym!BWOL: That’s - that’s just like our gym!ROBOT: Amazing. Thank you. Do you learn here?GLAL and BWOL: Yes.Emerging themes in children’s interactionsOur second question asked, What themes arise in children's interactions with the robot and each other? Inexamining the data, four main themes arose.Engagement with the robotWhen children first met the robot, they were generally curious and surprised. While some children were initiallyhesitant to talk with Skusie, as they met repeatedly with the robot and talked with each other about the triadexperience, their engagement with Skusie grew. Often, they would lay on their bellies during the activity, withtheir heads near Skusie’s head. They asked the robot questions about previous scenarios and interactions, wantingto catch up with it after some time away. Also, most children were hesitant to leave the robot at the end of theactivity. They tended to linger by the robot, asking questions about it or to it. The following examples illustratethis phenomenon.ROBOT: Tomorrow is my friend’s birthday. I don’t know what to do. Can you help me?BWHU: It’s Sam? It’s Sam? You love Sam? [a character from a previous scenario]BLJE: ¿Cuando fue tu cumpleaños, cuando fue el cumpleaños de tu amigo? (When was your birthday, when wasthe birthday of your friend?) [referring to a previous scenario]BLJE: No traje tus alas- (You didn’t bring your wings?) [an accessory Skusie wore last time it met with BLJE]ROBOT: See you next time. Bye, GLGL and GWAV. See you next time.GLGL: Bye.GWAV: Do you know where your home is?Treating the robot like a personChildren talked to the robot directly, asked it questions, and took turns with it, modeling sophisticated, inclusiveconversation skills. Often, they used its name or the second person pronoun “you.” Other times, they used theanthropomorphic pronouns “he” and “she.” BLED, for example, talked to Skusie directly, asking it, “Skusie, whatdo you know about tigers?” He then told it, “Sharks are very difficult, Skusie. They- they- they have big teeth.”Later, when his partner digressed from the conversation topic, BLED tried to get the conversation back on trackby asking, “What’s going to happen next, Skusie?” BWHU asked Skusie for a high five. When co-constructingan interaction with Skusie, BWOL said, “Let’s take him on an adventure. Oh this is going to be the funniest dayof school I’ve ever had.” He then dramatically fell down and popped back up to continue the activity.ICLS 2018 Proceedings93© ISLSForgiving the robot’s weaknessesChildren were forgiving of Skusie’s imperfections. Their desire to help Skusie learn about life on earth seemedcoupled with patience and support for its – and our – efforts. Children were generally patient and empathetic withSkusie even when it interrupted them and when it responded inappropriately due to software glitches or controllermistakes. Children were happy to meet with the robot, hugging and showing affection to Skusie.GLAL: Skusie move!BWOL: It’s ok. Skusie’s a robot. Skusie doesn’t even know about eating yet. ‘Cause he’s from a different planet,not Earth.BWOL: What favorite animal do you like, Susie?ROBOT: I don’t understand you.Moderator: She doesn’t know yet. ‘Cause she’s still learning about all of our animals here on Earth.BWOL: I’m still learning about other things.BLED: “You already tried that Skusie.” [when Skusie repeated the same picture]Learning to work togetherWhen encouraged by the robot, children from the mainstream culture and from Latino families gradually learnedto work together, sometimes across the language barrier. At the beginning of the triadic sessions, childrenhabitually talked to the robot individually as if each were alone with the robot. Quite often, when asked questionsby the robot, they answered simultaneously or gave Skusie opposite answers. In addition, shier children oftenlacked an opportunity to speak when they were paired with a more talkative child. After a few sessions where theteam observed this phenomenon, we added some explicit statements to the robot’s utterances, such as “Can youtalk one after the other?” “I am confused.” And “Can you two talk first and tell me one thing at a time?” Theserequests from Skusie usually induced children’s cooperation immediately. Such immediate improvement had notoccurred in earlier human-brokering sessions. Toward the end of data gathering, in May, the robot’scommunication skills had improved such that triads often had natural, easy conversations where all members children and robot – contributed equitably.Implications for designing for young childrenA few implications are drawn for designing for children. First, explicit invitation, such as calling on and rollingover to the child, was helpful in gaining children’s attention overall and particularly in encouraging shy childrento talk. Related to this, to elicit some children’s verbal responses, the robot repeated its invitational utterances.Quite often, children remained quiet and just gazed at the robot in response to its first utterances and spoke outonly after two or three repetitions of the utterances. Also, children’s autonomous exploration should beencouraged in the interaction with the robot. Just as they voluntarily brought in their prior knowledge andexperience to help the robot, children seemed to accept the robot’s free responses that were neither aligned withchildren’s own nor flowed logically. In this sense, the unpredictability of young children could be used inrobot/child interaction design in a productive way. Next, a robot’s empathy was contagious. When the robotexpressed appreciation for children’s information from their various personal experiences; children were alsopatient and understanding in their interactions with the robot and each other. Lastly, the bilingual robot seemedto help reduce stigma associated with language, perhaps, due to the study context uniquely. It was clear that whenSkusie spoke to the children in Spanish, children from Spanish-speaking families participated more actively andresponded to it gradually in Spanish.ReferencesBakhtin, M. M. (1987). Speech genres and other late essays (M. Holquist & V. W. McGee, Trans.): Universityof Texas Press.Boone, J. H. (2013). ¡Ya Me Fui! When English learners consider leaving school. Education and Urban Society,45(4), 415-439.Borg, S. (2009). Teacher cognition and language education: Research and practice. New York, USA: BloomsburyAcademic.Carter, M. J., & Fuller, C. (2016). Symbols, meaning, and action: The past, present, and future of symbolicinteractionism. Current Sociology Review, 64(6), 931-961.Gándara, P. (2010). The Latino education crisis. Educational Leadership, 67(5), 24-30.ICLS 2018 Proceedings94© ISLSGiménez-Dasí, M., Pons, F., & Bender, P. K. (2014). Imaginary companions, theory of mind and emotionunderstanding in young children. European Early Childhood Education Research Journal, 24(2), 186197. doi: 10.1080/1350293X.2014.919778González, N., Moll, L., & Amanti, C. (Eds.) (2009). Funds of knowledge: Theorizing practices in households,communities, and classrooms. Maywah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.Griffin, E. (2009). A First Look At Communication Theory (7th ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.Gudykunst, W. B. (Ed.) (2005). Theorizing about intercultural Communication. Thousand Oaks, CA: SagePublications, Inc.Harrė, R., & Moghaddam, F. (Eds.). (2003). The self and others: Positioning individuals and groups in personal,political, and cultural contexts.Immordino-Yang, M. H. (2016). Emotions, learning, and the brain. New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company.Kim, Y., & Smith, D. (2017). Pedagogical and technological augmentation of mobile learning for young children.Interactive Learning Environments, 25(1). 4-16. doi:10.1080/10494820.2015.1087411Ladson-Billings, G. (2009). The dreamkeepers: Successful teachers of African American children (secondedition). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Littlejohn, S. W., & Foss, K. A. (2009). Encyclopedia of communication theory (Vol. 1). Los Angeles, CA: SagePublications.Littlejohn, S. W., Foss, K. A. (2011) The theories of human communication. 10th edn. Waveland, Long Grove,IL.McFarland, J., Hussar, B., de Brey, C., Snyder, T., Wang, X., Wilkinson-Flicker, S., Gebrekristos, S., Zhang, J.,Rathbun, A., Barmer, A., Bullock Mann, F., and Hinz, S. (2017). The Condition of Education 2017(NCES 2017-144). U.S. Department of Education. Washington, DC: National Center for EducationStatistics.RetrievedonSeptember20,2017from https://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2017144Moll, L. C., Amanti, C., Neff, D., & Gonzalez, N. (1992). Funds of knowledge for teaching: Using a qualitativeapproach to connect homes and classrooms. Theory into Practice, 31(2), 132-141.Nasir, N. S. (2002). Identity, goals, and learning: Mathematics in cultural practice. Mathematical Thinking andLearning, 4(2&3), 213-247.National Center for Educational Statistics. (2016). Status and trends in the education of racial and ethnic groups2016. (NCES 2016-007). Retrieved from Washington, DC: https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2016/2016007.pdfNishida, H. (2005). Cultural schema theory Theorizing about intercultural Communication (pp. 401-418).Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.Paris, D. (2012). Culturally sustaining pedagogy: A needed change in stance, terminology, and practice.Educational Researcher, 41(3), 93-97.Radesky, J. S., Schumacher, J., & Zuckerman, B. (2015). Mobile and interactive media use by young children:The good, the bad, and the unknown. Pediatrics, 135(1), 1-3.Riek, L. D. (2012). Wizard of Oz studies in HRI: A systematic review and new reporting guidelines. Journal ofHuman Robot Interaction, 1(1), 119-136.Valencia, R. (2010). Dismantling contemporary deficit thinking: Educational thought and practice. New York:Routledge.Van Ausdale, D. & Feagin, J. (2001). The first R: How children learn race and racism. Lanham; New York;Toronto; Plymouth, UK: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.Vasquez, E. I., Lopez, A., Straub, C., Powell, S., McKinney, T., Walker, Z., . . . Bedesem, P. n. L. (2011).Empirical research on ethnic minority students: 1995-2009. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice,26(2), 84-93.AcknowledgmentsThis study was supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation (Cyberlearning and Future LearningTechnologies #1623561).ICLS 2018 Proceedings95© ISLS