Assessing the Validity of Peer Feedback in aSixth Grade Mathematics ClassMelissa M. Patchan, Karen E. Rambo-Hernandez, Brianna N. Dietz, and Kennedy A. Hathawaymelissa.patchan@mail.wvu.edu, kerambohernandez@mail.wvu.edu, bndietz@mix.wvu.edu,kahathaway@mix.wvu.eduWest Virginia UniversityAbstract: To better understand the possible benefits of using peer assessment in middleschool mathematics classes, we examined how the quantity and quality of peer feedbackcompares to teacher feedback. In general, students not only received more feedback frompeers, but the amount of feedback was also more consistent. Moreover, the sixth-gradestudents focused on similar issues and provided just as many solutions. Detected differencesin focus and type of solution could inform instructional design.IntroductionIn the US, emphasis in mathematics is moving away from computational fluency and focusing on student’sconstruction of mathematical arguments or explanations and analyzing the reasoning of others. While policymakers recognize the importance of mathematical communication, students are rarely asked to write inmathematics classes (Mastroianni, 2013). Writing is important because it can help students organize and refinetheir ideas, think deeper about concepts as they explain their ideas, and connect new concepts to existingknowledge (Flores & Brittain, 2003). However, teachers are concerned that grading writing tasks will take moretime than traditional mathematics work, and they lack the knowledge how to incorporate writing tasks(Teuscher, Kulinna, & Crooker, 2015).One way to address these issues is through the use of peer assessment. Peer assessment (often alsocalled peer review) is the quantitative evaluation or qualitative feedback of a learner’s performance by anotherlearner among students. Peer feedback is particularly beneficial because students can receive more totalfeedback from multiple peers that is articulated using more understandable terms and represents diverseaudience perspectives from peers than when receiving feedback from an over-taxed instructor (Patchan,Charney, & Schunn, 2009). Moreover, peer feedback can be just as effective as an instructor’s feedback inhelping students improve their drafts (e.g., Gielen, Tops, Dochy, Onghena, & Smeets, 2010) and sometimesmore effective (e.g., Cho & MacArthur, 2011).To examine quality in the current study, we focus on two feedback features that had large, positiveeffects on revision: the focus of the comment and providing a solution (Nelson & Schunn, 2009; Patchan,Schunn, & Correnti, 2016). The use of these features appears to depend on the reviewer’s prior knowledge. Forexample, a content instructor focused more on substance issues than a writing instructor, whereas the writinginstructor focused more on writing issues; college students (having less substance and writing knowledge thanboth instructors) fell between the two instructors (Patchan, et al., 2009). Similarly, a writing instructor provideddouble the amount of solutions as a content instructor, and college students again fell between the twoinstructors. Similar differences were observed among secondary students—they focused less on skills and moreon content, and they provided fewer solutions (Hovardas, Tsivitanidou, & Zacharia, 2014). To extend this work,the goal of the current study is to examine how the quantity and quality of feedback provided by middle schoolstudents compares to teacher feedback.MethodParticipants and contextThis study was conducted in a sixth-grade mathematics class in a small rural town located in West Virginia.Thirty-one students (24 females) from two sections participated in this study.Design and procedureParticipants created study guides with worked examples of word problems posed by the student. Then, studentsevaluated and commented on four peers’ drafts, and the teacher reviewed all students’ drafts. Finally, thestudents were randomly assigned to receive feedback from only their peers or only their teacher, and theyrevised their study guide using this feedback.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1765© ISLSAll of the participants’ feedback was segmented by idea units, and a total of 1,660 comments werecoded. Using a bottom-up approach, 38 issues were identified and coded, including seven general issues (e.g.,difficult to read or follow), 12 issues with the word problem (e.g., problem not solvable), and 19 issues with thesolution (e.g., incorrect formula). In addition, each comment was coded for the presence of three independentfeatures: problems, general solutions, and specific solutions.ResultsAlthough students received more feedback from four peers, the comments from the teacher were longer. Moreimportantly, students received a consistent amount of feedback from peers, whereas the amount of feedbackprovided by the teacher decreased over time (see Figure 1). Quality of drafts did not vary across time.Figure 1. Amount of feedback (i.e., number of comments and word count) across time by reviewer type.Peer feedback was much more likely to provide praise (16%) than teacher feedback (3%). When peerscriticized students’ work, they focused on similar issues as the teacher (i.e., missing question and incorrectformula). However, they were also more likely to complain that the work was difficult to read or follow (8% vs.4%); whereas the teacher was more likely to notice missing measurements (8% vs. 1%).Finally, both peers and teachers included solutions. However, the peer was more likely to provide ageneral solution (49% vs. 20%; e.g., “Make sure you use the correct formula”), and the teacher was more likelyto provide a specific solution (32% vs. 10%; e.g., “Use: SA=2πrh+πr2 to exclude top.”).DiscussionThis study demonstrated that students could benefit from more consistent feedback from peers that focuses onsimilar issues and includes a similar amount of solutions as teachers. Future analyses will also examine theimpact of these differences on implementation and revision quality. Findings could inform future work on whatadditional support students may need to provide helpful feedback.ReferencesCho, K., & MacArthur, C. (2011). Learning by reviewing. Journal of Educational Psychology, 103(1), 73-84.Flores, A., & Brittain, C. (2003). Writing to reflect in mathematics methods course. Teaching ChildrenMathemaics, 10, 112-118.Gielen, S., Tops, L., Dochy, F., Onghena, P., & Smeets, S. (2010). A comparative study of peer and teacherfeedback and of various peer feedback forms in a secondary school writing curriculum. BritishEducational Research Journal, 36(1), 143-162.Hovardas, T., Tsivitanidou, O. E., & Zacharia, Z. C. (2014). Peer versus expert feedback: An investigation ofthe quality of peer feedback among secondary school students. Computers & Education, 71, 133-152.Mastroianni, M. P. (2013). Writing in mathematics. In A. N. Applebee & J. A. Langer (Eds.), Writinginstruction that works: Proven methods for middle and high school classrooms (pp. 71-93). New York,NY: Teachers College Press.Nelson, M. M., & Schunn, C. D. (2009). The nature of feedback: How different types of peer feedback affectwriting performance. Instructional Science, 37(4), 375-401.Patchan, M. M., Charney, D., & Schunn, C. D. (2009). A validation study of students’ end comments:Comparing comments by students, a writing instructor, and a content instructor. Journal of WritingResearch, 1(2), 124-152.Patchan, M. M., Schunn, C. D., & Correnti, R. J. (2016). The nature of feedback: How feedback features affectstudents’ implementation rate and quality of revisions. Journal of Educational Psychology, 108(8),1098-1120.Teuscher, D., Kulinna, P. H., & Crooker, C. (2015). Writing to learn mathematics: An update. The MathematicsEducator, 24(2), 56-78.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1766© ISLS