Sequencing Arithmetic, Area, and Algebraic Instruction forTeaching the Distributive PrincipleSoo-hyun Im, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, imxxx045@umn.eduSashank Varma, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, sashank@umn.eduAbstract: The current study examined the effect of different instructional sequences forteaching the distributive principle for multi-digit multiplication. Third graders experiencedone of four sequences: Algebra-Arithmetic, Algebra-Area, Arithmetic-Algebra, and AreaAlgebra. All sequences produced improvements in solving practiced 2D × 2D problems.Critically, the Area-Algebra and Arithmetic-Algebra sequences had the largest learningeffects, with the former better for participants with some prior knowledge of 2D × 2Dmultiplication and the latter better for participants with no prior knowledge. All sequencesalso produced improvements on unpracticed transfer problems, with the Area-Algebrasequence producing the largest learning effects. Finally, improvements were most associatedwith prior knowledge of single-digit addition and subtraction – but not multiplication – facts.The implications of these results are discussed and future directions outlined.Keywords: multi-digit multiplication, distributive principle, mathematics educationIntroductionThe current study implemented three instructional approaches for teaching the distributive principle for solvingmulti-digit multiplication problems. In particular, it investigated the optimal combination and sequencing ofarithmetic, area (i.e., spatial), and algebra instructional approaches (Schwartz & Bransford, 1998).The distributive principle for multi-digit multiplications refers to the fact that one of two factors can besplit into two or more parts, each part multiplied by the other factor separately, and the partial products added(Anghileri, 1999). This principle is important for learning to solve multi-digit multiplication problems. Forexample, Liu, Ding, Gao, and Zhang (2015) found that fourth graders solved distributive-format problems (e.g.,25 × (10 + 2)) more quickly and accurately than conventional-format problems (e.g., 25 × 12). This findingsuggests that recognizing and applying the distributive property to compute partial products (e.g., 25 × 10 and25 × 2) improves performance of solving multi-digit multiplication problems.Previous studies have implemented a variety of instructional approaches to teach the distributiveprinciple (Baroody, 1999; Lee, 2014). The current study focused on three – arithmetic, area, and algebra. Thearithmetic approach takes advantage of concepts such as repeated addition and relational arithmetic factknowledge (Baroody, 1999). The area approach is often promoted by mathematics educators as being the mostcomprehensible to students (Lee, 2014). It takes advantage of visualizing partial products and decomposingfactors. In particular, it supports the shift from repeated addition reasoning into multiplicative reasoning (i.e.,factoring) (Cooney, Swanson, & Ladd, 1988). The algebra approach applies the distributive property to reexpress multi-digit multiplication as the sum of a series of simpler multiplications, and can be seen as anelementary form of symbolic algebraic reasoning. The arithmetic and area approaches are more concrete tostudents in making use of familiar arithmetic expressions and visual diagrams. The algebra approach is moreabstract to students in employing unfamiliar arithmetic expressions with missing operands.The goal of the current study was to determine the optimal combination and sequencing of the differentapproaches for teaching the distributive principle in multi-digit multiplication. Candidate sequences wereevaluated by changes in arithmetic proficiency across a pre-test and two post-tests. There were three researchquestions: (1) Do different instructional combinations and sequences lead to better performance on practicedmulti-digit multiplication problems? (2) Do different instructional approaches and sequences lead to betterperformance on transfer multiplication problems? (3) What is the relationship between prior knowledge ofsingle-digit arithmetic facts for the four operations and proficiency in multi-digit multiplication?MethodsParticipantsThe original participants were 120 3rd graders at an elementary school in Seoul, South Korea. We only analyzedthe data of the 96 participants who (1) completed all pre- and post-tests, (2) completed two weeks of practice,ICLS 2018 Proceedings1073© ISLSand (3) had scores on the final assessment of practiced 2D × 2D multiplication within ± 2 SDs of the overallsample. Among the final 96 participants, 61 students had already learned 2D × 2D multiplication in advancethrough a private academy or tutor. Thus, we separately analyzed the effect of our instruction on the priorlearning group and the no-prior learning group.DesignWe used a pretest-intervention-posttest design. Participants were randomly assigned to four different sequences:1) Algebra-Arithmetic, 2) Algebra-Area, 3) Arithmetic-Algebra, and 4) Area-Algebra. We also consideredparticipants’ prior learning of 2D × 2D multiplication, i.e., the prior learning vs. no-prior learning groupingfactor. Students practiced one instructional approach in the first week and the other in the second weekaccording to their instruction condition. On the final day of each week, they were administered post-testassessments measuring arithmetic proficiency in multi-digit multiplication.MaterialsInstructions for teaching distributive principleWe developed Arithmetic, Area, and Algebra instructional approaches for teaching the distributive principle formulti-digit multiplication (see Figure 1). In the arithmetic version, students solved multi-digit multiplicationproblems by retrieving arithmetic facts, recognizing relations between several given multiplication equations. Inthe area version, they solved problem by computing partial products by counting the number of squares in agrid. In the algebra version, they solved problems by decomposing factors based on their place value.Figure 1. Arithmetic, area, and algebra instructional approaches for teaching the distributive principle.For each instructional approach, practice items were formed by factors ranging between 11 and 19.Across a week of instruction, the difficulty of the items increased: the “easiness” of the factors decreased (e.g.,11 × 15  13 × 14) and the size of the products increased (e.g., 11 × 13  18 × 19). The three approaches werecombined into four sequences of a priori interest: Algebra-Arithmetic, Algebra-Area, Arithmetic-Algebra, andArea-Algebra. Importantly, the algebra approach was included in each sequence.AssessmentWe developed assessments to measure arithmetic factual knowledge and arithmetical proficiency in multi-digitmultiplication. Twenty 2D × 2D multiplication problems with factors in the range 11-19 were used at pre-testand at post-tests 1 and 2. The number of correct answers produced in fifteen minutes was the dependentvariable. This measure was used to evaluate research question (1) concerning learning. Five 2D × 2D problemswhich factors greater than 20, five 2D × 2D algebra format problems (e.g., 12 × __ = 156), and five 3D × 1Dproblems were used at both post-tests to evaluate research question (2) concerning transfer. The number ofcorrect answers produced in ten minutes was the dependent variable. Finally, single-digit addition/subtraction,multiplication, and division (40 items each) were used to measure arithmetical factual knowledge at pre-test. Foreach of these three measures, the number of correct answers produced in one minute was coded. This measurewas used to investigate research question (3) concerning individual differences.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1074© ISLSProcedurePrior to the intervention, participants completed the pre-test measures of 1D arithmetic and 2D x 2Dmultiplication. They then solved 36 multi-digit multiplication problems every day during the first week usingthe approach indicated by the workbook of the condition to which they had been assigned. On the final day ofthe first week, they completed the learning and transfer measures of post-test 1. The second week followed thesame structure, but for a different approach, and finished with post-test 2.FindingsPreliminary analysis showed that there were no significant differences in the pre-test scores across the foursequences in each of the prior learning and the no-prior learning groups. This indicates that our randomassignment was successful.Figure 2. Practiced 2D × 2D multiplication scores (max =20) by time, prior learning, and sequence.The first research question was whether different instructional combinations and sequences lead tobetter performance on practiced multi-digit multiplication problems. We addressed this in a three-way repeatedmeasures ANCOVA on post-test scores of practiced 2D × 2D multiplication problems with time, sequence, andprior learning as factors and pre-test scores as a covariate (see Figure 2). There was a main effect of time (F(1,87) = 63.577, p < .001, η p 2 = .422) and prior learning (F(1, 87) = 4.846, p = .030, η p 2 = .053). Although therewas no main effect of sequence (p = .545), scores on post-test 2 were significantly improved compared to pretest scores for all four sequences. Follow-up one-way repeated measures ANOVAs on students’ scores onpracticed 2D × 2D multiplication problems showed significant improvement for each sequence. The effect sizeswere largest in the Arithmetic-Algebra (η p 2 = .582) and Area-Algebra (η p 2 = .568) sequences, whichexperienced the algebra approach in the second week after experiencing one of the concrete approaches in thefirst week. There were also interaction effects of prior learning × time (F(1, 87) = 4.363, p = .040, η p 2 = .048)and prior learning × time × condition (F(3, 87) = 3.599, p = .017, η p 2 = .110). Participants in the no-priorlearning group benefitted most from the Arithmetic-Algebra sequence, whereas those in the prior learning groupbenefitted most from the Area-Algebra sequence.Figure 3. Transfer multiplication scores (max = 5 for each type) by time and prior learning.The second research question was whether different instructional approaches and sequences lead tobetter performance on transfer multiplication problems. We addressed this in three-way repeated measuresANOVAs with time, sequence, and prior learning as factors and post-test scores on the three transfer measuresas dependent variables: (a) unpracticed 2D × 2D problems, (b) 2D × 2D algebra format problems (e.g., 12 × __= 156), and (c) 3D × 1D problems. There was no main effect of sequence, and therefore Figure 3 collapsesacross this factor. There was a main effect of prior learning on all transferred multiplication problems (F a (1, 88)ICLS 2018 Proceedings1075© ISLS= 45.405, p a < .001, η a,p 2 = .340; F b (1, 88) = 11.315, p b = .001, η b,p 2 = .114; F c (1, 88) = 24.587, p c < .001,η c,p 2 = .218). Critically, there was a main effect of time on two types of transfer problems (F a (1, 88) = 16.717,p a = .001, η a,p 2 = .126; F b (1, 88) = 4.269, p b = .042, η b,p 2 = .046). For the Area-Algebra sequence, there wasthe largest improvement from post-test 1 (M = 2.57 SD = 2.01) to post-test 2 (M = 3.71, SD = 1.73) onunpracticed 2D × 2D multiplication problems (F a (1, 20) = 6.982, p a = .016, η a,p 2 = .259).The third research question concerned the relationship between prior knowledge of single-digitarithmetic facts and arithmetic proficiency in multi-digit multiplication after two weeks of practice learning thedistributive principle. We computed bivariate correlations between pre-test scores on single-digitaddition/subtraction, multiplication, and division, and post-test 2 scores on practiced 2D × 2D multiplicationproblems. The single-digit addition/subtraction scores were correlated with practiced 2D × 2D multiplicationscores for both the prior learning group (r = .502, p < .001) and the no-prior learning group (r = .473, p < .001).We additionally conducted a linear regression analysis to assess the overall relationship between single-digitarithmetic performance and practiced 2D × 2D multiplication at post-test 2 after controlling for prior learning.The results showed that 27.4% of the variance in the dependent measure was accounted for by single-digitarithmetic performance (F (4,91) = 8.580, p < .001), with single-digit addition/subtraction knowledge the onlysignificant predictor (stand.β = .417, p = .003).Conclusions and implicationsThe first research question was whether different instructional sequences lead to better performance on practicedmulti-digit multiplication problems. In fact, all four sequences resulted in improved performance at post-test 2on the practiced 2D x 2D problems. However, the Area-Algebra and Arithmetic-Algebra sequences had thelargest learning effects. This suggests that there may be some advantage to first practicing with more familiararithmetic representations or more concrete area representations before practicing with more abstract algebrarepresentations (Fyfe, McNeil, & Borjas, 2015). Moreover, the effect of instructional sequence differed as afunction of prior learning. For participants with prior learning of 2D x 2D multiplication, the Area-Algebrasequence produced the largest improvements, whereas for those with no-prior learning, the Arithmetic-Algebrasequence produced the largest improvements. Future research should follow up on these findings.The second research question was whether different instructional sequences lead to better performanceon novel transfer problems. All four sequences produced improved performance from post-test 1 to post-test 2on the unpracticed 2D × 2D problems and the 2D × 2D algebra format problems. Again, there were somedifferences in efficacy. The Area-Algebra sequence led to the greatest improvement in solving unpracticed 2D ×2D multiplication problems. One possible explanation of this finding is that using an area approach to visualizedecomposed factors produced a positive transfer effect on dealing with large unpracticed multiplicands. Futureresearch should evaluate this possibility.The third research question was whether there is a relationship between knowledge of single-digitarithmetic facts at pre-test and proficiency in multi-digit multiplication at post-test 2, after two weeks of practicelearning the distributive principle. A regression analysis revealed that there is a relationship and, surprisingly, itis driven by knowledge of single-digit addition and subtraction facts, not single-digit multiplication or divisionfacts. One interpretation of this finding is that multi-digit multiplication depends less on using multiplication tocompute partial products and more on using addition and subtraction to combine partial products. Futureresearch should evaluate this interpretation.ReferencesAnghileri, J. (1999), Issues in teaching multiplication and division. In I. Thompson (Eds), Issues in teachingnumeracy in primary schools (pp. 184–194). Open University Press, Buckingham.Baroody, A. J. (1999). The roles of estimation and the commutativity principle in the development of thirdgraders' mental multiplication. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 74, 157–193.Cooney, J. B., Swanson, H. L., & Ladd, S. F. (1988). Acquisition of mental multiplication skill: Evidence forthe transition between counting and retrieval strategies. Cognition and Instruction, 5, 323–345.Fyfe, E. R., McNeil, N. M., & Borjas, S. (2015). Benefits of “concreteness fading” for children's mathematicsunderstanding. Learning and Instruction, 35, 104–120.Lee, J. E. (2014). Deciphering multiplication algorithms with the area model. Mathematics Teaching in theMiddle School, 19, 556–563.Liu, R. D., Ding, Y., Gao, B. C., & Zhang, D. (2015). The relations between number property strategies,working memory, and multiplication in elementary students. The Journal of Experimental Education,83, 319–343.Schwartz, D. L., & Bransford, J. D. (1998). A time for telling. Cognition and Instruction, 16, 475–523.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1076© ISLS