Embodied Cognition in Observational Amateur AstronomyFlávio S. Azevedo, The University of Texas at Austin, flavio@austin.utexas.eduMichele J. Mann, The University of Texas at Austin, mjmann@utexas.eduAbstract: We investigate the embodied cognitive practices of amateur astronomers, as theyengage in observational routines in the field. In particular, we take an “interactionist”perspective to the problem and address the question: How is the body used as a resource forpractical, conceptual, and communicative purposes in the process of planning, searching for,and sighting celestial objects? The basis for our analysis is a set of ethnographic video and fieldnote records collected over several years of fieldwork. We scrutinize the moment-by-momentinteractions among practitioners for episodes in which different modalities of embodied actionare recruited and coordinated to produce and communicate complex meanings in the practice.As a whole, therefore, we seek to empower learners—as the ICLS 2016 calls for—by bringinginsight into foundational aspects of knowing and learning.Keywords: embodied cognition, amateur astronomy, hobbies, out-of-school learningIntroductionResponding to ICLS 2016’s call for research “… to provide [renewed] insight into how people learn,” in thispaper we investigate the embodied cognitive practices of amateur astronomers, as they engage in observationalroutines in the field. By and large, the human body has been relegated to a secondary role in accounts of reasoningand learning (Hall & Nemirovsky, 2012; Stevens & Hall, 1998). By contributing to approaches that work to reinscribe the body into cognitive processes (e.g., Goodwin, 2011, 2013; Nemirovsky, Rasmussen, Sweeney, &Wawro, 2012), our goal is to add to basic theorizing on knowing and learning in STEM practices and to finegrained analyses of the situated, context-dependent nature of these processes. We thus seek to empower learners—as the Conference calls for—by bringing insight into foundational aspects of learning.We pursue this inquiry from a perspective known as “interactionist” (Jordan & Henderson, 1995). Assuch, we seek to document how the body is used as a resource for action and resoning, in situ, on a moment-tomoment basis, in interaction with other bodies, material infrastructures (e.g., tools and instruments) and otherparameters of practice, such as communities’ norms and values, divisions of labor, histories of participation, andso on (e.g., Hall & Stevens, 1995; Stevens, 2000). Specifically, we ask the question: How is the body used as aresource for practical, conceptual, and communicative purposes in the process of planning, searching for, andconfirming sight of a celestial object?As we will see, this question becomes particularly interesting and complex when we consider theconditions of practice of observational amateur astronomy and the specifics of the “task” of finding any singlecelestial target. For good seeing, astronomers practice under the darkest possible conditions and only red-screenedlight sources (e.g., flashlights and computer screens) were allowed on site. Because the practice is denselypopulated with tools and various artifacts—including telescopes, tripods, binoculars, computers, books andvarious star charts and notebooks, tables and chairs, among others—and observations are often carried out in smallgroups, these conditions created some important practical challenges, such as coordinating joint activities andcommunicating information on celestial scenes to peers and visitors.Finding a celestial target clearly involves conceptual complexity as well. The process typically unfoldsas follows. First, the astronomer picks a target, frequently one missing from a pre-made, themed list ofobservational targets (or similar). Then, he/she may read some about the object, say, in search of informationregarding its shape, general look, location, and relationship to nearby celestial bodies. To do so, the astronomermay resort to a number of sources, from handwritten notes (taken at home), to printed books and other referencematerials, to computers (and other electronic, handheld equipment), and others. Following that, he/she will charta “star hopping” path through visible objects in the vicinity of, and towards the target, and finally attempt to sightit through the scope. In all, this makes for an iterative and relatively extended pursuit in which practitionerscontinuously assemble to one another representations and descriptions of a target scene, and coordinate theirunderstandings of it. Bodies take center stage in these processes, as we will see.Theoretical frameworkThe interactionist perspective that we adopt insists on a socio-cultural, activity-systemic perspective in whichknowing and learning are actively produced in the transactions among elements of such a system—including theICLS 2016 Proceedings585© ISLSorganization of the activity (or practice), the distribution of roles and attributions within the activity, the materialand historical conditions under which participants work, etc. (e.g., Gibson, 1979; Jordan & Henderson, 1995;Saxe, 1991; Hutchins 1995; Cole, 1996; Engeström, 1999). For our inquiry into embodied cognition, this meansthat we see “human thinking and learning [as] intimately tied not only to the body, but to a body that interactswith others and is active in social and cultural settings already rich with mediating artifacts that afford particularkinds of joint activity” (Hall & Nemirovsky, 2012, pp. 213-214). We take it that multiple modalities of embodiedaction are engaged in these processes—including gestures, talk, touch, prosody, gaze, body posture andorientation, and tool use (Goodwin, 2011; Hall, 1996; Nemirovsky et al., 2012; Stevens, 2012)—and our work isaimed at documenting how these modalities are manifested in observational amateur astronomy practice.Further, as Goodwin (2011) illustrates, multiple modalities of embodied action are coordinated inactivity, each mutually elaborating on one another as means of articulating and expressing complex meaning. Inaddition, because the oft-collaborative character of the task of finding a celestial object, coordinations andalignments between participants’ bodies should also be expected (Stevens & Hall, 1998; Hall, 1996). These shouldbe further intertwined with the immediate conditions of practice, as we will see in the analysis.Finally, we note that—as in other techno-scientific practices (Latour, 1987; Lynch & Woolgar, 1990)—observational amateur astronomy is heavily mediated by technical representations (e.g., star charts, maps, andpictures), tools (telescopes, binoculars, and others), and various artifacts. In action, these serve to structure andextend the active body and are critical for an account of how people create meaning within the collective, naturallyoccurring exchanges in the field.MethodsThe data we analyze here are ethnographic video records and field notes (Hammersley & Atkinson, 1995)produced during two distinct research studies. In the first study, which took place between 2002 and 2003, thefirst author (FA) documented the individual and collective practices of amateur astronomers with the goal ofexplaining structures and processes of extended, interest-based participation (Azevedo, 2013). In the second—which spanned the full year of 2014—we returned to the field with the explicit goal of documenting the embodiedpractices that permeates amateur astronomy field practice and which the first study had hinted at. In all, wecollected 8 hours and 55 minutes of video in study one and 6 hours and 11 minutes in study two, and several pagesof field notes, theoretical and analytical memos across both studies.Studies one and two were carried out on different settings as well. Study one in fact included twosettings—Mt Hillview and Lake Countryside, both located in Northern California—each of which was frequentedby different communities of astronomers. (All names are pseudonyms.) Study two took place within a singlecommunity of astronomers that met at the High Meadows observation site in the Texas hill country. In all cases,astronomy clubs and communities held a variety of events and we focused on the most common and recurrentones, namely the public “star parties” (i.e., outreach efforts) and members-only nights held at that site.Of particular importance, based on observations in study one, in study two we sought to address thechallenges of data collection under the dark conditions characteristic of astronomy field practice. This wasespecially crucial in light of the goal of documenting, at a fine grain of detail, the interactions between participantsand the bodily practices involved, the use of star charts, telescopes and other tools, and how these were coordinatedand elaborated upon throughout the “task” of seeing an object.To tackle this problem, we used an infrared (IR) camera fitted with an infrared lens. Because the camerashed light undetectable to the human eye, we were able to illuminate and record participants’ interactions andlong-term work without disturbing the original conditions under which they carried out their practice. Had weused a regular camera and illuminated the scene with red-screened flashlights, we would have circumvented thetechnical problem, but fundamentally altered the constraints and affordances that practitioners regularly encounterand thus the very character of the embodied practices we sought to study.Analysis and resultsWe scrutinized the full set of ethnographic records for moments in which participants’ (astronomers and visitors)bodies seemed to take an active role in the ongoing observational activity. We then bracketed these moments forfurther analysis and watched the corresponding videotape segments several times, all along transcribing parts thatrequired clarification or elaboration (for whatever reason). With episodes of embodied cognitive practicescatalogued and described, we classified them into categories that reflect either a modality of embodied action andreasoning or their functional role in the activity. We organize the presentation of results around these categories.ICLS 2016 Proceedings586© ISLSAverted visionAverted vision is a technique that is crucial to observing deep sky, and therefore faint, celestial objects. Thetechnique works by exploiting the basic structure of the human eye. Briefly, the eye has two distinct types ofreceptor cells—i.e., cones and rods. Cones are found mostly in the central area of the retina and their function isto make out details and colors in a scene. However, cones are not very sensitive to light. Rods, on the other hand,populate the periphery of the eye and they are very sensitive to light, though they cannot make out object detailsor colors.When applied to amateur astronomy practice, the technique posits one should look at a faint object at anangle—rather than directly, straight on—thereby exposing the most sensitive part of the eye to the scene (say, ina telescope or binoculars). The exact angle of off-center looking varies across individuals, but usually it fallsbetween 8 and 16 degrees. Both specialized books and amateur astronomers report that it takes time to learn thetechnique, but the gains in “seeing objects” are recognizably high (Dickinson & Dyer, 2008).Because averted vision requires training a body part itself to perform in unusual ways, the techniqueperhaps best exemplifies how deeply embodied cognitive processes can be in a STEM practice, and astronomy inparticular. The technique is perhaps also a prototypical example of learning-by-doing across STEM disciplines;no matter how much one might hear explanations of averted vision, mastering the technique takes extendedindividual practice.The body as medium of communicationThe unique conditions of practice that characterize observational amateur astronomy create practical demands thatseem quite specific to the hobby. In particular, the severe constraints imposed on the visual channel createchallenges for effective communicative practices, especially given the potentially complex nature of finding aspecific object among many plausible candidates. Apparently to compensate for this “loss,” amateur astronomersrely on various alternative ways of communicating information relevant to the ongoing task and the body isfrequently a protagonist in these processes.Particularly noteworthy, we have observed that bodies may be used literally as inscription surfaces tocommunicate and explicate details of celestial scenes (say, as seen through a telescope’s eyepiece). As an example,in an episode during the Mt Hillview event of 9/7/2002, Sally was searching for the M103 open star cluster in theconstellation of Cassiopeia. Upon finding it, Sally offered to share the view with FA. FA then sat next to thetelescope and Sally stood to his side. She then rested her left hand on his left shoulder and proceeded to use herright indicator finger to inscribe the telescope scene on FA’s back! To do so, she first traced a circle, startinghalfway up FA’s back and moving clockwise down and up. Such a circle was to represent the circular field ofview offered by the scope’s eyepiece. Sally then moved on to mark star hopping points on FA’s back, alwayswithin the limits of the circle and always discursively elaborating on her actions, checking on FA’s understandingas she went along.In a similar manner, in our most recent study in the High Meadows site (5/3/2014), we documented anevent in which a senior astronomer inscribed the Big Dipper asterism on the palm of a visitor’s (a young girl)hand. The goal was to explain to the girl how to find the star Polaris by following an imaginary straight lineextending from two of Big Dipper’s stars—a commonly known strategy.In all, these events show how seeing a celestial object is literally an interactional achievement in that itrequires touching bodies as a way to convey technical and observational information. Simultaneously, the episodesillustrate how modalities of embodied action are coordinated in activity, one elaborating on the other so as toachieve complex meaning that neither modality could individually convey (Goodwin, 2000, 2011).GesturingGestures (Kita, 2000; Roth, 2000) permeate all aspects of observational amateur astronomy, from planning anobservation to carrying it out and explaining one’s “seeing” to others. We organize our narrative around thefunctional uses of gestures throughout the collaborative problem solving process of seeing an object, folding intoit an account of how gestures appeared in conjunction with other modalities of embodied action.HighlightingHighlighting refers to a set of practices that “divide a domain of scrutiny into a figure and a ground, so that eventsrelevant to the activity of the moment stand out” (Goodwin, 1994, pp. 610). In an archeological excavation, forexample, an experienced researcher may highlight to an assistant the conceptually relevant marks on a patch ofdirt by gesturing with a dowel to selectively single out aspects of the dirt and elaborating verbally on whatconstitutes foreground and background in a “scene” (Goodwin, 2000, 2003). In amateur astronomy, highlightingtakes on various forms and they are particularly ubiquitous when astronomers communicate to one another specificICLS 2016 Proceedings587© ISLSinformation relevant to a star hopping sequence.To exemplify, consider an episode in which two astronomers (Guy and Bob) set out to observe theSombrero galaxy. Guy was the more experienced of the two and he took the lead in charting a path to their commontarget. After some studying of a few charts, Guy then proceeded to explain to Bob his star hopping sequence.Switching his gaze back and forth between the night sky and the star chart he held with his left hand, Guy traceda “C” pattern connecting objects in the vicinity of the target (Figure 1), all along narratively elaborating on aspectsof the pattern to which he was pointing. By doing so, he highlighted to Bob (and others) an emergent, relevantpattern among many other possibilities and this pattern could be used to anchor the path to the target.As a whole, highlighting practices of amateur astronomers almost always picked either emergent featuresof sets of celestial objects (as above) or well known, landmark object or configurations (e.g., the Big Dipper). Asa rule, the gestures making up these practices were performed over various media, including the sky, star charts,computer screens, picture books, and others.Figure 1. Four snapshots showing Guy’s tracing of a “C” shape to highlight a set of adjacent objects. For aboutone minute, he repeated the gesture 3 times, tracing the “C” back and forth (7/26/2014, High Meadows).Measuring and way findingAgain as part of communicative and coordination needs, participants use gestures to create relational, on-the-flymeasures that can aid in locating objects in a star hopping sequence. To illustrate with a single case, consider anepisode in which Jack and Brian had just finished confirming sight of a particular celestial target. Jack passed thetelescope seat to Brian and proceeded to describe what he (Jack) had seen. The following interaction ensued.Jack:Brian:FA:Jack:FA:ICLS 2016 Proceedings((to Brian)) Okay, if you notice you can… when you look at the Telrad((scope viewfinder)) you can use your averted ((vision)) a little bit andmove… it is a little above… see the three stars ((points with left indicatorfinger to the sky and gestures a line through three adjacent stars)) and theone that is directly above it ((gestures up and down on a line)), it is abouthalf again above it… when I went that far that’s what I got.[((inaudible))[Half what? It’s about half what?((to FA)) Uhh, when you go three stars ((points with left indicator finger tothird star in the sequence)) and then there’s a star above it ((“holds” twopoints with left indicator and thumb, Figure 2.a)). You go half that distanceup ((points with right indicator to a region above the points fixed by the lefthand, Figure 2.b))… or half again.Okay.588© ISLSa.b.Figure 2. (a) Jack “holds” two points (stars) that were key in his star hopping procedure—his left thumbpointing to one and left indicator pointing to another. The distance between the two fingers then emerges as ameasuring stick in the star hopping sequence; (b) Jack points with his right indicator to the direction of thehopping sequence, stating that target is to be found half a measuring stick distance added to last star in thehopping sequence (10/26/2014, High Meadows).Beginning in turn 1, Jack went briefly through the star hopping procedure that they had previouslyworked out, in the process using an improvised measure of distance to locate the position of the target celestialobject. Such a distance was a gestural yardstick (Figure 2.a) that had just emerged as an artifact of the pointing tostars in the hopping sequence. As Jack elaborated in turn 3, half of that measure was now to be added atop of thelast star in the hopping sequence—thereby flexibly reusing the emergent yardstick to communicate object location.As with highlighting practices, gestures used in measuring always appeared in coordination with other modalitiesof embodiment (tool use and speech) and it too occurred always across various media that formed theinfrastructure to the practice.Conclusions and implicationsWe have begun documenting the embodied cognitive practices of observational amateur astronomy with the goalof contributing to our general understanding of knowing and learning in STEM practices. The human body hasbeen conspicuously absent from accounts of knowing and learning and our work here is meant to help amelioratethis gap.In all, we have found many results that align with the extant literature, including tool use and gestures asessential forms of embodiment for knowing and communicating in action (Goodwin, 2011). We have alsouncovered some novel forms of embodied activity, such as the use of averted vision (as a way of improving one’sseeing of faint celestial objects) or inscribing the body with astronomical scenes, which we showed to reflect boththe core disciplinary aspects of astronomy but also the conditions of observational amateur astronomy practice.As we extend our investigations within and beyond amateur astronomy, we expect to continue uncovering avariety of new forms of embodied action and reasoning in STEM disciplines and to shed further light on processesof knowing and learning.ReferencesAzevedo, F. S. (2013). The tailored practice of hobbies and its implication for the design of interest-based learningenvironments. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 22(3), 462-510.Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge UniversityPress.Dickinson, T., & Dyer, A. (2008). The Backyard Astronomer’s Guide. Buffalo, NY: Firefly Books.Engeström, Y. (1999). Activity theory and individual and social transformation. In Y. Engeström, R. Miettinen,and R. L. Punamaki (Eds.), Perspectives on activity theory (pp. 19-38). Cambridge, MA: CambridgeUniversity Press.Gibson, J. J. (1979). An ecological approach to visual perception. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional Vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.Goodwin, C. (2000). Action and embodiment within situated human activity. Journal of Pragmatics, 32, 14891522.Goodwin, C. (2003). Pointing as situated practice. In S. Kita (Ed.), Pointing: Where language, culture, andcognition meet, (pp. 217-241). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.ICLS 2016 Proceedings589© ISLSGoodwin, C. (2011). Building action in public environments with diverse semiotic resources. Versus, 112-113,169-182.Hall, R. (1996). Representation as shared activity: Situated cognition and Dewey’s cartography of experience.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 5(3), 209-238.Hall, R., & Nemirovsky, R. (2012). Introduction to the special issue: Modalities of body engagement inmathematical activity and learning, Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(2), 207-215.Hall, R., & Stevens, R. (1995). Making space: A comparison of mathematical work in school and professionaldesign practices. In S. L. Star (Ed.), The cultures of computing, (pp. 118-145). Oxford, UK: BlackwellPublishers.Hammersley, M. and Atkinson, P. (1995). Ethnography principles in practice. London: Routledge.Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practices. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(10), 39-103.Kita, S. (2000). How representational gestures help speaking. In D. McNeill (Ed.), Language and Gesture, (pp.162–185). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.Latour, B. (1987). Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers through society. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.Lynch, M., & Woolgar, S. (1990). Representation in Scientific Practice. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Nemirovsky, R., Rasmussen, C., Sweeney, G, & Wawro, M. (2012). When the classroom floor becomes thecomplex plane: Addition and multiplication as ways of bodily navigation. Journal of the Learning Sciences,21(2), 287-323.Roth, W.-M. (2000). Gestures: Their role in teaching and learning. Review of Educational Research, 71, 365–392.Saxe, G. B. (1991). Culture and cognitive development: Studies in mathematical understanding. Hillsdale, NJ:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Stevens, R. R. (2012). The missing bodies of mathematical thinking and learning have been found. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 21(2), 337-346.Stevens, R. R. (2000). Divisions of labor in school and in the workplace: Comparing computer and papersupported activities across setting. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 373-401.Stevens, R., & Hall, R. (1998). Disciplined perception: Learning to see in techno-science. In M. Lampert and M.L. Blunk (Eds.), Talking mathematics in school: Studies of teaching and learning (pp. 107-149). NewYork, NY: Cambridge University Press.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the astronomy clubs and amateur astronomers who participated in this study for their time andfriendship. We also thank three anonymous reviewers for their comments and suggestions.ICLS 2016 Proceedings590© ISLS