Prior Knowledge for the Construction of a Scientific Model ofEquilibrationHillary Swanson, Northwestern University, hillary.swanson@northwestern.eduAbstract: The Next Generation Science Standards charge U.S. teachers with the task ofincluding patterns, as a crosscutting concept, in their science curriculum. This study exploresprior knowledge that is relevant to students’ construction of a scientific model of anequilibration pattern. A Knowledge in Pieces lens is applied to video transcript of a classdiscussion on thermal equilibration in order to identify elements of students’ prior knowledgethat might be productive for their construction of a scientific model of equilibration. Thediscussion occurred near the beginning of a unit on equilibration, in the middle of a yearlongpattern-based curriculum. Twenty-one 8th grade students participated in the class. Six previouslyundocumented knowledge elements are identified, characterized, and considered in terms oftheir potential productivity for helping students construct a difference drives rate model ofequilibration. These findings contribute to literature concerned with the productivity of priorknowledge in conceptual change.Keywords: Conceptual change, Knowledge in Pieces, prior knowledge, Knowledge AnalysisIntroductionThe Next Generation Science Standards promote 7 crosscutting concepts as recurring themes throughout the K12 science curriculum. The first of these is patterns. The Framework for K-12 Science Education argues thatpatterns are important for science and science learning because they are readily observed in nature acrossdimensions of structure and process; noticing patterns is a first step to asking deeper questions about themechanisms that drive their emergence; and patterns can be used as rules for categorizing similar phenomenawithin a unified explanatory framework (Schweingruber, Keller & Quinn, 2012).This study focuses on one specific process pattern: equilibration. Equilibration can be found in a range ofcontexts across the physical sciences. It can be seen in both the warming to room temperature of a cold liquid andthe diffusion of gas across a semipermeable boundary. Both phenomena follow a pattern in which their rate ofequilibration is directly proportional to the difference between their current state and their equilibrium state. Forexample, a cold liquid's rate of temperature change is directly proportional to the difference between itstemperature and the temperature of the environment with which it is equilibrating. When the temperaturedifference is large, the rate of temperature change is large. As the difference decreases, the rate of changedecreases. A difference drives rate model of equilibration can be a powerful tool for scientists as it predicts andexplains a range of observable phenomena. Despite its power, the difference drives rate pattern is usuallyintroduced later in the science curriculum when it is taught in the form of a differential equation, for example asNewton’s law of heating.It is the goal of this study to identify elements of prior knowledge that might serve as a foundation foryounger students’ construction of a conceptual understanding of the difference drives rate model of equilibration.This understanding might in turn help them make sense of phenomena like thermal equilibration before they havethe mathematical machinery to interpret Newton’s law of heating; it may also serve as a foundation for theirconstruction of related mathematical concepts later on. The research reported here looks at a single classdiscussion during which students generated explanations for an instance of thermal equilibration and asks thequestion: “What prior knowledge emerged as a resource for students’ construction of a difference drives ratemodel of equilibration?”By identifying elements of prior knowledge that are potentially fruitful for science learning, this studymakes theoretical and empirical contributions to the conceptual change literature. The larger work within whichthe study is situated makes a practical contribution to classroom science through insights into how instruction canbe designed to leverage students’ prior knowledge. Such instruction not only supports learning, but positionslearners as agents of knowledge construction. This, in turn, may have the power to enhance students' picture ofthe scientific enterprise, making science a discourse where their voices matter, and to which they might one daymake meaningful contributions.ICLS 2016 Proceedings162© ISLSTheoretical orientationI align my research with the Knowledge in Pieces (KiP) perspective (diSessa, 1993). KiP models knowledge as acomplex system of elements that are cued in response to the sense-making demands of a particular context.Consistent with constructivism, the development of more sophisticated knowledge involves the reorganizationand refinement of existing knowledge. This view stands in contrast with perspectives on conceptual change thatview knowledge as a unitary theory that is cued consistently across contexts, and learning as a process in which anaïve theory is replaced by a more expert one (Clement, 1982; McClosky, 1983).Motivated by the KiP model of learning, I investigate elements of students’ prior knowledge that arepotentially productive for their construction of a scientific model of equilibration. I have therefore analyzedstudent contributions to a relevant class discussion and identified potentially productive knowledge elements,characterized those elements, and considered how they might foster students' construction of a difference drivesrate model of equilibration. I compare the elements that I identify with a class of intuitive knowledge calledphenomenological primitives, or p-prims (diSessa, 1993). P-prims model the smallest units out of which a largerknowledge system may be comprised. They are deeply intuitive elements of explanations, providing a learnerwith an intuitive sense of mechanism. An example of a previously documented p-prim that is also identified hereis Ohm’s p-prim: the intuition that more effort begets more result.This study is embedded in a larger program of design-based research (Collins, Joseph & Bielaczyc,2004). The present analysis considers data from a class discussion that occurred during an iteration of a yearlongcourse in which students practiced identifying and articulating models of process patterns including equilibration.The fundamental assumption of KiP that guided my design of instruction is that prior knowledge can play aproductive role in students’ construction of scientific knowledge. Designing instruction is therefore about creatingopportunities for the learner to activate productive elements of their prior knowledge and engage those elementsin their construction of new knowledge (Hammer, 2000). This stands in contrast with instruction designed fromthe misconceptions perspective, which focuses on identifying incorrect knowledge and replacing it with correctknowledge (McClosky, 1983). Instruction was therefore designed to elicit and engage students’ prior knowledgein their construction of more sophisticated pattern models.To identify productive elements of students’ prior knowledge, I drew on a set of strategies for qualitativeanalysis connected with the Knowledge in Pieces framework and organized under the name Knowledge Analysis(KA). KA is characteristically focused on knowledge, analyzing the ideas that learners internalize, rather than themeans or modes through which they communicate those ideas. Knowledge in Pieces is firmly committed to thecomplexity and idiosyncratic nature of individual knowledge systems. Knowledge Analysis, therefore, begins witha grounded characterization of the data. It then compares emergent knowledge with the existing KiP model inorder to contribute to its expansion and refinement.Methodological approachThis study investigates the prior knowledge of a group of 8th grade students that is potentially productive for theirconstruction of a scientific model of equilibration. It considers data taken from a class discussion that occurredduring an iteration of design-based research. The instructional design under test was a middle school sciencecourse called Patterns Class. Patterns Class met for 40 minutes on Monday, Tuesday, and Thursday mornings.The class met both fall and spring semesters, totaling approximately 60 hours of instruction over the course of theschool year. The researcher was the primary instructor and undergraduate research assistants doubled as teachingassistants, attending class about one morning a week with moderate consistency over the school year.Patterns Class curriculum was designed to guide students through the systematic exploration of fourpatterns: threshold, equilibration, exponential growth and oscillation (though these names were never formallyintroduced to the class participants). The results presented here are taken from analysis of data from theequilibration unit. The target model of the equilibration pattern can be characterized as difference drives rate, inwhich the rate of a system’s equilibration is directly proportional to the difference between its current state andits equilibrium state. An example that is explored by students during the unit is the equilibration of a glass of coldmilk with a warm room. At the start, the temperature of the milk is farthest from the temperature of the room andit is observed to warm at the greatest rate. As it warms, the difference between the milk’s temperature and thetemperature of the room decreases and the milk is observed to warm at a progressively slower rate until it reachesthe temperature of the room.In each of the units, instruction was designed to support students in modeling the pattern by activatingand engaging their prior knowledge in a general sequence of activities that alternated between exploringprototypical examples and generating and refining models of the patterns those examples followed. Theequilibration unit was comprised of 7 core activities and ran for approximately 20 instructional hours. Thesequence of core activities consisted of: 1) investigating the thermal equilibration of a glass of cold milk, 2)ICLS 2016 Proceedings163© ISLSinvestigating the thermal equilibration of a glass of hot tea, 3) constructing a model of the general pattern ofbehavior common to both examples, 4) investigating the equilibration of beans in a partitioned box through asimulation of diffusion, 5) revising pattern models, 6) generating additional examples that followed the pattern ofbehavior exhibited by the three examples , and 7) revising pattern models.ParticipantsTwenty-one 8th grade students participated in the focal iteration of the Patterns Class. The majority of the studentswere children of families that had immigrated to the U.S. from Mexico and Central America. Several studentsidentified as African American and European American. English was a second language for most, Spanish beingthe primary language spoken at home. The majority of students attending the school were designated as EnglishLanguage Learners, and the majority qualified for free and reduced lunch. The group of students participating inPatterns Class was selected on the basis of availability and willingness to participate. The particular school wasselected because the science teacher there was amenable to sharing her elective period students with our group forboth fall and spring semesters. Her elective period had traditionally been used as a science enrichment period forstudents that had scored proficient or higher on tests of basic skills in English and math.Data collectionData relevant to the present report were collected in three different forms: 1) video footage, 2) field notes, and 3)teacher reflections. Two digital video cameras recorded the activities of every Patterns Class. One camera waspositioned at the middle of one side of the room and pointed at an angle out across the classroom toward the frontboard. This camera captured the activity of the teacher and/or student(s) speaking at the front of the room and theartifacts recorded on the front board. A second camera was positioned at the front of the room just to the side ofthe front board. It was pointed out across the tables at which the students sat and captured the activity of thestudents as they attended to the front of the room or engaged in small group work. Field notes taken by researchassistants and reflections written by the teacher were used to identify segments of video for more careful analysis.Video footage of a whole-class discussion was selected as data for the present study, as it was particularlygenerative of prior knowledge. The discussion was transcribed and investigated through a Knowledge in Pieceslens. Potential knowledge elements were identified, characterized and compared with previously documentedphenomenological primitives, and considered in terms of their potential productivity for students' construction ofa difference drive rate model of equilibration.Certain conventions were used to transcribe students’ verbal utterances captured on videotape. Thenames of students contributing to the class discussion have been replaced with pseudonyms. I omit certaincontributions that are interruptions or part of productive conversations that are not temporally linked to thecontributions that are immediately relevant to my analysis. I use the symbols defined below to indicate the flowof speech and gesture:•// - break in speech•/…/ - interruption or parallel speech•<…> - gestureMajor findingsMy analysis addresses the research question: “What prior knowledge emerged as a resource for students’construction of a difference drives rate model of equilibration?” I will present elements of prior knowledgeinvoked by the students during a class discussion to explain the changing rate of temperature change exemplifiedby the results (Figure 1, below) of a thermal equilibration investigation. Facilitated by the teacher, students sharedtheir explanations for why the temperature of a glass of cold milk would warm up quickly at first and then slowdown as the milk reached room temperature. Below, I present the knowledge elements in their order of appearanceand describe their context of emergence, character, and potential productivity for students’ construction of adifference drives rate model of equilibration.ICLS 2016 Proceedings164© ISLSFigure 1. Approximate graph of temperature over time for cold milk equilibrating with a warm room.Knowledge element 1: Slowing Down to StopThis element emerged near the beginning of the whole class discussion. The teacher had asked students to respondto an explanation for the milk’s changing rate of temperature change written by one student at the end of theprevious lesson: "Because it was getting to room temperature at the end so it was slowing down. It's like a race,when you're getting to the destination you start to slow down."Leo:Alvaro:um//why would you slow down when you're about to finish a race? It doesn't makesensesay there's a wall// are you going to run straight into it Leo?Leo:well I'm not gonna go slower though// because then I'll loseAlvaro:like no no no no no like// say you're winning cause you're going as fast as you can//then when you're gonna reach the wall// don't you start to like <stomps feet on theground> kinda/Michelle: /is there a wall?Alvaro: yes there's a wallMichelle: there is no wallAlvaro: there is a wallMichelle: where?Alvaro:the room temperature// huh? huh Michelle what? This time when you're running//you're racing// you run as fast as you can// but then you're gonna go// you're goingto hit a wall so you start to like slow down// you have to slow down to stopThe discussion begins when one student, Leo, challenges the internal consistency of the race analogy byquestioning the sensibility of slowing down at the end of a race. Alvaro responds to Leo by explaining that this isa special case in which the race ends at a wall. Michelle challenges Alvaro's wall, questioning the mappingbetween the wall and the milk. Alvaro connects the wall with room temperature and presents his idea once more.His explanation for the decreasing rate of change is: "you have to slow down to stop."Slowing down to stop appears to be a notion that belongs to Alvaro's intuitive sense of mechanism. Thewall, in Alvaro's analogy, serves to reinforce the sense that there is a hard line beyond which neither the runner,nor the temperature, can go. Trying to stop after moving quickly is a common experience of many middle schoolaged students (and many people, in general). Attempting an abrupt stop after activities like running, skating ordriving are several possible origins of this intuition. If one attempts to stop abruptly, inertia causes one toovershoot and continue beyond the intended stopping point. An abstraction of the experience of inertialovershooting may be the previously documented p-prim overcoming – the sense that one influence wins overanother (diSessa, 1993). One may intuitively know that they can avoid this overshooting by slowing down beforethey stop. It is reasonable to conjecture that this is an intuitive element of knowledge that Alvaro is drawing onwhen he says: "you have to slow down to stop."Though it has not been previously documented, slowing down to stop is a candidate for intuitiveknowledge roughly the grain size of a p-prim. The connection between slowing to a stop and the experience ofovershooting suggests that the knowledge element may in some cases be cognitively linked (and have high cuingpriority) with the p-prim overcoming. Slowing to a stop seems close, in character, to the p-prim slowingequilibration – the notion that things slow as they approach equilibrium (diSessa, 1993). I would argue, however,ICLS 2016 Proceedings165© ISLSthat it is different in three important ways. The first difference is the degree of urgency. While slowingequilibration is described by a natural and gradual easing to a stop, the slowing described by Alvaro is marked byan urgent need to stop. The second difference is in the location of the impetus for slowing. In the case of slowingequilibration the object slows because that is its natural internal tendency. In the case of Alvaro’s slowing, theobject is pressured to stop by an external entity or demarcation. The third difference is related to the stoppingpoint. In the case of slowing equilibration the object is returning to its natural state or state of balance. In the caseof Alvaro’s slowing, the object is moving to a new destination.Slowing to a stop is potentially very productive for the construction of a scientific model of equilibration.While it only explains the latter half of the equilibration curve (Figure 1, segment BC), slowing to a stop mapswell to that part of the curve and, moreover, it is analogous with difference drives rate, though in a spatialincarnation as distance drives rate. As the distance to the endpoint decreases, so does the speed of the equilibratingentity, until, at the endpoint, the rate of change is zero. The productivity of the element is limited in that it cannotbe generalized to explain the decrease in speed at any distance from the endpoint. Instead it only explains thechange in speed at a point where the entity is near enough to the endpoint that it needs to begin to slow down.This limitation will be clear in the way Alvaro thinks about the first half of the equilibration curve (Figure 1,segment AB).Knowledge elements 2 and 3: Energy Drives Rate and Energy is Greatest at theStartNoticing that the students have focused on the second half of the equilibration curve (Figure 1, segment BC), theteacher turns their attention to the task of constructing an explanation for the first half (Figure 1, segment AB).Teacher:let me ask you this: what if we need to do the other half of that// going really fast atthe start? Why would the water start warming up really fast at the start?Leo:because at the start you have a lot of energy to run so you run/Continuing to reason within the general context of the race analogy but shifting from the end of the raceto its beginning, Leo offers an idea that is completely unrelated to the "wall" at the finish line. He suggests: "atthe start you have a lot of energy to run." Because it is given in response to the teacher's question, Leo's idea couldbe interpreted as meaning "at the start you have a lot of energy to run, so you run fast." At the beginning of therace the runner’s speed is the greatest because they have the most energy. As the race unfolds, the runner uses upenergy and slows down as a result. It seems as though there are two underlying intuitions here. The first is energydrives rate. This is a potential abstraction of the experience of moving with greater speed when one feels energizedand moving more slowly when one feels less energized. The second intuition is that energy is greatest at the startof an activity. This implies that one has a fixed amount of energy to devote toward activity, and as one is active,one depletes that fixed amount of energy. The second intuition is potentially fruitful for constructing a scientificunderstanding of conservation of energy. It is probably grounded on the very common physical experience ofmoving quickly at the beginning of an activity (such as a race) when one is fresh and has not yet exerted oneself.As one goes along, one experiences increasing fatigue (which one might attribute to the expenditure of energy).Really, a person uses up chemical potential energy as their body converts it into the kinetic energy of theirmovement, so the explanation that Leo suggests is not unscientific in the context of the race.Leo's ideas might also be connected with the impetus conception of force, documented by earlymisconceptions researchers (Clement, 1982; McClosky, 1983). The conception explained a moving object asbeing driven forward by an internal impetus force that perpetuated its motion until it gradually died out. Here Leois calling the impetus force energy as opposed to force, but the idea appears to be much the same. At the beginning,the object (the runner in the case of his analogy) could be said to have a lot of force, but the force dies away overtime and results in the slowing and eventual stop of movement. An important distinction between Leo's idea andthe impetus force conception is that Leo's idea is invoked to explain human motion (though ultimately he mayhave meant it to explain the warming of the milk, as he shared the idea in response to the teacher’s question aboutthe milk). Impetus force is a documented explanation for the slowing of inanimate objects. While it is not scientificto explain an object’s slowing as the result of running out of impetus force, it is scientific to explain the slowingof a human runner as the result of running out of energy.Leo's intuition about having more energy to run fast at the start may in fact produce a curve that matchesthe equilibration curve and therefore provide a working explanation (possibly even one with predictive power) forthe changing rate of temperature change. Its productivity is ultimately limited, however, because it does not mapto difference drives rate, which is the target model of equilibration. While a race of a particular length mightICLS 2016 Proceedings166© ISLSafford a run that begins as a sprint and slows as the runner loses energy, it is possible to imagine that a shorterrace would yield a sprint of a consistent rate, or that a longer race would yield a run of variable pace, or one inwhich the runner stopped entirely before reaching the finish line. A main limitation of Leo’s reasoning is that rateis not dependent on the amount the entity has to change (position or temperature). It therefore does not map to thescientific model of equilibration as difference drives rate.Knowledge elements 4 and 5: Space Allows Speed and Ohm’s P-primLeo has hardly shared his idea when Alvaro interjects to voice his disagreement and provide an alternativeexplanation.Alvaro:/no// I disagree// Because you have more space <gestures spreading hands apart>//you're not going to crash into a wall <moves whole body forward> so that's why yourun faster/Leo:Alvaro:/that's not really true//you try to win//So you can try to like// win// that's why you're running faster// butthen// when you're like approaching the wall// you're gonna start to like slow down//so you don't want to like crash into itContinuing to reason in the context of the analogy of a race to a wall, Alvaro produces an alternativeexplanation for the high speed of the runner at the beginning of the race. This is that, unlike the end of the racewhere the wall constrains the runner's speed, at the start, the runner can safely run as fast as they want. His finalcontribution suggests that the runner will go as fast as possible at the start because they are trying to win the race.The goal of winning, together with the safety of the large space, drives the high speed of the runner at the start ofthe race. It is possible that Alvaro's conception of space is invoked as a result of the way he is thinking about therace with respect to the wall: with both the start of the race and the wall in mind the space between the startingline and wall is made salient. At the start, there is a great deal of space between the two and it is therefore safe torun fast. Near the finish there is less space and the runner is in danger of crashing into the wall and must thereforeslow to a stop.Both driving factors - space and effort – appear to be separate intuitions. Alvaro’s explanation has niceinternal consistency and it is likely that his intuition that space allows speed is cognitively connected with slowingto a stop. When there is space to run quickly, one runs quickly, as the space decreases one must slow to a stop.Both knowledge elements are connected with, and probably mediated by, a perception of safety. The experienceof running to a wall is a possible origin of the intuition that space allows speed. Alvaro’s intuition that effortdrives rate is essentially an instantiation of the previously documented intuition Ohm’s p-prim: greater effortbegets greater result. Ohm's p-prim has previously been shown to be highly productive in students' constructionof a difference drives rate model of equilibration (diSessa 2014). As well, Alvaro’s idea of space allows speedmight be useful for constructing a difference drives rate model of equilibration. It does map to difference drivesrate, if the entity is motivated to go as fast as it is allowed and responds proportionally to the decrease in space.This conceptualization of the relationship between space and rate is limited, however, in that it is possible toimagine that the entity would not have a proportional relationship with the distance. Rather, it may go fast at aconstant rate until it needs to slow down to avoid crashing into the wall.Knowledge element 6: Difference Drives Desire to Eliminate DifferenceThe teacher summarizes the ideas shared by Leo and Alvaro and frames them as competing explanations. Sheadds another explanation to these two, one that had been written by a student the previous day: "Because when itfirst goes in, the temperature is so different so it changes faster." She invites the students in the class to respondto any of the ideas put forth by their classmates thus far. She pulls Sofia's name at random and asks her which ofthe ideas make sense to her.Sofia:they all make sense// because// the last one// because the temperature is superdifferent// it wants// I guess it warms up fasterTeacher:Sofia:why does it go fast and slow// based on what you said?I guess// It wants to get warmer? I don’t knowTeacher:<writes on board> because it wants to/Sofia:/get warmer and reach room temperatureICLS 2016 Proceedings167© ISLSThe original idea read by the teacher maps directly to difference drives rate, however it is not clear whatintuition, if any, underlies it. In explaining why this idea makes sense to her, Sofia invokes an intuition about therelationship between the difference in temperatures and the desire of the cold milk to reach room temperature.She appears to be suggesting that the milk wants to be at the same temperature as the room. The temperaturedifference sparks that desire in the milk, to "get warmer" and "reach room temperature." Though her explanationis fragmented, it seems that for Sofia, the milk’s desire to eliminate the difference in temperature drives the rateat which it warms. It is plausible that she is invoking Ohm’s p-prim, connecting desire and rate through effort. Inthis case, a more complete version of her explanation would be comprised of three elements of intuitiveknowledge: difference drives desire to eliminate difference, desire drives effort, and effort drives rate (Ohm’s pprim).With so little data, it is difficult to say for certain what knowledge Sofia invokes. If she is in fact thinkingthat the milk’s desire to warm is directly proportional to its difference with room temperature and invoking Ohm'sp-prim, this would be highly productive. On this view, when the temperatures are very different, the milk has avery strong desire to decrease that difference, and, as a result of that strong desire works harder and decreases thedifference more quickly. As the difference decreased, so would the desire and effort of the milk, causing thedifference to decrease more slowly. In this way, logic relating the difference in temperature to the rate oftemperature change is highly productive for constructing a difference drives rate model of equilibration.Knowledge element 7: Difference Drives RateThe teacher turns to the class to invite the other students to respond to the ideas that have come up during the classdiscussion. She draws Mateo's name at random and asks him to explain the ideas that have made sense to himduring the discussion.Mateo:there's a big difference in the temperature// um like it has a lot to cover so it wantsto do it fastTeacher: what about this from here to here? <points to the second half of the warming curve>Mateo:like Alvaro said// it slows down 'cause there's a wallMateo's intuition that "it has a lot to cover so it wants to do it fast" appears to map directly to differencedrives rate. It is a sensible instinctive reaction to having a great distance to cover, or a great amount of differenceto decrease. Mateo's intuition seems to be the symmetric reflection of Ohm's p-prim. If we interpret "has a lot tocover" as implicating a large result to produce and "wants to do it fast" as implicating a desire to put forth a greatamount of effort, "it has a lot to cover so it wants to do it fast" can be interpreted as "greater result motivatesgreater effort." It is important to note that this is only meant to explain the beginning of the equilibration curveand Mateo invokes Alvaro’s notion of slowing to a wall to explain the rate at the end of the equilibration process.The knowledge element introduced by Mateo is very powerful. It can be used to both explain and predict theequilibration curve and maps smoothly to the idea of difference drives rate. His explanation in fact precedes theemergence of an articulation of difference drives rate that is free of anthropomorphic language and independentof Alvaro's "slowing down to stop" explanation.DiscussionSeven elements of prior knowledge were identified as potential resources for students' construction of a differencedrives rate model of equilibration. Six of these elements were previously undocumented. The first elementappeared to be connected with the previously documented p-prim overcoming. Several elements appeared to beconnected with a previously documented phenomenological primitive, Ohm's p-prim. These results verify existingelements of the Knowledge in Pieces model and suggest possible extensions to it.The broader study in which this work is situated makes a practical contribution through the design ofclassroom instruction that supports students’ construction of a difference drives rate model of equilibration. Inaddition to pattern knowledge and science practices (such as explanation and modeling) outlined by the NextGeneration Science Standards, Patterns Class presents students with a novel picture of the scientific enterprise.Much of the science curriculum that has been designed to emulate the practices of professional science has focusedon empirical activities, such as inquiry-based learning. While certain versions of inquiry have focused on thetheoretical side (White, Frederiksen, Collins, 2009; Lehrer, Schauble & Lucas, 2008), much inquiry curriculumis focused on engaging students in practices of observation, data collection, and representation. Patterns Classincludes empirical investigations but the theoretical half of the inquiry process is more heavily weighted.ICLS 2016 Proceedings168© ISLSMoreover, the theoretical half is not focused on engaging students in activities concerned with existing theories;rather, it is focused on scaffolding students' construction of their own theories. Much instructional time is devotedto theory building activities (such as the whole class discussion that was the focus of this report).Patterns Class features a strength-based curriculum that values and leverages the prior knowledge thatindividual students bring to their learning. The responsive nature of the instructional design does not privilegeformal knowledge over everyday knowledge. It supports students in the task of knowledge construction by buildingon their strengths. Though instruction has been designed with target scientific models in mind (e.g., equilibrationas difference drives rate), it is meant to support students' construction of their own pattern models and strives totreat students as autonomous agents of knowledge construction. The general nature of patterns makes themaccessible to students from a variety of backgrounds. Equilibration, for example, can be explored in physicalphenomena such as the warming of a glass of cold milk, or psychosocial phenomena such as the dissipation of astrong emotion over time. Students can think carefully about an example with which they personally resonate andconstruct their model of equilibration on the basis of that example. Because they afford a multitude of diverseentry-points to their exploration, patterns are an excellent object of thought with which to engage students fromdifferent backgrounds and levels of academic preparation in abstract thinking and authentic practices of science.ReferencesClement, J. (1982). Students’ preconceptions in introductory mechanics. American Journal of physics, 50(1), 6671.Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design research: Theoretical and methodological issues. TheJournal of the learning sciences, 13(1), 15-42.diSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an epistemology of physics. Cognition and instruction, 10(2-3), 105-225.disessa, A. A. (2014). The construction of causal schemes: Learning mechanisms at the knowledge level.Cognitive science, 38(5), 795-850.Hammer, D. (2000). Student resources for learning introductory physics. American Journal of Physics, 68(S1),S52-S59.Lehrer, R., Schauble, L. & Lucas, D. (2008). Supporting development of the epistemology of inquiry. CognitiveDevelopment, 23, 512-529.McCloskey, M. (1983). Naïve theories of motion. Mental models, 299-324.Schweingruber, H., Keller, T., & Quinn, H. (Eds.). (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education:: Practices,Crosscutting Concepts, and Core Ideas. National Academies Press.White, B., Frederiksen, J., & Collins, A. (2009). The interplay of scientific inquiry and metacognition: More thana marriage of convenience. Handbook of metacognition in education, 175-205.AcknowledgementsI would like to thank Andy diSessa and the Patterns research group at U.C. Berkeley for their formativecontributions to this work. I would like to thank Allan Collins for his critical insights into my analysis andfeedback on this work. This research was supported by the Spencer Foundation under grant 201100101.ICLS 2016 Proceedings169© ISLS