Engaging Teachers in Discussions Around Temporality Measuresfrom Analytics to Inform Knowledge Building DiscourseTeo Chew Lee, National Institute of Education, Chewlee.Teo@nie.edu.sgCarol Chan, Hong Kong University, cck@hku.hkAndy Ng, St Hildas Primary School, Ng_Ding_Xuan@moe.edu.sgAbstract: This study examined the use of learning analytics designs to support teacherunderstanding of knowledge building discourse. In this study, learning analytics are designedto help teachers shift their focus on idea-centric knowledge building discourse, i.e. one thatweigh students' questions and ideas on the potential for authentic inquiry and improvability.We present teachers' weekly meeting at which a group of teachers interpreted two sets ofmarkers in students' online discussion using Knowledge Forum®. They are (i) keywords ascontent markers and (ii) Knowledge Building scaffold support as epistemic markers. We hopeto inform the use of temporal measures of the learning analytics to surface invisible indicatorsto teachers that allowed them to understand students' discourse from the stance of improvabilityand reflect on how to improve the idea-centric discourse among students.IntroductionThis study is based on a series of research effort to develop a practical frame of 'learning analytics intervention'for teachers. This "Learning analytics intervention" for teachers -has been defined as the frame to guide teachersin the designing and enacting classroom activities and interaction with data from analytics tools, data, and reports(Wise, 2014; Wise & Chuy, 2011). There is huge potential in the use of learning analytics by teachers forprofessional development has not been well investigated and merit research attention.In many Singapore classrooms, the spectrum of student-centred inquiry-based practice is so large that itis not surprising that many of the students do not get to experience important cognitive activities such as exploringdissonance; negotiating meaning; co-constructing learning. In many classroom discussions, we observed from theknowledge building project, promising questions and ideas that students raised in class is often "killed" before theclass truly benefit from it. These promising ideas are either assessed as 'out of syllabus' or missed by the teacherhaving to navigate the many questions posted by students. In the long run, students may never get to developadequate competencies to lead or navigate a productive and creative discourse in work-place. This study on usinglearning analytics to engage teacher in understanding the tenets of idea-centric discourse by making use of learninganalytics to help teachers (i) identify discourse markers such as pivotal question or pivotal information and (ii)surface invisible indicators that are closely aligned to 21st century competencies (Chen & Resendes, 2014). This'evidence' of learning would provide the confidence to teachers in moving their class towards improvablediscourse.MethodThis poster describes the learning analytics designs based on Knowledge Forum work and a set of teacherdiscussion recording their interpretation of the different visualizations created by the analytics about theirclassroom practice. The intervention is to help teachers notice important but invisible indicators throughexamining the visualization of students’ discourse recorded on Knowledge Forum. The three sets of visualisationgenerated by learning analytics that we think would serve to surface these important but invisible indicators are:(a) Content as learning markers: Three sets of keyword maps, each set provdes a different level granularityof analysis to the teachers. The first is a composite visualisation of 2 related word-map (Fig. 1A) churnedout by learning analytics. The green wordmap that display main keywords most frequently used by thestudents and a yellow word-map that provides a higher granulairty showing words are used by studentseven if it is only once. The visualisation includes the bold words and the text boxes are added in to allowteachers to read the details of the notes connected in the analytics. The other two are wordmaps of thekeywords of the same topic from two other sources, the curriculum document and a corpus of scientificarticles.(b) Pattern of centrality of keywords in the discourse, which we colloquially termed it as ‘live of a word’ inthe online discussion database (Fig. 3). It provides teachers an overview of the kind of words collectivelyused by the students.(c) Epistemic markers: graph of different types of scaffold supports students adopted in their discourse.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1677© ISLS(d) Students’ interaction: pattern of centrality of students and their ideas in the database, which we termedas “live of a student” in the online discourse database as indicator of students’ contribution to thediscourse.Figure 1. Two sets of related word-map generated from students’ discourse.Analysis and discussionThe team engaged in discussion around analysis every three months. This discussion was attended by 4 teachersincluding (teacher A) who conducted the lessons. The meeting lasted 1.5 hours. In these discussions, the teachermade sense of these data from learning analytics in relation to the ‘seized’ and ‘missed’ opportunities in theirpractice, in the following three areas:(i) Developing concepts and content: Do the keyword maps reveal to them students’ ideas and questionsthat they did not notice in class? What do they see from the comparison across different sets of keywordmaps?(ii) Competencies of scientific thinking and literacies: Anything that surprised the teachers in the way theanalytics report to them how students think through and inquire about the problems?(iii) Class’ dynamics: Anything about the students leading the conversation or the pattern of reading and beread network that surprises them?From the discourse, the visualization seemed to have supported the teachers in reflecting on the missedopportunity of not using some of the very interesting questions from his students when he saw the wordmap fromhis students’ discourse. He also reflected on the lack of depth in the students’ word-map when he compared itacross the curriculum and of the scientific literature wordmaps, triangulated with the data from scaffold trackers.He shared that maybe he should have more time for the students to dwell deeper in their discussion. The teacherswere pleasantly surprised with this visualization of the centrality measures of the concept and content words usedby students. He agreed that these conceptual words may be more important than students just regurgitation contentwords. This indicates a possibility of translating the evidence of epistemic markers to influence teachers’ practicalmoves.ReferencesWise, A. F. (2014, March). Designing pedagogical interventions to support student use of learning analytics. InProceedings of the Fourth Intl Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge (pp. 203-211). ACM.Wise, A. F., & Chiu, M. M. (2011). Analyzing temporal patterns of knowledge construction in a role-based onlinediscussion. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6(3), 445-470.Chen, B., & Resendes, M. (2014, March). Uncovering what matters: Analyzing transitional relations amongcontribution types in knowledge-building discourse. In Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference onLearning Analytics and Knowledge (pp. 226-230). ACM.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1678© ISLS