Agentive Learning for Sustainability and Equity: Communities,Cooperatives and Social Movements as Emerging Foci of theLearning SciencesYrjö Engeström, University of Helsinki, yrjo.engeström@helsinki.fiAnnalisa Sannino, University of Helsinki, annalisa.sannino@helsinki.fiAydin Bal, University of Wisconsin-Madison, abal@wisc.eduHeila Lotz-Sisitka, Rhodes University, h.lotz-sisitka@ru.ac.zaTichaona Pesanayi, Rhodes University, tich@wessa.co.zaCharles Chikunda, Rhodes University, charles@award.org.zaManoel Flores Lesama, Universidade Federal do Paraná, flores.lesama@gmail.comAntonio Carlos Picinatto, Universidade Federal do Paraná, antoniocarlospicinatto@gmail.comMarco Pereira Querol, Universidade Federal de Sergipe, mapquero@gmail.comYew Jin Lee (discussant), National Institute of Education, Singapore, yewjin.lee@nie.edu.sgAbstract: This symposium expands the object and scope of the learning sciences by introducingcommunities, cooperatives and social movements as crucially important sites of learning. Thesymposium papers employ and critically interrogate cultural-historical activity theory,specifically the theory of expansive learning, and the emerging methodology of formativeinterventions as a potential framework for dealing with learning in communities, cooperativesand social movements. Expansive learning emerges as a process of revitalizing the commons,or commoning. The contributions of the symposium point toward the importance of analyzingand fostering transformative agency as a quality of learning.Overview of symposiumEvidence suggests that we have only years, not decades, to restore the balance before we tip the planet’s naturalsystems into irreversible cycles that will wreak havoc on vast swathes of nature and on the lives of billions ofpeople around the world. The looming global environmental crisis requires learning and agency that go beyondand across the confines of disciplines, age groups, institutions and cultures. Such learning and agency buildingmust be part and parcel of efforts to create and maintain sustainable and equitable forms of livelihood andcommunal life, that is, alternatives to capitalism as we know it. It is the task of engaged researchers to identify,analyze and foster them.We need to celebrate instances in which we see the market being effectively reembedded in civilsociety—where investment and production decisions are being driven by social needs rather than private-profitconsiderations. Where city governments team up with local credit unions, pension funds, and unions to supportthe emergence of local cooperatives, where these cooperatives join together in planning processes that involve thelocal community, where these cooperatives’ products respond to real economic, social, and environmental needsas determined by the people involved. Alternatives to capitalism also emerge within established institutions suchas education and health care, as innovative alternatives to privatization and commoditization.Here, even if the experiments are local in nature and far from the global scale we so urgently need, peoplecan at least begin to see the contours of the kind of world we need to create. There is an impressive range of suchnew democratic institutions and institutional ecologies that have been quietly developing just below the surfaceof public awareness in recent years. They presage various ways of reembedding the economy, not as a return topre-capitalist modes of embeddedness, but as the creation of a new form of society in which economic decisionsare made under norms of democratic dialogue (Adler, 2015).The notion of reembedding the economy is closely related to the notion of expanding the commons, orcommoning (Ostrom, 1990; Linebaugh, 2008). The notion of commons refers to the cultural and natural resourcesaccessible to all members of a society, including natural materials such as air, water, and a habitable earth; theseresources are held in common, not owned privately. Also knowledge itself needs to be understood as commons(Hess & Ostrom, 2007).This view calls for reorientation of educational research toward the dialectics of agency andtransformation in activities and communities in turmoil. Such a reorientation involves two major shifts. The firstshift is moving beyond (but not excluding) classrooms and schools, toward communities, work activities andsocial movements as sites of learning. The second shift is moving beyond observations and analysis towardtheoretically grounded interventions. The key ideas of such a reorientation include the following:ICLS 2016 Proceedings1048© ISLS•Learning and formation of agency are seen as intertwined processes; transformative agency is a centralquality and outcome of learning.•Schools are seen as nodes in a community or network of diverse activity systems struggling to learn anew way of living.•Learning and instruction are seen as increasingly horizontal processes of sharing and hybridizing –vertical processes cannot be regarded as self-evident or superior.•Learning and instruction are seen as part and parcel of longitudinal efforts to build sustainable andequitable ways of life; short episodes or courses of school learning need to be seen as special casesembedded in long-term processes of transformation.•Learning and instruction need to be built on the histories and indigenous funds of knowledge withincommunities.•Learning and instruction need to be re-connected to their driving forces, namely vitally significantcontradictions and efforts at their resolution in the lives of communities.Research on agentive learning for sustainability and equity in communities and activity systems such ascooperatives and social movements is typically conducted with the help of formative interventions;methodologies of intervention research are of foundational importance for this field.These challenges are addressed in four papers and a commentary, presented by scholars coming fromfive continents. In the first paper, Yrjö Engeström and Annalisa Sannino (University of Helsinki, Finland) proposea conceptual framework for studies of agentive learning in communities and social movements as an agenda forthe learning sciences. In the second paper, Aydin Bal (University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA) will presentfindings from Culturally Responsive Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (CRPBIS), a statewideformative intervention study. In the third paper, Heila Lotz-Sisitka, Tichaona Pesanayi and Charles Chikunda(Rhodes University, South Africa), using conceptual tools from cultural-historical activity theory (CHAT),analyze learning in two sustainability-oriented commonality building activities, namely co-management of naturalresources and communal food gardening. In the fourth paper, Manoel Flores Lesama, Antonio Carlos Picinatto(both from the Federal University of Paraná, Brazil) and Marco Pereira Querol (Federal University of Sergipe,São Cristovão, Brazil) analyze the learning challenges involved in the emergence of a rural credit cooperative inBrazil. Yew Jin Lee (National Institute of Education, Singapore) will serve as discussant of the symposium.•Agentive learning in communities and social movements: Toward a researchagendaYrjö Engeström and Annalisa Sannino, Center for Research on Activity, Development and Learning CRADLE,University of Helsinki, FinlandIs educational research effectively responding to the acute worldwide challenges of equity and ecologicalsustainability? We address this question in dialogue with recent analyses (e.g., Scott, 2015; Wooltorton & al,2015) which claim that scholarly work in education should be more relevant and engaged in supportingtransformative agency emerging in the struggles for fundamental human rights. A theoretical and methodologicalargument is developed drawing on data and findings from an ongoing research project on learning in productivesocial movements. The paper argues for interventionist studies that build on the interconnected categories ofalienation and transformative agency in analyses of expansive learning.Theoretical frameworkThe philosopher Sève (2012) defines alienation as a foundational category of dialectics having both an ontologicaland a gnoseological scope. This category allows one to grasp the historical development of human beings andprovides methodological insights for investigating this development. Alienation is a result of the separationbetween productive work and social wealth established by the capital throughout history. Within alienatedactivities intrinsic antagonistic forces are at play: On the one hand, the conditions of production and developmentseparated from individuals turn into subjugating forces; on the other hand, an unlimited emancipatorydevelopment of all forms of social wealth gains momentum. Within this dialectical perspective, alienation bothprevents and generates transformative agency. Alienation and transformative agency form a dialectical unity ofopposites.In the theory of expansive learning (Engeström, 2015), learning is seen as qualitative transformation ofcollective activity systems, such as work units and communities. Expansion refers to a type of learning in whichthe object of the activity is qualitatively widened and nobody knows ahead of time what exactly needs to beICLS 2016 Proceedings1049© ISLSlearned. Expansive learning leads to the formation of a new, expanded object and pattern of activity oriented tothe object. Three ideal-typical phases of the formation of the object in expansive learning may be identified,namely 1) emergence of an initial diffuse object; 2) formation of a consciously articulated, abstract germ cellobject, and 3) construction of a concrete expanded object. In focusing on the learners’ work to grasp and transcendthe contradictory unity of alienation and transformative agency, the paper takes a step forward in the developmentof the theory of expansive learning.Three casesThe aim of this study is to identify dynamics that trigger, sustain or prevent expansive learning in socialmovements facing major challenges of survival and sustainability. Our aim is also to understand how productivesocial movements may stabilize their achievements and accomplish longevity.Our first case is the Campesino a Campesino movement in Central America (Holt-Giménez, 2006). Thisis a large-scale movement which develops sustainable forms of livelihood for poor farmers, challenging thedominance of industrial forms of agriculture and food production owned by large corporations. In doing this, themovement has developed an entire pedagogy based on horizontal interaction between farmers.Our second case is the Herttoniemi Food Cooperative in Helsinki, Finland. Founded in 2011, thecooperative brings together consumers seeking reliable supplies of organic and nearby food, and agriculturalproducers of such supplies. The cooperative has about 200 members. It rents a field 30 kilometers from the centerof Helsinki where a hired farmer produces vegetables for the cooperative. During the harvest season, vegetablesare transported weekly from the field into the city to distribution points where members can come to pick up theirshare. In spite of its growing popularity, the continuity of the food cooperative is constantly at risk. Small-scaleecological farming is very labor-intensive and has to compete with the heavily subsidized farm products of largefood store chains.Our third case is the New York City Community Land Initiative (NYCCLI). NYCCLI brings togetherthe homeless of New York and activists seeking to establish novel forms of financing and administering affordablehousing. A central aspect of the activity of this movement are diverse forms of popular education and selfeducation of the homeless, the administrators, and the public at large.Our analysis will show that these movements are examples of the core challenges facing education andeducational research in the 21st century. The analysis of the cases leads us to propose a set of key concepts andcriteria for expanded objects of educational research. The analysis also reveals a number of novel potentials foreducation, as well as methodological challenges for educational research.Data and methodsThe first case is analyzed with the help of the rich historical and ethnographic data included in the pioneeringstudy of Holt-Giménez (2006). The two other cases are analyzed with the help of extensive ethnographicobservations and recordings of key meetings collected by our research group. In the analysis of the data, we usethe method of identifying discursive manifestations of contradictions (Engeström & Sannino, 2011) as well as thestepwise model of double stimulation as generative mechanism of transformative agency (Sannino, 2015).Preliminary findingsEach one of the three cases is dependent on learning and instruction, understood as generation of new practicesand requisite knowledge. In the three cases, learning and instruction are highly motivated by commoning efforts(Linebaugh, 2008) that stem from contradictions in the lives of the participants. Learning and instruction in thesecases are primarily horizontal processes of sharing, combining and hybridizing different kinds of knowledge andexpertise. Learning and instruction are longitudinal processes; there are no fixed terminal objectives. Themovements and communities in the three cases could, however, benefit greatly if schools joined them.Our findings indicate that the object of educational research and theorizing can and should be expandedalong three dimensions: (1) Spatially; learning and instruction need to be seen as increasingly horizontal processesof sharing – vertical processes are merely special cases; schools need to be seen as only nodes in a community ornetwork of activity systems struggling to learn a new way of living. (2) Temporally; processes of learning andinstruction need to be seen as part and parcel of longitudinal efforts to build sustainable and equitable ways of life;short episodes or courses of school learning need to be seen as special cases embedded in long-term processes oftransformation. (3) Motivationally; learning and instruction need to be re-connected to their driving forces, namelysignificant contradictions and efforts at their resolution in the lives of communities - drivenness needs to berecognized as a quality of productive learning.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1050© ISLSToward ecological validity and sustainability: Transforming schools from theground upAydin Bal, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USAThis paper presents findings from Culturally Responsive Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports(CRPBIS), a statewide formative intervention study. The CRPBIS research team partnered with the WisconsinDepartment of Public Instruction, an urban school district, and community organizations (e.g., Urban League,Centro Hispano) to establish an inclusive problem solving process in schools, called Learning Lab. The goal ofthe Learning Lab is to build schools’ capacities for equity-oriented transformation (Bal, 2011). Learning Labswere implemented at three preK-12 schools in order to redesign discipline systems with local stakeholders,specifically those who are historically marginalized from schools’ decision-making activities. The paper willreport on the implementation of a Learning Lab at Martin Luther King Jr. (MLK) High School in the 2013-2014school year. The author will discuss how Learning Lab members examined the racialization of discipline at MLKand designed a new behavioral support system that was culturally responsive to the diverse experiences, needs,and goals of their school community.Significance of the studyIn U.S. schools, African American, Native American, and Latino students receive suspension and expulsion morefrequently and are punished more severely for less serious incidents such as disrespect and excessive noise thantheir White peers (The Office for Civil Rights [OCR], 2014). Racial disproportionality has an impact on thelikelihood of academic failure and involvement in the juvenile justice system (American PsychologicalAssociation, 2008). As a systemic contradiction, disproportionality creates a double bind for educators - “asocietally essential dilemma which cannot be resolved through separate individual actions alone—but in whichjoint co-operative actions can push a historically new form of activity into emergence” (Engeström, 1987, p. 165).To handle this double bind, schools often rely on federally sanctioned standards-based programs for systemschange. Those programs prescribe a universal behavioral support model implemented with high fidelity assolutions. The standards-based programs have not improved behavioral outcomes for non-dominant students(Vincent & Tobin, 2011).Theoretical framework and research questionsEffective and sustainable transformations demand a robust theory of change and building coalitions (Soja, 2010).CRPBIS is informed by Engeström’s (2015) expansive learning theory. Grounded in historical materialism,expansive learning theory offers a new methodology called formative intervention for facilitating systemictransformations led and owned by local stakeholders (Engeström & Sannino, 2010).This case study answers the following research questions: How can the Learning Lab be understoodthrough expansive learning actions? How did the Learning Lab facilitate the creation of a culturally responsiveschool discipline system at an urban high school?Method and analysisThe Learning Lab at MLK was comprised of 14 members: Two administrators, five teachers, five parents, onestudent, and the director of a local social justice organization. Members met for 11 sessions. Multiple data sourceswere analyzed including 96 hours of video recordings, interviews, and office discipline referrals. An in-depthqualitative analysis was conducted to trace the expansion of the MLK discipline system through a cycle of learningactions.ResultsSix expansive learning actions emerged in the Learning Lab: Questioning, analyzing, modeling, examining,implementing, and reflecting on the Lab process. Learning Lab showed promise as a means towarddemocratization of the school’s decision-making process. Overall, the CRPBIS Learning Labs functioned asresearch and innovation sites for the schools as well as for the research team to develop tools for authenticcommunity-school collaborations. The district is now working with the CRPBIS team to scale up Learning Labs.ImplicationsIn the age of standardization with the relentless neoliberal attacks against public education, educators in the UnitedStates find themselves between a rock and a hard place juggling multiple tasks of the top-to-bottom educationreform initiatives while facing lessening opportunities to experiment, reflect on their practice, and collaborateICLS 2016 Proceedings1051© ISLSwith other educators, students, and families. The CRPBIS Learning Labs and other grassroots coalitions mayprovide organic and sustainable ways of re-imagining schools as spaces of solidarity and emancipation.Building commonality: Navigating historically situated power relations inCHAT expansive learning researchHeila Lotz-Sisitka, Tichaona Pesanayi and Charles Chikunda, Rhodes University, South AfricaDeveloping activities of protecting, conserving, sustainably using and sharing the commons equitably with dueconsideration for all people and non-humans has been described in various fora as one of humanity’s most pressingchallenges, including in UNESCO’s most recent document framing the purpose of education and learning for the21st century (UNESCO, 2014).We draw on Peter Linebaugh’s (2014) analysis of expropriation activities and appropriations of land andcommon property resources in the English countryside considering these issues as they traverse the rockyhistorical terrain of colonial Empire Expansion under British, Dutch, French and Belgian colonial rule. Jumpingseveral generations southwards to the southern tip of Africa, we discuss two sustainability oriented commonalitybuilding activities, namely co-management of natural resources and communal food gardening. These activitiesand their emergent development are shaped by mediational and generative research based on cultural-historicalactivity theory. They are framed as relevant activities in the early 21st century in postcolonial, decolonizingsocietal contexts, and involve a re-appropriation and a re-claiming of the commons and commonality undercomplex conditions of climate change and water scarcity (Rittel & Weber’s (1973) ‘wicked problems’ andEngeström’s (2009) fourth generation CHAT objects).The two case studies illuminate how via expansive learning in CHAT generative research processes,communities, formerly disenfranchised and left bereft of land, resources and other means of livelihoods arebeginning to reclaim the commons through expansive learning and transformative agency - one bit at a time. Thetwo cases are:Case 1: A case of emerging co-management activity in the northern part of South Africa in the LimpopoProvince, Olifants River Catchment, where communities previously disenfranchised of their land are nowengaging in the activity of co-management of natural resources with a view to beneficiation of the widercommunity. In this case, we analyse early historical data in expansive learning and new activity formation, toprobe how communities navigate power relations in order to establish conditions for cognitive justice in changelaboratory contexts where new activity formation for co-management becomes possible (case: award.org.za).Case 2: A case of communal farming activity in the south eastern part of South Africa in the EasternCape Province, Nkonkombe Municipality where communities previously disenfranchised of their land and laterforced into communal farming under Bantustan state regulation are now developing a more democraticallyconstituted form of communal food gardening under harsh conditions of drought and loss of technology capacityfor supply of water to food gardens. This leaves elderly people with the difficult activity of carrying buckets ofwater to drums to provide water for their gardens, and food for their families. Rainwater harvesting andconservation (RWH&C) as alternative water management activity, involving a multi-stakeholder learningnetwork, is being developed by the Lloyd Village community via CHAT expansive learning change laboratoryworkshops (case: amanziforfood.co.za).In both cases, we firstly describe the history of the object of commoning activity (co-management inCase 1, and communal RWH&C in Case 2), the activity systems involved, contradictions emerging at the interfaceof interactiing activity systems, change laboratories, networked and expansive learning processes, and emergingevidence of agency expressions and transformative agency (Engeström and Sannino, 2010).Secondly, we deepen the analysis of these processes of expansive learning and agency formation usinglenses of decolonization and cognitive justice and we reflect critically on how communities navigate powerrelations in order to engage in transformative activity oriented towards sustainability, the common good, and a reclaiming of the commons. These power relations, as our data shows, are complex, multi-layered, deeplyhistorically and culturally imbued, and are extremely difficult to navigate in modern conditions. Yet peopleinvolved in the expansive learning processes do this, showing a willingness to traverse colonially instituted andother oppressive boundaries, in attempts to build new human activity that is beneficial to themselves, others andthe common good. Two extracts from the data show but some of the contours of these dynamics:ICLS 2016 Proceedings1052© ISLS“Equity partnerships in the co-management agreements must provide landowners withshareholding in the businesses, jobs and opportunities” (Case 1: Co-management agreementconditions document drawn up by previously disadvantaged communities).“We will also participate in the trainings because farmers must not know more than us” (Case2: Extension Officer -male, Personal Communication, July 15, 2014).While the focus of our analysis is on local sustainability-oriented and commonality building activities,the analysis presented here has wider resonance as re-claiming the commons is not only a matter of concern forlocal rural communities in the global South who have been disenfranchised, but is rather a matter of concern forpeople across the planet who share common good resources such as clean air, water and the planet itself.Dialectics of expansion and contraction: The emergence of a rural creditcooperative in the southwest of Paraná State, BrazilManoel Flores Lesama, Federal University of Paraná, Brazil; Antonio Carlos Picinatto, Federal University ofParaná, Brazil; and Marco A. Pereira Querol, Federal University of Sergipe, BrazilSustainable agriculture faces the challenge of how to finance its operations. The study aims at analyzing thelearning processes and the agency of farmers and rural advisors during the creation and development of acooperative of rural credit for Sustainable Agriculture. Learning is not linear, but both expansive and contractive.Moreover, the production of social organizational structures to support sustainable practices, such as cooperativesand associations, involve agency of local actors, taking actions to transform their local activities.MethodologyThe developmental trajectory of the emergence and development of a rural credit cooperative is investigatedthrough a historical analysis. The unit of analysis is a network of functionally connected activity systems.Historical events, understood here as actions, are selected using the concept of critical events, which are eventsthat change the elements of an activity system. Here, we are particularly interested in the events related to thecreation of the cooperatives that support farms towards more sustainable production in the Southwest region ofParaná State, Brazil. A narrative is produced by organizing the historical events in a chronological order. Thenarrative is then analyzed using the model of the cycle of expansive learning, in which developmental phases areidentified by observing qualitative changes in the structure of an activity.The caseIn 1966, in order to support alternative more sustainable forms of agricultural production, a group of small farmersfrom the Southwest region of Paraná, with the support of priests from Belgium, created an association of farmerscalled ASSESSOAR. The association promoted solutions to the challenges faced by farmers so that they couldproduce an alternative agriculture. Alternative refers to the adoption of practices and technologies that preservethe environment. The function of agriculture was not only production of commodities, but also conservation ofnatural resources and maintenance of local communities.In order to support more sustainable production, the participants of ASSESSOAR, using financialresources from European NGOs, created a Rotating Credit Fund. The fund was successful in financing smallfarmers who were interested in producing more sustainably. However, the volume of credit was an importantlimitation to expand the credit to a larger number of farmers. Moreover, a group of rural advisors who did notagree with the modern agricultural model created a new cooperative of rural advisors called COOPERIGUAÇU.In 1995, social movements together with trade unions and representatives of Landless WorkersMovement started a series of protests requesting policies for family farmers. These sets of protests from the socialmovement called Grito da Terra (Cry from the Land) led to the creation in 1996 of a new rural credit line exclusivefor family farmers, a line called PRONAF – Custeio.ASSESSOAR and COOPERIGUAÇU supported the creation of cooperatives of rural credit in ParanáState, forming the cooperative system of credit called CRESOL. Despite being directed to small farmers,PRONAF-Custeio followed the old logic and principles of the model of credit created during the dictatorshipperiod – originally created to finance modern inputs such as pesticides and chemical fertilizers. Therefore, thecredit became a way to finance technologies aimed basically at increasing production and productivity.To sum up, the new cooperative CRESOL and the rural credit line PRONAF –Custeio, which weresolutions that were aimed at supporting sustainable production, soon became instruments for conventional modernagriculture.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1053© ISLSPreliminary findingsTwo findings are highlighted on the basis of a preliminary analysis of the case. First, the study shows that thecooperatives ASSESSOAR, COOPERIGUAÇU and CRESOL were attempts at supporting an alternative modelof more sustainable agriculture. They were outcomes of the initiatives of local farmers, local rural advisors, andEuropean priests. Their actions were motivated by the negative consequences of the conventional model ofagriculture. They created cooperatives and associations to overcome the challenges faced in small farms.Second, the study shows that the long-term trajectory of collective learning in this case is neither linearnor exclusively expansive. The ASSESSOAR and COOPERIGUAÇU were important expansions towardsmaking sustainable agricultural production viable in small farms. However, the tentative effort to expand thevolume of credit available to small farms through the creation of the new cooperative CRESOL and PRONAFCusteio increased the volume of money, but also changed the object of the financing activity. The object changedfrom financing environmentally and socially sustainable food production to highly productive and highlyprofitable standardized commodity production. This change is interpreted as a qualitative contraction of the object.Although there has been discourse in CRESOL about the importance of financing sustainable agriculture, thepractices show that the credit has been directed only towards conventional forms of agriculture.ReferencesAdler, P. (2015). Book review essay: The environmental crisis and its capitalist roots: Reading Naomi Klein withKarl Polanyi. Administrative Science Quarterly, 60(2), 13–25.American Psychological Association. (2008). Are zero tolerance policies effective in the schools? AmericanPsychologist, 63, 852-862.Bal, A. (2011). Culturally responsive school-wide positive behavioral interventions and supports framework.Madison, WI: Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction.Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding. Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit.Engeström, Y. (2015). Learning by expanding. 2nd Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Engeström Y, Sannino A. (2010). Studies of expansive learning: Foundations, findings and future challenges.Educational Research Review, 5, 1-24.Engeström, Y. & Sannino, A. (2011). Discursive manifestations of contradictions in organizational change efforts:A methodological framework. Journal of Organizational Change Management, 24(3), 368-387.Freire, P. (2000). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Continuum International Publishing Group.Hess, C. & Ostrom, E. (2007). Understanding Knowledge as a Commons: From Theory to Practice. Cambridge,MA: The MIT Press.Holt-Giménez, E. (2006). Campesino a campesino: Voices from Latin America's farmer to farmer movement forsustainable agriculture. Oakland, CA: Food First Books.Linebaugh, P. (2008). The Magna Carta manifesto: Liberties and commons for all. Berkeley, CA: University ofCalifornia Press.Linebaugh, P. (2014). Stop, Theif! The commons, enclosures and resistance. Oakland, CA: PM Press.Ostrom, E. (1990). Governing the commons: The evolution of institutions for collective action. Cambridge:Cambridge university press.Rittel, H., & Weber, M. (1973). Dilemmas in a general theory of planning. Policy Sciences, 4, 155-169.Sannino, A. (2015). The principle of double stimulation: A path to volitional action. Learning, Culture, and SocialInteraction, 6, 1-15.Scott, W. (2015). Public Understanding of Sustainable Development: Some Implications for Education.International Journal of Environmental & Science Education, 10(2), 235-246.Sève, L. (2012). Aliénation et emancipation (Alienation and emancipation). Paris: La Dispute.Soja, E.W. (2010). Seeking spatial justice. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights (2014). Civil rights data collection. School discipline.Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.UNESCO (2014) Rethinking Education. Towards a global common good? Paris: UNESCO Publishing.Vincent, C. G., & Tobin, T. J. (2011). The relationship between implementation of school-wide positive behaviorsupport (SWPBS) and disciplinary exclusion of students from various ethnic backgrounds with andwithout disabilities. Journal of Emotional & Behavioral Disorder, 19, 217-232.Wooltorton, S., Wilkinson, A., Horwitz, P., Bahn, S., Redmond, J., & Dooley, J. (2015). Sustainability and actionresearch in universities: Towards knowledge for organisational transformation. International Journal ofSustainability in Higher Education, 16(4), 424-439.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1054© ISLS