Reassembling Home-work: Mixing “Newer” and “Older”Technologies in Home Learning EnvironmentsDeborah Silvis, University of Washington, dsilvis@uw.eduKatie Headrick Taylor, University of Washington, kht126@uw.eduReed Stevens, Northwestern University, reed-stevens@northwestern.eduAbstract: Home is the original place for children’s learning and a vital site for studying newtechnological practices. Families’ uses of new technologies present questions andopportunities for research at the intersection of family life, learning, and technology. With somuch to do, how do families make use of emerging technologies to accomplish everydaytasks? Drawing on an ethnography of families’ media engagement, this paper examines thenature of young people’s assigned tasks at home. Through analysis of interactions betweenchildren, parents, the home setting, and material resources, we develop a theory of learningthat accounts for how newer and older technological forms are reassembled in everyday taskslike homework and chores. We discuss how, through mixing media, repurposing space, andremote assistance families make home “work” with technology. These reassembly processescollapse tools, nesting old and new media together in ways that are increasingly relevant fordesigning learning environments.IntroductionEvery day it seems there is a new gadget or app available that potentially changes the nature of “everyday”practice and learning. Still, while devices and services fall out of use and others come to take their place, there isoften continued coordination between old and new technologies (Stevens, 2000), while new skills are beingacquired or infrastructures accommodate new systems. As danah boyd (2014) concluded, this exchange ofdifferent media does not usher in all new practices as much as it provides new mediums for maintaining socialpractices over time. Technologies may disappear (or remain in play), but the social practices they reflect andenable are constantly re-worked. Thus, everyday sites of learning- like family life at home- are set pieces forstudying how people arrange older (i.e. paper-based) media and newer (i.e. computer-based) tools and resourcesduring collaborative activity (Stevens, 2000).Home-work is a common site of such collaborative activity. Traditionally, “homework” was assignedin school. However, a wide variety of assigned tasks occupy children working at home, the original site oflearning, where, historically, family routines have always entailed some version of children’s work contributingto collective endeavors (Rogoff, Najafi & Mejía-Arauz, 2014). What we are calling home-work includes:schoolwork assigned by a teacher; household chores; helping parents who are working from home; pet care;music practice; and tasks performed at home that are required for activities pursued during discretionary time(e.g. for clubs, sports teams, faith-based groups). Home-work, broadly defined as the routine tasks young peopleare assigned to do while at home, continues to occupy a sizable portion of out-of-school time (Kremer-Sadlik &Gutiérrez, 2013). While new forms of media have transformed how learners engage in sociotechnical practices,the amount of time young people spend on home-work has not shown similarly dramatic changes (Twenge,2017).This contradiction presents a number of questions about the relationship between home-work andmedia engagement or technology use. If children are doing as much home-work as ever and also using moreand more types- of media, then how (if at all) do they use these new media and emerging technologies toaccomplish tasks at home? What types of materials and technologies are used during home-work? How arehome-work routines re-mediated through new technological practices? This paper addresses these questions byanalyzing how young people accomplish assigned tasks at home. We studied how changing technologicalpractices reassemble families everyday home-work routines. In this paper, we describe three processes that wereinvolved in this reassembly: mixing media, repurposing space, and remote assistance.FrameworkWe take a situated and sociocultural approach (Brown, Collins & Duguid, 1989; Lave & Wenger, 1991;Vygotsky, 1978) to learning and its on-going re-mediation (Cole & Griffin, 1983) through technology.Accordingly, in this study, we took a historically broad perspective on what counted as technologies; paperbased tools like worksheets, sheet music, pencils, markers, and clip boards continue to be part of everydayhome-work alongside new tablet computers, mobile phones, laptops, and other screens. Today, screensICLS 2018 Proceedings752© ISLSmonopolize the attention of users and researchers of technology and new media (e.g. boyd, 2014; Twenge,2017)). With this intense focus on emerging digital spaces for learning, one might ask what the implications areof studying home settings as sites of technological re-mediation. When so much of kids’ media engagementtoday is digital and virtual, why bother examining physical spaces or material resources?While one response to this is empirical- and we will address this in the current analysis- there is a realsense in which everyday activities are still very much mediated by “older” technologies. This is not onlybecause these technologies are deeply embedded in sociotechnical practices (Star & Ruhleder, 1996), nor asimple consequence of persistent inequities in access to opportunities for learning with new media andtechnology (Ito et al., 2013; Rideout & Katz, 2016), but because they are still serviceable for users (Cole,2017). Re-mediation involves less a replacement of one tool by another than a reorganization of the underlyingactivity that supports coarticulation of new technologies with old (Stevens, 2000). Coarticulation involvescoordinating the use of different tools within interactions as people work together, divide their labor, and jointlyperform a task (Stevens, 2000). In media environments where older and newer tools coexist, this process ofcoarticulation requires hybrid paper-digital practices and novel sociotechnical arrangements.These new arrangements are a consequence of complex processes of reassembling social life (Latour,2005), yielding new configurations of people, materials, and their spatio-temporal dynamics (Leaner, Phillips, &Taylor, 2010). New media practices do not only bring about proliferating virtual contexts, they also bringheightened awareness to physical spaces for learning where people and material resources are co-present.Everyday tasks cut across physical and virtual contexts and are populated by heterogeneous technologies; not allsociotechnical practices converge around interactive screens (c.f. Jenkins, 2006). Boyd (2014) found that thesocial lives of networked teens are complicated by how computer mediated communication and web-basedservices collapse contexts, spreading activity out across more spaces. In contrast, we are analyzing children’swork at home, because these learning contexts collapse tools, distributing learning across a range oftechnologies and reassembling domestic routines.Reassembly disrupts what is taken for granted in sociotechnical practices, revealing the “invisiblework” required to maintain everyday routines (Star, 1990). For example, when televisions became commonfixtures in American living rooms in the 1950s, this domestic space (formerly used for formally entertainingguests) was repurposed for everyday family recreation, impacting the work of caring for children who couldthen congregate around TV screens (Spigel, 1992). Work processes that go unseen or unrecognized areassociated with a gendered division of labor; child care and domestic work has historically been performed bywomen (Cowen, 1983), with the lion’s share falling to women of color (Star & Strauss, 1999). In general, in ourstudy, mothers were primarily responsible for caring for children while homework was done. And while theadvent of domestic technologies- from the washing machine to personal home computers- promises tostreamline family life, new technologies have paradoxically not eased the work load of women at home (Cowen,1983). Less still is known about how children’s work is impacted by technological change. This presentsquestions about the ways children’s home-work is being reassembled and the nature of work processes that areinvolved in their learning at home.Design and methodsIn this analysis, we draw on data collected in an ethnographic study of family life at home as it is currentlybeing transformed by new (especially mobile) forms of media and technology. Participants included eighteenfocal children in twelve families from diverse racial, ethnic, geographic, and socioeconomic backgrounds.Participants were recruited from local youth-serving organizations, camps, and other places where young peoplebetween the ages of nine and thirteen years old spend time; this period of development is significant for mediaengagement because it is about the time when children get their own devices (Rideout & Katz, 2016).Data collection in this ethnographic study of families “daily media rounds” (Taylor, Takeuchi &Stevens, 2017) took place over two years in two separate US cities, and methods included the following: semistructured interviews with parents and children (48 total); video recorded observations conducted during homevisits, some of which were recorded by children using point-of-view cameras (i.e. GoPros®) (approx. 100 hrs);experience sampling through nightly phone calls (90 total calls), and a novel research activity for digitalmapping of participants’ technology use (Silvis, Taylor & Stevens, in press), which was also video recorded (16digital artifacts). To answer our research questions- how homework routines are re-mediated by newer and oldertechnologies- we drew on ethnographic and interaction analysis (Hall & Stevens, 2016). We produced multimodal transcription of the talk, gesture, gaze, coordination of body movements (or lack thereof), uptake of tools,use of space, and other aspects that played into moment-to-moment interactions (Tulbert & Goodwin, 2011).ICLS 2018 Proceedings753© ISLSAnalytic findingsA wide variety of assigned tasks took place across families participating in the study. During the school year,many of these tasks centered around schoolwork assigned by teachers. During discretionary time and summerbreak, children’s assigned tasks often took other forms, such as chores and housework, music or dance practice,or informal research projects (e.g. where to go on vacation). Because we were studying families’ new mediaengagement and technology use, we looked specifically at times when various technologies were being used toaccomplish tasks. We found three processes of reassembly of children’s work that cut across these assignedtasks and reorganized the activities of home-work: mixing media, repurposing spaces, and remote assistance. Inwhat follows, we focus on three instances of kids and parents working together during homework time. Each ofthese examples serves as a representative case of the three overarching processes of technological reassemblythat happened in the course of assigned tasks.Spreading homework across sheets of paper and screensChildren’s home-work often required collaborating with parents, and their division of labor involvedasymmetrically distributing media and materials (Stevens, 2000). One Saturday afternoon, Natalie an elevenyear-old who participated in the study in a Midwest city, helped her mom complete an Excel spreadsheetcontaining information from a survey her mom had distributed at work. Natalie’s mom presented this to her as“work they needed to do together;” later, Mom told us she often enlisted Natalie in tasks for her job iftechnology was involved, in order to teach her daughter new technical skills. As they worked together on thecouch in the living room, Natalie’s mom held the paper surveys, while Natalie was responsible for computerdata entry. Using her mom’s laptop, Natalie created columns and rows and managed which information sheplaced in various fields. Her mom acquainted her with certain application functions, for example, by indicatingthe feature for expanding a row in order to view its contents. Natalie occasionally looked over at the sheets ofpaper surveys her mom held, however she primarily relied on her mom to verbally relay the information fromthe paper forms before transforming this into digital data.Figure 1. Video stills of mixing media during homework. Clockwise from upper left: Natalie’s mom reportsinformation from paper-based surveys (upper left), Natalie enters data into Excel spreadsheet (upper right), theycollaborate over the screen (lower right), they collaborate over paper (lower left).Natalie assisted her mom with her work, re-distributing their family’s labor across people but alsoacross forms of technology. For the most part, they maintained a strict division of labor: Natalie managed thecomputer-based work, and her mom handled the paper-based materials (See Figure 1). At times, the distributionof the task was more fluid, and they used either the screen or the papers as a substrate for joint activity(Goodwin, 2013). As they coordinated this joint activity, they stayed physically huddled together side-by-sideICLS 2018 Proceedings754© ISLSon the couch, their arms and hands repeatedly overlapping in activity. The task required that paper and digitalforms be mixed together, similarly positioned side-by-side and interleaved in action. For Natalie, learning tomanage data through Excel required coarticulation of computer-based and paper-based source of informationthrough collaborative work with her mom (Stevens, 2000). This spreadsheet home-work activity literally spreadthe task out across sheets of paper, software, and screens, mixing together older and new forms of technology.Doing homework at the scale of the houseJoint activity that involves mixing media is not always a stationary affair. As mobile technology becomes aubiquitous aspect of family life, home-work can take place over more- and more distributed- spaces in thehome. In the next instance of using technologies to accomplish assigned work, we turn to a more traditionalversion of homework, completing work after school that was assigned by a teacher. Oscar and Eddie, nine-yearold twins in a West Coast city, had been tasked with creating a paper book cover for their language arts class;the cover was to be based on a book they had read or wanted to read, so that they had some familiarity with thecontent. The instructions involved designing the cover, creating a synopsis for the front flap and researching theauthor or illustrator for the back flap. The twins, avid Pokémon fans, both decided to base their covers on theirfavorite book, The Pokémon Deluxe Handbook, an encyclopedia of over seven hundred Pokémon.While they worked on this assignment one day after school over at least two hours (they were notfinished by the conclusion of our scheduled visit), their activities spanned the entire home floor plan (See Figure2). Eddie centered his work at the kitchen table, sketching his front cover design there and also consulting theassignment instructions and encyclopedia while watching TV in the living room; the twins’ mom had placed theinstructions on a clipboard that traveled around the home, helping Oscar and Eddie remember the prompts andtask structure. Oscar began his work at the table and then, having finished his cover design ahead of his brother,he opted to move to the living room couch, where he could research a Pokémon illustrator on his Mom’s laptop.The couch also afforded a better vantage point to watch TV, which remained on in the background while theyworked. And yet, the living room was ostensibly a space for “technology breaks” from homework, not forlegitimate “work.” Moving homework materials and mobile technologies into this area repurposed space in away that reorganized the underlying activity (Spigel, 1992). Both mobile devices and paper-based resourceswere instrumental in re-establishing what a given space could legitimately be used for and what technologieswould “work” there to accomplish the task.Figure 2. Homework repurposes space in the home. A segment of the home floor plan used during homework,including available materials and technologies (left). Eddie uses the kitchen table primarily for paper-basedwork (top). Oscar moves to the couch to research illustrators on Mom’s laptop and discovers Bulbapedia,Wikipedia for Pokémon (bottom).Remote time-keeping during piano practiceReassembling home-work is a temporal as well as a spatial enterprise. In a third instance of reassemblinghomework, ten-year-old Brittany, who lived in the study’s Midwest city, practiced piano in the evening afterICLS 2018 Proceedings755© ISLSschool, supported by different material resources across two separate days. On the first visit to the home,Brittany sat at the piano, reading sheet music and repeating several lines of music in one piece forapproximately thirty minutes. Her mom, an accomplished piano instructor who assists her children’s pianopractice, intermittently came to Brittany’s side, clapping out the beat and circling notes and bars on the papersheets (See Table 1). Brittany’s mom encouraged her daughter’s repetition and constructively critiqued hertechnique. On a subsequent visit, after Brittany closed her sheet music, her Mom approached the bench andoffered a new way to practice (See Table 2). She placed her cell phone on the piano’s music stand, and Brittanyproceeded to use a mobile app to play “When the Saints Go Marching In;” Mom reported that her cousin, whoalso teaches piano lessons, had told her about this app. A virtual image of the keyboard on the screen indicatedwhen to play each key, and a built-in metronome feature held the beat. As Brittany tried to keep tempo, hermom approached and indicated where the metronome feature was located on-screen and then told her to press“showtime” so they could hear the accompaniment.Table 1: Practice session with paper-based time keepingTime5:39TechnologiesTalkMom: So we’ll circle that and say “two” so youremember it’s a C and not a D12:30Mom: It’s slow, quick, quick, slow. Do you hearhow it (snaps fingers twice)?22:28Mom: I just want to make sure you know how todo it, so I don’t have sit with you when youpractice it all week… three, two, one, three, twoand three and…GTable 2: Practice session with mobile app time keepingTime14:1414:42ICLS 2018 ProceedingsTechnologiesTalkBrittany: Is this middle C?Mom: Yes, it’s in practice mode, so it’ll wait foryou. (walks into kitchen) Look at the metronomeon the phone.Brittany: (finishes playing) I did the wrongrhythm, totally. I did it way faster than the thingwas going. That’s why I didn’t get too manypoints (applause from app plays in background).756© ISLS17:22Mom: I don’t understand this timing. Hit the“showtime” button.Brittany’s family imported a new form of technological assistance into piano practice that was remote,in the sense that technical help was not immediately contingent on Brittany’s activity. While the device was colocated, it did not respond to Brittany’s mistakes by actively adjusting its assistance based on her performancein real time (however it did score her at the end of the song and give her a round of enthusiastic applause if sheplayed well). The mobile app nonetheless maintained familiar aspects of piano practice to which Brittany wasaccustomed. Her mom placed the phone in the same location and position on the piano stand used for traditionalsheet music; and Mom was still available to offer support. However, rather than standing next to Brittany,counting the beat, tapping the music with her pencil, Mom left her phone to act as a remote mentor andmetronome; when she did offer support, it was mostly aimed at helping Brittany use the app- not play the piano.This temporary exchange of traditional tools- like sheet music, pencil, and manually tapping out the beat- with aform of remote assistance, reassembled the task. While remote assistance in and of itself is not exactly new tolearning technology designs, learners now often engage in such temporal toggling between remote and colocated resources for learning during home-work.Conclusions and implicationsThis paper has described three sociotechnical processes that reassemble families’ ordinary home-work routines:mixing media, repurposing space, and remote assistance. In the case of Natalie and her mom completing anExcel spreadsheet, the mixing of “older” and “newer” technologies was required for a task, supporting Natalieto develop technological fluency with a new software program. In the case of Oscar and Eddie, doing ahomework assignment involved moving a variety of technologies from room to room, repurposing domesticspaces as a way of reassembling routines at the scale of the home. In the case of Brittany, practicing piano usingthe remote assistance of a smartphone app introduced a new way of keeping time where “collaboration” wasout-of-sync compared to more proximal assistance her mother provided in prior practice sessions. Theseexamples of young people accomplishing routine tasks at home show some common ways in which technologyis re-mediating everyday learning and give specificity to how transformations in the mediational means oflearning reorganize activities. We suggest that the reorganization of home-work involves less a replacement ofpaper materials by digital technologies than a reassembly and reordering of family life. This reassemblycollapses tools, mixing technologies together over space and time in order to accomplish tasks.There are several implications of these findings for understandings of how learning with technologyand new media are changing in a digital age. For one, home-work represents an important site for studying howtechnology is transforming family life. Because so much of children’s time in and out of school is spent doingwork assigned by other people, it is important to continue to ask how these tasks get accomplished and whatchildren learn through participating in them. The tools and technologies children have available not onlyreorganize such tasks, they also make new learning possible and potentially change what counts as home-work,making visible how children’s contributions help stabilize sociotechnical systems (Star, 1990). Giving childrencredit for all the work they do and all the things they know is an important contribution of scholarship that recenters informal sites like family life as valuable resources for learning (Rogoff, Topping, Baker-Sennett &Lacasa, 2002). Knowing more about how technology is involved in these unique and idiosyncratic funds ofknowledge (Gonzales, Moll, Amanti, 2003) will be important as more technologies are incorporated into homesand families’ routines. The challenge that faces us now is how we will connect these important sites of learning,such as homework, to culturally valued technical opportunities beyond children’s homes (Ito et al., 2013) andthroughout their “learning lives” (Erstad, 2012).Our analyses of young people’s work at home also suggest that reassembling domestic routinesthrough technology use is a collaborative endeavor. This finding is important for understanding how jointmedia engagement (JME) supports learning (Takeuchi & Stevens, 2011). Children often seek assistance fromothers to complete their homework (Kremer-Sadlick & Gutiérrez, 2013), and the increased prevalence of digitalmedia at home presents opportunities for new forms of JME that bring people together over valued (and not soICLS 2018 Proceedings757© ISLSvalued) tasks like homework assignments from school, household chores, music rehearsal, pet care, sportspractice, and other activities. Even parents’ work lives can bleed into children’s assigned tasks, as was the casefor many of the families who participated in our study. These emerging configurations of people, tasks,resources, and space that constitute JME are continually reshaped as new technologies co-articulate in novelways with older ones (Stevens, 2000).A third and related implication follows from this: it is simply not the case that digital technologiesremove young people from their family networks and isolate them from larger family routines (c.f. Turkle,2010; Twenge, 2017). In fact, what these analyses have shown is that the presence of media and technology inthe home present new opportunities for intergenerational teaching and learning in the family context, and whatsome of the configurations of families’ resources for learning can look like. This builds on prior studies ofparents’ supports of children’s uses of technology (Barron, Martin, Takeuchi & Fithian, 2009) and families’unique patterns of media engagement (Levinson, Siyahhan, Pressey & Taylor, 2015) and extends it in animportant way. While digital technologies may be the natural focus of much of our work because of criticalquestions regarding learning technology design (Roschelle, Martin, Ahn & Schank, 2017), there are still manyolder tools and technologies we need to account for in studying families’ shifting sociotechnical practices.Therefore, a final implication is that we should take an expansive perspective on what counts asinnovation in learning designs. In the current moment, when so much of our work still relies on oldertechnological forms whose utility and relevance are not diminished by digital tools, we ought to consider hybriddesigns (Stevens, 2000; Ma, 2017) that draw on domestic processes we have described here. Repositioningfamilies as generating novel forms of technological work, as we have done in this analysis, is not or not only amatter of making it possible for them to participate in activities we design. It is equally important to shift ourview to the many ways families are already adept at using a variety of technologies to reassemble daily routines(Levinson et al., 2015). These vital sites for learning and living continue to situate heterogeneous tools andtechnologies together in ways that will require on-going study.ReferencesBarron, B., Martin, C. K., Takeuchi, L., & Fithian, R. (2009). Parents as learning partners in the development oftechnological fluency. International Journal of Learning and Media, 1(2), 55-77.Brown, J.S., Collins, A., Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. EducationalResearcher, 18(1), 32-42.boyd, d. (2014). It’s complicated: The social lives of networked teens. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.Cole, M. (2017). The living hand of the past: Re-covering the role of technology in human development.Presentation at the Jean Piaget Society Annual Meeting. San Francisco, CA.Cole, M. & Griffin, P. (1983). A socio-historical approach to re-mediation. Quarterly Newsletter of theLaboratory of Comparative Human Cognition, 5(4), 69-99.Cowen, R.S. (1983). More work for mother: The ironies of household technology from the open hearth to themicrowave. NY: Basic Books.Erstad, O. (2012). The learning lives of digital youth- beyond the formal and informal. Oxford Review ofEducation, 38(1), 25-43.Gonazalez, N., Moll, L.C., Amanti, C. (2005). Funds of knowledge: Theorizing practices in households,communities, and classrooms. Mawah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Goodwin, C. (2013). The co-operative, transformative organization of human action and knowledge.Journal of Pragmatics 46, 8-23.Hall, R. & Stevens, R. (2016). Interaction analysis approaches to knowledge in use. In A.A. diSessa, M. Levin,and N.J.S. Brown (Eds.), Knowledge and Interaction: A Synthetic Agenda for the Learning Sciences.NY: Routledge.Ito, M., Gutierrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., &... Watkins, C. (2013). Connected learning:An agenda for research and design. Irvine: CA: Digital Media and Learning Research Hub.Jenkins, H. (2006). Convergence culture: Where old and new media collide. NY: NYU PressKremer-Sadlik, T. & Gutiérrez, K. (2013). Homework and recreation. In E. Ochs & T. Kremer-Sadlik(Eds.), Fast-forward Family: Home, Work, and Relationships in Middle-Class America. Berkeley, CA:University of California Press.Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor network theory. NY: Oxford UniversityPress.Leander, K.M., Phillips, N.C., & Taylor, K.H. (2010). The changing social spaces of learning: Mapping newmobilities. Review of Research in Education, 34(1), 329-394.ICLS 2018 Proceedings758© ISLSLevinson, A., Siyahhan, S., Pressey, B., & Taylor, K.H. (2015). Diverse families and media: Usingresearch to inspire design. A report of the Families and Media Project. New York: The JoanGanz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop.Ma., J.Y. (2017). Designing disruptions for productive hybridity: The case of walking scale geometry.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25:3, 335-371.Rideout, V. & Katz, V. (2016). Opportunity for all? Technology and learning in lower-income families. Areport of the Families and Media Project. New York: The Joan Ganz Cooney Center at SesameWorkshop.Roschelle, J., Martin, W., Ahn, J. & Schank, P. (Eds.) (2017). Cyberlearning community report: The state ofCyberlearning and the future of learning with technology. Menlo Park CA: SRI International.Rogoff, B., Topping, K., Baker-Sennett, J. & Lacasa- P. (2002). Mutual contributions of individuals,partners, and institutions: Planning to remember in Girl Scout Cookie sales. Social Development,11:2, 267-289.Rogoff, B., Najafi, B. & Mejía-Arauz, R. Constellations of cultural practices across generations: IndigenousAmerican heritage and learning by observing and pitching in. Human Development, 77(2-3), 82-95.Silvis, D., Taylor, K.H., Stevens, R. (in press). Community Technology Mapping: Inscribing places when‘everything is on the move.’ The International Journal of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning.Spigel, L. (1992). Make room for TV: Television and the family in postwar America. Chicago: University ofChicago Press.Star, S.L. (1990). Power, technology, and the phenomenology of conventions: On being allergic to onions. TheSociological Review, 38(1), 26-56.Star, S.L. & Ruhleder, K. (1996). Steps towards and ecology of infrastructure: Design and access forlarge information spaces. Information Systems Research, 7(1), 111-134.Star, S.L. & Strauss, A. (1999). Layers of silence, arenas of voice: The ecology of visible and invisible work.Computer-Supported Collaborative Work: The Journal of Collaborative Computing, 8:9-30.Stevens, R. (2000). Divisions of labor in school and in the workplace: Comparing computer and papersupported activities across settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 373-401.Takeuchi, L., & Stevens, R. (2011). The new co-viewing: Designing for learning through joint mediaengagement. A report of The Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop and LIFE Center.Taylor, K.H., Silvis, D. & Stevens, R. (2017). Collecting and connecting: Intergenerational learning with digitalmedia. In E. Gee, L.M. Takeuchi & Wartella, E. (Eds.), Children and Families in the Digital Age:Learning Together in a Media Saturated Culture. NY: Routledge.Taylor, K.H., Takeuchi, L. & Stevens, R. (2017). Mapping the daily media round: Novel methods forunderstanding families’ mobile technology use. Learning, Media and Technology, 1-15.Tulbert, E. and Goodwin, M.H. (2011). Choreographies of attention: Multimodality in a routine familyactivity. In J. Streeck, C. Goodwin, & C. LeBaron (Eds), Embodied Interaction: Language andBody in the Material World. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Turkle, S. (2011). Alone together: Why we expect more from technology and less from each other. NY:Basic Books.Twenge, J. (2017). iGen: Why today’s super-connected kids are growing up less rebellious, more tolerant, lesshappy and completely unprepared for adulthood. NY: Simon & Schuster.Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank all of the young people and their families who participated in this study and let us intotheir homes to watch them work and play.ICLS 2018 Proceedings759© ISLS