Teaching For Versus Through Problem Solving:Impact on Teaching and LearningAnnelies Raes, Celine Vens, Pieter Vanneste, and Fien DepaepeAnnelies.raes@kuleuven.be, Celine.vens@kuleuven.be, Pieter.vanneste@kuleuven.be,Fien.depaepe@kuleuven.beITEC, KULeuven, BelgiumAbstract: This paper presents the results of a quasi-experimental study with third bachelorstudents in Medicine comparing the teaching for problem solving and teaching throughproblem solving condition. This study focuses both on the outcome and process effects. Onthe cognitive level this includes students’ conceptual learning gain. On the affective level thisincludes students’ experienced motivation both in the instruction phase and the problemsolving phase. This study complements previous research by taking a zoomed-in perspectiveincluding multimodal data streams (i.e. audiovisual, self-report, logdata and psychophysiological data) to fully understand the effects on the teaching and learning mechanisms.Although we did not find statistically significant effects regarding the conceptualunderstanding, the results of the affective outcome and process variables are consistent withthe growing body of evidence that generating solutions to novel problems prior to instructioncan improve deeper learning and can make teaching more interactive and student-centered.Theoretical and empirical frameworkProblem solving is often suggested as the new way of learning to cognitively activate students and prepare themfor the 21st Century skills (Felmer, Pehkonen, Kilpatrick, 2016; Lester & Cai, 2016). During the past 30 yearsthere have been significant advances in our understanding of the cognitive, metacognitive, and affective aspectsof problem solving in domains as science and mathematics. It is known that problem solving has many learningadvantages, but it is also known that problem solving places higher cognitive demands and is often difficult fornovices in a certain field with inconsistent and limited prior knowledge as indicated within the instructionistconstructivist debate (Kirschner, Sweller, & Clark, 2006). To reduce this burden on the cognitive resources andmitigate problems associated with learner disengagement and learner frustration, many teachers still opt fordirect instruction or knowledge transfer preventing struggle and saving time, and to make sure the correctinformation is taught (Sweller & Chandler, 1991). Although there are several reasons to believe in theeffectiveness of problem solving based on considerable research on teaching problem solving in classrooms,there remain far more questions than there are consistent answers about this complex form of activity. One ofthese questions is if problem solving should be taught as a separate topic in the curriculum or if it should beintegrated throughout the curriculum? Schroeder and Lester (1989) identified these two opposite types ofapproaches to problem solving as 1) ‘teaching for problem solving’ (further abbreviated as TforPS) starting withthe content and concepts and then moving to solving problems and 2) ‘teaching through problem solving’(abbreviated as TthroughPS) meaning students learn the content and concepts through real contexts, problems,situations and problems followed by an instruction phase. Although not equivalent, the latter approach can in away be related to the theoretical framework of Kapur (2008) defining productive failure as a teaching andlearning approach which engages students in solving problems requiring concepts they have yet to learn,followed by a consolidation and instruction phase on the targeted concepts. This approach is based on the workof Schmidt and Bjork (1992) suggesting that experimental manipulations that may hinder performance in theshorter term can actually be productive for learning in the longer term. They even concluded that maximizingperformance in the initial learning may not necessarily be the ones that maximize learning in the longer term.Previous research has found that starting with problem solving prompts the activation of prior knowledge andidea generation from different perspectives (Schwartz, Chase, Oppezzo, & Chin, 2011). These studies moreoverindicated that approaches as productive failure are specifically beneficial for retention and transfer (see e.g.Kapur, 2013). In recent work, Kapur (2016) deepens this approach and suggests to distinguish four possibilitiesfor designing learning: i.e. productive or unproductive success, and productive or unproductive failure. Withinour conceptualization, we assume that the TforPS has a higher chance to lead to productive success, whereasTthroughPS has a higher chance to lead to productive failure.This study compared the TforPS and TthroughPS condition in a quasi-experimental study with thirdbachelor students in medicine. This study complements to previous work as it aims to better understand theeffects of the opposite approaches on both outcome and process variables including multiple streams of data.ICLS 2018 Proceedings408© ISLSNot only the student’s knowledge gain and behavior is being studied, but also their psycho-physiological state isbeing monitored. During the experiment, wearables attached to the teacher’s and some of the students’ wrists,measure their skin conductance level, skin conductance phasic responses and skin temperature. In doing so, therelative stress level a student experiences during a certain moment in the experiment can be determined.Research questions and hypothesesThe first research question focuses on the effect of both approaches on the outcome variables on the cognitiveand on the affective level. The outcome variables include students’ conceptual knowledge gain and their selfefficacy on the cognitive level and students’ experienced mental effort, experienced competence satisfaction,and intrinsic motivation and perceived value of the learning activities (instruction phase and problem-solvingphase) on the affective level. Thanks to the wearable data, also the stress level that students and the teacherexperience is studied. Based on previous research, the hypothesis of this study is that in the TthroughPScondition, on the one hand, the cognitive demands will be higher both for students and for the teacher, but onthe other hand, students’ agency and therefore also their interest, during the task and during the followinginstruction will be higher. Regarding the effect on the learning gain, we did not expect significant differences onthe posttest immediately after the intervention, but hypothesize based on previous literature that the benefits ofTthroughPS will unfold on the retention test on the longer term (Schwartz et al., 2011). As the effects are highlydependent on the way the intervention is implemented and the way it includes the expected cognitivemechanisms that facilitate learning from productive failure (Loibl, Roll, & Rummel, 2016), evaluating thesemechanism was part of our second research question.The second research question focuses on the effect of both approaches on the process variables andaims to more qualitatively analyze the effects on the learning mechanisms during the problem-solving phase andthe teaching mechanisms during the instruction phase. Within the scope of this study and based on thetheoretical assumption that TthroughPS is more time consuming and more demanding, we compared theduration and effort during the problem-solving phase in both conditions and hypothesized that starting with theproblem solving phase is more engaging, but also more demanding, and consequently more time consuming.Based on previous literature indicating that instruction after problem solving provides more opportunities forinteractions between students and teacher, both the amount and duration of the interactions in the instructionphases of both conditions were analyzed and compared.Methodology: Intervention and measurementsThis study was conducted during students’ regular class periods of the course ‘Biostatistics’ taught at theUniversity of Leuven, campus Kulak Kortrijk in Belgium. The specific study was scheduled September 29,2017. During previous academic years, the content about sampling methods and bias within sampling was givenduring a lecture based on a power point presentation in which the content is taught using a case study of theNational Health Study. Within the scope of the current study, this specific lecture has been redesigned and atransfer task has been added to the instruction phase in which the students were asked to set up a survey toevaluate the psychosocial wellbeing of students within their campus. The focus of the task was not to formulatethe questions of the survey, but students had to focus on how to select the method of data collection, how toselect a good sample, how to deal with randomness, how to deal with non-response and how to solve theproblem of over-and under-sampling through weights. This year, this curriculum was given to 48 third yearbachelor students in Medicine. For the purpose of the study, as depicted in Figure 1, students were randomlyassigned to one of the two conditions: TforPS and TthroughPS.ICLS 2018 Proceedings409© ISLSFigure 1. Procedure and design of the quasi-experimental study including both outcome and process variables.In the TforPS condition, students first got direct instruction in which the instructor modeled and contrasted thedifferent sampling methods with appropriate instructional facilitation and explanation to make them attend tocritical features and possible bias within the sampling methods. The direct instruction phase was followed by thecollaborative problem-solving phase. In the TthroughPS condition the instruction phase followed the problemsolving phase and aimed to explain the exact same content but afforded opportunities to compare and contrastrelevant student-generated solutions. The learning setting of this study is illustrated in Figure 2.In this study the main dependent outcome variables were situated on the cognitive and affective level.To assess students’ knowledge gain, students administered three equivalent test forms, one as pretest, one asposttest, and one as retention test two months after the intervention. In line with previous research (e.g. Kapur,2013), the pretest included 4 multiple-choice questions and one open-response question; the post- and retentiontest included 6 multiple-choice questions and the same open-response question. Based on Bandura’s work(1997), students’ perceived self-efficacy was also measured by asking students to rate on a scale from 0 – 100how confident they felt about the correctness of their given answer. To measure students’ mental effort andmotivation during both the instruction and problem-solving phase the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI)(Deci & Ryan, 2000) was administered immediately after the given session.To assess and compare the learning and teaching mechanisms, in both conditions, different datastreams have been triangulated. First, audiovisual data have been recorded during the complete interventionfrom three camera positions to capture student-student and student-teacher interactions for observing andcapturing the teacher’s and students’ actions and reactions throughout the instruction phase. One cameramoreover captured the student-student interactions of one group in both conditions. Second, students’ reasoningand answers during the problem solving phase were logged on the technology platform WISE on which theproblem solving task was provided to students and students’ answers were evaluated by means of theknowledge integration rubric (Slotta & Linn, 2009). Third, psycho-physiological data were collected by usingindividual sensors measuring skin conductance, skin temperature and acceleration.This overall study design has been evaluated and approved by the Social and Societal EthicsCommittee and all students gave their informed consent.ICLS 2018 Proceedings410© ISLSFigure 2. Learning context of the study: upper picture depicts the problem-solving phase, the lower picturedisplays the instruction phase within the TthroughPS condition in which both slides and students input wereshown on the teacher’s screen as displayed at the lower right side.ResultsRQ 1. Effects on students’ progress in conceptual understanding, self-efficacy andmotivationBased on paired t-tests, an overall increase between pretest and posttest was found with respect to students’conceptual knowledge (t(46)= 2,14 p < .001) and regarding students’ self-efficacy (t(27)= 11,56 p < .001).Moreover, one-way analyses of covariance (ANCOVA’s) were conducted with posttest scores as dependentvariable, condition as independent factor, and pretest scores as covariate to discover whether there aredifferences between both conditions on the posttest measure regarding conceptual knowledge and self-efficacy,after adjustment for the pretest scores. ANCOVA indicated no significant difference between the conditions asdepicted in Figure 3. Moreover, no effect was found on the retention test that was administered two monthslater.ICLS 2018 Proceedings411© ISLSFigure 3. Students’ progress in conceptual understanding and self-efficacy.To test students’ motivation during both the instruction and problem-solving phase the IMI was administeredimmediately after the given session. Figure 4 displays the results regarding the different subscales of the IMI,including the experienced enjoyment during respectively the instruction and the problem-solving phase, theperceived competence, the effort they put into the activity, the perceived value or importance of the instructionand problem solving, the perceived autonomy or choice and finally the relatedness students experienced. First,we found significant within-subject differences in motivation between the evaluation of the instruction phaseand the evaluation of the problem-solving phase. The mean interest and relatedness for example wassignificantly higher during the group work (respectively (t(46)= 0.29, p = 0.045 and t(46)= 0.55, p < 0.001).Yet, the perceived value and competence was significantly higher regarding the instruction phase. Althoughthese are interesting results, the main focus of this study was the ordering effect the problem-solving task firstversus second. Based on between-subject analyses we found two trends. Regarding the instruction phase on theone hand, we found that students’ perceived choice or experienced autonomy was higher during the instructiongiven after the group work. On the other hand, we found a lower perceived competence during the problemsolving phase given before the instruction phase. It is important to interpret these results with caution as they arebased on a small scale study. Nevertheless, these trends are in line with previous findings in the literature.Figure 4. Students’ perceived motivation based on the post-experimental intrinsic motivation inventory (IMI).RQ 2. Effects on the learning and teaching mechanismsTo assess and compare the learning and teaching mechanisms in both conditions, first audiovisual data havebeen analyzed. Table 1 summarizes the results of the analysis and indicates that in both conditions the timespent to the instruction phase was comparable (i.e. circa 1 hour). However, the time students spent on theproblem-solving task differed significantly between both conditions. In the TforPS condition in which theICLS 2018 Proceedings412© ISLSinstruction was followed by the group work, one group already finished the task after 25 minutes. Themaximum time spent on the group work was 41 minutes. The time spent on the problem-solving task in theTthroughPS condition was higher (mean time spent was 46minutes versus 36 minutes in the TforPS condition)and the variation was lower. The minimum time spent on the task was 44 minutes.When having a closer look at the quality of answers during the problem-solving task, we found asubstantial difference between both conditions. To indicate this difference, Table 1 displays the differences inlengths of the answer on the most challenging subtask of the group work. This subtask asked to postulate theirsampling method to select 120 students for the campus survey keeping in mind the prerequisite of selecting thesame number of students from all students years and guaranteeing the presence of students from large as well assmall faculties in the sample.Table 1: Comparing the duration and interactions in both conditionsDuration of instruction phaseDuration of problem solving phaseof five groupsStudent-teacher interactionsStudent-teacher interaction timeNumber of students interactingwith teacherQuality of group work:indicator length of reasoningregarding task 3.1 ‘Sampling’)Teaching FOR PSInstruction followed by groupwork: N = 23; 5 groups59 minutesMin. time spent:25 minutesMax. time spent:41 minutesMean time spent:36.6 minutes3 interactions2 initiated by the teacher1 initiated by a student asking for aclarification2min10sec2 out of 23 studentsTeaching THROUGH PSGroup work followed byinstruction. N = 25; 5 groups1h4minutesMin. time spent: 44 minutesMax. time spent: 47 minutesMean time spent: 46 minutes6 interactions5 initiates by the teacher, 1initiated by student asking aquestion10min20sec6 out of 25 studentsMin. 9 wordsMax. 44 wordsMean: 24Min: 43 wordsMax: 171 wordsMean: 78 wordsFirst, it was revealed that the mean length of answers of student groups within the TforPS conditionwas significantly lower than the lengths of answers of student groups within the TthroughPS condition (M=24versus M=78). Within the TforPS condition, although the answers were shorter, the answers were correct in fourout of the five groups, but were less reflective. Three groups used in their answer the correct conceptualizationof systematic sampling and stratification. It was also interesting to see that three groups made the samplingmethod visible in the drawing tool in the same way the sampling method was demonstrated by the teacherduring the instruction phase. One group described and drew the sampling method in the correct manner, but didnot specify the conceptualization of the method. We found that the one group in the TforPS task that only spent25 minutes on the task, did not provide a correct and satisfying answer and also exhibited off-task behavior (i.e.drawing a funny smiley in the drawing tool which was meant to visualize their sampling method, see Figure 5).Within the other groups within both conditions no off-task behavior was indicated. The answers of the studentgroups within the TthroughPS condition better described the procedure of the sampling method they proposed,yet only one student group described their method correctly as stratified sampling. No group used the drawingtool to make visible their method, yet, as depicted in Figure 2, two groups had actively used the provided whiteboards to support their reasoning. One dome camera captured the student-student interactions of one group inboth conditions, the results of these analyses will be presented at the conference.ICLS 2018 Proceedings413© ISLSFigure 5. Analyzing students’ answers during the problem solving phase logged on the technology platform.Based on previous literature indicating that instruction after problem solving provides moreopportunities for interactions between students and teacher, both the number and duration of the interactions inboth instruction phases were analyzed and compared. Again, we found remarkable differences between bothinstruction phases. In the instruction phase within the TforPS only 3 teacher-students interactions were observedwhich only lasted 2 minutes, two were initiated by a question of the lecturer, one was initiated by a clarifyingquestion of a student. The interactions included 2 different students. During the course, the lecturer asked 4more questions (e.g. is everything clear?), but students did not respond. This was not the case in the instructionphase in the TthroughPS condition. In this condition, 6 student-teacher interactions were identified and theinteraction time lasted 10 minutes. The interactions included 6 different students and the discussions dealt aboutthe different strategies they applied during their group work.Regarding the psycho-physiological data of the students, no significant differences in skin conductancelevel between the two conditions on the one hand, neither between the problem-solving and instruction phase onthe other hand, were found. It is however still possible that different students experience a certain part of thecourse differently than others. Therefore, the covariance between the measured stress and the level of stressindicated in the self-report will further be explored. The teacher’s psycho-physiological data depicted in Figure6 shows that the teacher experienced more stress or arousal during instruction phase within the TthroughPScondition. This seems logical as it was the first time the teacher gave her course in this way and the interventionexpected her to build upon the student-generate solutions by comparing and contrasting them with the correctsolution, which takes the instructor out of the comfort zone. During the problem-solving phase, the teacher didnot interfere, which is reflected in the data as well. After the intervention, the teacher remarked that it was noteasy to refer to students-answers in the instruction phase and she reflected about the need of a co-teachingcontext.Figure 6. Teacher’s skin conductance level during the experiment.Conclusion and discussionThis study is based on considerable research on teaching problem solving in classrooms and helps to betterunderstand and solve the remaining questions about this complex form of activity. The field stresses that there ismuch more than the two extremes in teaching and learning, i.e. pure direction instruction and unguideddiscovery learning, however more research is needed to provide evidence-based design guidelines regardingthese problem solving design within the middle position (cfr. productive failure and productive success) toachieve optimal learning for all students.More specific, this quasi-experimental study focused on the order of the collaborative problem solvingtask. While the first research question focused on the effect on the outcome variables, the second researchquestions focused on the process variables including the teaching mechanisms during the instruction phase andthe learning mechanisms during the problem-solving phase. Although we did not find significant effectsregarding the conceptual understanding both on the short and longer term, the results of the affective outcomevariables and the qualitative analysis are consistent with the growing body of evidence that generating solutionsICLS 2018 Proceedings414© ISLSto novel concepts and problems prior to instruction can improve learning and teaching compared to studentswho received instruction first (DeCaro & Rittle-Johnson, 2012; Kapur 2013). The analysis of the quality ofanswers revealed that starting with problem solving prompts activation of prior knowledge and idea generationfrom different perspectives.Although this is a rather small intervention study on a short term, this study complements to the field ofthe Learning Sciences by bringing together multiple streams of data from both a qualitative and quantitativeperspective to fully understand the learning and teaching mechanisms during different approaches towardsproblem solving and instruction. Taking this zoomed-in perspective gave us the opportunity to capture theinteraction processes between the several actors (students, groups and the teacher) and sources (technology,peers and the teacher). The additional analysis of the group work will moreover give us better insight in thecollaborative process and the way different students seek for help and/or use the provided support which isoffered in the task environment. We only started to use psychophysiological data within this educational contextand the results within this study did not results in significant differences in the student data, however, we founda considerable trend in the teacher’s data; we will further explore these data as we believe that these data can tellus more detailed information about the affective states of students during teaching and learning in problemsolving contexts. A replication study is currently deployed in secondary education (grade 11 and 12) includingthe same measurements on a larger scale, including more students and spread over a longer time (4 times 50minutes instead of 2 times 50 minutes). The first part of the study will be comparable with this design includingstructured problem solving by means of the web-based inquiry science environment. In the second half of theintervention, however, the problem solving task will be more open and less guided compared to the first one.Consequently, this experimental condition will compare problem solving with a higher chance to lead to successfollowed or advanced by instruction and problem solving with a higher chance to lead to failure followed oradvanced by instruction. According to Kapur (2016) such experimental comparison providing a breakdown ofresults comparing students who achieved problem-solving success with those who did not is lacking in the field.This extended replication study will provide fruitful insight into the complexity of problem solving, which issituated between the two extremes, i.e. pure direction instruction and unguided discovery learning.ReferencesBandura, A. (1997). Self-Efficacy: The Exercise of Control. New York: W.H. Freeman.DeCaro, M. S., & Rittle-Johnson, B. (2012). Exploring mathematics problems prepares children to learn frominstruction. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 113, 552–568.Deci, E. L. & Ryan, R. M. (2000). The Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI). Retrieved fromhttp://selfdeterminationtheory.org/intrinsic-motivation-inventory/Felmer, P., Pehkonen, E., & Kilpatrick, K.. (2016). Posing and Solving Mathematical Problems : Advances andNew Perspectives. Springer International PublishingKapur, M. (2008). Productive failure. Cognition and Instruction, 26, 379–424Kapur, M. (2013). Comparing learning from productive failure and vicarious failure. The Journal of theLearning Sciences, 23, 651–677.Kapur, M. (2016). Examining Productive Failure, Productive Success, Unproductive Failure, and UnproductiveSuccess in Learning. Educational Psychologist, 51(2), 289–99.Kirschner, P. A., Sweller, J., & Clark, R.E. (2006). Why Minimal Guidance during Instruction Does Not Work:An Analysis of the Failure of Constructivist, Discovery, Problem-Based, Experiential, and InquiryBased Teaching. Educational Psychologist, 41(2), 75–86.Loibl, K., Roll, I., & Rummel, N. (2016). Towards a Theory of When and How Problem Solving Followed byInstruction Supports Learning. Educational Psychology Review 1–23.Lester, F. K. & Cai, J. (2016). Can Mathematical Problem Solving Be Taught? Preliminary Answers from 30Years of Research in Posing and Solving Mathematical Problems. Cham: Springer Intl Publishing.Schmidt, R. A., & Bjork, R. A. (1992). New conceptualizations of practice: Common principles in threeparadigms suggest new concepts for training. Psychological Science, 3, 207–217.Schroeder and Lester (1989). Developing understanding in Mathematics via problem solving. In P.R. Trafton(Ed.), New directions for elementary school mathematics (pp. 31-42). Reston, VA: NCTM.Schwartz, D. L., Chase, C. C., Oppezzo, M. A., & Chin, D. B. (2011). Practicing versus inventing withcontrasting cases: The effects of telling first on learning and transfer. Journal of EducationalPsychology, 103, 759–775.Slotta, J. D. &. Linn, M. C. (2009). WISE Science, Web-Based Inquiry in the Classroom. New York: TeachersCollege Press.Sweller, J., & Chandler, P. (1991). Evidence for cognitive load theory. Cognition and Instruction, 8, 351–362.ICLS 2018 Proceedings415© ISLS