Collaboration Scripts Should Focus on Shared Models, Not onDrawings, to Help Students Translate Between RepresentationsSally P.W. Wu, University of Wisconsin – Madison, pwwu@wisc.eduMartina A. Rau, University of Wisconsin – Madison, marau@wisc.eduAbstract: Students often struggle to translate between physical and virtual models when learning concepts in STEM courses. Collaborative activities may help students overcome these difficulties, especially if collaboration scripts prompt students to discuss shared representations.Which representation should collaboration scripts focus students’ interactions on? We investigate this question in a quasi-experiment with 560 undergraduate chemistry students. All students collaboratively built physical ball-and-stick models of molecules and translated them intowedge-dash drawings. Two experimental conditions received a collaboration script. For themodel condition, the script prompted students to focus on the physical ball-and-stick models.For the draw condition, the script prompted students to generate intermediary drawings on paper. Compared to a control condition with unscripted collaboration, the model condition showedhigher learning gains and the draw condition showed lower learning gains—especially for students with low spatial skills. Our results yield theoretical and practical implications for collaborative practices with multiple representations.Keywords: Multiple representations, collaboration scripts, physical and virtual models, chemistry, spatial skillsIntroductionFigure 1. Physical ball-and-stick model (A) and wedge-dash structure (B). Each shows two isomers: moleculeswith the same molecular formula but different 3D arrangement of the atoms.Figure 2. Students collaboratively work with physical ball-and-stick models and virtual wedge-dash structures.Students in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) often use multiple visual representationsto illustrate abstract concepts (Ainsworth, 2008). For example, when learning about molecular geometry, studentsare typically asked to translate 3D physical ball-and-stick models (Figure 1A) into 2D wedge-dash structures(Figure 1B). To make these translations, they may work collaboratively with physical models and virtual representations (Figure 2). However, prior research shows that students often fail to spontaneously engage in effectivecollaboration strategies (Lou, Abrami, & D’Apollonia, 2001). Instructional support can alleviate these difficulties,for instance by providing collaboration scripts that prompt students to discuss how to translate between the representations. In our prior research, we found that such a collaboration script enhanced students’ learning comparedto unscripted collaboration during the same activity (Rau, Bowman, & Moore, 2017).ICLS 2018 Proceedings504© ISLSCollaboration scripts for translating between multiple representations may be effective because they focus students’ collaborative interactions on shared representations. In our prior research, we observed two practicesthat are commonly promoted by instructors when students collaboratively translate physical into virtual representations. First, instructors often prompted students to focus on physical models they collaboratively constructedand to compare models directly to the virtual representation. Second, instructors often asked students to translatethe physical representation into an intermediate drawing and compare the drawing to the virtual representation.Which of these instructional practices should collaboration scripts promote? We address this question in a quasiexperiment in which undergraduate chemistry students collaboratively translated physical ball-and-stick modelsinto virtual wedge-dash structures to make sense of chemistry concepts related to molecular geometry.Prior researchIn the following, we briefly review research on students’ difficulties in translating among multiple representationsand collaborating effectively. We then discuss how collaboration scripts may alleviate students’ difficulties byfostering the disciplinary practices of physical modeling and drawing.Students’ difficulties in translating between multiple visual representationsMany STEM concepts are visuospatial and/or not directly observable. To make these concepts accessible, instruction in STEM domains uses multiple visual representations (Ainsworth, 2008; Rau, 2017). For example, chemistryinstruction typically uses physical ball-and-stick models with wedge-dash structures (Figure 1) to illustrate concepts related to molecular geometry. Students benefit from multiple visual representations only if they can translate between representations to make sense of the underlying concepts (Rau, 2017). However, many studentsstruggle with such translations (Ainsworth, 2008), which can impede their success in STEM domains, includingchemistry (Stieff, 2007).Translating between representations is particularly difficult for students with low spatial skills (Stieff,2007) because translating requires students to map the visual features of one representation to correspondingfeatures in the other representation (Rau, 2016). To do so, students must hold visual features in working memoryand mentally rotate the features to align them (Hegarty & Waller, 2005). By definition, students with lower spatialskills experience higher cognitive load during this task, which can jeopardize their learning from multiple visualrepresentations (Hegarty & Waller, 2005; Stieff, 2007). Indeed, the chemistry education literature documents thatstudents with low spatial skills have more difficulties in translating between representations, which can result inlower learning gains (Stieff, 2007).Students’ difficulties in collaborating with multiple visual representationsCollaboration can help students overcome difficulties in translating between representations because students canhelp each other map visual features and make sense of how representations show key concepts (van Dijk, Gijlers,& Weinberger, 2014). When working individually, students often fail to spontaneously reflect on their understanding of visual representations (Ainsworth, Bibby, & Wood, 2002). When working collaboratively, students mayrealize that they hold divergent views on the visual representations, which may prompt them to engage moredeeply in making sense of the visual representations (Zhang & Linn, 2011). Further, collaboration may help students with low spatial skills receive support from peers to help them align and map features of different representations.Yet, students often have difficulties in collaborating effectively (Lou et al., 2001; Weinberger, Stegmann,Fischer, & Mandl, 2007). Instructional support can help students overcome these difficulties, for instance byscripting their collaborative interactions. Such collaboration scripts can guide students’ interactions, for instance,by asking questions for students to discuss or by prompting them to explain concepts to one another (Fischer,Kollar, Stegmann, & Wecker, 2013; Weinberger et al., 2007). In a prior experiment (Rau et al., 2017), we testedthe effectiveness of a collaboration script that adaptively provided prompts to discuss representations when students reached an impasse in translating between representations. Results showed higher learning gains for studentswho received the collaboration script than for students who worked on the same activities without the script.Supporting collaborative practices with multiple visual representationsYet, prior research on collaboration scripts has not examined how to focus students’ collaborative interactions onspecific practices related to translating between multiple visual representations. Specifically, we observed twodisciplinary practices that are common in classroom activities with multiple visual representations (NRC, 2012).Both of these practices serve to focus students’ attention on a shared representation.ICLS 2018 Proceedings505© ISLSFirst, instructors often prompt students to focus on shared physical models. Prior research suggests thatinteractions with physical models can help students learn domain knowledge (Stull, Hegarty, Dixon, & Stieff,2012). For instance, students’ interactions with ball-and-stick models are constrained because the balls (atoms)have a designated number of holes for sticks (bonds), which are spread out as far apart as possible in a tetrahedralshape. Engaging in such interactions with the physical model can help students learn and retain information aboutthe representation, such as how it shows molecular geometry and how to rotate the model for projection onto a2D plane. Further, the ability to rotate physical models may also alleviate difficulties in mental rotation for students with low spatial skills (Barrett, Stull, Hsu, & Hegarty, 2014). However, much research suggests that modelscould hinder learning because students often do not know how to spatially align physical models with other representations to map features (Barrett et al., 2014). Because spatial alignment is particularly challenging for students with low spatial skills, focusing collaborative interactions on physical models could disadvantage studentswith low spatial skills.Second, instructors often prompt students to draw additional visual representations on paper because itengages students in a valued disciplinary practice for STEM professionals (NRC, 2012). Professionals often drawintermediary representations to help them translate across representations during collaborations (Kozma &Russell, 2005). Prior research shows that drawing visual representations can help students learn domainknowledge (Schmeck, Mayer, Opfermann, Pfeiffer, & Leutner, 2014; Zhang & Linn, 2011). Further, drawingactivities may facilitate mental rotation because students can physically orient their drawings on paper to mapvisual features. Indeed, prior research shows that spatial skills do not affect students’ benefit from drawing activities (Schmeck et al., 2014). However, drawing activities without instructional support have been shown to resultin high cognitive load, especially if the drawing task involves mental rotation (Schwamborn, Thillmann,Opfermann, & Leutner, 2011). This effect could disproportionally affect students with low spatial skills. Therefore, focusing students’ collaborative interactions on drawing may disadvantage students with low spatial skills.In our prior study on adaptive collaboration script for translating between representations (Rau et al.,2017), we observed both practices. First, students used a shared modeling kit to construct physical ball-and-stickmodels. Consequently, when the collaboration script prompted them to discuss translation between the representations, they often focused on the models. Second, our classroom observations showed that students often drewwedge-dash structures on paper when they reached an impasse, a practice encouraged by the teaching assistantsin the course. Hence, either of these practices could have accounted for the effectiveness of our collaborationscript. However, our prior experiment did not control for whether or not students were prompted to engage ineither type of collaborative practice.Research questionsOur brief review of collaborative practices in STEM shows that it is, to date, unclear whether prompting studentsto focus on physical models or to generate intermediary drawings will best support their learning with multiplevisual representations. Based on Learning Sciences theory, one can argue both for potential positive and negativeeffects of each collaborative practice. Further, both collaborative practices are common in STEM professions andoften encouraged by instructors in STEM courses. Therefore, our goal is to investigate:Research question 1: Is a collaboration script more effective if it focuses students’ collaborative interactions on physical models or on intermediary drawings in terms of enhancing students’ learning of domainknowledge?Further, because translating between representations is particularly difficult for students with low spatialskills (Hegarty & Waller, 2005; Stieff, 2007), we investigate:Research question 2: Do students’ spatial skills moderate the effects of model-focused and drawingfocused collaboration scripts?MethodChemistry course and participantsTo address these questions, we conducted a quasi-experiment with 560 students in an undergraduate chemistrycourse at a Midwestern U.S. university. The course involved two 50-minute lectures attended by all students, one50-minute discussion session, and one 3-hour lab session each week. Lab and discussion sessions were held insmaller sections of about 18 students each. The lab and discussion sessions were led by teaching assistants (TAs).All TAs received the same training in leading these sessions at the beginning of the semester. During the semester,students worked in small groups of 2-3 students during discussion and lab sessions.ICLS 2018 Proceedings506© ISLSOur quasi-experiment took place in a lab session which covered a topic related to molecular geometry:chemical isomers. Isomers are molecules made of the same atoms but differ in the spatial arrangement of theiratoms. Instruction on isomers crucially relies on connecting the representations shown in Figure 1 because differences in the atoms’ spatial arrangements within molecules can have dramatic effects on the properties of chemicalcompounds. For example, if students fail to understand the difference between the left and right isomers in bothFigure 1A and 1B, they may fail to understand that the melting point of the left isomer differs from the meltingpoint of the right isomer.Experimental designThe chemistry course had 34 lab sections. Two experimental conditions received a collaboration script. Specifically, five lab sections (n = 78 students) were assigned to the model condition that received a model-focused script.Six lab sections (n = 110 students) were assigned to the draw condition that received a drawing-focused script.The remaining 23 sections were assigned to a control condition (n = 383 students) that received no collaborationscript. Students selected lab sections at the beginning of the semester to fit their schedule. We do not have anyreason to believe that systematic differences exist between sections.During the lab sections, all students worked collaboratively in dyads with the visual representationsshown in Figure 1 on a sequence of chemistry problems. The problems required students to construct a physicalball-and-stick model of a specific isomer and to translate it into a wedge-dash structure. Further, each problemcontained conceptual questions that required students to use the representations to make sense of concepts relatedto isomers.Experimental conditionsFigure 3. Students draw virtual wedge-dash structures of structural isomers in Chem Tutor.The model and draw conditions received a collaboration script that prompted them to discuss how to translatebetween physical ball-and-stick models and virtual wedge-dash structures while they solved chemistry problems.As in our prior study (Rau et al., 2017), the collaboration script was implemented in an educational technologythat presented the chemistry problems: Chem Tutor (see Figure 3). The Chem Tutor problems were created to beidentical (i.e., same steps, same questions, same molecules) to problems on a paper worksheet traditionally usedin this lab session. Chem Tutor instructed students to build the model collaboratively, input answers using a dropdown menu, and draw the wedge-dash structure in an interactive tool. If students made an error on a problem, thecollaboration script provided immediate feedback by highlighting the part of the conceptual question or of thewedge-dash structure that was incorrect and prompting students to discuss it with their partners (Figure 3).Throughout all lab sessions for the model and draw conditions, the first author and several research assistantsprovided technical support with Chem Tutor. The TA for each session answered questions about the content, asthey typically do for each lab session.The difference between the model and the draw conditions regarded the introductory prompts in thecollaboration script and an equivalent spoken prompt provided at the beginning of the lab session. Students in themodel condition received prompts to “carefully build and orient their physical ball-and-stick models” before constructing virtual wedge-dash structures in Chem Tutor. Students in the draw condition received prompts to “plantheir wedge-dash structures on paper” before constructing them in Chem Tutor. The respective prompts state thatICLS 2018 Proceedings507© ISLSthe practice of “constructing models” or “drawing on paper” benefits students because it “aligns with the work ofprofessional chemists and is an essential part of their reasoning process.”Control conditionA “business-as-usual” control condition did not receive a collaboration script. Students solved the same sequenceof chemistry problems using a paper worksheet traditionally used in this lab session. The worksheet contained thesame problem-solving steps, conceptual questions, and isomers. Students also used a shared modeling kit to construct the physical ball-and-stick models, but they wrote down answers to the conceptual questions and drewwedge-dash structures on the worksheet without a collaboration script. At the end of the 3-hour lab session, TAscollected the worksheets to provide written feedback on problem solutions and wedge-dash drawings in the following week’s lab session.AssessmentsTo assess students’ learning of domain knowledge, we used a pretest and posttest on isomers, evaluated in ourprior study (Rau et al., 2017). A retention scale of the test assessed students’ ability to recall isomer concepts fromthe lab. A transfer scale assessed students’ ability to apply this knowledge to predict the stability of molecules.To assess students’ spatial skills, we used the Vandenberg & Kuse test for mental rotation ability (Peterset al., 1995). This test was evaluated and used in prior research on chemistry learning (e.g., Stieff, 2007).ProcedureWe conducted our study as part of an undergraduate chemistry course. A lecture in week 3 of the semester coveredmolecular geometry and chemical isomerism. In week 4, students worked on activities in accordance with theirtypical lab schedule. First, as the required pre-lab exercise, students completed the pretest and spatial test online.Then, during their scheduled 3-hour lab session, students completed problems using Chem Tutor or worksheetthat corresponds to their condition. Lastly, students completed the posttest online as the required post-lab exerciseat the end of week 4.ResultsPrior checksTable 1: Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) of test scores by conditionConditionControlModelDrawSpatial test.881 (.140).875 (.132).857 (.166)Retention scalePretestPosttest.527 (.190).651 (.195).515 (.170).630 (.202).541 (.186).628 (.210)Transfer scalePretestPosttest.540 (.403).745 (.356).654 (.397).801 (.326).727 (.369).764 (.375)Because we used a quasi-experimental design in which students were not assigned to conditions at random butbased on their lab section, we first checked for potential differences between conditions prior to the intervention.Table 1 shows the means and standard deviations of test scores by condition. A multivariate analysis of variance(MANOVA) with condition as independent factor and test scores (retention pretest, transfer pretest, and spatialskills test) as dependent measures showed no significant differences between conditions on the retention pretest(F < 1) or on the spatial skills test, F(2, 570) = 1.24, p = .291. However, there was a significant difference on thetransfer pretest, F(2, 570) = 10.61, p < .01. Post-hoc comparisons showed that students in the draw condition hadsignificantly higher scores than students in the control condition (p < .01). No other differences were significantat the pretest. To account for pretest differences, all following analyses use pretest scores as a covariate. Next, wechecked for learning gains from pretest to posttest. A repeated-measures ANOVA showed significant learninggains on the retention test, F(1, 570) = 145.63, p < .01, as well as on the transfer test, F(1, 570) = 75.37, p < .01.Differences between conditionsBecause we conducted a quasi-experiment with assignment to condition by lab section rather than by student, weused a hierarchical linear model (HLM) to analyze differences between conditions. HLMs take into account nestedsources of variance due to the fact that, for instance, students taught by the same teaching assistants tend to havemore similar knowledge than students taught by different TAs. Specifically, we used an HLM that included aICLS 2018 Proceedings508© ISLSrandom intercept for TAs. In addition, the HLM included pretest scores as a covariate to control for pretest differences prior to the intervention, condition as independent factor to test research question 1, and spatial skills andan interaction effect of condition with spatial skills to test research question 2.On the retention posttest, there was no significant main effect of condition (F < 1) nor a significantinteraction between condition and spatial skills (F < 1). On the transfer posttest, there was a significant main effectof condition on learning gains, F(2, 564) = 5.03, p < .01, such that the model condition outperformed the controlcondition and the control condition outperformed the draw condition. This effect was qualified by a significantinteraction between condition and spatial skills, F(1, 564) = 4.75, p < .01. To gain insights into the nature of thisinteraction effect, we split students into groups with low spatial skills (0-33rd percentile on the spatial skills test),medium spatial skills (34th-66th percentile), and high spatial skills (67th-100th percentile). Post-hoc comparisonsshowed that the effect of condition was significant only among students with low spatial skills (p < .05), but notamong students with medium or high spatial skills (ps > .10). Figure 4 illustrates these effects.Figure 4. Average scores on transfer posttest by condition and post-hoc splits into low (0-33rd percentile), medium (34th-66th percentile), and high (67th-100th percentile) spatial skills. Error bars show standard errors ofthe mean.DiscussionThis study investigated the effects of two disciplinary practices on a collaboration script that supports translationbetween multiple visual representations. Specifically, we tested whether a collaboration script is more effective ifit focuses students’ collaborative interactions on physical models or on generating intermediary drawings (research question 1). We found no effects on retention of chemistry knowledge. This finding is not surprising because collaborative interactions are known to be less effective for the acquisition of simple knowledge than forcomplex knowledge (Kirschner, Paas, & Kirschner, 2010). Accordingly, we found higher learning gains on a testof chemistry knowledge transfer for students who received a model-focused collaboration script, compared tounscripted collaboration in a control condition. By contrast, students who received a drawing-focused collaboration script showed lower learning gains on the transfer test than the control condition.In addition, because translating between representations is particularly difficult for students with lowspatial skills, we investigated whether students’ spatial skills moderate the effects of model-focused and drawingfocused collaboration scripts (research question 2). We found that the advantage of the model-focused collaboration script and the disadvantage of the drawing-focused script were particularly pronounced for students with lowspatial skills.Why might the drawing-focused collaboration script have resulted in lower learning gains than unscripted collaboration? We propose three potential reasons. First, drawing intermediary representations mightresult in cognitive overload, particularly for students with low spatial skills. The purpose of the lab session inwhich we conducted our experiment was for students to learn to translate ball-and-stick models into wedge-dashstructures. Hence, students were not yet proficient at generating drawings to translate between these representations. When asking students to draw on paper to plan their wedge-dash structures, students receive no support fordoing so. Drawing without support can increase cognitive load (Schwamborn et al., 2011), especially for studentsICLS 2018 Proceedings509© ISLSwith low spatial skills (Hegarty & Waller, 2005; Stieff, 2007), which in turn may impede learning. Second, focusing students’ collaborative interactions on drawings may reduce translation and sense making between thetarget representations. In our lab session, the goal was to learn to translate physical ball-and-stick models intowedge-dash structures. Because students in the draw condition were asked to plan their wedge-dash structures onpaper first, they may have focused on copying the wedge-dash structure from the paper rather than reflecting onhow it translates from the ball-and-stick model. Third, focusing students on generating drawings may reducecollaboration altogether. Even though the collaboration script prompted students to discuss intermediary drawingswith their partner, students drew individually on their own piece of paper, which implies ownership. Focusingstudents’ collaborative interactions on representations that they “own” may discourage collaboration—for instance, a partner may be less inclined to modify someone else’s drawing. This might, in turn, reduce reflection onhow the representations show concepts (van Dijk et al., 2014).Why was the model-focused collaboration script effective, in particular for students with low spatialskills? We consider two potential reasons. First, focusing students’ attention on the ball-and-stick models mayhave increased collaboration. Students used a shared modeling kit to build the physical ball-and-stick models.Because students built models together, they “co-owned” the models, which may have encouraged them to modifythe models while answering conceptual questions and constructing wedge-dash structures. Second, students withlow spatial skills may particularly benefit from collaborative interactions that focus on physical models becausetheir partner can help them spatially align the representations. To translate physical ball-and-stick models intowedge-dash structures, students have to mentally project the 3D model into a 2D plane for the wedge-dash structure. By definition, students with low spatial skills have more difficulties than students with high spatial skills inmentally rotating objects. Students in the model condition were prompted to collaborate with their partner tospatially align the physical ball-and-stick models with wedge-dash structures. The partners of students with lowspatial skills may have helped them externally rotate the physical model to facilitate projection from 3D into 2D.LimitationsOur results should be interpreted in light of the following limitations. First, causal inferences from quasi-experiments are generally limited because non-random differences between conditions may exist. Although we took allpossible steps to ensure the equivalency of the conditions, an experiment with random assignment of individualsto conditions should replicate our results. Second, our experiment was situated in the context of a specific chemistry course. Even though we consider the naturalistic context of our experiment a strength in terms of externalvalidity, future research should test if our results generalize to other STEM courses. Finally, our experiment focused on two specific representations. Therefore, future research should replicate our findings in other STEMdomains that use different physical and virtual visual representations (e.g., 3D and 2D protein models in biology,geological layers and block diagrams).ConclusionOur results contribute to theory about collaborative learning. We provide novel insights into the mechanisms thatmay account for the effectiveness of collaborative activities on students’ learning with multiple visual representations. We isolated two possible mechanisms that focus students’ collaborative interactions on physical modelsor on generating intermediary drawings. Our findings suggest that, especially for students with low spatial skills,focusing shared attention on physical models is a mechanism through which collaboration may enhance students’learning, whereas focusing on intermediary drawings is a mechanism through which collaboration might hinderstudents’ learning.Further, our results make practical recommendations for the design of collaboration scripts and collaborative practices in STEM instruction. We recommend that collaboration scripts focus students’ collaborative interactions on shared models rather than on intermediary drawings. Further, we caution instructors against encouraging students to generate intermediary drawings when translating between representations, especially if theyhave low spatial skills. Our study shows that even a simple tweak of how students are prompted to collaborativelyuse shared representations can render a collaboration script more or less effective than unscripted collaboration.ReferencesAinsworth, S. E. (2008). The educational value of multiple-representations when learning complex scientificconcepts. In Visualization: Theory and Practice in Science Education (pp. 191–208). Springer Netherlands.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-5267-5_9Ainsworth, S. E., Bibby, P., & Wood, D. (2002). Examining the effects of different multiple representationalICLS 2018 Proceedings510© ISLSsystems in learning primary mathematics. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 11(1), 25–61.https://doi.org/10.1207/S15327809JLS1101Barrett, T. J., Stull, A. T., Hsu, T. M., & Hegarty, M. (2014). Constrained interactivity for relating multiplerepresentations in science: When virtual is better than real. Computers & Education, 81, 69–81.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2014.09.009Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Stegmann, K., & Wecker, C. (2013). Toward a script theory of guidance in computersupportedcollaborativelearning.EducationalPsychologist,48(1),56–66.https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2012.748005Hegarty, M., & Waller, D. (2005). Individual differences in spatial abilities. The Cambridge Handbook ofVisuospatial Thinking, 121–169. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511610448.005Kirschner, F., Paas, F., & Kirschner, P. A. (2010). Task complexity as a driver for collaborative learningefficiency: The collective working-memory effect. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 25, 615–624.Kozma, R., & Russell, J. (2005). Students becoming chemists: Developing representational competence.Visualization in Science Education, 121–145.Lou, Y., Abrami, P. C., & D’Apollonia, S. (2001). Small group and individual learning with technology: A metaanalysis. Review of Educational Research, 71(3), 449–521.NRC. (2012). Discipline-based education research: Understanding and improving learning in undergraduatescience and engineering. Journal of Engineering Education, 102(4), 261. https://doi.org/10.1002/jee.20030Peters, M., Laeng, B., Latham, K., Jackson, M., Zaiyouna, R., & Richardson, C. (1995). A redrawn Vandenbergand Kuse mental rotations test: different versions and factors that affect performance. Brain and Cognition,28(1), 39–58. https://doi.org/10.1006/brcg.1995.1032Rau, M. A. (2017). Conditions for the effectiveness of multiple visual representations in enhancing STEMlearning. Educational Psychology Review, 29(4), 717–761. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-016-9365-3Rau, M. A., Bowman, H. E., & Moore, J. W. (2017). An adaptive collaboration script for learning with multiplevisual representations in chemistry. Computers & Education, 109, 38–55.https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2017.02.006Schmeck, A., Mayer, R. E., Opfermann, M., Pfeiffer, V., & Leutner, D. (2014). Drawing pictures during learningfrom scientific text: Testing the generative drawing effect and the prognostic drawing effect. ContemporaryEducational Psychology, 39(4), 275–286. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cedpsych.2014.07.003Schwamborn, A., Thillmann, H., Opfermann, M., & Leutner, D. (2011). Cognitive load and instructionallysupported learning with provided and learner-generated visualizations. Computers in Human Behavior,27(1), 89–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2010.05.028Stieff, M. (2007). Mental rotation and diagrammatic reasoning in science. Learning and Instruction, 17(2), 219–234. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2007.01.012Stull, A. T., Hegarty, M., Dixon, B., & Stieff, M. (2012). Representational Translation With Concrete Models inOrganicChemistry.CognitionandInstruction,30(4),404–434.https://doi.org/10.1080/07370008.2012.719956van Dijk, A. M., Gijlers, H., & Weinberger, A. (2014). Scripted collaborative drawing in elementary scienceeducation. Instructional Science, 42(3), 353–372. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11251-013-9286-1Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K., Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2007). Scripting argumentative knowledge constructionin computer-supported learning environments. Scripting Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6,191–211. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-36949-5Zhang, Z. H., & Linn, M. C. (2011). Can generating representations enhance learning with dynamicvisualizations?JournalofResearchinScienceTeaching,48(10),1177–1198.https://doi.org/10.1002/tea.20443AcknowledgmentsThis research was supported by the UW-Madison Graduate School, National Science Foundation through AwardIIS #1651781, and Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, through Award #R305B150003to the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not representviews of the National Science Foundation and U.S. Department of Education. We thank instructors Judith Burstyn,Etienne Garand, Ive Herman, Judy Hines, and the teaching assistants who helped us implement the experiment.We also thank Hannah Bowman, Maggie Cram, Jainaba Corr, and Haengjung Ye for their conceptual andtechnical support.ICLS 2018 Proceedings511© ISLS