Exploring the Margins of the Field: Rethinking STEM in EducationChristopher P. Ostrowski, Sandra Becker, Zulay Diaz Caceres, Marilu Lam-Herrera, and Stefan Rothschuhchris.ostrowski@ucalgary.ca, sandra.becker@ucalgary.ca, zulay.diazcaceres@ucalgary.ca,marilu.lamherrera@ucalgary.ca, stefan.rothschuh@ucalgary.caUniversity of CalgaryAbstract: As a cohort of Learning Sciences doctoral students, we are at the crux of shapingnew possibilities for STEM in education. We share key learnings gleaned around criticalnotions of STEM (science, technology, engineering, mathematics) after participating in aconference that explored marginalized groups and ideas in STEM education. Key ideas wedistilled for further deliberation include: 1) How is STEM identified and who is part of it?; 2)Why is critical discourse essential in STEM? and; 3) How do we attend to affect and aestheticexperience in STEM? We argue considering such issues and fostering epistemic fluency willallow STEM to grow and diversify. In presenting our understandings of STEM as it exists,and where we feel it is moving, our learning provokes dialogue about how critical researchcan impact STEM and educational research.Keywords: STEM, Critical, Marginalization, AffectIntroductionWe are a multidisciplinary and international cohort of Learning Sciences doctoral students in Western Canada.Here, we discuss current trends and critical issues in STEM (science, technology, engineering, mathematics),how it is taken up in society, who has access to it, what it says about our world, and where STEM is headed.Our participation in a conference on critical and marginalized areas of STEM motivated us to reflect on thenorms of STEM in literature, ideas of how to stretch and reconsider STEM, and how we, as emerging scholars,position ourselves relative to STEM and its future. We ground our discussion in established STEM andLearning Sciences literature, and three resonances from the conference: 1) How is STEM identified and who ispart of it?; 2) Why is critical discourse essential in STEM? and; 3) How do we attend to affect and aesthetics inSTEM? Our intent is to advance ways educators and scholars can rethink how STEM is taught, learned, andexperienced.BackgroundThe term STEM originated in the United States in the 1990s as a strategy to strengthen the political presence ofscience, technology, engineering, and mathematics practitioners (Moore & Smith, 2014). Historically, STEMhas been a mostly Western discourse based on labour productivity, Eurocentric paradigms, economic efficiency,and economic growth (Bhabha, 1985; Smith, 2012). As STEM evolves, there is disagreement of whatconstitutes STEM, calling for a rethinking of the field and its scope (Bybee, 2013; English, 2016). Scholarsadvocate for integrating STEM disciplines; however, the lack of a “common operational definition orconceptualization of STEM” (Breiner, Harkness, Johnson & Koehler, 2012, p. 9) and implementation issues ineducation settings, are a challenge.Educators have struggled to overcome subject-specific thinking in STEM (Sochacka, Guyotte, &Walther, 2016). Linking art with STEM, to form STEAM, is one way to integrate multiple disciplines and isargued as fundamental for innovation and creativity (Bailey, 2015). The arts, and more broadly, aestheticexperiences can foster opportunities to teach and learn through transforming materials into unique forms andengendering continuity across disciplines and experiences (Farris & Sengupta, 2016). However, gluing moredisciplines to the STEM moniker may encourage further compartmentalization rather than holistic integration.At the same time, blending disciplines together may dilute disciplinary ways of knowing and being, causing a“jack of all trades, master of none” effect. This tension needs further exploration. To move beyond thetraditional discourse of STEM as separate disciplines motivated by human capital (increased production),scholars need to envision STEM in terms of human capability (holistic lives of personal value) (Sen, 1997).Critical questionsHow is STEM identified and who is part of it?ICLS 2018 Proceedings1105© ISLSIdentity is inseparable from how researchers, students, and educators shape their beliefs, values, and how theycharacterize STEM. For example, “fantasy worlds” describe how students and educators position themselveswithin STEM and how it is defined within various contexts (Holland, Lachicotte, Skinner, & Cain, 1998; Rahm,2008). In fantasy worlds, identity is shaped in how a person can see themselves and the way others see them.These perceptions are in constant flux and are affected by contexts and environments. Integrating STEM withina person’s identity strongly shapes learning experiences (Battiste, 2004; Shanahan, 2009). Unfortunately,learners in many communities are discriminated against because of identity prejudices and beliefs that identity isproblematic for learning processes (Montejo, 2010). For instance, traits such as gender, class, and ethnicbackground are often used to predict success or failure in science careers (Archer, 2011; Wong, 2015).Traditionally, the sciences have promoted Caucasian, privileged, Euro-American men (Baker, 1998). Manyfactors perpetuate this promotion, including lucrative industry sponsorships welcomed by educationalinstitutions to prepare the next generation of STEM experts and benefit industry. Thus, scholars may be(implicitly) drawn to maintain the systemic inertia of STEM. Attempts to overcome these inequalities need to beaddressed more openly. Fortunately, science identities are fluid and educators and students can overcome thesetraditional notions (Shanahan & Nieswandt, 2011; Wong, 2015). This leads to questions of how someoneembodies or rejects STEM as part of their identity (e.g., who gets to be a ‘science person’?).Current Western curriculums commonly give lesser priority to non-dominant perspectives. Fortunately,STEM is evolving to better appreciate marginalized groups and critical perspectives such as indigenousknowledge, decolonization, disabilities, and gender in how STEM is defined (Battiste, 2004; Hwang & Taylor,2016; Smith, 2012). For example, from an indigenous perspective, there is a mutual interest to integrate Westernand indigenous notions of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics, even if they go by differentnames (Hatcher, Bartlett, Marshall, & Marshall, 2009). Identity is becoming the foci of re-thinking and redesigning STEM as past and current inequalities are confronted (Esmonde & Booker, 2017).“All people need STEM understanding in order to make sound decisions for themselves, their families,and their communities” (Marrero, Gunning, & Germain-Williams, 2014, p. 2). In providing varied access toSTEM learning opportunities, not only do students “reshape their ways of thinking about what science is, how itgets done, and who might pursue it” (Rham & Moore, 2016, p. 771), they create moments for students todevelop and question their own identities as scientists and STEM contributors. This can lead to STEM learningthat builds on the lived experiences of participants within their communities, while promoting public action insolving societal problems (Adams & Gupta, 2013; Rham & Moore, 2016).Why is critical discourse essential in STEM?STEM is interdisciplinary but (often) not inclusionary. STEM has traditionally turned a blind eye to issues ofequity, access, and cultural diversity (Esmonde & Booker, 2017; Takeuchi, 2016). It has privileged Eurocentricways of knowing, where scientists are objective owners of knowledge who share what they know, devoid ofcultures and contexts (M. C. Shanahan, personal communication, September 28, 2017). However, culturalpractices are intertwined with STEM and accounting for diversity and critical discourse are becomingeducational imperatives (Strong, Adams, Bellino, Pieroni, Stoops, & Das, 2016). Incorporating multiple ways ofknowing, showcasing ways to navigate diverse ways of knowing, and establishing epistemological fluency areongoing challenges for STEM educators.Unfortunately, marginalized groups and ideas are often treated as a complication and there is resistancein upsetting carefully crafted ways of teaching, learning, and knowing STEM (Bang & Medin, 2010). We arguediversity is crucial for advancing the field and not a problem to overcome. Like identity, heterogeneity in peopleand perspectives is inseparable from teaching and learning (Rosebery, Ogonowski, DiSchino, & Warren, 2010).For example, virtual avatars with customizable sex, gender, and appearance challenge the traditionalheteronormativity of STEM, giving a space and a place for identities to be rethought about how biology istaught and learned (Shanahan, 2009). Gender fluidity also opens avenues to integrate affective dimensions ofSTEM (McWilliams, 2016). For example, how does gender, desire, and emotion change sex education? How dobiology curricula address social relationships as understood in other species? If the next great scientists are tomake sense of the world, STEM educators cannot ignore deviations to heteronormativity nor ignore howingrained heteronormativity is in everyday repertoires of teaching and learning practices (Sumara & Davis,1999). Broadly, STEM educators need to consider how disciplinary norms can evolve toward greater inclusion,equity, and access.How do we attend to affect and aesthetic in STEM?A pervasive, but glossed over, component of teaching and learning is aesthetic and affect. Emotions have astrong connection to the design of learning environments (e.g., digital games), and to students’ thinking andICLS 2018 Proceedings1106© ISLSactions (Kim & Kim, 2010). Emotions are also situated and distributed among people, places, and knowledge.For example, professional game developers strive to balance levels of challenge, reward, advancement, andenjoyment to keep players enthralled for hours, days, and months. Engagement is key for learning; therefore, inthe world of coding, game-based learning, and digital experiences, not only does emotion matter for design, it isalso part of the learning process. Moreover, playing a game is only the start. Critique and interpretation of agame is where students can get at the heart of its content, ideas, and perspectives. For digital environments andcode to mean something, they have to connect with the world around it. As people experience virtual, physical,and augmented environments, emotions are the threads that weave these experiences together and supportlearning transfer across contexts.STEM also needs to integrate values and ethics in how it is taught and learned. For example, when anengineer designs a militarized drone, how can educators prepare engineers to grapple with the moral and ethicalissues of how their work can save or end the lives of people they may never know (Philip, Gupta, Elby, &Turpen, 2017)? Design embodies sociocultural norms and identities. It represents an aesthetic of what counts aslegitimate repertoires of practice, priorities of teaching and learning, and individual ideologies. Students andeducators of STEM need ways to navigate the beliefs and values of others and how they strengthen, pull, andknit the fabric of STEM in education.Future directionsAs emerging scholars in the Learning Sciences, and future educators in STEM, we remain sensitive to thefield’s development and our role in addressing critical issues in STEM research and learning. We anticipatedisciplines outside of STEM will benefit from similar critical discussions in current and future research. Byexploring common interests such as curriculum development, educational leadership, or lifelong learning inSTEM, researchers foster a shared goal of understanding the mechanisms of learning. We believe criticalresearch showcases the potential integrative power of STEM, while addressing the diverse needs andperspectives of learners found in classrooms. Considering that, we question if a focus on critical research canpush the compartmentalization and stratification that exists within STEM to the margins, opening uppossibilities for integrated research beyond STEM as it exists today. Could this critical focus be the end ofSTEM as we know it? We are excited to be part of a fluid, developing field, that questions established beliefs,pushes and shifts boundaries, and promotes diverse, holistic, and powerful ways of knowing.ConclusionExploring critical ideas has expanded our STEM epistemologies and our personal ontologies of what it means tobe a STEM scholar. We came to STEM through the traditional routes, so we try to reconcile our biases forrethinking the field, while acknowledging our skewed perspectives associated with a Western education model.We are also aware of the thorny relationships between critical change and the fiscal realities associated withimplicit or explicit exclusion to retain these privileges. We argue for STEM and the Learning Sciences to growand advance, scholars, educators, and students need to consider how STEM is defined, who it includes, and howit can attend to affect. Engaging in these issues has influenced our academic pursuits by heightening ourawareness of the complexities of teaching and learning across disciplines, epistemological perspectives, andresearch approaches. By having a shared trajectory for STEM, future researchers can address significantproblems, expand the field, and have a positive impact on students’ lives and their communities.ReferencesAdams, J. D. & Gupta, P. (2013). “I learn more here than I do in school. Honestly, I wouldn’t lie about that.”:Creating a space for agency and identity around science. International Journal of Critical Pedagogy,4(2), 87-104.Archer, L. (2011): Constructing Minority Ethnic Middle-class Identity. An Exploratory Study with Parents,Pupils and Young Professionals. Sociology 45(1), 134–151.Bailey, C. (2015). An artist’s argument for STEAM education. Education Digest, 81(1), 21-23Baker, D. (1998). Equity issues in sciences education. In B. Fraser & K. Tobin (Eds.), International handbookof science education (pp. 869–895). Dodrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.Bang, M. and Medin, D. (2010). Cultural processes in science education: Supporting the navigation of multipleepistemologies. Science Education, 94, 1008–1026.Battiste, M. (2004). Animating sites of postcolonial education: Indigenous knowledge and the humanities.Canadian Society for the Study of Education Plenary Address, May, 29, 2004.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1107© ISLSBhabha, H. K. (1985). Signs taken for wonders: Questions of ambivalence and authority under a tree outsideDelhi, May 1817. Critical inquiry, 12(1), 144-165.Breiner, J. M., Harkness, S. S., Johnson, C. C., & Koehler, C. M. (2012). A discussion about conceptions ofSTEM in education and partnerships: What is STEM? School Science and Mathematics, 112(1), 3-1.Bybee, R. W. (2013). The case for STEM education: Challenges and opportunities. Arlington, VA: NationalScience Teachers Association.English, L. D. (2016). STEM education K-12: Perspectives on integration. International Journal of STEMEducation, 3(1), 1-8.Esmonde, I., & Booker, A. N. (Eds.). (2017). Power and privilege in the learning sciences: Critical andsociocultural theories of learning. New York, NY: Routledge.Farris, A. V., & Sengupta, P. (2016). Democratizing children’s computation: Learning computational science asaesthetic experience. Educational Theory, 66(1–2), 279–296.Hatcher, A., Bartlett, C., Marshall, A., & Marshall, M. (2009). Two-eyed seeing in the classroom environment:Concepts, approaches, and challenges. Canadian Journal of Science, Mathematics and TechnologyEducation, 9(3), 141-153.Holland, D., Lachicotte Jr., W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds.Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Hwang, J., & Taylor, J. C. (2016). Stemming on STEM: A STEM education framework for students withdisabilities. Journal of Science Education for Students with Disabilities, 19(1), 4.Kim, B., & Kim, M. S. (2010). Distributed emotions in the design of learning technologies. EducationalTechnology, 50(5), 14–18.Marrero, M. M. Gunning, A. E., & Germain-Williams, T. (2014). What is STEM education? Global EducationReview, 1(4), 1-6.McWilliams, J. (2016). Queering participatory design research. Cognition and Instruction, 34(3), 259–274.Montejo, V. D. (2010). Maya intellectual renaissance: Identity, representation, and leadership. Austin, TX:University of Texas Press.Moore, T. J., & Smith, K. A. (2014). Advancing the state of the art of STEM integration. Journal of STEMEducation: Innovations and Research, 15(1), 5-10Philip, T. M., Gupta, A., Elby, A., & Turpen, C. (2017). Why ideology matters for learning: A case ofideological convergence in an engineering ethics classroom discussion on drone warfare. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 1–41.Rahm, J. (2008). Urban youths’ hybrid positioning in science practices at the margin: A look inside a school–museum–scientist partnership project and an after-school science program. Cultural Studies of ScienceEducation, 3(1), 97.Rahm, J., & Moore, J. C. (2016). A case study of long‐term engagement and identity‐in‐practice: Insights intothe STEM pathways of four underrepresented youths. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 53(5),768-801.Rosebery, A. S., Ogonowski, M., DiSchino, M., & Warren, B. (2010). “The coat traps all your body heat”:Heterogeneity as fundamental to learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(3), 322–357.Sen, A. (1997). Editorial: Human capital and human capability. World Development, 25(12), 1959-1961.Shanahan, M.-C. (2009). Identity in science learning: Exploring the attention given to agency and structure instudies of identity. Studies in Science Education, 45(1), 43–64.Shanahan, M.-C., & Nieswandt, M. (2011). Science student role: Evidence of social structural norms specific toschool science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 48, 367–395.Smith, L. T. (2012). Decolonizing methodologies: Research and indigenous peoples. London, UK: Zed Books.Sochacka, N. W., Guyotte, K. W., & Walther, J. (2016). Learning together: A collaborative autoethnographicexploration of STEAM (STEM + the arts) education. Journal of Engineering Education, 105(1), 15-42.Strong, L., Adams, J. D., Bellino, M. E., Pieroni, P., Stoops, J., & Das, A. (2016). Against neoliberal enclosure:Using a critical transdisciplinary approach in science teaching and learning. Mind, Culture, andActivity, 23(3), 225-236.Sumara, D., & Davis, B. (1999). Interrupting heteronormativity: Toward a queer curriculum theory. CurriculumInquiry, 29(2), 191–208.Takeuchi, M. A. (2016). Friendships and group work in linguistically diverse mathematics classrooms:Opportunities to learn for English language learners. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25(3), 411–437.Wong, B. (2015). Careers “From” but not “In” science: Why are aspirations to be a scientist challenging forminority ethnic students? Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 52, 979–1002.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1108© ISLS