Understanding the Role of Embodied Interaction in PreschoolChildren’s Learning About Science in Informal SettingsZayba Ghazali-Mohammed, University of Edinburgh, z.ghazali@ed.ac.ukAbstract: Science researchers and practitioners are often challenged by how best to assess theeffectiveness of science activities in preschool children whose language skills are stillemerging. Yet, research has demonstrated the critical importance of early learning onindividual potential. Building on evidence that movement is tightly intertwined with thinking,this project will investigate how thought and movement link as embodied leaning to enhancescience understanding. During a 3-year period, researcher-practitioner teams across sixmuseum sites will collaboratively investigate links between movement and learning outcomesat selected science exhibits for young learners. The study aims to gather evidence forembodied interactions during science learning and articulate design principles about howmuseum exhibits can most effectively encourage cognitive and physical engagement withscience. Such guidelines are largely absent in the field of informal science learning; hence thisproject seeks transformational change in how learning is understood.Embodied science learningRecent research is suggesting that the way we think is inseparably linked to our body-based experiences in theworld. In other words, our thinking is embodied. Embodied cognition is an umbrella term that refers to thetheory that thought is intertwined with how the body interacts with the world; or more simply put, the idea thatthe mind not only drives the body, but that the body very much influences our thinking. There is currently alarge appetite for understanding how preschool children engage in Science, Technology, Engineering, andMathematics (STEM), particularly around areas of science learning in informal settings (museums etc.).Assessments into preschool children’s conceptual knowledge of science, even assessments in more domaingeneral abilities, are scant (Tolmie, Ghazali-Mohammed, Morris, 2016) meaning science education researchersand practitioners often face the challenges of designing and evaluating learning experiences for very youngchildren whose language skills are still emerging.In this regard, gesture studies have drawn attention to the importance of visual and motor imageryunderpinning thought in domains including science and mathematics that have previously neglected these moreembodied representations (Novack, Goldin-Meadow & Woodward, 2015). Such research has particular valuefor young children whose knowledge is often assessed on linguistic abilities (Brenneman, 2011), despite thelikelihood of developing visual and motor imagery underpinning certain concepts before being able to expresstheir thinking verbally (Kontra, Goldin-Meadow & Beilock, 2012). Given the importance of spatial-dynamicrelationships in science concepts, it is possible that children are able to demonstrate their emergentunderstanding through gesture (Alibali & Nathan, 2011; Sauter, Uttal, Alman, Goldin-Meadow & Levine,2012). Gesture could therefore provide a unique opportunity to capture children’s thinking and offer greaterrecognition of children’s capacity in areas such as science.Hence, building on the evidence that movement is tightly intertwined with thinking, a research projectnamed Move2Learn (M2L) was launched. This is a 3-year internationally collaborative project with theUniversity of Edinburgh, University College London, and the University of Illinois Urbana Champaign. M2L isalso working with six practitioner sites across the UK and USA including the Glasgow Science Centre, ScienceMuseum London, Grounds for Learning, Children’s Museum Indianapolis, Sciencecenter, Ithica New York, andthe Phillip and Patricia Frost Museum of Science in Miami. M2L is funded by the National Science Foundation(USA), The Wellcome Trust (UK) and the Economic and Social Research Council (UK).The focus of M2L is on how embodied cognition theory can inform the design of museum exhibits andeducational programmes. The project seeks to identify key elements or characteristics of informal body-basedscience experiences that do not simply engage children through physical movement, but also support theinternalization and activation of key science concepts as an integral part of early science learning. The researchis also dedicated to advancing the understanding of how preschool children (aged 3-5 years), especially thosefrom under-represented communities, think, learn, and communicate about science. It also focuses onconducting translational research that will change and inform practice in the informal science learning sectorworldwide. Part of this work will involve using immersive technologies, such as Kinect sensors and fitnesstracking watches, given the increasing role these are having in science centres and museums.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1857© ISLSBy challenging traditional accounts of the mind-body relationship, this research is theoreticallysignificant and there are also exciting implications for how we help children learn in areas such as science. It ispossible that we can facilitate learning by designing exhibits that encourage particular ‘meaningful’ actions; wecan also encourage specific gestures that simulate meaningful actions. For these reasons, a design-basedmethodology will be applied in order to address three key research questions:1.What elements of sensory and action experiences are key to informing the design of exhibits that aimto exploit embodied interactions for learning?2. What is the role of bodily enactment /gestures in assessing children's understanding of scienceconcepts?3. What cultural differences in the kinds of embodied engagement emerge across diverse museumsettings?One of the broader aims of the project is to be able to provide feedback to museum exhibit designers about thecore features of an exhibit children respond to, why and how these work, and to use our results as a way toinform the future design of new exhibits using technology. The project is working very closely with museumpractitioners in order to achieve this goal and to better understand how research could inform the design anddevelopment of exhibits to produce favourable outcomes e.g. attract more visitors from disadvantagedbackgrounds.The contribution of the research to the Learning Sciences field is threefold. Firstly, over the course ofthe project, the empirical findings will enhance understanding of the role of the body-based movements inscience concept development within several diverse settings and for numerous science topics. From thesefindings common themes and general principles will be extracted that will provide insights into the nature ofembodied learning and how interactive and communicative experiences (e.g. gesturing) can support thislearning. Second, the project aims to develop a supplementary observation tool that will enable practitionersand researchers to identify and analyse children’s actions, gestures and movements that align with scienceconcepts under study and provide a useful and standardised way of assessing engagement. Finally, by the end ofthis project, principles for intentionally designing exhibits that elicit productive sensorimotor activities will bedocumented. These research-based design guidelines could include how an exhibit elicits movement, promotessocial interaction and collaboration, aligns with a science concept or idea, uses gestures as part of thesignage/interpretation process, prolongs dwell time, or assesses the degree to which adults physically engagewith children.This project will raise awareness of embodied approaches to learning as well as build strongercollaborations between informal science educators and Learning Sciences researchers. It is also likely that wecan develop better ways to find out what children know and understand by looking at how they interact andgesture in formal settings too. This may be particularly valuable for children who are less able to expressthemselves verbally or through writing. Embodied Learning therefore offers exiting new avenues for both thedesign of science exhibits and how we facilitate children’s interaction. It is also increasingly possible to takeadvantage of emerging technologies that can capture and respond to how children move their bodies in informaland formal science environments.ReferencesAlibali, M.W., & Nathan, M.J. (2012): Embodiment in Mathematics Teaching and Learning: Evidence FromLearners' and Teachers' Gestures, Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(2), 247-286Brenneman, K. (2011). Assessment for preschool science learning and learning environments. Early ChildhoodResearch & Practice, 13, 1Kontra, C., Goldin-Meadow, S., & Beilock, S. L. (2012). Embodied learning across the life span. Topics inCognitive Science, 4, 731–73Novack, M.A., Goldin-Meadow, S., & Woodward, A.L. (2015). Learning from gesture: How early does ithappen? Cognition, 142, 138-147Sauter, M., Uttal, D.H., Alman, A.S., Goldin-Meadow, S., & Levine, S.C. (2012). Learning what children knowabout space from looking at their hands: the added value of gesture in spatial communication. Journalof Experimental Child Psychology, 111(4)587-606.Tolmie, A., Ghazali-Mohammed, Z., & Morris, S. (2016). Children’s science learning: a core skills approach.British Journal of Educational Psychology, 86(3), 481-497AcknowledgmentsICLS 2018 Proceedings1858© ISLSThis material is based upon work supported under a collaboration between the National Science Foundation(NSF), the Wellcome Trust, and the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) via a grant from the NSF(NSF grant no. 1646940) and a grant from the Wellcome Trust with ESRC (Wellcome Trust grant no.206205/Z/17/Z).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1859© ISLS