Comparing First- and Third-Person Perspectives in EarlyElementary Learning of Honeybee SystemsKylie Peppler, Naomi Thompson, Joshua Danish, and Armin Moczek,kpeppler@indiana.edu, naothomp@indiana.edu, jdanish@indiana.edu, armin@indiana.eduIndiana UniversitySeth Corrigan, Collective Shift/LRNG, seth@lrng.orgAbstract: While prior literature has demonstrated that even young children can learn aboutcomplex systems using participatory simulations, this study disentangles the impacts of thirdperson perspectives (offered by traditional simulations) and first-person perspectives (offeredby participatory simulations) on children’s development of systems thinking and biologylearning. Through the lens of honeybee nectar collection, we worked with three first-gradeclassrooms assigned to one of three conditions -- instruction through use of a first-personperspective only, third-person perspective only, and integrated instruction -- to engage ideasof complex systems thinking. In each condition, systems concepts were targeted throughinstruction and assessment. The combined and third-person classrooms demonstratedsignificant gains while the first-person classroom showed gains that were not statisticallysignificant, suggesting that third-person perspectives play a critical role in how children learnsystems thinking. This work also puts forth a novel assessment design for young childrenusing multiple-choice questions.IntroductionFrom food webs to traffic to the respiratory system, complex systems are present in every facet of daily life. It isimportant to be able to reason and make decisions based on systems phenomena. However, we know systemsthinking to be a difficult concept for people at all stages to grasp (Hmelo-Silver & Azevedo, 2006; Resnick,1999). From an educational standpoint, the importance of these systems is two-fold. First, complex systems areall around us, prevalent in the natural and social world. Second, systems dynamics are quite generative andapply across content settings and domains despite being challenging for students to initially grasp, they are alsoa set of dynamics that are challenging for students to learn while also being generative and requisite for a deepunderstanding of most any domain of science (see Hmelo-Silver & Azevedo, 2006; Resnick, 1999). Given thevalue of systems understanding, researchers have been working to develop new insights into how we can makethem more approachable. In particular, a number of researchers have proposed that we introduce students tosystems concepts early in their academic careers, potentially transforming lifelong learning trajectories(Thompson, Peppler, & Danish, 2017; Danish, 2014; Assaraf & Orion, 2009; Grotzer & Basca, 2003).One approach to engaging learners with complex systems concepts has been through computersimulations, where children can interact with visual representations of how systems elements interact (e.g.,Danish, 2014; Hmelo-Silver, Eberbach & Jordan, 2014; Grotzer et al., 2015). A second successful approach hasinvolved participatory simulations through which children physically act as agents within a system (Danish,Peppler, Phelps, & Washington, 2011; Colella, 2000). While both approaches have led to demonstrable learninggains for young children, few studies have investigated the unique contribution of each approach to learning. Isone generally more beneficial to young learners? Does each contribute to slightly different learning outcomes orare these approaches interchangeable?Previously, we demonstrated that when combined within a curriculum, these approaches do providestudents with unique opportunities to engage in discussions about the core systems concepts being studied(Danish, Thoroughgood, Thompson & Peppler, 2017; Thompson, Peppler, & Danish, 2017). The presentanalysis builds on this prior work with a similar aim of exploring how the third-person perspective offered bytraditional simulations and the first-person perspective offered by participatory simulations work in differentways to support children’s systems thinking learning. The current project moves beyond our prior work byshifting from one integrated classroom to working with three first grade classrooms in a typical Midwesternelementary school to compare how students learned about systems thinking through the lens of honeybeesacross three conditions: first-person perspective only, third-person perspective only, and integrated (first- andthird-person perspectives combined).Honeybees as a complex system accessible to young childrenICLS 2018 Proceedings512© ISLSThe term “complex systems” is used to describe collections of inter-dependent and inter-related elements wherethe collection, or system, has properties that emerge from both the individual elements and their relationship toeach other (Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006). In the case of honeybees collecting nectar, the initial topic of thecurrent project, we can view the honeybees within a hive, the hive itself, and the flowers that the bees visit tocollect nectar as a system. Honeybees collect nectar from these flowers, converting it into honey within the hive.As scout bees discover good sources of nectar, they return to the hive where they will perform a “bee dance”which indicates the direction and distance to the source of nectar, as well as the quality of the nectar source(Seeley, 1995). Other bees observe this dance and then set out in search of the identified flowers. If they in turnfind an abundant supply of nectar, they return and repeat the dance. The result is not only an incredibly efficientnectar collection operation, but also a highly adaptive one with honeybees ceasing to visit flowers that are nolonger effective sources of nectar, and shifting rapidly to new supplies.What makes this a complex system is not just the fact that it consists of different elements (i.e., thebees, the physical hive where they store their nectar, the flowers which may or may not have nectar), but alsothe inter-relatedness of these elements, and the different levels of analysis at which it operates (Hmelo-Silver &Azevedo, 2006). The different levels of the system are also the first place where we see a clear distinctionbetween experts and novices. Novices tend to view a system such as this in terms of its superficial structures(e.g., the honeybee body parts) and behaviors (e.g., bees do a dance) instead of the functions of these behaviorsand structures (e.g., the dance leads to faster nectar collection) (Hmelo-Silver, Marathe, & Liu, 2007; HmeloSilver & Pfeffer, 2004). One reason why the functions are so elusive may be that these functions often requirean examination of the emergent properties of the system as a whole, rather than the local behaviors. One goal ofthe current project was, therefore, to help move young students from superficial descriptions of the system ofhoneybees collecting nectar to a more nuanced understanding of the functions that these different behaviorsserve for the hive as a whole.One successful approach to examining complex systems in education has been to focus on the processthrough which properties of the system “emerge” from the behaviors or properties of the individual elements oragents (Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006; Wilensky & Resnick, 1999; Wilensky & Stroup, 2000). In the case ofhoneybees collecting nectar, for example, we want to help children understand the way the hive as a whole isefficient at collecting nectar despite the fact that individual bees engage in behaviors that don’t immediatelyappear to be effective, such as spending time dancing (instead of collecting more nectar) or continuing to lookfor new flowers when the hive has already found some that represent a good source of nectar. The concept ofemergence also pushes against the misconception that the queen bee directs all activity in the hive. Priorresearch has consistently shown that this kind of emergent property is even challenging for adolescents andadults to understand, particularly because it requires the ability to shift one’s perspective back and forth between“levels” of analysis, represented here by the individual bees and the hive as a whole (Hmelo-Silver & Azevedo,2006; Wilensky & Resnick, 1999).First- and third-person perspectives on early childhood systems thinkingWhile previous work has shown that although systems thinking is an advanced and complex topic, youngchildren can begin to learn these concepts through play and embodiment (e.g., Danish, 2014; Assaraf & Orion,2009). In particular, the concepts of feedback, a process that leads to increase or decrease in an action orbehavior (Sweeney, 2012); iteration, a repetition and building up of an action or behavior (Wilensky & Resnick,1999); and constraints, properties that make work within a system more difficult (Wilenksy & Reisman, 2006)are crucial systems thinking concepts with which learners may struggle. As such, we built our assessment toaddress these three concepts. Drawing on activity theory (Engeström, 1987), we know that examining how jointactivities are mediated is useful in understanding how learning occurs in these contexts and can provide insightsinto how the organization of activity might support students in engaging with different aspects of a system(Danish, 2014). For example, first person perspectives have proven powerful in helping students to engage withthe constraints within a system, whereas a third person perspective has helped them to see the emergentproperties more clearly (Danish, 2014; Danish et al., 2017). Capitalizing on these prior findings, the key designdifferences between the conditions in our current work is the perspective through which the activities aremediated: First- and third-person perspectives on the system. Table 1 summarizes our expectations for how thedifferent perspectives would support students’ engagement with different aspects of the system.The first-person perspective allows learners to take the role of an actor (i.e., a honeybee) in a system(i.e., collecting nectar from flowers and returning it to the hive). With this view, they can experience first-handindividual constraints that might arise for the actors, and see how other factors such as feedback may causebehavior adaptations in response to those constraints. However, patterns on a larger scale may be more difficultto track from this perspective.ICLS 2018 Proceedings513© ISLSWe hypothesized that a first-person perspective of nectar collection could better illuminate the complexcommunication patterns that happen inside the hive and could be particularly important for our target age group,given the need to learn about complex systems from multiple analytic levels at the same time in order to fullyunderstand the relationship between levels (Hmelo-Silver & Azevedo, 2006). While most prior work onparticipatory simulations has targeted older children, teens, and adults, this body of research fails to take intoaccount the alignment between participatory simulations and the play activities of young children, who arealready apt to explore topics of interest through play-acting and games (c.f., Youngquist & Pataray-Ching,2004). In addition, it has been suggested that an agent-based perspective where students reason about thebehaviors of individual agents within the system increases the potential of students to transfer theirunderstanding to other systems (Goldstone & Wilensky, 2008).Table 1: Hypothesized strengths of each model/perspective in the context of honeybeesTargetedconceptsFirst-person views increasesawareness of:Third-person views increasesawareness of:Integrated first- andthird-person viewsincreases awareness of:HoneybeebehaviorReasons behind individualbehaviors (e.g., why beeswaggle dance)How the hive as a whole adaptsand pursues a single nectarsource.The impact behaviors thatovercome challenges in the1st-person perspectivehave on patterns in the 3rdperson.FeedbackloopsThe benefit one's ownactivities gain from feedback.How feedback from a few beescan impact many more bees.How providing feedbackhelps the hive as a whole,just as receiving feedbackhelps an individual bee.IterativeprocessesHow repeated activities canlook different at the individuallevel, depending on thecontext (e.g., does a flowerstill have nectar).Repetition as a path to betterresults for the hive as a whole,in contrast to a hive without thesame feedback loops andrepeated patterns of behavior.(No expected difference)ConstraintsChallenges individual beesface (e.g., finding flowers withnectar is challenging).Challenges the hive as a wholefaces (e.g., gathering enoughfood to survive through winter).How individual and groupconstraints are interrelated.By contrast, the third-person perspective allows learners to observe the actions of many actors in asystem (i.e., all the honeybees that are searching for nectar) from a bird’s eye view. Here, rather thanexperiencing individual constraints, learners can visualize the larger impacts of constraints on the whole system(e.g., falling nectar levels in winter). The build-up of iterative behaviors into emergent patterns is also moresalient from this removed viewpoint.We hypothesized that the third-person perspective would better provide learners with a view of largescale patterns. Much of the previous work on systems thinking with children has focused on third-personcomputer simulations, often designed by the learners themselves (c.f., Wilensky, 2006; Wilensky & Resnick,1999). As with the first-person work, this often occurs with older children and adults as complex computerprogramming is often involved. Previous work with the third-person simulation discussed here has shownsuccess in helping very young children begin engaging with complex systems through the lens of honeybeehives (Danish, 2014). This view from the outside allows learners to track actions and outcomes and makeconnections to smaller scale behaviors that can be difficult to notice from a first-person perspective. It is alsoideal for discussing iteration as students watch actions repeat and build.Guiding theory of learning: Activity TheoryHere, we designed for learning by drawing on Activity Theory (Engeström, 1987; Engestrom, 2008), atheoretical framework grounded in the work of Vygotsky (1978) that focuses on learning as a mediated, socialICLS 2018 Proceedings514© ISLSprocess where learners move toward a shared goal. Activity theory provides ways to attend to the rules, tools,communities, and divisions of labor that shape the learning process. These mediators shape and define learners’interactions with each other, the technology, and the learning goal. Using this theoretical perspective, we canfocus on these intersections and the roles they play as children generate and transform their ideas about howsystems work. From this perspective, it is understood that learning is socially mediated (see Vygotsky, 1987;Greeno, 2006). This informs the focus throughout the curriculum on group discussions and debrief. Thecontributions of individuals in a classroom impact the learning of the group as a whole, as well as individualstudents. In designing the curriculum, we used activity theory as a guiding theory for the design, payingparticular attention to the system elements to build parity across the three conditions. Regardless of condition,the shared goals of each classroom were the same: to collect as much nectar as possible (either themselves orthrough a computer simulation), and to gain new understandings about honeybees along the way. The maindifference across conditions was the perspective through which the activity was mediated.General design-based research approach and research questionsOur general approach to the overarching work was a Design-Based Research paradigm (The Design-BasedResearch Collective, 2003) where we iterated on the designs of our intervention and assessments until we wereable to conduct the present quasi-experimental study. The current study was designed to further refine ourunderstanding of the differential contributions of first- and third-person perspectives on systems learning as wellas the features of our designs that appear to support this learning. In order to accomplish this, we developedconjectures during our design process about what specific features of the tools we are developing we believe ledto student exploration of or understanding of particular aspects of the content and then evaluate thoseconjectures as part of our summative evaluation (Sandoval, 2004). Throughout the design and implementationprocess, we worked regularly with children and teachers as co-designers, mutually determining the purpose,value, and interpretation of our software prototypes, physical materials, and curricular approach (Nelson, 2000).Application of this iterative process allowed the designs to progressively improve over the course of fiveiterations of technology and curriculum. To ensure that the proposed activity system effectively complementscurricular and practical realities, we consult with practitioners to inform our design and development throughoutthe process.We look to answer the questions: (1) How do children’s performances on a systems thinkingassessment change before and after engaging in the BeeSim curriculum? (2) How do these changes differbetween experiencing the curriculum through a first-person lens, a third-person lens, or a combination of thetwo? (3) How might first- and third-person perspectives work together and separately to support systemsthinking learning?The BeeSim designsAll three conditions in this study took place over about 12 days, or in about 8 to 9 hours of activity. In eachclassroom, we began by interviewing a sample of the students for a qualitative assessment of learning; thisinterview was repeated at the end of the implementation. Each implementation also began and ended with a 20question multiple-choice assessment administered through a clicker system.We wrote three versions of the BeeSim curriculum corresponding with the three conditions. Theparticipating classroom teachers were involved in the curriculum design process and provided useful insightsinto classroom appropriateness. Each version of the curriculum followed the same progression from simple tomore complex topics, introducing more nuanced accounts of systems thinking concepts -- feedback, constraints,and iteration -- along the way. Each condition began by introducing the basics of the honeybee body, thenmoved to the basics of bee nectar collection in a single hive, introduced competition by comparing two hives,introduced the waggle dance as the feedback mechanism, explored how feedback and system constraints wererelated, and considered the role of negative feedback (or the lack thereof). The typical pattern for a sessionbegan with teacher-led recaps and soliciting student predictions, was followed by the planned simulation play,and ended with a teacher-led debrief.In the first-person condition, the planned simulation activity involved students using electronic beepuppets to collect nectar from larger than life flowers placed around a classroom. Large swaths of yellow fabrichung from the ceiling, creating “hive” spaces where students waited for their turn in the field. RFID tags in theflowers could be read by sensors in the bee puppets’ heads, allowing information to be transmitted between thebee and a central server. Lights on the bee’s body indicated how much nectar it was holding, how much energyit had, and the quality of a flower when checked. The curriculum progressed as indicated above, all framedthrough the first-person perspective. While students were occasionally asked about what an occurrence mightmean for “the whole hive” or to think about more than just their individual bees, no activities or directICLS 2018 Proceedings515© ISLSinformation was given from a third-person perspective in order to separate how first-person learning activitiesimpact learning about both first- and third-person perspectives.In the third-person condition, the planned simulation activity involved students engaging with acomputer simulation that represented idealized behaviors of honeybee hives. The interface could show eitherone or two hives. To compare patterns and the effects of the waggle dance, one hive could be set to “not dance”while the other was set “with dancing.” With all other variables held constant, students could observe and makepredictions about the hives’ differences. Other adjustable variables included flower number, position, andquality. The curriculum progressed as indicated above, all framed through the third-person perspective. Whilestudents were occasionally asked about what an occurrence might mean for an individual bee, no activities ordirect information was given from a first-person perspective in order to separate how third-person learningactivities impact learning about both third and first-person perspectives.The integrated condition incorporated parts of both the first- and third-person conditions. Students bothplayed with electronic bee puppets and engaged with a computer simulation. We identified the form ofsimulation -- 1st person or 3rd person -- that we felt, based on prior experience, was most likely to engagestudents productively with the concept. For example, the first-person bee puppets were chosen to introduce thewaggle dance because it would allow students to directly experience the role of the dance, whereas ourexperience suggested that students were more likely to see aggregate patterns through the third personsimulation. Children in this condition also had access to a separate “playback” technology that allowed themovements of the bee puppets between the flowers and the hives to be played back in real time for the studentsto reflect upon. This provided an experience that was truly a blend of first- and third-person perspectives, as thebees represented the children’s individual actions, but were treated as a bird’s eye view.Participants and data sourcesThe project took place in a public school in a mid-sized, midwestern city. The school population is 86.6% white,with 41.8% receiving free or reduced lunches. The school, and our particular classrooms were evenly split interms of gender. Data collection occurred in the schools three first grade classrooms; we worked closely witheach teacher who led activities and approached the curriculum in ways appropriate for her students. Wecompared performance and change across two time points for the three conditions: first-person (n= 19), thirdperson (n=21), and integrated (n=20) perspectives. To compare the differences between the three conditions, wecollected multiple forms of observation and assessment data. All sessions were video and audio recorded. Allstudents took two pre- and post-assessments before and after the 12 day intervention. The first asked students todraw how bees get food. The second was a 20-question multiple-choice assessment given through a clickersystem. Over three design and testing iterations, we created this assessment to ask eight “simple” biology-basedquestions (e.g.,This forager bee just came out of the beehive. Its job is to collect nectar. What will it do next?)and twelve “complex” systems-based questions (e.g.,This bee saw a waggle dance that said this flower had alot of great nectar, but all the nectar was gone when it got there! If other bees saw the same waggle dance, whatwould they do?). All questions and answer options were read out loud at least twice to alleviate concerns aboutvarying reading levels. It is important to note that due to concerns of test fatigue with young students -- mostfirst grade students do not often take multiple-choice assessments -- we were unable to tease apart some of themore nuanced concepts we hypothesized would differ across conditions. Also, a random sample of 20% fromeach condition was chosen to participate in pre- and post-interviews to provide qualitative evidence ofunderstanding.This paper focuses on the results from the pre- and post- multiple-choice questions. We used a latentvariable modeling approach (Skrondal and Rabe-Hasketh, 2004), employing the unidimensional Rasch model toestimate impacts of the BeeSim instructional content. Two general rounds of analysis are presented. The firstround of analysis groups all students regardless of condition, responding to RQ1. The second round of analysis– treatment specific analysis - disaggregates students into their respective condition groups in order to facilitatea three-way comparison of the mean student growth for each group across the pre-test and post-test, respondingto RQ2. Use of the Rasch model employs students’ response vectors for the respective assessments in order toestimate student abilities measured in logits, and standard errors. Using students’ resulting parameter estimatesat pre-test and post-test, and a difference-in-differences, we employed the simple t-test in order to determine thesignificance of change in performance from the pre- to post-assessments.ResultsResults from a total of 60 students were used in the analysis. A total of three students were dropped from theanalysis because they were missing responses to more than half of the test items at pre-test and post-test. Asummary of the following results can be found in Table 2 below.ICLS 2018 Proceedings516© ISLSWhen all three conditions were grouped together (N = 60), the mean student ability estimate at pre-testwas -0.472 logits with a standard deviation of 0.657. The mean standard error for the pre-test ability estimatesacross the sample, is 0.526 logits. By comparison, the mean student ability at post-test was +0.188 logits with astandard deviation of 1.351 logits, and an average standard error of 0.606 logits. Thus, ability estimates at posttest were higher on average and more dispersed (exhibited a larger variability across the sample) than those atpre-test. Use of a paired sample t-test confirms that the difference in ability estimates is significant. Thedifference in mean ability estimates between pre-test and post-test administrations is more than half of a logit,+0.660 logits, with t = 3.897 (Confidence Interval: 0.321, 0.999) and p < 0.0001. Using Cohen’s d to calculatethe associated effect size, this difference in means is associated with an effect size of 0.621 – appropriatelycategorized as a ‘medium’ sized effect. These results address RQ1 which asked about general gains across allconditions on the systems thinking pre- and post-measure.To address RQ2, we also compared the performance of each condition. As a first step, students’ abilityestimates across the three groups were compared to ensure they were equivalent. In each case the differences inthe three groups’ mean ability estimates were not statistically significant (p > 0.05). This supports the claim thatthe three groups were equivalent with regard to their ability estimates at pre-test, though we note it does notguarantee that the groups were equivalent with regard to other baseline characteristics.On average, students in the classroom receiving the first-person condition (n = 19) did not exhibitsignificantly different abilities between the pre-test and the post-test administrations of the BeeSim assessment.At pre-test, the mean ability estimate of the group was -0.291 logits with a standard deviation of 0.742 and amean standard error of 0.533 logits. At post-test, the mean ability estimate was -0.103 logits with a standarddeviation of 1.479 and a mean standard error of 0.631 logits. Application of the t-test with 18 degrees offreedom resulted in t = 0.650 and p < 0.523.In the third-person condition (n = 21) students had significantly higher ability estimates at post-testthan at pre-test. At pre-test, the mean ability estimate for this group was -0.457 logits with a standard deviationof 0.695 and a mean standard error of 0.152. The mean ability estimate at post-test was 0.470 logits with astandard deviation of 1.548 and a mean standard error of 0.338 logits. Use of the t-test resulted in t = 2.706 with20 degrees of freedom, and p < 0.05. Applying the function for Cohen’s d, there was a medium estimated effectsize found of 0.77.The largest change in ability estimates across the three groups was exhibited by students in theintegrated condition (n = 20). Among these students, the average ability estimate at pre-test was -0.658 logits.Those estimates have a standard deviation of 0.492 and a mean standard error of 0.110 logits. At post-test, themean ability score for the group had risen to +0.169 logits with a standard deviation of 0.949 and a meanstandard error of 0.212. The t-test results were statistically significant with t = 3.882 with 19 degrees of freedomand p < 0.001. The magnitude of the effect was large with Cohen’s d = 1.09.Table 2: T-test results for change from pre- to post-assessmentConditionNPre(Logits)Post(Logits)Change(Logits)Cohen’s dAll60-0.4720.1880.66 (p <.001)0.621First-Person19-0.291-0.1030.188 (p < .5)NAThird-Person21-0.4570.4700.927 (p < .05)0.77Integrated20-0.6580.1690.827 (p < .01)1.09Additionally, we categorized the multiple-choice items into “simple” and “complex.” Simple itemswere those pertaining to non-systems thinking content, such as honeybee biology (e.g., honeybees have a head,thorax and abdomen) or behaviors (e.g., honeybees take on different jobs and responsibilities throughout theirlifecycle). Complex questions addressed the systems thinking concepts feedback, constraints, and iteration. Wecalculated the average percentage of correct answers for each category and compared the three conditions. Theintegrated condition had the largest gain on the simple items, moving from 43.55% correct to 63.29% correct.ICLS 2018 Proceedings517© ISLSThe Simulation condition had the largest gain on the complex items, moving from 46.67% correct to 59.34%correct. See Table 3 for a summary of these results.Table 3: Change in average percent correct from pre- to postSimple PreSimple PostGainComplex PreComplex PostGainFirst- Person48.61%49.47%0.86%42.59%49.62%7.03%Third- Person46.67%59.34%12.68%36.90%55.20%18.29%Integrated43.55%63.29%19.74%30.76%46.29%15.53%Conclusion and discussionThese findings suggest the third-person and integrated conditions provided better systems thinking learningoutcomes, although all three conditions made gains from the pre- to post-assessment. Students in the thirdperson condition also performed best on the complex items, although the gain was only slightly more than theintegrated condition. While this suggests the third-person perspective might be the most important, our ongoingqualitative analyses are beginning to indicate that the first-person perspective supports some importantconversations and thus learning gains that are not yet measured through this multiple-choice assessment thatmay continue to complexify these early findings.In addition to these results on the multiple-choice assessment, we hypothesize that moving back andforth between first- and third-person perspectives, as in the integrated condition, provides some additionalinsight and experiences not reflected in the multiple-choice scores. In our presentation, we will also sharefurther analyses of the other assessment items as well as the classroom video data to reveal the nuancesprovided by the three conditions.Scholarly significanceThis work suggests three main outcomes and implications for systems thinking education research. First, earlyelementary students are capable of learning systems thinking concepts, particularly through third-personperspectives. This is particularly compelling given the costs and easy scalability of digital simulations such asthese. It may seem intuitive that children in this age range would have difficulty reasoning about systems froman outside perspective, but our work demonstrates that this viewpoint was especially beneficial for learningoutcomes. This is important for early childhood educators in particular, as freely-available curriculum and toolsdeveloped for the third-person perspective could help educators begin to introduce systems thinking earlier andmore often, through embodied, playful techniques and familiar, high-quality biology content.Second, there seem to be additional benefits to engaging in a system through multiple perspectives.Students in the integrated condition did significantly better on the post-assessment than the pre- with an effectsize larger than the third-person condition. This suggests that further research and design iterations may morefully utilize the affordances of moving back and forth between first- and third-person perspectives. That said,the current research seems to locate the driving factor for these gains, particularly in learning about complexity,are fueled by third person perspectives. As a result, future iterations of the BeeSim platform is working toinvestigate real-time data visualizations of first-person player activity through our work in a new system, calledAntSim, through a uniquely developed indoor positioning system. This work is the focal point of our futureresearch and publications. One hypothesis that we have around why third person perspectives may be drivingthese learning outcomes is that is to quicker to watch multiple rounds of bees foraging for nectar and to see theemerging behaviors via a computer simulations (and can even be played in a fast forward fashion) than to playthe participatory simulation bee puppet game with a group and develop the sufficient expertise in the game sothat the emergent patterns can be seen in the same way. Consequently, the third-person perspective conditionmay have had more time to debrief more fully and deeply engage the content across more cycles of play than inperson groups. Future studies may wish to design comparisons between first and third person perspectives withthis limitation of the group comparisons in mind. Integrated maybe didn’t get to dive as deep into simulation aswould have been necessary for better resultsICLS 2018 Proceedings518© ISLSLastly, further research should continue to tease apart complex and simple concepts in systemsthinking and additional types of systems thinking content as it may be that emergence is particularly well suitedfor third person perspectives while other systems thinking concepts may be more well-suited for first-personperspectives. The differences in performance between the conditions on these simple and complex measuressuggests that first- and third-person perspectives may impact levels of systems thinking differently. Definingthese differing impacts more fully may have implications for the design and progression of systems thinkingcurriculum in the future.ReferencesAssaraf, O. B.-Z., & Orion, N. (2010). System thinking skills at the elementary school level. Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching, 47(5), 540–563.Colella, V. (2000). Participatory Simulations: Building Collaborative Understanding Through ImmersiveDynamic Modeling. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 471–500.Danish, J. A. (2014). Applying an activity theory lens to designing instruction for learning about the structure,behavior, and function of a honeybee system. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 23(2), 100-148.Danish, J. A., Peppler, K., Phelps, D., & Washington, D. (2011). Life in the hive: Supporting inquiry intocomplexity within the zone of proximal development. Journal of science education and technology,20(5), 454-467.Danish, J., Thoroughgood, L., Thompson, N., Peppler, K. (2017, April). BeeSim: Re-Mediating Students’Engagement with Honeybees Collecting Nectar from a First and Third-Person Perspective.Presentation at 2017 Annual Meeting of AERA, San Antonio, TX.Engestrom,Y.(1987).Learningbyexpanding:Anactivity-theoreticalapproachtodevelopmental research. Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit Oy.Grotzer, T. A., & Bell Basca, B. (2003). How does grasping the underlying causal structures of ecosystemsimpactstudents’understanding?JournalofBiologicalEducation,38,16–29.doi:10.1080/00219266.2003.9655891Grotzer, T. A., Powell, M. M., Derbiszewska, K. M., Courter, C. J., Kamarainen, A. M., Metcalf, S. J., & Dede,C. J. (2015). Turning transfer inside out: The affordances of virtual worlds and mobile devices in realworld contexts for teaching about causality across time and distance in ecosystems. Technology,Knowledge and Learning, 20(1), 43-69.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Azevedo, R. (2006). Understanding complex systems: Some core challenges. Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 15, 53–62.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Eberbach, C., & Jordan, R. (2014). Technology-Supported Inquiry for Learning aboutAquatic Ecosystems. Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science & Technology Education, 10(5), 405413.Resnick, M. (1999). Decentralized modeling and decentralized thinking. In W. Feurzeig & N. Roberts (Eds.),Modeling and simulation in precollege science and mathematics (pp. 114–137). New York, NY:Springer.Seeley, T. D. (1995). The wisdom of the hive: The social physiology of honey bee colonies. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Sweeney, L. B. (2012). Learning to Connect the Dots: Developing Children’s Systems Literacy. Solutions, 5(3),55–62.Thompson, N., Peppler, K., & Danish, J. (2017). Designing BioSim: Playfully encouraging systems thinking inyoung children. In Zheng, R. & Gardner, M. (Eds.), Handbook of research on serious games foreducational applications, Ch.7 (pp. 149-167). Hershey, PA: IGI Global.Wilensky, U., & Reisman, K. (2006). Thinking Like a Wolf, a Sheep, or a Firefly: Learning Biology ThroughConstructing and Testing Computational Theories—An Embodied Modeling Approach. Cognition andInstruction, 24(2), 171-209.Wilensky, U., & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in levels: A dynamic systems approach to making sense of theworld. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 8(1), 3–19.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation underGrant No. 1324047 awarded to Kylie Peppler, Joshua Danish, and Armin Moczek. Any opinions, findings,and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do notnecessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. Thank you to Janis Watson and the manyteachers and students who made this work possible.ICLS 2018 Proceedings519© ISLS