Designing Dialogues on Writing and College Readiness AcrossEducational InstitutionsAlecia Marie Magnifico, University of New Hampshire, alecia.magnifico@unh.eduChristina Ortmeier-Hooper, University of New Hampshire, christina.ortmeier@unh.eduAbstract: College readiness, particularly with regard to academic writing, has become centralto education policy. While this transition seems a natural point where college professors andsecondary teachers might build the mutual understandings that “readiness” suggests, littlecontact occurs. This tendency is unfortunate, because both groups contribute expertise andinsight about students’ writing needs. In order to build grounded knowledge about collegewriters and transitions, we invited a group of secondary English teachers and college writinginstructors to a series of School-University Dialogues. This paper reports on the successes andchallenges of this affinity-space-based collaboration, examining its emergent design featuresover time, as well as evidence of its ability to effect change in teachers’ practices and roles.IntroductionCollege readiness, particularly with regard to academic writing, has become central to federal and state-leveleducation policies. National foundations, standards consortia, and state-level education agencies have worked todevelop assessments and standards aimed at college and career readiness for all students. Too often, teachers siton the sidelines of these conversations about college readiness and writing across high school and college levels.Even while the transition between high school and college seems a natural point where college and secondaryteachers might collaborate to build the mutual understandings that “readiness” suggests, little contact occurs(Alsup, 2001; Alsup, Bush, Brockman, & Letcher, 2011). When contact does occur, professors and policy-makersoften blame secondary teachers for students’ poor writing and preparation (e.g. Goldstein, 2017; Sanoff, 2006).Secondary teachers, however, possess valuable knowledge about student writing even if the standardizedassessments to which their teaching often responds do not line up well with disciplinary models of college writing.Similarly, college professors understand the demands of the extended, theoretical, researched writing that studentsmust complete in college (Fanetti, Bushrow, & DeWeese, 2010). We wondered if bringing representatives of thesegroups together to build local knowledge about first-year college writers and college transitions would producemore grounded understandings. We invited a group of local English teachers and college writing instructors to aseries of School-University Dialogues. Rather than one-time, top-down, expert-led professional development, wedesigned the Dialogues to respect the expertise of all teachers and to reflect a wide swath of teaching experiences.Literature review: Models for professional development and learningIn secondary schools, “professional learning communities” (PLCs) have become widespread models for teacherlearning (e.g. DuFour, 2007; Vescio, Ross, & Adams, 2008). PLCs, often organized in reaction to traditional, topdown professional development, build teacher learning “communities of practice” (Lave & Wenger, 1991). Theresults of implementing such structures, however, are diverse and can be equally restrictive for teacher participants(DuFour, 2007; Lock 2006). For instance, many PLCs are school- or team-wide and devised to study a topicconsidered important by administration leaders. As early as 2001, Grossman, Wineburg, and Woolworthcautioned that “community,” as applied to school structures like classrooms and teacher organizations, “has lostits meaning” (p. 943). These structures, in other words, may or may not be open to equitable participation.In contrast, learning scientists have embraced the concept of researchers working alongside ofpractitioners and administrators to design professional development and learning interventions. Rather than a topdown model, Penuel, Roschelle, and Shechtman’s (2007) articulation of co-design positions teachers as centrallyimportant designers of research solutions to instructional problems. Similarly, Spillane, Halverson, & Diamond(2004) have considered principles of distributed leadership in which school leaders actively collaborate in orderto accomplish diffused tasks like professional development, instructional (re)design, and reform. Broader conceptsof design-based implementation research (Penuel, Fishman, Cheng, & Sabelli, 2011) argue that in order tosuccessfully implement educational interventions (particularly at scale), collaborative work that draws on thepractical expertise of researchers, administrators, and practitioners is necessary, even though such negotiation isoften challenging due to the disparate experiences and worldviews of various members (see also Penuel,Roschelle, & Shechtman, 2007).More recently, school districts have paired with research organizations in research-practice partnerships(RPPs) where stakeholders investigate questions, design interventions, and gather data together (Coburn, Penuel,ICLS 2018 Proceedings824© ISLS& Geil, 2013; Penuel, Coburn, & Gallagher, 2013). RPPs are often large, grouping diverse colleagues includingteachers, administrators, policymakers, and researchers. This work typically examines common features of suchmodels: place-based, long-term inquiry; focus on instructional problems; and the production of findings that mightnot be possible without diverse partners. RPPs bring together multiple values, cultures, and complexcollaborations, though research suggests teachers’ input is sometimes marginalized in such partnerships.Existing research on professional or design partnerships in the area of writing and college readinessamong college writing faculty, English education, and secondary teachers, however, has been limited. Formal andinformal interaction, collaboration, and research across high schools and colleges is rare, and the divide betweencollege writing programs and secondary teacher education has been clearly documented (Alsup, 2001; Alsup, etal., 2011). When collaborative conversations between high school and college teachers do occur, they are oftenshort-term (Strachan, 2002; Donahue, 2007; Crank, 2012). In other words, in the realm of ELA/writing teaching,such initiatives have so far failed to build extended research-practice partnerships (Coburn, Penuel, & Geil, 2013)that might create sustainable programs that ease high school students’ transitions to college.The design of dialoguesAs we began to plan the first meeting of the School-University Dialogues, one story echoed. Years before we’deven considered starting the discussion, several colleagues had been asked to talk with high school teachers aboutcollege preparation. They’d arrived in an auditorium and were appalled when they were seated on the stage,literally above the high school teachers, and, as representatives of “higher education,” asked to answer questionsabout what schools could do better. Avoiding such situations and metaphors became our guiding principle.Figure 1. Addressing disconnects between college and high school through mutual dialogue.Our model, shown in Figure 1, is explicitly dialogic and focuses on teaching writing across the highschool–college divide. We wanted the resulting professional learning to respect the expertise of all of the teachersin the room. As such, though we did want to engage in active exploration and honor the various institutional andsociocultural contexts from which members come, we rejected the idea of working from a communities of practiceframework (Lave & Wenger, 1991). Communities of practice are simply too intertwined with individual learningtrajectories that develop from novice to expert. Rather, in our network of teachers, everyone was simultaneouslyan expert teacher in her own institutional context and a novice teacher in the other institutional context, and wouldlikely make both legitimate peripheral moves and central ones depending on the current topic of discussion. Wethus turned to Gee’s (2004, 2017) idea of affinity spaces to provide more equitable grounding. This work explicitlyreconceptualizes learning as residing in spaces, not in individuals—an important shift towards understanding howthe development of expertise is necessarily dispersed and distributed in collaborative networks.Affinity spaces are sites of informal learning where groups with diverse expertise interact around a“common endeavor” (Gee, 2004, p. 85). We use this concept to place writing teachers’ and researchers’ interestson the same level, to disrupt traditional boundaries, to examine expertise as distributed across people andinstitutions, and to build “dialogues” around a joint interest. While many scholars have theorized affinity spacesprimarily as online entities (e.g. Lammers, Curwood, & Magnifico, 2012), we see this terminology as useful fordescribing and designing ongoing interactions among otherwise-disconnected teachers. Whereas high school andcollege writing teachers have historically talked about each others’ institutions in conversations about “collegereadiness,” they have rarely connected in person (Strachan, 2002). Conceptualizing this group as an affinity spacefocuses our activity on cultivating lateral, non-hierarchal discussions across institutions and individuals.MethodsICLS 2018 Proceedings825© ISLSRationale and research questionsBy conceptualizing Dialogues as an affinity space and viewing professional learning as equitable, collaborative,and distributed, we made a commitment as leaders to revise its structures over time, adjusting to the needs of thegroup. In other words, we knew that this design would remain emergent and contingent; thus it became importantto employ practitioner-based action research methods (e.g. Chiseri-Strater & Sunstein, 2006) to capture changesand learning over time. Similar to Cole and Packer’s (2016) study of the 5th Dimension, sustainability was moreimportant to us than maintaining a particular design or structure, and the input of Dialogues members in theongoing design of the space and our collaborative research has been vital. As such, we cannot document learningin Dialogues merely by describing members’ work in meetings or analyzing the various products and presentationsthat participants have made over time. Here, we follow the work that Cole and Packer (2016), Curwood (2013),Fields and Kafai (2009), and Lammers (2016) have done to examine the evolution of learning practices, groupstructures, and overall designs over time. We adapt the analysis of “key moments” in participants’ learning(Halverson & Gibbons, 2009) to the necessary shifts that we made to the design of Dialogues in collaborationwith our members, and we ask the following research questions: (1) What evidence do we have that this spacemattered to participants’ teaching practices? (2) What evidence do we have that the Dialogues design was able tocreate new roles, structures, relationships, or knowledge? How do we know that design adaptations were effective?In asking these questions, we aim to articulate the adaptive design structures of Dialogues and considerwhen similar “key moments” or key shifts might become necessary in the life of similar groups and partnerships.ParticipantsWhile 22 college professors and high school teachers have participated in Dialogues meetings over the years, herewe focus on the 13 members who have sustained participation through all of the group’s phases and have beenconsistent attendees. (All names are pseudonyms except ours, and we plan to eventually look more closely atmembers who have ceased participation. They, too, are important in affinity spaces.) The members listed belowin Table 1 represent the teams who have developed each of the four current cross-institutional research projects:Table 1: Teams who have developed each of the four current cross-institutional research projectsPseudonymAleciaChristinaKaseyMarieEllenNatalieColleenLaraJanetMelissaLindsaySamCaitlinRoleCo-director of Dialogues, English Teacher EducatorCo-director of Dialogues, Director of CompositionHigh school English teacherHigh school English teacherHigh school English teacherHigh school English teacherHigh school librarian, at-risk English teacherHigh school ESL teacherCollege composition teacherCollege composition teacherCollege composition teacher, English teacher educatorCollege composition teacher, graduate student, project assistantCollege ESL composition teacher, graduate studentAttendance2014-current2014-current2014-current2015-current2014-current2014-current2014-current2015-current2014-7/20172014-current2014-current2015-current2015-currentDataAnalyses were conducted using multiple artifacts including: field notes, meeting agendas, meeting transcripts,lpost-meeting debriefs, post-event surveys, and participant-created presentations, chapters, and narratives. For thepurposes of this analysis, we were interested in macro-level shifts and structures of Dialogues, and how we adaptedthe activity over time to sustain participation. We engaged in open-ended thematic analysis (e.g. Boyatzis, 1998)of observational data and field notes on Dialogues meetings, as well as the artifacts listed above. From thisanalysis, three “key moments” where reorganizations of activity became necessary to respond to memberslearning and research interests emerged. These phases describe macro-level evolutions over time, whereas weplan to engage in further micro-level analyses in the future to further tease out these themes and findings.FindingsThe findings we present here focus first on the long narrative arc and macro-level results of this partnership. Toprovide context for readers, we first show the overall progression of “common endeavors” in which we haveICLS 2018 Proceedings826© ISLSengaged, and how members of the partnership have used their participation in the collaboration to begin projectsin their own classrooms and school buildings. We then analyze three “key moments,” or phases, in the design ofDialogues, to show how we made design changes to respond to the interests and the needs of the participants.The overall picture: Building common and research-driven endeavorsOur first agenda included questions to foster a collaborative, distributed discussion: “What do we share? What arecommon concerns? What are some experiences/ideas about writing that we all value as writing teachers? Whatare the questions that are still on the table?” (April, 2014). We wanted every teacher’s expertise to be valued.In the participants’ reactions and field notes from this initial meeting, we learned that everyone wantedto keep talking. One high school teacher noted surprise: “I assumed it would be…more of a lecture from thecollege profs. This was so much more than what I expected.” Another high school teacher asked “could we hearfrom current [college] students at some point?” A college teacher noted that she was thinking about “how we havethe same challenges across the board… and so much to learn from one another” about teaching writing. In theApril, 2014 meeting, we began a list of topics for future discussions, centering ideas for learning from each other.Beginning in October, 2014, we designed a system for high school teachers and college professors tolearn from each other: Over two meetings, we brainstormed research topics and questions about writing teaching.Then, as leaders, we created a “speed dating” activity, asking participants to rotate to a variety of topics anddiscuss which ones they were interested in taking forward into a larger project. Topics included “revision andediting,” “creating motivation to write,” “workshop writing or peer conferencing,” and a space for further ideas(October 2014). By Spring 2015, four topic groups of high school and college teachers had emerged and coalesced:1. Revision (two high school teachers, one Composition instructor, Alecia)2. Second-language writers (one high school teacher, one ESL Composition instructor, Christina)3. Students’ attitudes towards research (one high school teacher, one Composition instructor, oneComposition graduate student and instructor)4. Digital and multimodal writing (two high school teachers, one Composition instructor)During the next two years, members of these research collaborations worked together to visit each other’sclassrooms, design action research studies, collect data (including surveys, interviews, and artifacts), analyze thesedata, and present this work in public, first at a University-level colloquium and later at the National Conventionof Teachers of English (NCTE) conference. All four of these initial teams (representing 13 participants altogether,including Alecia and Christina) successfully completed cross-institutional, action research studies. Each grouphas since completed a full draft of a chapter detailing these findings, and together, we are writing a book proposalto highlight the Dialogues partnership. In the following sections, we detail the phases of the partnership, showingthe deliberate and emergent design choices and the ways in which participants responded to evolutions over time.Phase 1: Brokering access and building curiosity through visceral experienceDialogues began with building curiosity and brokering access to a range of students and teaching experiences.Bringing college professors and secondary teachers together for lunch and conversation was the centerpiece ofthis phase, but from the beginning, we wanted to open the institutional doors. At first, we used Dialogues meetingsto host panels on college transitions and writing with first-year college students and experienced professionals. Ineach meeting, we included time for open discussions, for listening to a variety of experiences, and for consideringteaching and learning practices across the settings. This curiosity building became our first common endeavor.Brokering access to studentsField notes and transcripts demonstrate that participants used the cross-institutional conversations to see and thinkbeyond their own settings. In this excerpt from December, 2014, high school teachers asked questions of firstyear college students to project forward and understand the writing preparation that their own students need, andcollege professors considered how to tease out and understand their students’ prior knowledge from high schools:Janet: We try to do a questionnaire at the beginning of [Composition] to try to learn wherestudents are coming from with writing. What are the best questions to ask [students] about theirwriting background?Student 1: What was the most meaningful writing assignment you did in HS? And why? Whatwas the least valuable writing assignment you did in HS?Student 2: Those are good. What kinds of writing make you feel comfortable or uncomfortable?What do you want to learn about writing?ICLS 2018 Proceedings827© ISLSEllen: What do you wish your HS teachers would have taught you?Student 3: Revision. I only did one paper in HS where there were revisions.Student 2: Talking about writing. More discussion about why are you writing what you’re writing.(12/12/2014 Field Notes)Because the first year students had been high school students recently, conversations with them made the collegetransition—and a number of elements that are typically obscured from college professors’ and high schoolteachers’ vision—very tangible. Such experiences helped to motivate the necessity of cross-institutional learning.Brokering access to classrooms across settingsIn addition to building curiosity, direct social contact allowed us to broker access to members’ classrooms andstudents to extend the discussion. We opened up university Composition classrooms to Dialogues secondaryteachers, and we encouraged secondary teachers to likewise welcome Dialogues professors. To normalize thesevisits, we visited classrooms ourselves when invited. Long before we planned research projects, these crossinstitutional visits enabled learning about college and secondary writing with observation and visceral experience.For example, Sam, a graduate student and Composition instructor, reflected on differences across settingsand how “being back in a high school after a decade or so makes everything feel foreign to me” (Sam, narrative).Two ESL teachers, one secondary and one college, learned about the deep differences in their students and settingsby visiting each others’ classrooms, and subsequently decided to introduce their students to each other:Lara’s students were in her classroom for one period each day, but for the rest of the day, they…interacted with mainstream students […] Many had been in the U.S. for enough time and withenough purpose to feel that this country was their home. […] In my classroom (IntensiveEnglish), the students were only enrolled in English language classes [...] They identified ascitizens of their home countries and temporary residents of the U.S. (Caitlin, narrative).Overall, in-person access to multiple teaching settings and practices effected curiosity. In these initial meetingsand classroom visits, Dialogues participants began to think across each others’ settings, and to articulate ideasabout their writing students. Their expertise as writing teachers, and as teacher-learners, began to grow as theyrealized how much their institution’s norms and practices colored the ways in which they understood teaching.Phase 2: Building research questions and doing action researchIn Phase 2 of Dialogues, we began to encourage all of the members to follow their emerging interests and questionsin order to craft small cross-institutional action research projects. Rather than considering answers through opendiscussions, we settled on articulating honest questions and active areas of interest and inquiry in the fields ofComposition and English Education. These questions began to lead into research.Cross-institutional action research: Opportunities and tensionsInitially, in October 2014, we “speed dated” during a meeting as a way to articulate interests and surface questions.As questions coalesced around several topics, we suggested a new common endeavor—cross-institutionalresearch—to continue learning from each other and move our work forward. We wrote an internal grant to fundDialogues meetings and a local research colloquium, and hoped that our intuition about research was correct. Wetook up teacher research in our April, 2015 Dialogues meeting with a short writing prompt: “[T]hink about whatyou know. Think about things that bother you. Think about things that work for you. Think about changes you’dlike to make to your own practice… or base it on the observation you did this morning…” (4/3/2015 Field Notes).Field notes and transcripts show that these discussions built curiosity around research, which Alecia andChristina led by offering practitioner-friendly texts (e.g. Chiseri-Strater & Sunstein, 2006) and sharing our ownresearch projects, methods, and journeys. In subsequent meetings, we included time for research groups to meet,asked secondary teachers to share their Masters-level qualitative projects (a requirement at our university), andsolicited experiences with IRBs and methods from college professors and graduate students.From Fall 2015 through Summer 2016, Dialogues teams developed questions, designed research, andcollected data. Teachers at both levels consulted with us as they identified, tried, and adopted a variety of researchpractices including observations, surveys, interviews, and artifact analyses. This process was rarelystraightforward, however. College and high school teachers are busy, and everyone struggled with finding time tovisit each others’ classrooms. Ellen, a high school teacher, experienced this tension acutely. She was deeplycommitted to her group’s work on digital and multimodal writing, but her family’s health and responsibilities atICLS 2018 Proceedings828© ISLSschool forced her to miss two Dialogues meetings and delay active data collection. She confessed to Christina thatshe was “nervous” to attend because she felt that “she no longer had a role to play, and she’d let the group down”(5/13/2016 Debrief Memo). She did choose to attend the meeting, though, and her presence enabled her toreconnect with her group and pull the project towards successful completion. Ellen’s story, along with numerousother moments of guilt and difficulty (from leaders and participants alike), suggests the challenge of sustaining aspace in which all participants play central roles and bring vital expertise to the discussions.Reflections on cross-institutional action research: Changes in teaching practiceLooking beyond participants’ research experiences, their reflections reveal that they began to think differentlyabout teaching practices as a result of their research. Marie noted that her group’s revision study helped her adoptcolleagues’ practices “I use the revision activities my group came up with in my teaching now. I intend to explorethe possibilities of digital essays, which I learned about from [another group]” (Marie, 10/12/2016 Survey).Similarly, Janet, a college instructor, shifted the way in which she introduced the research paper in herfirst-year writing class in response to her group’s interviews with students about research practices and techniques:I realized that while I encouraged inquiry, I didn’t include safeguards in my assignments […] Ibegan sharing results from our team’s transfer studies with my classes: ‘If you like your project,’I would say, ‘you’re not only more likely to do well on your paper, but to remember it. Researchdemonstrates it. If you don’t like your research question, switch it now’ (Janet, narrative).Overall, designing action research had far-reaching consequences. Dialogues participants evaluated and appliedwidely accepted, professional tools of qualitative research. They learned about research ethics, submitted IRBproposals, developed data collection and analytical methods, negotiated cross-institutional research, and interactedwith students from multiple institutions in person and through research artifacts. These experiences led them toreflect on their work in complex ways, building confidence in each others’ practices and their own conclusions.Phase 3: Becoming writers and presenters for a broad audienceIn May 2016, the research teams had persevered through challenges to plan and execute their projects, and weknew from one-on-one conversations that many members were worried about their progress. We decided, insteadof dwelling on delays, to celebrate the team, as well as the recent funding of our local colloquium grant and ourroundtable symposium acceptance to the NCTE conference. We brought cake, decorations, and Dialogues t-shirtsto the meeting; asked everyone to share their plans or progress; took stock of challenges and what we’d learned;and began to consider how to address these local and national audiences. We reasoned that in order to continue todevelop members’ identities as researchers and developing experts in their topic areas (particularly after difficultwinter logistics), Dialogues members needed to shift towards, and celebrate, this emerging common endeavor.External audience as professional validationAn external audience proved important in Dialogues members’ confidence and identity as researchers. After ourSeptember, 2016 local research colloquium, we surveyed the group about presenting to colleagues, mentors, andadministrators, all of whom had been invited. Many seemed surprised by the interest, including Lindsay, a collegeinstructor: “I enjoyed seeing the big turnout, realizing that people are interested in our research” (9/2016 Survey).Ellen noted that she was “glad” she hadn’t walked away after the winter’s setbacks: “The audience was receptive[and] the questions they asked were helpful in giving us ideas as to where to go from here” (9/2016 Survey).Exciting, too, were members’ positive responses to each others’ presentations, which most hadexperienced in final form for the first time at the colloquium. Lara, for instance, noted that “it was great to shareresearch [and] methodologies and learn from colleagues from multiple levels of education as well as differentareas among the state” (9/2016 Survey). While we knew that all of the teachers enjoyed socializing at Dialoguesmeetings, presenting as professionals increased their respect for each other, too. As Janet put it, “[I want] to takemore opportunities to learn from my high school peers… The others’ presentations reminded me of how muchmore I can learn from them” (9/2016 Survey). This mutual professional respect only got stronger when we reprisedour research findings in an NCTE symposium, and several members told us afterwards that they very much wantedto write chapters for a book about our findings and experiences (now in progress).Writing as real practice and as empathyWe suspected that Dialogues members would see themselves differently as a result of conducting research, writingand giving presentations, and composing book chapters. We didn’t anticipate that members would share theexperience of becoming teacher-researchers and writers with their students. Engaging in teacher-writing providedICLS 2018 Proceedings829© ISLSways for college professors and high school teachers to discuss real-world writing practices with students, and toempathize with their composition struggles. Casting back to a Winter, 2017 Dialogues meeting where we beganto draft reflective narratives, Kasey remembered her excitement at Alecia’s decision to include mentor texts inour writing. She recalled bursting into her classroom the next day, saying “‘You’ll never believe what happenedyesterday!’ [...] I couldn’t wait to show [my students] that real people use mentor texts…” (Kasey, narrative).After the writing retreat that we hosted in August 2017, in preparation for assembling our now-in-processbook manuscript, we asked members to consider whether they would tell their students about their experiences.The responses described several helpful practices to student writers, including Caitlin’s suggestion to “create aplace where we can focus on our task and leave other concerns out of that space” (8/2017 Survey). Severalteachers, including Lindsay, Marie, and Kasey, who worked together on their research chapter, spoke to theimportance of collaboration and “working with a writing group to help motivate you” (Kasey, 8/2017 Survey).Colleen spoke directly to empathy with students for whom writing doesn’t come easily: “It really helps them toknow that learning never stops and that everyone struggles with written expression” (Colleen, 8/2017 Survey).Discussion and significanceOverall, the Dialogues have been successful: they have led to partnerships among high school teachers and collegeprofessors, partnerships among four secondary schools and our university, local cross-institutional knowledgeabout college transitions and college readiness in English Language Arts, and the generation of research-basedfindings about student writing and college readiness that have been presented in local and national venues.Learning Sciences literature notes that context and perspective are critical features of instructionalsituations. Penuel, Roschelle, and Shechtman’s (2007) co-design suggests teachers should be active partners ineducational research design, while Spillane, Halverson and Diamond’s (2004) work shows that school leadersbenefit from working with a network of partners to implement change. Dialogues shows us that these findings arenot confined to situations where instructional reform or new design are being developed; rather, the need forrespecting context and noting perspective extends to the ordinary practice of fields like writing and collegereadiness. In short, the difficulties of preparing students look very different for high school teachers and collegecomposition instructors. Neither of these views are correct; rather, each is incomplete. They inform each other.A space like Dialogues—one that deliberately draws on the expertise of teachers across institutions andlevels—reveals this partiality clearly, and it has encouraged members to visit each others’ spaces and learn fromeach others’ students and findings. When college professors like Janet and secondary teachers like Marie discussthe ways in which they have revised their classroom practices in response to their own research, it becomes easyto understand how Coburn, Penuel, and Geil’s (2013) conception of a research practice partnership creates realchange in educational institutions. When we enable teachers to work together and learn from each other, studentsand colleagues at both levels benefit. High school students see their teachers’ cross-institutional expertise as theybegin applying to college. First year college students get the benefit of a professor who understands that their priorknowledge of high school writing is critical to their future success. One limitation here is that we are not (yet)aware of students who came through the high school classes of a Dialogues member into first-year writing at ouruniversity, but we are eager to learn about how these perceived benefits to students play out.Along with this broadened view of student writers during college transitions, Dialogues has enabled newwriterly roles for teachers. Over time, and through research design and writing experiences, college professorsand high school teachers have begun to talk about themselves as not just teachers, but actively working researchersand writers who have observed a range of learning settings. In their research groups, Dialogues teachers haveconsidered not only data that they’ve collected, but how their teaching practices might respond. Some groups haveeven extended their work into bringing their students into dialogue (in the case of Lara and Caitlin’s ESL students).This attention to, and empathy for, students’ experiences as writers helps teachers tune into the communicative—not just evaluative—nature of writing, and may help students write for real settings beyond the classroom walls.In short, while changeable and contingent, the emergent nature of this design has enabled us to respondto participants’ needs and continually reinvent our Dialogues space to suit the changing needs and phases of thegroup. In turn, that responsiveness has enabled Dialogues members to follow their interests, adapt their practices,and create new knowledge across institutions about college readiness in the increasingly-central field of writing.If we had initially aimed to create a community of practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991), or a professional learningcommunity (DuFour, 2007) in which we taught secondary teachers and college composition instructors aboutqualitative research, Dialogues might well have ceased when we reached the end of the initial static design.Instead, the emergent nature of a designed affinity space (Gee, 2004, 2017) has pushed us to teach, listen to, andsustain each other over time. The diverse expertise that has grown through our ongoing conversation is far morediverse, respectful, interesting, and useful to secondary and college educators than we had initially imagined.ICLS 2018 Proceedings830© ISLSReferencesAlsup, J. (2001). Seeking connection: An English educator speaks across a disciplinary contact zone. EnglishEducation, 34(1), 31-49.Alsup, J., Bush, J., Brockman, E., & Letcher, M. (2011). Seeking connections, articulating commonalities: Englisheducation, composition, writing teacher education. College Composition & Communication, 62, 668687.Boyatzis, R.E. (1998). Transforming qualitative information. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.Chiseri-Strater, E., & Sunstein, B.S. (2006). What works?: A practical guide for teacher research. Portsmouth,NH: Heinemann.Coburn, C.E., Penuel, W.R., & Geil, K. (2013). Research-practice partnerships at the district level: A new strategyfor leveraging research for educational improvement. NY, NY: William T. Grant Foundation.Cole, M. & Packer, M. (2016). Design-Based Intervention Research as the science of the doubly artificial, Journalof the Learning Sciences, 25(4), 503-530.Crank, V. (2012). From high school to college: Developing writing in the disciplines. WAC Journal, 23, 49-64.Curwood, J.S. (2013) The Hunger Games: Literature, literacy, and online affinity spaces. Language Arts, 90(6),417–427.Donahue, T. (2007). Notes of a humbled WPA: Dialogue with high school colleagues. The Writing Instructor, 23,1-20.DuFour, R. (2007). Professional learning communities: A bandwagon, an idea worth considering, or our best hopefor high levels of learning? Middle School Journal, 39(1), 4-8.Fanetti, S., Bushrow, K.M, & DeWeese, D.L. (2010). Closing the gap between high school writing instructionand college writing. English Journal, 99(4), 77-83.Fields, D. & Kafai, Y. (2009). A connective ethnography of peer knowledge sharing and diffusion in a tweenvirtual world. Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 47-68.Gee, J.P. (2017). Teaching, learning, & literacy in our high-risk high-tech world. NY, NY: Teachers CollegePress.Gee, J.P. (2004). Situated language and learning: A critique of traditional schooling. NY, NY: Routledge.Goldstein, D. (2017, August 2). Why kids can’t write. The New York Times, pp. ED8.Grossman, P., Weinberg, S., & Woolworth, A. S. (2001). Toward a theory of teacher community. TeachersCollege Record, 103(6), 942-1012.Halverson, E.R. & Gibbons, D. (2009). “Key moments” as pedagogical windows into the video productionprocess. Journal of Computing in Teacher Education, 26(2), 69-74.Lammers, J.C. (2016). “The Hangout was serious business”: Leveraging participation in an online space to designSims fanfiction. Research in the Teaching of English, 50, 309-332.Lammers, J.C., Curwood, J.S., & Magnifico, A.M. (2012). Toward an affinity space methodology: Considerationsfor literacy research. English Teaching: Practice and Critique, 11(2), 44-58.Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge UniversityPress.Penuel, W.R., Coburn, C.E., & Gallagher, D.J. (2013). Negotiating problems of practice in research–practicedesign partnerships. National Society for the Study of Education Yearbook, 112(2), 237-255.Penuel, W.R., Fishman, B.J., Cheng, B.H., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development at theintersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331-337.Penuel, W., Roschelle, J., & Shechtman, N. (2007). Designing formative assessment software with teachers: Ananalysis of the co-design process. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 2(1), 51–74.Sanoff, A.P. (2006, March 10). A perception gap over students’ preparation. Chronicle of Higher Education.Spillane, J.P., Halverson, R., & Diamond, J.B. (2004). Towards a theory of leadership practice: A distributedperspective. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 36(1), 3-34.Strachan, W. (2002). Talking about the transition: Dialogues between high school and university teachers. In T.C.Thompson (Ed)., Teaching writing in high school and college: Conversations and collaborations.Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.Vescio, V., Ross, D., & Adams, A., (2008). A review of research on the impact of professional learningcommunities on teaching practice and student learning. Teaching and Teacher Education, 24, 80-91.ICLS 2018 Proceedings831© ISLS