Supporting Undergraduate Bioscience Learners in Problem-SolvingProcess Skills Using a Technology-Enhanced LearningEnvironmentAnurag Deep, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, anuragdeep4949@iitb.ac.inAbstract: Problem-solving process skill is required to solve various open problems ingenetics, and most often learners make the mechanical application of this skill without acomprehensive conceptual understanding. To address this difficulty, I am planning to developa TEL environment which will be based on dynamic variable manipulation, system-generatedappropriate and dynamic feedback, etc. for teaching this skill. Through a series of empiricalstudies, this research aims to design and evaluate the TEL environment.VisionUndergraduate bioscience and medical learners learn genetics since it is a compulsory foundational course intheir curriculum. Learners are required to identify and justify the patterns of inheritance behind variousbiological phenomena. To identify these inheritance patterns, they have to solve problems which are eithercause-effect problems (closed problems) or effect-cause problems (open problems) (Orcajo & Aznar 2005).Learners solve these problems by connecting theoretical knowledge with practical they do in the lab (Crews etal. 1997).Experts solve these kinds of problems by performing a series of skills that can be grouped into problemrepresentation, problem-solving and problem analysis (Orcajo & Aznar 2005). Problem representation requiresthem to qualitatively analyze the problem and propose a hypothesis. Problem-solving needs them to do stepslike the design of a resolution strategy (analysis of problems in parts or resolution of a simpler case, study theproblems using tables, graphs, percentages, etc.) and resolution (application of concrete cases with numericaldata). Lastly, problem analysis includes steps to interpret the results according to hypothesis and theoreticalframework used. These steps are often unclear to non-experts/learners as to why they are doing these steps.However, learners’ difficulty as reported in literature includes the mechanical application of commonproblem-solving process steps without a comprehensive conceptual understanding of these steps (Karagoz &Cakir 2011). So there is a need of teaching this skill explicitly to the learners. Therefore to provide an authenticlearning environment for problem-solving process skill, I propose a Technology-Enhanced Learning (TEL)environment: Geneticus Investigatio (GI) as part of my doctoral research.The proposed TEL environment will be based partly on the theory of anchored instruction (Crews et al.1997). The learning environment will have a problem context similar to problems faced by researchers. Furtherlearning material and activities in the environment will serve to “anchor” the subsequent learning which willalso encourage exploration. I have used the TELoTS framework which gives step by step guidelines to identify,characterize steps and design learning activities for TEL environment (Murthy et al. 2016).A classroom study with 22 undergraduate bioscience learners (convenience sampling) was conductedwith this initial version of TEL environment to further inform the redesigning of the learning environment.Through this study difficulty faced by learners were triangulated from the individual interviews which wereconducted with the learner and are being addressed in the second version of TEL. I am thinking to evaluate myTEL system from learning, engagement and interaction perspective and would like to discuss my researchquestions and respective data collection and analysis method for re-designing and evaluating my learningenvironment.ReferencesCrews, T. R., Biswas, G., Goldman, S., & Bransford, J. (1997). Anchored interactive learning environments.International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (IJAIED), 8, 142-178.Ibáñez Orcajo, T., & Martínez Aznar, M. (2005). Solving problems in genetics II: conceptualrestructuring. International Journal of Science Education, 27(12), 1495-1519.Karagoz, M., & Cakir, M. (2011). Problem-solving in Genetics: Conceptual and ProceduralDifficulties. Educational Sciences: Theory and Practice, 11(3), 1668-1674.Murthy, S., Iyer, S., & Mavinkurve, M. (2016). Pedagogical Framework for Developing Thinking Skills usingSmart Learning Environments. Learning, Design, and Technology: An International Compendium ofTheory, Research, Practice, and Policy, 1-49.1880