In the Hive: Designing for Emergence When Teaching ComplexSystems in Early ChildhoodKylie Peppler, Naomi Thompson, Joshua Danish, and Armin Moczekkpeppler@indiana.edu, naothomp@indiana.edu, jdanish@indiana.edu, armin@indiana.eduIndiana UniversityAbstract: This Design-Based Research study explores the iterative design decisions for aparticipatory simulation created to teach children in grades K–2 about complex biologicalsystems. In this simulation, children assumed the role of honeybees, whose job was to collectnectar from flowers and bring it back to a hive, learning about the social nature of honeybeecolonies (e.g., the need for honeybees to communicate the location of nectar via a “waggledance”). As we designed the simulation, we iteratively analyzed the ways that children in arange of low-tech and high-tech conditions engaged in creating a nonverbal system ofcommunication. Findings suggest that the spatial layout of the simulation directly influencedthe game’s difficulty levels and subsequently impacted both the nonverbal communicationand the learning outcomes of the activity. This paper presents the iterative design cycles andoutlines implications for studies seeking to design participatory simulations for youngchildren.IntroductionSystems thinking has been identified as a useful and necessary topic to integrate into K–12 education (seeHmelo-Silver & Azevedo, 2006; Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006), operating on the belief that teaching systemsthinking at an early age can help the next generation address the complex nature of an interconnected world.However, the majority of learners do not fully understand these concepts on a deep level ( Resnick & Wilensky,1993). Seeking to address these gaps as they pertain to young children’s (K–2) understandings of complexsystems in science, we developed a participatory simulation (Colella, 2000), named BeeSim, that provides afirst-person look into the complexity of bee colonies, in particular the interconnected challenges of collectingnectar (Peppler, et al., 2010). Similar to role-playing games, participants in a participatory simulation reenactthe roles of single elements within a system, enabling them to forge personally meaningful understandings oftheir element’s specific behaviors, as well as its role in a greater whole (Colella, Borovoy, & Resnick, 1998). Bysituating imaginative exploration into a suite of elementary science curricula, BeeSim is designed to help younglearners engage with complex systems-thinking concepts through play and technology (Peppler, et al., 2010).One of the primary challenges of designing a participatory simulation for this purpose is finding ageappropriate ways to engage whole classrooms (or larger) in complex systems thinking without stifling youngchildren’s fluid, imaginative play. Driving our design of the game was the investigation into which designfeatures lead to the emergence of systems understanding, as well as robust and productive communication in thehive between game participants. Through a series of pilot tests and design cycles, BeeSim underwent a numberof transformations, both in terms of the components of the game (e.g., puppets representing the biologicalsystems) as well as the rules of gameplay (Thompson, Peppler, & Danish, 2017) to maximize learning andengagement. This paper analyzes the iterative design cycles of the participatory simulation, particularly theways that design decisions impacted children’s learning of complex systems. Close attention is paid to theinfusion of technological elements (e.g., electronic textiles and position tracking) into the game and how theirpresence changed the foundation for learning.Complex systems thinking, biological systems, and childrenA system is recognized as “complex” when the relationships within it are not obvious, and the individualelements of the system give rise to new overall properties that are difficult to see or explain (Hmelo-Silver &Azevedo, 2006). This is especially true in biological systems, where individual organisms may act in ways thatseem counterintuitive when compared to the behavior of the system as a whole. For example, individualhoneybees spend a considerable amount of time “dancing” to communicate nectar location to other bees in thehive. However, this behavior gives rise to faster and more efficient nectar collection for the hive as a whole.Young children, however, tend to assume this time spent dancing is wasteful (Danish, 2014). This surprisinginteraction between levels (Wilensky & Resnick, 1999) in the system is known as emergence.Much of the work around systems thinking education has been through biological systems; muchthought has been given to teaching biology, or life science, to young learners, as it is a topic children areICLS 2018 Proceedings584© ISLSfamiliar with and curious about. For example, Hmelo-Silver has often studied children’s understanding ofaquatic and respiratory systems (e.g., Hmelo-Silver, Marathe, & Liu, 2007), while Wilensky has looked intolarge ecologies involving wolf, sheep, and grass (e.g., Wilensky & Reisman, 2006). Although these studies werenot conducted with children in our target age range, their findings help us see the benefits of exploring complexsystems through biological systems. Wilensky and Reisman (2006) found that simulations employing agentbased models helped students think more deeply about complex systems and relate the agent-based occurrencesto the aggregate level occurrences. Games are especially powerful because they allow children to take on newperspectives through play, supporting productive learning (Peppler, Danish, & Phelps, 2013).This project emerged from a longer history of research using bees as a vehicle for teaching complexsystems (Danish, 2009; Danish, Peppler, Phelps, & Washington, 2011). Most notable of these is BeeSign, a 2Dcomputer-based program that offers a third-person perspective on biological systems (Danish, 2009). Theoverarching goal of adapting BeeSign to a participatory simulation was to offer a play-based, first-personperspective on the behavior of bees with a focus on the challenge of finding nectar, engaging in the design ofnonverbal communication (i.e., how bees convey the location of flower nectar to other bees), and othervariables, such as nectar quality, nectar depletion, and a limited flight range. We aimed to develop a high qualityfirst-person participatory simulation for two reasons: (1) to engage entire classes of children in a single systemsthinking activity, which would better reflect the collective behaviors of biological systems; and (2) we sought tocreate two parallel first- and third-person conditions (or at least to the extent possible) to disentangle thedifferential contributions of first- and third-person experiences on learning of complex systems in earlychildhood. The key challenge of the latter goal was to find ways to control for the overall difficulty level, depthof systems thinking concepts engaged in the activity, and overall entertainment value of the game play for eachof these conditions.MethodsUsing a Design-Based Research paradigm (Design-Based Research Collective, 2003), the four most recentiterations of BeeSim discussed here were tested in two mixed-grade (grades 1-2) classrooms and one first-gradeclassrooms at different suburban, midwestern elementary schools; design cycles 1 and 2 at one school, cycles 3and 4 in two comparable schools in the district. Three teams with seven to nine students in each engaged incycles 1 and 2 (fifteen boys and eight girls), while two teams with between ten and twelve students in each(twelve boys and ten girls) participated in cycles 3 and 4. Each team included at least one member of eachgender. It is important to note that earlier versions of BeeSim did take place between BeeSign and the fourcycles discussed here, but designs were less pertinent to the current, optimized design reached in cycle 4.Before each game began, participants were divided into two teams and were told about the objectivesof gameplay: bees had to collect nectar and bring it back to the hive within a fixed time period, bees needed tocommunicate to each other about which flowers had the most nectar, and no bee could talk during the game,only signal the location of the nectar to other bees via a “waggle dance.” The BeeSim curriculum covers anumber of aspects of the hive system, including the constraints bees face as they struggle to feed the hive, howbees communicate, and why this communication is important. In the honeybee system, unlike other systems inthe animal kingdom, communication is done through a waggle dance in which returning foragers perform aseries of figure-eight movements to communicate both the direction and abundance of a food source to her sisterbees. The waggle dance contains quite a bit of information about the direction, distance, and type of nectar. Aschildren learn about the waggle dance, they invent a novel waggle dance to communicate with their hivematesin game play.Observations from each of the four major design cycles highlighted here were accumulated through acombination of videotaped game sessions, written observations and ex post facto discussions between theresearch team and the children participants’ homeroom teachers (who integrated BeeSim into additionalactivities in the classroom, including discussions and engagement with the BeeSign curriculum). Throughdiscussions with teachers, as well as observations of how children engaged in the simulation during game play,the research team was able to determine which learning objectives and game dynamics could be optimizedthrough refinement of the game rules and components between cycles.FindingsData collected from each design cycle helped to clarify the design elements of the simulation that were linkedwith children's’ engagement with authentic biological and systems-thinking concepts. The sequence ofobservations, and the design iterations they necessitated, are presented in chronological order below in Table 1.Note that BeeSign has been included in this table as a reference to the starting point of these activities. As lateriterations were built and refined, we often looked back to BeeSign as a point of comparison. We worked toICLS 2018 Proceedings585© ISLSmirror the productive design choices where appropriate, and departed in careful and intentional ways, such aswhere the shift from third-person perspective to first-person perspective changed gameplay and interactions.Table 1: Summary of the various design cycles, including key design features and outcomesBeeSign(2D computersimulation)DesignFeaturesOutcomesBeeSim: Low-Tech ConditionsBeeSim: High-Tech ConditionsCycle 1 (v1.0)Cycle 2 (v2.0)Cycle 3 (v3.0)Cycle 4 (v4.0)Number ofSimultaneousActors10222525Number of Flowers2+1268–104–6Distribution of theFlowers in theFieldSelectivelydistributedaround the hiveto promoteeffective inquiry.Randomlydistributed in alarge, outdoorspaceOrganized in asmall grid of 2rows of 3 flowersin a 2’x3’ areaRandomlydistributed in alarge, indoorspaceRandomlydistributed in arelatively small,indoor classroomspace; in and aroundregular classroomfurnitureComponent DesignComputersimulation,interactivewhiteboardPaper flowers, eyedroppersLife-size flowers, Arduino-enhancedpuppets, RFID tags communicate betweenpuppet, flowers and hiveQuality of DanceCommunicationn/aInfrequent,SimpleFrequent,ComplexInfrequent,SimpleFrequent, ComplexSystems ThinkingConcept ofEmergence presentYesXYesXYesn/aIncludeconstraints thatmake keyphenomenasalient.Includetechnology inways continue toprovide authenticconstraints.Iteratively test tohighlight tensionsbetween physicaland computerspaces.Check in withlearning goals often.Design Principle / TakeawayCycle 1: “Low-tech” condition with distributed fieldIn the first iteration of BeeSim, participants carried an eyedropper for use as a proboscis (the straw-like mouthof a bee) to collect nectar from twelve laminated paper flowers. The flowers were scattered randomly around alarge outdoor garden space, anywhere from 20–40 feet from the hive (see Figure 1), behind each were situatedDixie cups of colored water representing nectar. Once the simulation started, each team could set out a “forager”to search for nectar in the yard, and then were asked to nonverbally communicate the location of the mostnectar-filled flowers to the other bees back in the hive using an invented “waggle dance.”Findings from this design revealed a number of challenges for the young age group. For one, (1) thechildren were easily distracted by the size of the field, likely exacerbated by (2) the random placement andcopious numbers of flowers, which made it difficult for children to formulate and communicate meaningfulwaggle dances to other members of their hive. The free structure of the game also led to (3) participants notreturning to the hive in a timely manner, as well as (4) cheating by surreptitiously peering at the nectar levels ofall flowers, thus undermining the importance of the “waggle dance” and weakening the emergence of biologicalor systems understanding. Reducing the number of flowers and size of the playing space was hypothesized as away to lower the barriers to success, as well as insert ways for adults to moderate how participants collectednectar and communicated with the hive. From these discoveries, we might suggest a concrete takeaway for othereducators designing activities for young elementary learners: include constraints that make key phenomena andICLS 2018 Proceedings586© ISLSlearning goals salient for learners, and identify ways to enforce those constraints. In our experience, a focus on“winning” a game can lead learners to circumvent rules and constraints if possible.Cycle 2: “Low-tech” condition with optimized fieldWe next tested the game with the same children as before, but the total flower count was reduced to six andarranged more closely together: in a 2x3 grid approximately 20’ from the hive. Additionally, childrens’adherence to the rules of the simulation were enforced by adult moderation. In this instance, a pair of twochildren from one hive were permitted in the field at any given time. To collect nectar, children indicated to anadult stationed by the flowers which flower they wanted to check, and after checking this flower their imaginaryenergy ran out and they had to return to the hive. Back at the hive, these students used their dance tononverbally communicate which flower the next bee pair should check.Figure 1. Field layout in low-tech cycle 2 (top) and high-tech cycle 3 (bottom) conditions.The optimized game space and presence of adults to scaffold the rules of play resulted in consistentlyon-task performances from the children, including the invention of elaborate waggle dances to communicate thenectar location to team members (see Table 2). After the simulation, we observed that children’s resultingconversations about nectar collection were productive and insightful about how bees communicate within thehive. In particular, many of the students began to recognize the benefit of each bee dancing for the performanceof the hive as a whole—a rudimentary recognition of the emergent properties of the system.While the emerging analyses suggest that learning may have improved through these design changes,we identified a need to make the gameplay experience more active for all participants, especially since youth notactively “foraging” had little to do back at the hive. Furthermore, while the nectar collection was moresystematic in this instantiation, having to communicate first to an adult before collecting is distal to theauthentic biological model. Our next design cycle was driven by the idea that a technology-enhancedenvironment could communicate the biological rules of the bees more consistently, reducing the need for adultsto police youth children’s game choices, enabling more youth to play simultaneously, as well as opening thedoor for more biological science to be integrated into bee behaviors due to a reduced emphasis on enforcing therules. Design takeaways from this iteration center around the decision of whether and how to introducetechnology to a learning experience. Here, the inclusion of technology was positioned as a way to provideconstraints on students’ behavior that was authentic to the learning context.ICLS 2018 Proceedings587© ISLSTable 2: Summary of “waggle dance” communication created by teams in BeeSim v2.0Condition HiveNameCommunicate DirectionCommunicate DistanceCommunicate Quality/AmountBeeSimv2.0Team1Hand above head if on the topshelf, at neck height if on themiddle shelf, mid-chest heightfor lowest shelfHold up one, two, or threefingers to indicate how faralong the shelf the flower isN/ATeam2Jump and point up for topshelf, jump and point down forbottom shelf, just jump formiddle shelfHands to the left if it is thefirst flower on the shelf,middle if it’s the secondflower or to the right if it’sthe thirdN/ATeam3Thumbs up above head for topshelf, thumbs up straight infront for middle shelf, thumbsup down low for bottom shelfThumb bent to to the right forclosest flower, straight up formiddle flower, tilted out forthe far flower.Using the other hand,thumbs up if there isnectar or thumbs downif there is notCycle 3: “High-tech” condition with distributed fieldSeeking to increase children’s autonomy and support a larger number of actors, as well as increasing biologicalrealism in the next iteration of the game, we designed computationally-enhanced puppets and a field of uniquelydesigned electronic flowers into the participatory simulation. Making use of the LilyPad Arduino platform--amicrocontroller board that can be stitched safely into textiles--each player used bee puppets that included anXBee 2.5 2mW wireless module multiple sets of 3 LEDs, and an RFID reader. The XBee Wireless Moduleallowed for wireless communication between the glove and another XBee attached to a computer via USB.During gameplay, students wearing the bee puppets could monitor through a set of three LEDs the amount ofnectar currently stored on the glove, while an additional set of LEDs in the bee’s antennae displayed the amountof nectar in each flower checked. To represent the finite energy levels of bees as they travel between the hiveand a flower, a tri-colored LED was used as an energy meter, moving from green to red to indicate to studentswhen they needed to return to the hive.The flowers incorporated RFID tags that would be scanned by the bee puppet to “check for nectar.” Inaddition to being more proportional in size to the bee puppets, the flowers were also diversified in terms ofvariety of flower types and collection methods, and were once again returned to a more random, distributedarrangement in the playspace (see Figure 1). When the RFID scanner in the bee puppet came near the RFID tagin the flower, the computer noted the time and flower ID of the collection. If the child returned to the hivebefore energy ran out, the total amount of nectar for the team increased by the amount of nectar currently storedon the bee. The initial rationale for returning to a greater number of flowers was that we hypothesized thathaving more actors in the field would necessitate more overall coordination of activity as a result of needing tocommunicate which source of nectar the bees should visit. Given that this was indoors and arranged around theexisting furniture for a temporary installation for the class, this also led a random distribution of the flowers,which we had hypothesized as not being problematic given the new time constraints placed on the system.The introduction of the technology led to some new affordances in the game. Not only could morechildren participate at a time, but the puppet itself communicated nectar storage and energy levels to thechildren, opening up the gameplay for the emergence of new biological understanding. For instance, in thisversion, children had a limited amount of time to collect and deposit nectar and a finite storage capacity. Duringthe allotted time, a child would run from flower to flower and try to collect nectar. A child could collect one unitof nectar from any given flower and would also be informed as to how much nectar remains inside the flower.ICLS 2018 Proceedings588© ISLSOnce the child’s nectar stomach (represented via an LED array) was filled, he or she returned to the hive anddeposit the stored nectar.Furthermore, the electronics-based version of the BeeSim game gave the instructor more freedom andbetter access to data than in previous incarnations. For instance, because the energy of a bee was monitored byan adult’s stopwatch in BeeSim 2.0, children often failed to consider the range to be a real constraint for bees,because it was not a real constraint for them. In contrast, the computational textile bees embedded the bees’energy into the game in a natural and familiar manner such that the children in the role of the bees had to attendvery carefully to it, or suffer the consequences (lost nectar). This resulted in far more attention to detailsimportant to understanding the system. In addition to the bee range, the computational textiles also helped tomodel limited amounts of nectar collection, flower variables such as random nectar depletion and the difficultyof determining if a flower has nectar without visiting it, and supported easier tracking of how much nectar wascollected.However, there were key challenges in this version of the game as well. While constraints on time, etc.were all designed to help the children reflect upon the constraints that real bees face as they collect nectar, aswell as the benefits of the solutions that honeybees have evolved to these constraints (e.g., the waggle dance toconvey nectar sources), it also had inadvertent negative impact on the observed quality and frequency of thecommunication in the hives (see Table 3). This stemmed from the infrequency of finding nectar in the field,which was due to the random placement of the flowers in the field, overall number of flowers, as well as thelimited amount of time to search for nectar. For example, one bee would only have a limited amount of time inthe field to find nectar, which would oftentimes be unsuccessful until the game was too close to completion,leaving very little time to use the waggle dance and for others to “listen” to and act on this information beforethe end of the class period (see Table 3). The subsequent video analyses of this version led us to see a pattern ofplay that is problematic with the distributed field of flowers (as similarly seen in cycle 1); overall complexity ofthe task is increased when there are more than 6 or so objects in the field to check. Debrief and reflectiveconversations, did work to address this complexity, but it felt necessary to simplify the nectar collection task aswell. Thus, in subsequent versions of the game, we sought to reduce the overall number of flowers to helpprovide an easier entry into the game play and help to focus the actors on the behaviors (i.e., the waggle dance)that lead to better understanding of emergence within the system. Here, we might see design takeaways thathighlight tensions between physical simulations and computer simulations. The number and type of elements ineach might be different and can only be determined through testing.Table 3: Summary of “waggle dance” communication created by teams in BeeSim v3.0Condition HiveNameBeeSim3.0Team1Communicate DirectionShake body in the direction ofthe flower.Team2CommunicateDistanceCommunicateQuality/AmountCommunicateFlower ColorIndicate numberof steps usingfingers.N/APurple: pinchthumb andforefingerPink: touch faceOrange: fisttouching chinYellow: mimicpeeling a bananaN/AN/ANumbered flowers oneN/Athrough six from right to leftin terms of their placement inthe field. Step out the shape ofthe number.Cycle 4: “High-tech” condition with simplified layoutIn the latest testing of BeeSim, participants used the electronically enhanced components but the gameplayreturned to the optimized number and arrangement of flowers from v2.0. Overall findings indicated thatICLS 2018 Proceedings589© ISLSperformance on pre-to-post measures improved in every case, indicating strong learning gains fromparticipation in this cycle.While the designs and rules of play were similar to cycle 3, new game designs emerged when theoverall number of flowers was reduced, which was kept at 4–6 throughout the testing. Generally, one of theflowers was a distractor that would not produce nectar appealing to honeybees in nature. Additionally, anotherflower was often set to “empty,” and one more was partially filled with nectar. Although the smaller number offlowers meant that participants might be able to check multiple flowers in a relatively short amount of time,with so many of the flowers empty or nearly empty, participants needed to utilize the waggle dance to be mostefficient and avoid losing time/energy at empty flowers. The flowers were placed at random locations in theclassroom, both to prompt the need for unique waggle dances, and to accommodate immovable classroomfurniture.As a result of this optimized flower arrangement, waggle dances became more efficient during thisround of design. Rather than attempting to convey flower color, as had occurred in v3.0, participants focused inon the quality and amount of nectar of the flowers (see Table 4). The faster or slower shaking used by Team 1mirrored the faster or slower waggling performed by real honeybees. To convey quality, participants needed toattend to an additional piece of information, found in the antennae of the bee puppets. Lights here would flashvery quickly for high quality flowers, and more slowly for low quality flowers. Participants in v3.0 were lesslikely to notice this information as there were many flowers to choose from, and quality became lessconsequential. This iteration of game play revealed more frequent and more complex communication within thehive sooner in the game play, which allowed for participants to experience and note emergent behaviors in thehive (i.e., that you can more efficiently collect nectar when you communicate where to go to find nectar withyour hivemates). This leads to a final design takeaway: it is crucial to check in through the iteration process toensure core learning goals are not overshadowed by design changes.Table 4: Summary of “waggle dance” communication created by teams in BeeSim v4.0Condition HiveNameBeeSim4.0CommunicateDirectionCommunicate DistanceCommunicate Quality/ AmountTeam 1 Shake body in theHold hands closedirection of the flower together, mediumdistance, or far apartFaster shaking to indicate higherquality, slower shaking to indicatelower qualityTeam 2 Shake body in thedirection of theflowerRub stomach and nod head as if“yummy” to indicate higher quality,give thumb’s down to indicate lowerqualityIndicate number of stepsusing fingersDiscussionThrough iterative cycles of development, the various versions of BioSim represent a shift in a number of thedesign features, enabling and constraining the children's activities via the designs and computational affordancesof the wearable computers to make visible more aspects of the system. In short, the overall designs of thesystem were optimized for this age group when the (a) time to discover nectar was constrained by the puppetdesign and (b) the overall number of flowers in the field was reduced to minimize the number of possibilities forthis age group Such findings provide insights into the complexity involved in promoting systems understandingfor this age group, and they help us understand the role that spatial design plays in capitalizing on theaffordances of learning materials, but they could have gone unnoticed had the research focused only on thesummative impact of the intervention.In sum, these cycles of development revealed how technology could facilitate the implementation ofrobust game rules, highlighting the importance of communication within the hives. Future participatorysimulations designed for young children can build on the design takeaways outlined here. We see them asemerging principles that could guide the design of other types of contexts beyond biological systems and socialinsects. Furthermore, achieving one of the primary goals of the simulation (i.e., first-person perspectives on theICLS 2018 Proceedings590© ISLSbee’s role in the greater system), the technological enhancements made to the BeeSim simulation in the lateriteration of the game facilitates changes to the game rules that simulate an experience closer to that of realhoneybees, which could be skinned and used in other applications to model parallel systems, such as bloodcirculation and/or army ants foraging for food. The findings in this paper serve to highlight the importance ofindividual design elements within a system and how these elements work together to shape the system as awhole.ReferencesColella, V. (2000). Participatory Simulations: Building Collaborative Understanding Through ImmersiveDynamicModeling.JournaloftheLearningSciences,9(4),471–500.doi:10.1207/S15327809JLS0904_4Colella, V., Borovoy, R., and Resnick, M. (1998). Participatory simulations: Using computational objects tolearn about dynamic systems. Proceedings of the CHI '98 (Los Angeles CA).Danish, J. A. (2009, April). BeeSign: A design experiment to teach kindergarten and first grade students abouthoneybees from a complex systems perspective. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the AmericanEducational Research Association, San Diego, CA.Danish, J. A. (2014). Applying an activity theory lens to designing instruction for learning about the structure,behavior, and function of a honeybee system. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 23(2), 100-148.Danish, J. A., Peppler, K., Phelps, D., & Washington, D. (2011). Life in the hive: Supporting inquiry intocomplexity within the zone of proximal development. Journal of science education and technology,20(5), 454-467.Design-Based Research Collective. (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educationalinquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5-8, 35-37. Retrieved November 16, 2017 from:http://www.designbasedresearch.org/reppubs/DBRC2003.pdfHmelo-Silver, C. E., & Azevedo, R. (2006). Understanding complex systems: Some core challenges. Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 15(1), 53–61. doi:10.1207/s15327809jls1501_7Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Marathe, S., & Liu, L. (2007). Fish swim, rocks sit, and lungs breathe: Expert-noviceunderstanding of complex systems. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(3), 307–331.doi:10.1080/10508400701413401Jacobson, M. J., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educationalimportance and implications for the learning sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15, 11–34.Peppler, K., Danish, J. A., & Phelps, D. (2013). Collaborative gaming: Teaching children about complexsystems and collective behavior. Simulation & Gaming, 44(5), 683-705.Peppler, K., Danish, J., Zaitlen, B., Glosson, D., Jacobs, A., & Phelps, D. (2010). BeeSim: Leveraging wearablecomputers in participatory simulations with young children. Published in the proceedings of the 9thInternational Conference on Interaction Design and Children, Barcelona, Spain.Resnick, M. & Wilensky, U. (1993). Beyond the deterministic, centralized mindsets: New thinking for newsciences. Presented at the annual conference of the American Educational Research Association(Atlanta GA.Thompson, N., Peppler, K., & Danish, J. (2017). Designing BioSim: Playfully encouraging systems thinking inyoung children. In Zheng, R. & Gardner, M. (Eds.), Handbook of research on serious games foreducational applications, Ch.7 (pp. 149-167). Hershey, PA: IGI Global.Wilensky, U., & Reisman, K. (2006). Thinking like a wolf, a sheep, or a firefly: Learning biology throughconstructing and testing computational theories—an embodied modeling approach. Cognition andInstruction, 24(2), 171–209. doi:10.1207/s1532690xci2402_1Wilensky, U. and Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in levels: A dynamic systems perspective to making sense ofthe world. Journal of Science Education and Technology, (8)1, 3-19.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation underGrant No. 1324047 awarded to Kylie Peppler, Joshua Danish, and Armin Moczek. Any opinions, findings,and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do notnecessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. Thank you to Janis Watson, and the manyteachers and students who made this work possible.ICLS 2018 Proceedings591© ISLS