Translating Theory to Practice: Technology Solutions to SolvePractical Issues for Teaching Reading Comprehension at theSecondary LevelDonna Caccamise, Megan K. Littrell-Baez, and John WeatherleyDonna.caccamise@colorado.edu, Megan.littrellbaez@colorado.edu, john.weatherley@colorado.eduUniversity of Colorado BoulderAbstract: We describe a theory- and evidence-based curriculum that improves readingcomprehension skills needed to learn from difficult informational text and the theory’stranslation into an online program that allows for individualized instruction for greaterscalability in today’s technology-enhanced classrooms. Feature design is based on cognitivescience, user input/experiences, and a configuration of highly flexible web-applications toprovide interactive features necessary to adapt a teacher-led curriculum into one that isautomated and tied to student achievement.IntroductionThe overall goal of our theory-based curriculum, BRAVO, is to teach students how to understand and learnfrom challenging, informational texts (IES Award #R305A110467). This requires effortful processing. Skilledreaders with rich background knowledge on the topic may rely on comfortable, automatic processing to get themeaning of text. However, average to struggling readers need to rely on conscious problem-solving skills todeeply comprehend and learn from the text. Providing simplified texts or even texts that are within a student’scomfortable reading level may help initially pique interest and motivation, as Guthrie, Klauda, & Ho (2013)argue, but this approach can also encourage passive comprehension and create a false sense of understanding.Instead, students need experience with difficult, real-life materials and the tools to deal with them. This is whatthe BRAVO curriculum has been developed to provide for middle/high school students. An implementationefficacy study, conducted in traditional teacher-led classrooms, showed significant promise at improvingreading comprehension skills for struggling and average readers. However, this study also demonstrated a needfor more individualized instruction that can best be achieved via electronic means of delivery to captureindividual needs for instruction and practice. This research and development program has generated severalimportant questions and possible answers for designing a curriculum that both improves learning effectively andis designed with teacher input and student experiences, increasing the likelihood of broader adoption of thecurriculum.BRAVO CurriculumThe BRAVO curriculum is based on Kintsch’s (1998) model, which posits that readers engage in parallelprocessing during reading to create a textbase and a situation model. The textbase represents the informationpresented directly in the text, whereas the situation model represents deeper connections between the textbase,the reader’s topic knowledge, and inferences they generate that go beyond the text. Specifically, our curriculummethodically teaches students advanced reading skills that include local cohesive linguistic strategies such asanaphora; global cohesive techniques such as text structures, transition words, and bridging inferences to helpreaders build a reliable textbase as well as the inferencing, questioning, and use of organizational supports tointegrate the textbase content into a situation model, the deepest level of processing. Instruction and exercise ofthese components of reading comprehension is made possible because the instruction is uniquely embedded intoa series of texts designed to build knowledge in a subject domain, in this case Ecology. Furthermore, thiscurriculum aligns with the growing consensus among educational researchers about the need to embedcomprehension instruction in content area classes (e.g., Guthrie et. al., 2013; Mckeown et al., 2009; Romance &Vitale, 2011). Heller and Greenleaf (2007) state that…policymakers and education leaders should make it clear that content area teachers dohave the responsibility to provide instruction in the kinds of reading and writing that arespecific to the given academic disciplines… (p. 25-26).However, trying to convince practitioners to blend comprehension instruction with content learning is a majorobstacle, especially since many science teachers emphasize a hands-on approach to science education (e.g.,observation, doing experiments, recording, analyzing, and presenting results—usually orally). Norris andICLS 2018 Proceedings1437© ISLSPhillips (2003) point out that although these instructional methods are all important for achieving scientificliteracy, this approach often comes at the expense of textbased learning and communication of abstract conceptsand theories. As a result, many students are severely unprepared for further academic training and/orprofessional careers (cf. Sullivan, 2016). An important aspect of scientific literacy is the ability to communicatewith broader audiences through writing, and to read and evaluate what others have contributed on a topic ofinterest. Thus, reading skills are as crucial to science domains as they are to literature, history and social scienceexpertise. The bottom line is that students need a lot more practice in reading and learning from complexmaterials, well before they fill out their college applications.Practical barriers to implementation and scalingOur initial findings and motivation for this project indicate that while this theory-based curriculum can beefficacious, there are practical issues that can only be addressed through technology and personalized learning.These practical issues include: 1. Reading teachers’ discomfort with topics other than stories/literature. 2.Variability in secondary students in their reading comprehension skills from needing little guidance to needingextensive instruction and practice. The complete language arts curriculum for a struggling reader would slowdown a general education content area class (e.g. science) to an unacceptable level. 3. Content area teachers areoften not trained, evaluated, or comfortable teaching language arts in their class.eBRAVO Web ApplicationThe eBRAVO project addresses these issues with individualized instruction; practice and online instructionalsupport is the driver of our continuing development and the focus of this poster (IES Award #R305A170142).The direction for this work comes from classroom implementation of BRAVO in Colorado and California at themiddle school level, as well as qualitative analysis of teacher focus groups and workshops. We outline whatteachers say they want regarding useful technology and literacy instruction; what they do and do not already doin their classrooms; how that aligns with what is still needed; and our strategy for integrating this informationinto a highly usable and effective learning tool for use in today’s secondary classrooms.Moving beyond the traditional classroom implementation of the BRAVO curriculum, eBRAVO relieson a web application to provide an adaptive, personalized learning experience to aid learners in readingcomprehension while providing specific domain knowledge in a (STEM) subject area such as ecology. As such,the software must be flexible to support a number of varying workflows, be able to deliver a variety of content,be able to adapt its presentation and pacing based on inputs from the learner, and provide timely feedback andreporting to students and teachers.SummaryThis poster will illustrate the alignment of the teacher/student-centered needs with the technology design toindividualize instruction, transforming this traditionally teacher-led, 8-week reading comprehension curriculum,into an online tutoring system and finally to online assistive technology for use in content area classrooms.ReferencesGuthrie, J. T., Klauda, S. L., & Ho, A. N. (2013). Modeling the relationships among reading instruction,motivation, engagement, and achievement for adolescents. Reading Research Quarterly, 48(1), 9-26.Heller, R., & Greenleaf, C. L. (2007). Literacy instruction in the content areas: Getting to the core of middleand high school improvement. Retrieved from the Alliance for Excellent Education websitehttp://all4ed.org/wp-content/uploads/2007/06/LitCon.pdfKintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for cognition. Cambridge; New York, NY, USA: CambridgeUniversity Press.McKeown, M. G., Beck, I. L., & Blake, R. G. (2009). Rethinking reading comprehension instruction: Acomparison of instruction for strategies and content approaches. Reading Research Quarterly, 44(3),218-253.Norris, S. P., & Phillips, L. M. (2003). How literacy in its fundamental sense is central to scientific literacy.Science Education, 17(2), 224-240.Romance, N. R., & Vitale, M. R. (2011). An Integrated Interdisciplinary Model for Accelerating StudentAchievement in Science and Reading Comprehension across Grades 3-8: Implications for Researchand Practice. Society for Research on Educational Effectiveness.Sullivan, P. (2016). An open letter to high school students about reading. Academe, 102 (3). Retrieved fromhttps://www.aaup.org/article/open-letter-high-school-students-about-reading#.V-BDkDW6NA5ICLS 2018 Proceedings1438© ISLS