Exploring Predictors of Secondary School Teachers’ Use ofTechnology to Support Student-Centered TeachingYaoran Li, Vitality Popov, Veronica Garza, and Anne Keicheryaoranli@sandiego.edu, vpopov@sandiego.edu, vgarza@sandiego.edu, anne.keicher@gmail.comUniversity of San DiegoAbstract: The current study aims to explore predictors that independently contribute to highschool teacher use of technology in general and for different teaching purposes (studentcentered and traditional). High school teachers (N=928) responded to a survey that consisted ofmeasures of their pedagogical beliefs, beliefs towards technology, and perceived trainingeffectiveness. A series of multilevel models were used to explore the independent effects ofthese factors on teacher use of technology in general and for different teaching purposes. Theresults showed that teachers’ technology self-efficacy was a significant predictor of teacher useof technology in general. More importantly, teachers’ instructional approach and opennesstowards technology were more salient when predicting teacher use technology to supportstudent-centered teaching. Our findings suggest that teachers’ pedagogical readiness is asimportant as technological readiness for technology integration in teaching to serve moreadvanced teaching purposes.IntroductionOver the past several decades, technology implementation in schools has been a major reform effort (e.g., Berrett,Murphy, & Sullivan, 2012). Conversations in the United States around transforming teaching and learning via theuse of technology is being fueled at the national level by initiatives such as the Call to Action and P21’sFramework for 21st Century Learning (see Office of Educational Technology, 2010 for review). One objective isto use technology to prepare students to be critical thinkers, problem solvers, communicators, and innovators (P21Partnership for 21st Century Learning, 2009). However, reaching this objective depends on a range of conditionsand factors associated with the teacher, student, technology itself, technology-enhanced innovation,policy/legislation, and district/school–level (Groff & Mouza, 2008; Spector, 2010). While all these factors areimportant for successful technology integration, the teacher who serves as the “innovator” appears to play acrucial role in making pedagogical transformation regarding the use of technology in their teaching (Tondeur etal., 2016). Current evidence indicates that, despite the increased availability of technology in schools (Bulman &Fairlie, 2016), effective integration of technology into teaching and learning, meaning the teacher uses technologyas a tool to enhance students’ experiences in the classroom, continues to be a challenge (Inan & Lowther, 2010;Rodriguez, Nussbaum & Dombrovskaia, 2011).Teachers use technology for various purposes to support: 1) administrative or management activities,such as tracking students’ grades, 2) traditional or teacher-centered instructional practices, such as lecturing orpresenting, and 3) support student-centered teaching activities, such as giving students choice on how todemonstrate their learning (Palak & Walls, 2009). However, many studies on technology integration or teacheruse of technology did not differentiate the purposes of using technology and used the frequency of teacher use oftechnology tools in the classroom as the outcome measure of technology integration (Aldunate & Nussbaum,2013; Mumtaz, 2000). Only a few studies examined the predictors of teacher use of technology for studentcentered practices (Fu, 2013). This limits our ability to understand some important issues, such as whether thepredictors of teacher use of technology for teacher-centered instructional practices are the same as the predictorsof teacher use of technology to support student-centered teaching practices. To help fill this void in the existingliterature, the present study explored the independent contribution of a variety of teacher factors in predictingtheir use of technology tools: in general, to support traditional instructional practices, and to support studentcentered teaching purposes.Theoretical framework and significance of the workTechnological Pedagogical Content Knowledge (TPACK, Koehler & Mishra, 2009) highlighted that teachers’content knowledge and pedagogical competencies are equally important as the technology capabilities, andsuggested that a thoughtful alignment of three interconnected capabilities can support teacher effective integratetechnology into teaching practice (Voogt et al., 2013). Besides these teacher beliefs and knowledge, InternationalSociety for Technology Education (ISTE) revealed that the development of TPACK requires ongoingICLS 2018 Proceedings160© ISLSorganizational support and professional development with dedicated time for teachers to (re)design and enacttechnology-enhanced lessons (ISTE, 2009). In alignment with these theoretical frameworks, a considerableamount of empirical research studies has been published over the past two decades to explore factors thatinfluence teacher use of technology tools in teaching (e.g., Ertmer, 1999, 2005; Hew & Brush, 2007; also seeBuabeng-Andoh, 2012, for review). Although teacher-related factors have been widely viewed from differentperspectives, there are mainly four strands of research in the literature, which are: 1) teachers’ attitudes or beliefstowards technology, 2) teachers’ pedagogical beliefs, and 3) teachers’ perceived training effectiveness andorganizational support. Below, we reviewed some major findings in the existing literature on these factors.A considerable amount of research has been conducted to investigate the influence of teachers’ beliefstowards technology on their use of technology (see Buabeng-Andoh, 2012, for a review). Teachers’ perceivedcompetency beliefs of technology, or self-efficacy in using technology, has been found to relate to a more frequentuse of technology in the classroom. Teachers with prior computer experience are more likely to learn newnecessary skills, such as looking up information more quickly and seamlessly than those who have no priorexperience (Groff & Mouza, 2008). On the contrary, teachers lacking confidence in their computer skills are lesslikely to use technology into their teaching practices (Wozney, Venkatesh, & Abrami, 2006). In addition toperceived competence in technology skills, teachers’ positive attitude toward technology, such as passion abouttechnology, openness towards technology, or feeling comfortable using technology, may also affect theirtechnology integration practices (see Hew & Brush, 2007, for a review).Research has also suggested that teachers’ pedagogical beliefs are an important predictor of their use oftechnology (e.g., Ertmer & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2010; Ertmer, Ottenbreit-Leftwich, Sadik, Sendurur, &Sendurur, 2012). For example, Hermans, Tondeur, van Braak, and Valcke (2008) examined the influence ofteachers’ educational beliefs on teacher use of computer with 525 primary school teachers. They found thatteachers’ constructivist beliefs predicted unique variance in teacher use of computers above and beyond teachers’background variables and teachers’ attitudes towards computers. As part of a large-scale national study in theNetherlands, Drent and Meelissen (2008) revealed that primary and secondary teachers’ background, technologycompetency beliefs, attitudes toward technology, and their pedagogical approach all explained unique variancein their use of technology to support educational objectives. Based on findings from a qualitative approach, Ertmeret al., (2012) suggested that teachers with student-centered beliefs tended to use technology through a morestudent-centered approach. However, research in this area is still limited comparing to research in teachers’ beliefstowards technology.Some research suggests that teacher trainings are related to teacher technology use. For example, in anempirical study that employed the Teacher Attribute Survey, Vannatta and Fordham (2004) suggested that theamount of technology trainings teachers received is a predictor of teachers’ technology use. Another institutionalfactor that have been also suggested important is organizational supports, which means to provide teachers withtime and environment to practice the ways to integrate technology in teaching and getting feedback. Based on alongitudinal case study, Levin and Wadmay (2008) suggested that opportunities to practice, reflect, and interactwith other teachers are crucial in the process of facilitating classroom technology adoption. Also, Wong and Li(2008) found that the collaborating and an experimentation culture set by school leaders influenced effectivetechnology integration. Although it is intuitive to relate trainings and supports focusing on technology withincreased technical skills and use of technology, trainings or supports that focus on teachers' curriculumdevelopment or pedagogical practices may be as important as efforts to improve teachers’ technology using skills(Sandholtz & Reilly, 2004).Although most of existing literature focused on predictors of teacher use of technology in general, somerecent studies suggested that teachers’ pedagogical beliefs, teachers’ self-efficacy around technology, andreceived professional development support predicted teachers’ use of technology in student-centered ways(Ananiadou & Claro, 2009; Chen, 2010; Miranda & Russel, 2012). These studies, however, did not differentiateand compare the predictors of teachers’ use of technology for different purposes. Another layer of complexity inthis research area relates to inclusive investigation of multiple teacher-related factors and their independentpredictive effects. As noted earlier, only few studies investigated the independent contribution of teachers’pedagogical beliefs, teachers’ technological beliefs and attitudes, and teacher training to teacher use of technology(see Tondeur et al., 2016 for review). Also, most studies focused on pre-service teachers and primary schoolteachers, thus, research on high school teachers is limited.Considering these research gaps, the current study aims to include multiple types of teacher-relatedfactors (pedagogical beliefs, technological beliefs, and perceived professional development) that can help usunderstand the independent contribution of each set of predictors in terms of using technology for differentteaching purposes. A large set of survey data were collected from high school teachers from a large, urban schooldistrict implementing a one-to-one technology initiative. For this study, the following research questions areICLS 2018 Proceedings161© ISLSaddressed: 1) how are the teacher-related factors independently predict high school teacher using technology ingeneral? 2) how are the teacher-related factors independently predict teacher use of technology to support studentcentered teaching practice? 3) how are the teacher-related factors independently predict teacher use of technologyto support traditional teaching practice?MethodologiesParticipants and procedureAs part of a larger longitudinal study conducted in a large, urban K-12 public school district in the SouthwesternUnited States, a district-wide teacher survey was disseminated to high school teachers in spring 2016 with anonline survey system. Researchers received teacher emails from the district and all high school teachers were sentan individual email via their school requesting their participation. The survey remained open for two weeks andduring this time, teachers were sent three reminders about the survey but the survey participation was voluntary.In this school district, approximately 75% of students are classified as economically disadvantaged, and themajority of students are Hispanic (62%) and African American (25%) in 2016 as indicated by indices on thedistrict’s website. All high school teachers received the survey link, and participation was anonymous andvoluntary. Within a two-weeks survey window, 1,054 high school teachers answered on survey from 38 highschools, a 52% return rate. Of the 1,054 teachers who participated, 928 respondents passed at least one of thefraud items. Fraud items are commonly used in online survey to ensure participants answer the questionnaireseriously and carefully. For example, the questionnaire stated the clear directive to “Please choose StronglyDisagree on this item.” If a participant answered anything other than “Strongly Disagree,” then the participantdid not pass that item. Survey data of the 928 participants were included in the current study. Of the 928participants, 26% were English teachers, 19% were math teachers, 20% were science teachers, 18% were socialscience teachers, and 17% were teaching other subjects. This sample included more female teachers (59%) thanmale teachers. Forty-two percent of the teachers had more than 10 years of teaching experience, and 28% of theteachers had less than three years of teaching experience. About 39% teachers were 24-34 years old; 26% were35-44 years old; and the remaining teachers were 45-years-old or older.MeasuresThe survey consisted of a variety of measures on teachers’ perceptions and practice related to their technologyuse and classroom instruction. For the current study, the variables that we were interested in serving as predictorswere teachers’ pedagogical beliefs, teachers’ attitudes or beliefs towards technology, teachers’ perceived trainingeffectiveness and organizational support, with teachers’ demographics included as covariates. The outcomevariables were teachers’ use of technology for different purposes. Most survey items related to teacher use oftechnology were adapted from the Second Information Technology in Education Study Teacher Questionnaire(SITES, 2006) and the Technology - Instructional Practices Survey for Minnesota Teachers (MinnesotaDepartment of Education, 2014), and some were developed by the researchers. Questions related to teachers’pedagogy were developed by the researchers based on multiple theoretical frameworks such as the Bloom'sRevised Taxonomy Model (Anderson & Krathwohl, 2001), 21st Century Skills (P21 Partnership for 21st CenturyLearning, 2009), and ISTE Standards for Educators (2008). The researcher-developed survey items were createdand refined through an iterative process between researchers specialized in educational technology and teachereducation and consultants with expertise in in quantitative methods and assessment. An early draft of the surveywas created and piloted by the researchers in spring 2015, and 519 high school teachers from different contentareas participated in the pilot study. The researchers slightly revised the survey and then piloted the survey againwith a group of 14 high school teachers before it was administered for the current study. The researchers revisedthe survey items one more time based on feedback from the teachers to ensure that the survey items about teachers’beliefs and actual practice were relevant. Researchers also revised the item of the teacher use of technology tohave a clear focus on student-centered learning versus traditional teaching methods.AnalysesFor the first research question, we explored whether the variables of interest are predictive of teacher use oftechnology tools in general after controlling for teachers’ background variables. For the second research question,we explored to what extent teachers’ pedagogical belief, teachers’ technological belief and attitude, and teachertraining predicted teacher use of technology to support traditional teaching purpose and teacher use of technologyto support student-centered teaching purpose after controlling for teachers’ background variables and teacher useof technology tools in general. With teacher use of technology tools in general being controlled, the analysis canICLS 2018 Proceedings162© ISLSidentify the independent contribution of the targeted predictors to teacher use technology for different teachingpurposes. Preliminary data analysis showed that the random effects between schools are significant in the nullmodels when predicting teacher use of technology in general (p<.01) and teacher use of technology to supporttraditional teaching (p=.02). The intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) of the null models predicting teacheruse of technology in general, teacher use of technology to support student-centered-teaching, and teacher use oftechnology to support traditional teaching were .09, .02, and .05, respectively. To control for the random effectsbetween schools and to have a consistent structure of the models, a random intercept was added to all threeprediction models using PROC MIXED (SAS, 2004). A series of hierarchical linear models were used toinvestigate these two research questions. All data available for the modeling were used in this study. For eachresearch question, we ran a model with only the teacher background variables first, and then a model added in allthe personal and institutional predictors. Except for the teacher background variables, all the predictors andoutcome variables were standardized using PROC STANDARD (SAS, 2004) with M= 0 and SD= 1. In thesemodels, female teachers were used as the reference group when investigating the gender difference, teachers whowere 45-years-old or older were used as the reference group when investigating the age difference, teachers whotaught science were used as the reference group when investigating the content difference, teachers who taughtlower grade levels (9th and 10th grade) were used as the reference group when investigating the grade leveldifference, and teachers who had more than 10 years of teaching experience were used as the reference groupwhen investigating the teaching experience difference.ResultsTable 1 shows the descriptive statistics of all the predictors and outcome variables and the correlations betweenthem. The correlation between the two pedagogical beliefs variables (Learning Goals, Instructional Approaches)was moderate (r= .40); the correlation between the two attitudes towards technology variables (Openness toTechnology to Support Instructional Practice, Self-Efficacy in Using Technology) was moderate (r= .27); Thecorrelation between the two training variables was high (r=.59). All the predictors were correlated with teacheruse of technology tools in general to a small size (rs= .14-.24), and the largest correlations appeared with theattitudes towards technology variables (rs=.23, .24). Regarding teacher use of technology to the support studentcentered teaching purposes, most of the predictors correlated with this outcome to a medium size (rs=.22-.38). Incontrast, the pedagogical beliefs variables (rs= .15, .18) and the training variables (rs= .19-.20) had lowercorrelations with teacher use of technology to support traditional teaching purpose than attitudes towardstechnology variables (rs=.23, .26).Table 2 shows the estimates of the predictors when the background variables were controlled ascovariates. A preliminary regression analysis showed that none of the predictor has violated the multicilinearityrule (VIFs < 3). When predicting teacher use of technology tools in general (Model 1B), both attitudes towardstechnology variables, self-efficacy in using technology and openness to technology to support instructionalpractice were significant (β =.15, p<.01), and (β =.08, p=.07), respectively, indicating that teachers who havehigher confidence in their technology skills and who are more open to using new technology in teaching usetechnology tools more frequently in their teaching practices in general.ICLS 2018 Proceedings163© ISLSWhen predicting teacher use of technology to support teaching purposes (Model 2B & Model 3B),teacher use of technology tools in general was a significant predictor in both models (βs=.17, .21.19, ps<.01), aswell as teachers’ self-efficacy in using technology (βs=.11, .13, ps=.01). Furthermore, Model 2B shows thatteachers’ instructional approach also independently predicted teacher use of technology to support studentcentered teaching (β =.23, p<.01), however, teachers’ instructional approach was not significant when predictingteacher use of technology to support traditional teaching. Interestingly, openness towards technologyindependently predicted teacher use of technology to support student centered teaching (β =.15, p<.01) but nottraditional teaching. These findings indicate that teachers who frequently use a student-centered teachingapproach or who are more open to experimenting with technology are more likely to use technology to supportstudent-centered teaching. Given the exploration nature of this study, with Bonferroni corrections, teachers’ selfefficacy in using technology was the only significant predictor of using technology in general and use oftechnology to support teacher-centered teaching, while teachers’ instructional approach and openness totechnology significantly predicted teacher use of technology to support student-centered teaching.In addition, although the perceived effectiveness of training was not significant when predicting the threedifferent measures of teacher use of technology, the estimates of the training with a technology focus weremarginally significant across three models while the estimates of the teaching training in general were higherwhen predicting use of technology to support student-centered teaching (β =.11, p=.09) than when predicting useof technology to support traditional teaching (β =.03, p=.64).DiscussionStudent-centered instruction is a highly-valued way to approach learning experiences for students as it focuses onthe learner. In a student-centered learning environment, teachers may guide their students through the discoveryof new knowledge, facilitate discussions, and/or give students the freedom to explore in their learning.Unfortunately, increased availability of technology in schools has not led to overall improvement in classroomteaching practices (Cuban, 2001; Cuban, Kirkpatrick, & Peck, 2001; Windschitl & Sahl, 2002). The technologytools only helped provide the environmental readiness, or addressed the first-order barriers; how to address thesecond-order barriers, or overcome the challenges related to teacher readiness (Ertmer, 1999, 2005; Kim et al.,2013) became increasingly important for this stage of technology integration in many schools and districts in theU.S. To address this challenge, one area of research indicates that teachers with more constructivist views andpractices tend to not only use technology to support higher order thinking skills, but also use technology morefrequently and to support more student-centered curricula (Baylor & Ritchie, 2002; Ertmer,et al., 2012; Overbay,Patterson, Vasu, & Grable, 2010). Recent research showed that “tool access”, “constructivist pedagogy”, and acombination of “will” and “skill” can explain a significant amount of the variance (60%-90%) in teachers’ levelICLS 2018 Proceedings164© ISLSof technology integration (Christensen & Knezek, 2017; Knezek & Christensen, 2016; Petco, 2012). Whileprevious studies have examined teacher beliefs and professional development factors as related to teachers’frequency of technology use, only a few have examined the predictors of teacher use technology in a studentcentered way. Furthermore, according to the author's knowledge and a comprehensive literature review, noexisting study has differentiated the predictors of teacher technology use for traditional teaching and studentcentered teaching. Thus, results of the current study have important implications for education practitioners andresearchers.First, the findings of the current study is aligned with results from previous research on technology selfefficacy (see Hew & Brush, 2007, for a review). When background variables were controlled, technology selfefficacy was still a significant predictor of teacher technology use in general and teachers use technology tosupport either student-centered or traditional teaching purposes. This result suggests that teachers’ confidence inusing technology is directly related to their actual use of technology in the classroom. As in the well-known “LittleEngine that Could” story, those who “think I can, think I can” may hold an advantage over those without suchbeliefs. Bandura (1989) suggested that self-efficacy may influence behavioral outcomes through motivationaland affective processes. The mechanisms through which teachers’ technology self-efficacy influence theirtechnology use behaviors may involve these dual processes. Motivationally, as suggested by the TAM model,technology self-efficacy might influence both teaching-related decision-making and later engagement intechnology-related instructional activities. Teachers low on technology self-efficacy may correspondingly hold alow expectancy for carrying out the optimal teaching outcomes by using technology, so they may avoid usingtechnology when they do not have to. If technology is asked to be required for their teaching, they may flag intheir efforts and work passively. Affectively, technology self-efficacy may enhance teachers’ coping in the faceof obstacles when designing and delivering technology integrated instruction. Teachers who have stronger beliefsmay be able to experience less anxiety, think more openly and persist longer when faced with difficulties thanteachers who are beset by self-doubt (Bandura, 1989).Second, one important finding of the current study is, when predicting teacher technology use to supportstudent-centered teaching, teachers’ instructional approach was an important contributor. The effect of teachers’instructional approach was found to be independent from teachers’ technology self-efficacy. Notably, whenpredicting use of technology to support student-centered teaching together, the estimate of teacher’s instructionalapproach was more than double the size of the estimate of the technology self-efficacy, suggesting that teachers’pedagogical approaches and technology usage tendency are both important, but teachers’ pedagogical approachis even more crucial to determine teachers’ use of technology for more desired learning outcomes. This findingis aligned with the TPACK Model, which has been widely used to provide a foundation for practitioners andresearchers to understand the multiple components of supporting teachers in their practice and the relationship totechnology (Koehler & Mishra, 2009). The TPACK framework emphasizes the integrated roles of teachers’technological knowledge, pedagogical knowledge, and content knowledge and suggests that good practicerequires all three components. The current study did not focus on one specific content area, and we did notmeasure teachers’ content knowledge, but our results highlighted the importance of teachers’ pedagogicalreadiness and technological readiness to effective teaching with technology.Third, we found that teachers’ openness towards technology was also an independent predictor of teacheruse technology to support student-centered teaching when technology self-efficacy was controlled. Althoughteachers who were more confident in their technology ability may be more willing to experiment and practice,these two constructs are different. Another factor that could influence teachers’ openness to technology isteachers’ mindset. Dweck, Chiu, & Hong (1995) suggested that people’s mindsets about the malleability of abilityframe the way they perceive and interpret experiences and events, which in turn influence their reactions andresponses in such situations. People with a fixed mindset (also referred to as entity theory) tend to believe thatability is fixed and unchangeable, while people with a growth mindset (also referred to as incremental theory)tend to believe that through effort and appropriate strategies, learners can improve their ability. People with agrowth mindset are more likely to focus on skill improvement and effective strategy use rather than documentingability and superficial strategy use. In a new 1-to-1 program, most teachers are not skilled at using instructionaltechnology; however, teachers who have a growth mindset may be more likely to learn how to improve their skillsand take risk to try new technology and pedagogy, while teachers who have a fixed mindset would feel morecomfortable using the traditional way to teach and to maintain their performance. The current study did notexplicitly measure teachers’ mindset, but the results on openness towards technology suggest that the teachermindset might have an active role in determining teachers’ choice of teaching approach and their performanceover time. Future research can investigate how teacher mindset influences teachers' perceptions, practice, andperformance regarding instructional use.ICLS 2018 Proceedings165© ISLSThis study has important implications for practitioners organizing professional learning experiences forteachers. Research in professional learning has highlighted issues of self-confidence and coaching as importantand difficult. For example, Goff and Mouza (2008) suggested that teachers lack of computer knowledge andexperience is the most foreseeable challenge for teachers implementing instructional technology in the classroom.Our research confirmed that teachers’ confidence in using technology is a starting point for teacher use oftechnology, either for traditional teaching use or for student-centered teaching purposes. More importantly, ourfindings suggest that developing systems of both technological and pedagogical support that accommodateteachers’ technology and pedagogical skills may help teachers integrate technology into their classrooms moreeffectively. Only technological support is insufficient to equip teachers with the skillset to implement technologyto create a student-centered learning environment. Furthermore, building a culture that embraces innovation andexperimentation with new technology may be also important. Effective professional development needs toaddress school culture, teachers’ mindset, and provide sufficient time for modeling, experimentation, andreflection, as well as follow-up support for technology integration in the classroom.ReferencesAldunate, R., & Nussbaum, M. (2013). Teacher adoption of technology. Computers in Human Behavior, 29(3),519-524.Anderson, L.W. (Ed.), Krathwohl, D.R. (Ed.), Airasian, P.W., Cruikshank, K.A., Mayer, R.E., Pintrich, P.R.,Raths, J., & Wittrock, M.C. (2001). A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing: A revision ofBloom's Taxonomy of Educational Objectives (Complete edition). New York: Longman.Bebell, D., Russell, M., & O’Dwyer, L. (2004). Measuring teachers’ technology uses: Why multiple-measuresare more revealing. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 37(1), 45-63.Berrett, B., Murphy, J., & Sullivan, J. (2012). Administrator insights and reflections: Technology integration inschools. The Qualitative Report, 17(1), 200–221.Buabeng-Andoh, C. (2012). Factors influencing teachers' adoption and integration of information andcommunication technology into teaching: A review of the literature. International Journal of Educationand Development using Information and Communication Technology, 8(1), 136.Bulman, G., & Fairlie, R. W. (2016). Technology and education: Computers, software, and the internet (No.w22237). National Bureau of Economic Research.Carstens, R., & Pelgrum, W. J. (2007). Second information technology in education study: SITES 2006 technicalreport. The International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA).Chen, R. J. (2010). Investigating models for preservice teachers’ use of technology to support student-centeredlearning. Computers & Education, 55(1), 32-42.Cuban, L., Kirkpatrick, H., & Peck, C. (2001). High access and low use of technologies in high school classrooms:Explaining an apparent paradox. American Educational Research Journal, 38(4), 813-834.Drent, M., & Meelissen, M. (2008). Which factors obstruct or stimulate teacher educators to use ICT innovatively?Computers & Education, 51(1), 187-199.Ertmer, P. A., Addison, P., Lane, M., Ross, E., & Woods, D. (1999). Examining teachers’ beliefs about the roleof technology in the elementary classroom. Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 32(1), 54–72.Ertmer, P. A. (1999). Addressing first-and second-order barriers to change: Strategies for technology integration.Educational Technology Research and Development, 47(4), 47-61.Ertmer, P. A., & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, A. T. (2010). Teacher technology change: How knowledge, confidence,beliefs, and culture intersect. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 42(3), 255-284.Ertmer, P. A., Ottenbreit-Leftwich, A. T., Sadik, O., Sendurur, E., & Sendurur, P. (2012). Teacher beliefs andtechnology integration practices: A critical relationship. Computers & Education, 59(2), 423-435.Fu, J. S. (2013). ICT in education: A critical literature review and its implications. International Journal ofEducation and Development using Information and Communication Technology, 9(1), 112.Groff, J., & Mouza, C. (2008). A framework for addressing challenges to classroom technology use. AACeJournal, 16(1), 21-46.Hannafin, M. J., & Land, S. M. (1997). The foundations and assumptions of technology-enhanced studentcentered learning environments. Instructional Science, 25, 167–202.Hermans, R., Tondeur, J., van Braak, J., & Valcke, M. (2008). The impact of primary school teachers’ educationalbeliefs on the classroom use of computers. Computers &Education, 51, 1499–1509.Hernández-Ramos, P. (2005). If not here, where? Understanding teachers’ use of technology in Silicon Valleyschools. Journal of Research on Technology in education, 38(1), 39-64.ICLS 2018 Proceedings166© ISLSHew, K. F., & Brush, T. (2007). Integrating technology into K-12 teaching and learning: Current knowledge gapsand recommendations for future research. Educational Technology Research and Development, 55(3),223-252.Hursh, D. (2007). Assessing No Child Left Behind and the rise of neoliberal education policies. AmericanEducational Research Journal, 44(3), 493-518.InternationalSocietyforTechnologyinEducation,(2009).Retrievedfrom:http://www.iste.org/docs/pdfs/netsessentialconditions.pdf?sfvrsn=2Islam, M. S., & Grönlund, Å. (2016). An international literature review of 1: 1 computing in schools. Journal ofEducational Change, 17(2), 191-222.Kay, R. H. (2006). Evaluating strategies used to incorporate technology into preservice education: A review ofthe literature. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 38(4), 383-408.Koehler, M. J., & Mishra, P. (2009). What is technological pedagogical content knowledge. Contemporary issuesin technology and teacher education, 9(1), 60-70.Levin, T., & Wadmany, R. (2006). Teachers’ beliefs and practices in technology-based classrooms: Adevelopmental view. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 39(2), 157-181.Levin, T., & Wadmany, R. (2008). Teachers' views on factors affecting effective integration of informationtechnology in the classroom: Developmental scenery. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education,16(2), 233.Minnesota Department of Education (2014). Technology - Instructional Practices Survey for Minnesota Teachers.Retrieved from https://education.state.mn.us/mdesurvey/index.php/16773/lang-en.Mumtaz, S. (2000). Factors affecting teachers' use of information and communications technology: a review ofthe literature. Journal of Information Technology for Teacher Education, 9(3), 319-342.P21 Partnership for 21st Century Learning. (2009). Framework for 21st Century Learning. Retrieved fromhttp://www.p21.org/about-us/p21-framework.Palak, D., & Walls, R. T. (2009). Teachers’ beliefs and technology practices: A mixed-methods approach. Journalof Research on Technology in Education, 41(4), 417-441.Selya, A. S., Rose, J. S., Dierker, L. C., Hedeker, D., & Mermelstein, R. J. (2012). A practical guide to calculatingCohen’s f2, a measure of local effect size, from PROC MIXED. Frontiers in psychology, 3, 111.Sandholtz, J. H., & Reilly, B. (2004). Teachers, not technicians: Rethinking technical expectations for teachers.Teachers College Record, 106(3), 487-512.SAS Institute (2004) Statistical analysis system 7.5. Cary, NC: Author.U. S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Technology (2010). Transforming American Education:Learning powered by technology. National Educational Technology Plan, 2010. Retrieved September 8,2017, from https://www.ed.gov/sites/default/files/netp2010.pdfTondeur, J., Hermans, R., van Braak, J., & Valcke, M. (2008). Exploring the link between teachers’ educationalbelief profiles and different types of computer use in the classroom. Computers in Human Behavior,24(6), 2541-2553.Tondeur, J., van Braak, J., Ertmer, P. A., & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, A. (2017). Understanding the relationshipbetween teachers’ pedagogical beliefs and technology use in education: a systematic review of qualitativeevidence. Educational Technology Research and Development, 65(3), 555-575.van Braak, J. (2001). Factors influencing the use of computer mediated communication by teachers in secondaryschools. Computers & Education, 36(1), 41-57.Vannatta, R. A., & Nancy, F. (2004). Teacher dispositions as predictors of classroom technology use. Journal ofResearch on Technology in Education, 36(3), 253-271.Voogt, J., Fisser, P., Pareja Roblin, N., Tondeur, J. and van Braak, J. (2013), Technological pedagogical contentknowledge – a review of the literature. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 29, 109–121.Watson, D. M. (2001). Pedagogy before technology: re-thinking the relationship between ICT and teaching.Education and Information Technologies, 6 (4), 251–266.Windschitl, M., & Sahl, K. (2002). Tracing teachers’ use of technology in a laptop computer school: The interplayof teacher beliefs, social dynamics, and institutional culture. American Educational Research Journal,39(1), 165-205.Wong, E. M., & Li, S. C. (2008). Framing ICT implementation in a context of educational change: A multilevelanalysis. School Effectiveness and School Improvement, 19(1), 99-120.Wozney, L., Venkatesh, V., & Abrami, P. C. (2006). Implementing computer technologies: Teachers' perceptionsand practices. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 14(1), 173.ICLS 2018 Proceedings167© ISLS