The Role of Instructional Goal Setting for Teaching ComputationalThinking in Robotics ClassroomsEben B. Witherspoon, University of Pittsburgh, ebw13@pitt.eduAbstract: Robotics curricula offer rich, applied opportunities to learn computational thinking.However, these opportunities are likely to vary, as educators adapt curricula to their learningenvironments. A comparative case study approach is used to examine how two middle schoolTechnology Education teachers conceptualize and articulate instructional goals whenincorporating a novel computer science curriculum in their robotics classrooms. Evidencesuggests tacit differences in teacher’s framing of instructional goals around computationalthinking, with implications for curricular design.Computer science education is now widely considered to be an integral part of a well-rounded science, technology,engineering and mathematics (STEM) education. In the United States, the fastest growing careers are likely torequire some degree of computational literacy, and the ability to use computers and programming logic to solveproblems in a variety of applications. Researchers have used the term computational thinking to describe thisparticular 21st century skill, as “an approach to problem solving in a way that can be solved by a computer...aproblem solving methodology that can be transferred and applied across subjects” (Barr & Stephenson, 2011).However, still relatively little is known about particular pedagogical practices that might be linked to effectiveinstruction in this class of generalizable computational skills.Robotics education is one field that has been studied by educational psychologists as learningenvironments that could provide authentic opportunities to learn generalizable computational skills in an appliedsetting (Grover & Pea, 2013). In the last few decades, robotics programs have become nearly ubiquitous in primaryand secondary schools in the United States, both as elective after-school programs and recently within generaleducation classrooms. Many of these technology-rich programs are situated in Technology Education (“Tech Ed”)departments, which have historically focused on vocational training in specific and often localized industrialtechnologies, and are taught by teachers with varied training and experience in computer programming (Shields& Harris, 2007). Therefore, there is likely to be large variance in the particular focus and pedagogical approachto teaching computational thinking across robotics programs, as well as in learning outcomes for students.Theoretical frameworkResearch has shown that teacher beliefs about pedagogy and content interact with curriculum to determine waysthat materials are implemented, often creating disparities between the curriculum as designed and curriculum asenacted (Remillard, 2005). Instructional goal setting provides one useful framework for predicting how teachersactivate resources in ways that differ from the intent of the designed curriculum (Stein & Meikle, 2017). Goalsthat are explicitly stated and refined into sub-goals at the lesson planning stage may improve the design ofinstructional activities that increase student achievement (Hiebert, Morris, & Spitzer, 2017). However, in complexand ill-defined learning environments like Tech Ed classrooms, it is likely that teachers hold multiple goalssimultaneously, arranged in hierarchical systems that determine which goals are activated in certain situations(Davis, Janssen, & Van Driel, 2016; see Figure 1). In this framework, horizontal incoherence represents directlycompeting goals, which can lead to disparities in enacted curriculum as teachers prioritize one goal over another.Vertical incoherence arises when the pedagogical skills to plan and enact lesson activities aligned with higherlevel goals are unavailable, or not activated during a particular lesson.MethodsThis study employs a comparison case study design to examine the following research questions: 1) How dorobotics teachers conceptualize and articulate computational thinking goals, particularly in a Tech Ed setting? 2)How do instructional goals play out in teachers’ enactment of curriculum, through planning and classroominteractions?Interviews and classroom observations were conducted with two in-service Technology Educationteachers who were teaching an online, problem-based robotics curriculum that emphasizes computational thinkingconcepts. These teachers were purposively selected for analysis as their classroom observations and interviewsrevealed interesting contrastive cases of instructional goal setting, despite the overall similarity in their years ofteaching experience, student populations, and content. In addition to classroom observations, teachers were askedto complete brief goal setting sheets during their planning period prior to each class. Data were analyzed using aICLS 2018 Proceedings1443© ISLSgrounded theory approach, including iterative qualitative coding, and a constant comparison technique to identifythemes across cases.Figure 1. A sample hierarchical goal system, adapted from Davis, et al., 2016. Dotted arrows at the same levelrepresent horizontal incoherence; dotted arrow across levels represent vertical incoherence.Preliminary findings and implicationsOverall, while both teachers initially expressed similar high-level instructional goals for their students, differencesappeared in their enactment at the lesson planning stage, and during individual instructional interactions. Forexample, both teachers identify “using technology to solve problems” as a high-level goal. However, analyses ofplanning documents and classroom observation suggest different conceptualizations of the role of computationalthinking in solving problems with technology: as either a specific and explicit set of skills learned separately fromthe technological content, or as more general, implicit problem-solving heuristics acquired through hands-onexperiences with technology, and extensive trial and error. In a hierarchical goal system, these differentconceptualizations of computational thinking may relate to the level of vertical and/or horizontal incoherencebetween computational thinking goals embedded in the curriculum, and competing instructional goals held byTech Ed robotics teachers.Further analyses using this approach could inform the design of curriculum that acknowledges andincorporates teachers instructional goal systems in educative materials, as well as have implications for the contentof professional development in computational thinking for robotics teachers. It is also likely that unobserved,external barriers influenced how our case study teachers interpreted and implemented the curriculum. Future workthat incorporates an organizational perspective could help account for these broader influences on teacherimplementation.ReferencesBarr, V., & Stephenson, C. (2011). Bringing Computational Thinking to K-12: What is Involved and What is theRole of the Computer Science Education Community ? ACM Inroads, 2(1), 48–54.http://doi.org/10.1145/1929887.1929905Davis, E. A., Janssen, F. J. J. M., & Van Driel, J. H. (2016). Teachers and science curriculum materials: wherewe are and where we need to go. Studies in Science Education, 7267(May), 1–34.http://doi.org/10.1080/03057267.2016.1161701Grover, S., & Pea, R. (2013). Computational Thinking in K-12: A Review of the State of the Field. EducationalResearcher, 42(1), 38–43. http://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X12463051Hiebert, J., Morris, A. K., & Spitzer, S. M. (2017). Diagnosing Learning Goals: An Often-Overlooked TeachingCompetency. In T. Lueders, K. Philipp, & J. Lueders (Eds.), Diagnostic Competence of MathematicsTeachers(11thed.,pp.193–206).Cham,Switzerland:SpringerInternational.http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-66327-2Remillard, J. T. (2005). Examining Key Concepts in Research on Teachers’ Use of Mathematics Curricula. Reviewof Educational Research, 75(2), 211–246. http://doi.org/10.3102/00346543075002211Shields, C. J., & Harris, K. (2007). Technology Education : Three Reasons Stereotypes Persist. Journal of STEMTeacher Education, 44(2), 60–72.Stein, M. K., & Meikle, E. (2017). The nature and role of goals in mathematics education. In D. Spangler & J.Wanko (Eds.), Research companion to principles to action (pp. 1–11). Reston, VA: National Council ofTeachers of Mathematics. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-31450-1ICLS 2018 Proceedings1444© ISLS