Designing Outdoor Learning Spaces With iBeacons: CombiningPlace-Based Learning With the Internet of Learning ThingsHeather Toomey Zimmerman, Susan M. Land, Chrystal Maggiore, Robert W. Ashley, and Chris Milletheather@psu.edu, sland@psu.edu, chrystal@psu.edu, rma5386@psu.edu, chrismillet@psu.eduPenn State UniversityAbstract: This paper presents a collective case study of learners using mobile technology toengage in place-based science learning in an Arboretum. Our work investigates how proximitybased computing mediates youth’s engagement in scientific observations and conversations intheir Appalachian community. We draw upon theory from informal learning, place-basedlearning, and context-sensitive educational technologies to inform the research. Data from 26children in a summer camp program include log files, field notes, and video-records. Ourfindings illustrate how an iBeacon system supported children’s playful and scientificengagement (including in observational practices). We provide insights into designing forlearner-centered mobile computing that moves beyond presenting just-in-time information tocreating digital-physical spaces where learners engage each other and natural objects to supporttheir interests in science.Keywords: informal learning, mobile computing, pedagogical design, science education, gardensIntroductionAs mobile technologies become ubiquitous tools in educational settings, new opportunities have been created foreveryday objects to become connected to mobile devices. These connected devices have resulted in digitallyaugmented learning environments, which are referred to as the Internet of Things (IoT) (Trappeniers, Feki,Kawsar, & Boussard, 2013) or Internet of Learning Things (IoLT) (Selinger, Sepulveda, & Buchan, 2013). In theIoLT, designers connect computers to objects to bring together digital resources and physical places. Our researchand development agenda seeks to inform science learning experiences with design principles for technologyenhanced pedagogies. Specifically, we are investigating how informal learning institutions (ILIs), such as zoos,gardens, and science centers, can adopt iBeacon technologies to augment exhibits to engage visitors in interactivelearning activities within and about their community. As such, our work conceptualizes how proximity-basedtechnologies, informed by an IoLT perspective, can support youth to learn about biology, geology, hydrology,and ecology in the places that matter to their daily lives.Theoretical frameworkConceptually, our research and design efforts use an IoLT paradigm to make visible the scientific phenomenapresent (Eberbach & Crowley, 2009) in an ILI in ways that align with instrumental and social disciplinarypractices. Through this work, we transform object-oriented institutions into child-centered learning spaces as wedraw upon three literatures: informal learning, context-sensitive technologies, and place-based learning.The informal learning perspective (Bell, Lewenstein, Shouse, & Feder, 2009) acknowledges thatpeople’s sociocultural experiences, prior knowledge, and purposes/agendas for engaging in activities need to behonored in the design of learning experiences. Informal learning processes that we support with our design workinclude (a) meaning-making through talk where learners understand new phenomena through social interactions(Leinhardt, Crowley, & Knutson, 2002) and (b) making, drawing, or developing artifacts in order to elaborate,share information, and connect and build ideas (Kafai & Resnick, 1996).The learning with mobile technology literature considers the learner's interactions with their physicallocation, others, and the technology as part of context-sensitivity. Context-sensitivity is often associated with typesof augmented reality (AR) (Dunleavy, & Dede, 2014). Sharples (2013) asserted that context in a learningenvironment is more than just the setting, instead context is negotiated moment-by-moment through learners’interactions with the physical location, technology, material resources, and other people. We also drew heavilyon research on science learning with mobile computers (Chen, Kao, & Sheu, 2005; Huang, Lin, & Cheng, 2010;Kamarainen, et al., 2013; Land & Zimmerman, 2015; Looi, et al., 2010; Rogers, et al., 2005).Place-based learning (Smith, 2002) aims to ground learning experiences in community perspectives toillustrate how global and abstract concepts manifest in local places and spaces. Place-based activities recognizelearners’ everyday experiences as assets to future learning. When place-based learning is combined with context-ICLS 2016 Proceedings942© ISLSsensitive technologies, mobile computers become tools for learners that mediate connections between a localsetting and the broader disciplinary perspectives (Zimmerman & Land, 2014).Technological setting: The Places iBeacon systemThe iBeacons development platform (Places) includes a content management system (CMS), the Places appdeployed on iPad™ tablet computers, a server that hosts the CMS and data analytics, and iBeacons placed atbiological, geological, ecological, and hydrological exhibits within the Arboretum. We used Gimbal™ iBeaconsthat were battery-operated Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) transmitters. iBeacons transmit signals to a user’s mobiledevice in ways that allow the device to detect a learner's proximity to the iBeacon. With the fine-grained proximityinformation, the Places app pushes relevant content and learning activities to children and families.The research team developed a CMS to communicate to the Places app via the Internet. In the CMS, theresearchers loaded customized maps of the Arboretum exhibits, diagrams, photographs, and text (written at a 3rdgrade reading level for children ages 8-9) as well as unique codes found oneach iBeacon. The CMS was designed so that a learning designer couldconnect unique educational resources to each iBeacon in its database. Whenin the Arboretum, the Places app launches the appropriate exhibit map whenit detected an iBeacon that was identified on that map. The iBeacons allowthe Places app to push information to learners at the proximity level of aspecific tree specimen or exhibit component (at a precision that other locationaware technologies such as GPS nor QR codes cannot easily accomplish).This specificity of proximity enables the IoLT perspective in ILIs, becauseFigure 1. When iBeacons areiBeacons can support a visitor to compare and contrast relevant features ofdetected, the Places apptwo trees or two sculptures that are just meters apart.launchesa map for children,For the two case studies presented here, learners were given iPads towhich highlights the trees withuse with Places in the Arboretum. (Note: After the Places app is downloaded,additional learning activities.the Internet is not needed). As the children reached a proximity thresholdspecified by an algorithm set by researchers in the CMS, the iBeacon triggeredthe display of content on the iPad that included a learning activity and scientific information. During the learners’visit to an ILI, the Places app used the iPad’s hard drive to store data about the learners’ interactions with andproximity to each iBeacon. The data captured by the Places app contained an iPad-specific ID, iBeacon ID,content ID attached to the iBeacon, first access time, number of total access points, and last access time. Whenthe Places app next accessed the Internet, Places transmitted non-personally identifiable log file data back to thePlaces server with the users’ consent (and assent).MethodsThe overarching methodology is a collective case study to consider the unique features of a case (i.e., eachiBeacon-enabled learning experience) as well as to compare and contrast two cases. We selected the Arboretumat Penn State as our study site as it is a prototypical outdoor ILI. The Arboretum has a pollination garden, a modelcave, children’s garden, live specimens, sculptures, and various scientific representations. Learners in Case Ainclude 26 summer camp youth aged 6-10 learning about caves, and learners in Case B include 24 youth (fromthe same summer camp) learning about fruit. Learners worked in small groups with the teachers from the campto use the Places app and iBeacon system.In order to investigate how an iBeacon mobile computer system can be designed to support learners’ sciencelearning in ILIs, this study asks the following two questions:What types of conversations do learners have while using the materials? What types of engagementpatterns can be observed related to playful and/or scientific learning?Data collected include: (a) observations of small groups of children using the Places app and iBeacons at theArboretum, (b) learning analytics of small groups’ actions based on iBeacon proximity; (c) small groups’photographs and drawings, and (d) recording from digital video-cameras and GoPro® point-of-view cameras.•Observations of children at the Arboretum at Penn StateEach researcher followed one small group of children on-site. Researchers did not ask questions of the childrenbut assisted with technical issues as needed. Field notes were compiled into a database, and episodes wereidentified related to (a) learner experiences with wayfinding and usability of the app and (b) learners’ discourserelated to their observations of trees, the technologies, and science concepts. The episodes identified on the fieldICLS 2016 Proceedings943© ISLSnotes were coded from our theoretical framework as well as by emergent codes. Multiple researchers workedtogether on transcripts during team meetings to confirm themes and patterns related to the research questions.Learning analytics of children using the Places appFrom the Places app, the research team collected detailed logfiles at the level of each small group, rather thanindividual learners. These logfiles from small groups were coordinated to the fieldnotes so that we could align theonline data with on-site observations. We collected data that included the mobile device ID, content set accessed,iBeacon accessed, timestamp, and learners’ digital photographs. Logfiles were exported into Excel for analysis.From these data, we determined the time spent at each plant specimen, the learning pathway taken across theArboretum, and breadth and depth of the science content that each group accessed.Video-recordings of the learners at the ArboretumWe collected video-recordings of the children at the Arboretum. Team members made content logs where keyactions were identified. Researchers noted connections to prior knowledge, connection to concepts presented, useof representational forms, and talk that described or explained relevant scientific phenomena. The team heldinteraction analysis sessions where researchers described, documented, and interpreted the learners' activities inthe Arboretum. Narrative accounts of each group of learners were developed as were analytical memos related tothemes of place-based learning, informal science learning, play, and technical use issues.FindingsCase A: iBeacons assisted learners to coordinate ILI exhibits’ content to their localcommunity, its history, and the learners’ playful interestsIn Case A, we developed a 60-minute tour that showed learners models of phenomena that were of geological,hydrological, and biological importance to their community. An important theme on the tour was the way thatwater transformed the landscape and how the land transformed the water. All 26 children were observed to engagein playful and scientific discussion around the iBeacon content. The first excerpt illustrates how four childrenwere able to connect Places app science content to a life-sized model of a cave:At the iBeacon trigger for the cave, the Places text read: "Do you see where the water may have dissolvedthe rocks?” Cora pointed up to the stalactites. Then, Alex, Zoey, and Sawyer also pointed at thestalactites. Sawyer said, “see the white rock”. Alex and Zoey added, “and the white stalagmites”.The excerpt with Cora, Alex, Zoey and Sawyer illustrate how the text triggered by an iBeacon could act as aprompt to support observations of small (less than 10 cm) stalactites that grew on the ceiling of the model cave.Even while observing in the garden, learners added imaginative role-play elements to the iBeacon content.In this second excerpt, Sebastian added a time machine element to iBeacons activity, pretending that he could goback in time when his local community was covered by ocean to explore the prehistory of his community:•Sebastian: Oh yeah! This is our next destination. This has to be. Is this real coral? Ohhhh, thetrannsssmittter! Look! I'm putting this in here. Locked coordinates with black rock. ((He puts a rock inthe hole in the coral model.)) Locked in coordinates. Look this fits in here perfectly! I'm going to thebeach . . . ((singing)) yeah!We interpret Sebastian’s time-travel interactions to be consistent with expectation for play (and fun) in an ILIsetting. While we designed structure in our iBeacon program for Places, we took care not to over-structure theprogram — we left space for learners’ interests (and personal agendas and aims) alongside the scientific aims.•Case B: iBeacons supported observational practices across a large exhibitionIn Case B, we created a 60-minute observationally-focused tour that applied one concept — the biodiversity offruit. We placed iBeacons on trees that had visible evidence of fruit in the Arboretum, but we encouraged thegroups of learners to find other plants or trees with fruit. The 24 summer camp children engaged in observationsthat resulted in playful, descriptive, and conceptual discussion of plants, as shown by these three excerpts:•Playful talk: After investigating a tree and observing its many pinecones, Sebastian raised his handsabove his head to imagine that he was a pinecone similar to those he saw: “I’m a very small pinecone”.•Descriptive talk: A teacher asked if the children observed any differences between two crabapples trees.The children described differences in tree size, tree shape, bloom color, and branching pattern.•Conceptual talk: While looking at a tree, Sawyer and Violet observed strawberry plants at its base. Violetconnected the berry plants to others she had seen: “. . . they usually bloom in the early spring”.ICLS 2016 Proceedings944© ISLSThese three examples from our dataset learners engaged in scientific observations of the selected iBeacon-ed treesas well as other content that piqued their interests. These three excerpts were typical of others’ scientific andplayful interactions related to observing plants at the Arboretum.Cross-case discussion and implications to learning with mobile technologiesAcross the two cases, we found that both play and science learning — especially related to observational practices(Eberbach & Crowley, 2009) — were supported when we integrated an iBeacon system into a summer campprogram. In keeping with the goal to design an IoLT experience (Selinger, et al., 2013) for youth, the PlacesiBeacon system delivered content, question prompts, and activities to children in the Arboretum in a manner thatsupported them to look deeply at plants. We also found that social interactions occurred in the form of sciencerelated learning conversations (Leinhardt, et al., 2002) of both a descriptive and conceptual nature. This projectadds to the understanding of how to blend context-sensitive technologies with place-based perspectives onlearning because the design principles were supported by our case analyses to align to the orienting meta-principleof augmenting outdoor spaces to reveal scientific aspects that might not be visible to novice learners. Based onour analysis, we posit that by empowering young learners to explore ILIs with iBeacon systems (or similarcontext-sensitive educational technologies), youth can follow their own interests as they engage in the sciencepractice of observation. Learners can also use iBeacon systems to control the depth and breadth of science contentpresented, based on their proximity to pre-selected specimens and exhibits.ReferencesBell, P., Lewenstein, B., Shouse, A. W., & Feder, M. A. (Eds.) (2009). Learning science in informal environments:People, places, and pursuits. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.Chen, Y. S., Kao, T. C., & Sheu, J. P. (2005). Realizing outdoor independent learning with a butterfly-watchingmobile learning system. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 33(4), 395-417.Dunleavy, M., & Dede, C. (2014). Augmented reality teaching and learning. In Handbook of research oneducational communications and technology (pp. 735-745). Springer New York.Eberbach, C., & Crowley, K. (2009). From everyday to scientific observation: How children learn to observe thebiologist’s world. Review of Educational Research. 79(1), 39-68.Huang, Y.-M., Lin, Y.-T., & Cheng, S.-C. (2010). Effectiveness of a mobile plant learning system in a sciencecurriculum in Taiwanese elementary education. Computers & Education, 54, 47–58.Kafai, Y. B., & Resnick, M. (1996). Constructionism in practice: Designing, thinking, and learning in a digitalworld. New York: Routledge.Kamarainen, A. M., Metcalf, S., Grotzer, T., Browne, A., Mazzuca, D., Tutwiler, M. S., & Dede, C. (2013).EcoMOBILE: Integrating augmented reality and probeware with environmental education fieldtrips. Computers & Education, 68, 545-556.Land, S. M., & Zimmerman, H. T. (2015) Socio-technical dimensions of an outdoor mobile learning environment:A three-phase design-based research investigation. Educational Technology Research &Development. 63(2), 229-255. DOI: 0.1007/s11423-015-9369-6.Liu, T., Peng, H., Wu, W., & Lin, M. (2009). The effects of mobile natural-science learning based on the 5Elearning cycle: a case study. Educational Technology & Society, 12, 344–358.Looi, C.-K., Seow, P., Zhang, B., So, H.-J., Chen, W., & Wong, L.-H. (2010). Leveraging mobile technology forsustainable seamless learning: a research agenda. British Journal of Educational Technology, 41(2),154–169.Rogers, Y., Price, S., Randell, C., Fraser, D. S., Weal, M., & Fitzpatrick, G. (2005). Ubi-learning integrates indoorand outdoor experiences. Communications of the ACM, 48(1), 55–59.Selinger, M., Sepulveda, A., & Buchan, J. (2013). Education and the Internet of Everything: How ubiquitousconnectedness can help transform pedagogy. White Paper of Cisco, San Jose, CA.Sharples, M. (2013). Mobile learning: Research, practice, and challenges. Distance Education in China, 3, 5–11.Smith, G. A. (2002). Place-based education. Phi Delta Kappan, 83(8), 584.Trappeniers, L., Feki, M. A., Kawsar, F., & Boussard, M. (2013). The Internet of things: The next technologicalrevolution. Computer, 46(2), 24-25.Zimmerman, H. T., & Land, S. M. (2014). Facilitating place-based learning in outdoor informal environmentswith mobile computers. TechTrends. 58(1), 77-83. DOI: 10.1007/s11528-013-0724-3.AcknowledgmentsWe thank participating youth and the Arboretum at Penn State. This research and development work funded bythe Research Initiation Grant program by Center for Online Innovation in Learning.ICLS 2016 Proceedings945© ISLS