Socialization and Cognitive Apprenticeship in Online DoctoralProgramsMurat Öztok, Lancaster University, m.oztok@lancaster.ac.ukKyungme Lee, Lancaster University, k.lee23@lancaster.ac.ukClare Brett, University of Toronto, clare.brett.utoronto.caAbstract: Research to date on the effectiveness and popularity of online doctoral programshas looked largely at either quantitative measures of student satisfaction or of administrativeeffectiveness and design. This qualitative study reports findings from four online doctoralprograms in one UK university. We analyse the data through the lens of cognitiveapprenticeship to help us better understand the individual trajectories of students in the thesisportion of their programs.Research backgroundThe claims of effectiveness and quality of online/distance education programs are often based on generallyperceived advantages of technological affordances such as accessibility, flexibility, or interactivity rather thanissues concerned with pedagogical goals, such as providing opportunities for online/distance students withenculturation of scholarship, who normally do not experience research apprenticeship typically enjoyed by oncampus students (Brett, Lee, & Oztok, 2016). Two of the most common perspectives on this research thatappear in the current literature are: 1) student experiences of or satisfaction with their online/distance postgraduate program (Bolliger & Halupa, 2012), and 2) administrative or institutional reviews of the process andoutcomes of the planning, design and implementation (Kumar & Dawson, 2012). A growing number ofenrolments in the program is often considered as primary evidence of program success. Here, we use the termsocialization to conceptualize both the implicit and explicit processes by which post-graduate students acquirethe knowledge and skills necessary for their scholarly development and professional career (Brett et al., 2016).In order to examine and articulate how socialization happens throughout online doctoral studies, we also use thenotion of cognitive apprenticeship. We define and explain how we are using these terms in more detail in thefollowing section.Theoretical frameworkPost-graduate educationPost-graduate education, particularly at the doctoral level, is traditionally characterized as an apprenticeship inwhich students are learning the practice of research by working with supervisors and peers. According to Laveand Wenger (1991), learning occurs through various apprenticeship arrangements through a relational process oflegitimate peripheral participation: “activities, tasks, functions, and understandings do not exist in isolation; theyare part of broader systems of relations in which they have meaning. These systems of relations arise out of andare reproduced and developed within social communities” (p. 53). The community, Lave and Wenger assert,implies “participation in an activity system about which participants share understandings concerning what theyare doing and what that means in their lives and for their communities” (p. 98). However, the ways in whichscholarship is learned in face-to-face spaces cannot simply be applied to online programmes. Online/distanceprogrammes are not naturally built on these principles and thus the range of experiences needed for theapprenticeship model of learning may become decontextualized due to the lack of sense of research group.Cognitive apprenticeshipIn this model, learning is about acquiring domain-specific methods through a combination of observation,coaching, and practice. The concept of cognitive apprenticeship is built on these principles but it goes beyondpractical skills and focuses on cognitive skills in two distinct ways:First, the term apprenticeship emphasizes that cognitive apprenticeship was aimed primarily atteaching the processes that experts use to handle complex tasks. Like traditionalapprenticeship, cognitive apprenticeship emphasizes that knowledge must be used in solvingreal-world problems. … Second, the term cognitive emphasizes that the focus is on cognitiveskills, rather than physical ones. Traditional apprenticeship evolved to teach domains in whichthe target skills are externally visible, and thus readily available to both student and teacherICLS 2018 Proceedings1741© ISLSfor observation, refinement, and correction, and bear a transparent relationship to concreteproducts. (Collins & Kapur, 2014, p. 110).Cognitive apprenticeship, thus, is concerned with knowledge required for expertise: not only learning subjectmatter specific concepts, facts, and procedures but also acquiring nuanced knowledge about how to learn andwhen to apply, new concepts, facts, and procedures.Socialization in graduate schoolsIt refers to the “process through which individuals gain knowledge, skills, and values necessary for successfulentry into a professional career requiring an advanced level of specialized knowledge and skills” (Weidman,Twale, & Stein, 2001, p. iii). Socialization into graduate school requires different level of understanding andcommitment depending on individual needs, goals, profession, and the nature of the discipline.MethodologyThis study was conducted in 4 different online/distance doctoral programs in a UK university. 22 studentsagreed to participate in a semi-structured interview. Here, we summarize our initial findings due to limits.FindingsStudents seemed to internalize their isolation as a natural process for their development as a researcher orscholar. The personal nature of the doctoral thesis was the main theme in their explanation of the doctoraleducation. However, the concept of cognitive apprenticeship posits that through participating in communities,students not only learn subject matter specific concepts and facts but also acquire knowledge about how to learnnew concepts, facts, and procedures. Unfortunately, our results indicate that students lack enculturation in theprinciples of cognitive apprenticeship. This lack of enculturation is manifest in how they internalized theirisolation as a natural process inherent in the doctoral work. The result is that they are inaccurately equating theunstructured and personal nature of the thesis work with the experience of working alone which has resultedfrom the lack of program structure at this phase of the doctoral journey.Discussion and conclusionDespite the inconclusive nature of our findings, it is evident that we have to rethink the theory and practice ofonline/distance post-graduate education. We need to think differently about traditional notions of apprenticeship.Perhaps, the first step towards a more effective direction is to focus less on quantitative measures for success,like enrolment statistics or graduation rate but rather to employ qualitative judgements of the post-graduateexperience. What might be the guidelines for such qualitative judgments? The answer may lie within theprinciples of the learning sciences: knowledge is distributed across individuals within the environment. That is,learning is not an in-the-head phenomenon but a matter of engagement with, participation in, and membership toa community (Oztok, 2016). It is through this notion of learning that we may develop a more effectiveframework to reconceptualise the theory and practice of online/distance post-graduate education within thecognitive apprenticeship model of learning.ReferencesBolliger, D. U., & Halupa, C. (2012). Student perceptions of satisfaction and anxiety in an online doctoralprogram. Distance Education, 33(1), 81-98. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01587919.2012.667961Brett, C., Lee, K., & Oztok, M. (2016). Socialization and Social Capital in Online Doctoral Programs. In S.Cranmer, N. B. Dohn, M. de Laat, T. Ryberg, & J. A. Sime (Eds.), Proceedings of the 10thInternational Conference on Networked Learning 2016 (pp. 264 - 268). Lancaster, UK: LancasterUniversity.Collins, A., & Kapur, M. (2014). Cognitive Apprenticeship. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbookof the Learning Sciences (2nd ed., pp. 109-127). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Kumar, S., & Dawson, K. (2012). Theory to practice: Implementation and initial impact of an online doctoralprogram. Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration, 15(1).Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. New York, NY:Cambridge University Press.Oztok, M. (2016). Cultural Ways of Constructing Knowledge: The Role of Identities in Online GroupDiscussions. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 11(2), 157-186.Weidman, J. C., Twale, D. J., & Stein, E. L. (2001). Socialization of graduate and professional students inhigher education: A perilous passage? San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1742© ISLS