Domain-General Metacognitive Instruction Reduces ProductiveLearning Behaviors and Performance?Darrel R. Davis, Miami University, davisdr@miamioh.eduJ. Elizabeth Richey, University of Maryland, jerichey@rhsmith.umd.eduCristina D. Zepeda, University of Pittsburgh, cdz7@pitt.eduAbstract: Metacognition is critical to self-regulated learning, but can a domain-generalintervention improve college students’ course performance? We compared an interventionteaching metacognitive knowledge and skills against one in which students read feature newsarticles related to course content. Students in the metacognitive condition performed worse onthe final exam than students in the reading condition when controlling for prior metacognitiveawareness. We discuss future directions for understanding how metacognitive interventionsimpact students’ learning.Major issues and significanceMetacognition, or the process of thinking about one’s thoughts, strategies, and learning, plays a crucial role inself-regulated learning (Winne, 1995). Students must be able to recognize what they do not understand, plan andexecute an appropriate course of action, and evaluate its effectiveness. Experiments testing interventions topromote metacognition have typically involved extensive, in-class training directed by researchers or instructors(Dignath & Buttner, 2008), which limits applicability outside the context of the study. Zepeda, Richey, Ronevich,and Nokes-Malach (2015) found that an intervention targeting declarative knowledge about metacognition andthe application of metacognitive skills to course content improved middle school science students’ motivation,conceptual physics knowledge, and course performance. Results raised questions about how the interventionaffected students (e.g., were they studying more? making better use of resources?) and whether a similarintervention could help older students, who tend to be better but still flawed metacognitive thinkers (Metcalfe,Eich, & Castel, 2010).The goals of the current work are threefold: First, we seek to test a metacognitive intervention amongcollege students. Given that adults’ metacognitive skills plateau, and that college students typically represent aselective group of high-performing students, it is not clear they will benefit from practicing metacognitive skills.Second, we aim to adapt prior research by creating a domain-general intervention. Most prior work has customizedthe intervention to incorporate problems or activities from the course in question. While this has often proveneffective, it creates a barrier for teachers wishing to apply existing interventions in their classes. Third, we arecollecting fine-grained data within a learning management system on students’ course behaviors. This rich datasetwill provide greater insights into the learning behaviors associated with levels of metacognition and the effects ofa metacognitive intervention.MethodologyStudents were from a large, public university in the Midwest enrolled across five sections of two introductorylevel educational psychology courses: one section of an intro-level course for non-majors taught by one instructor(64 enrolled) and four sections of an intro-level course for majors taught by two instructors (138 enrolled).All students were asked to provide consent to analyze their course data; they were informed that theywould be completing all course activities regardless of consent. Data from 27 students were removed fromanalyses because the students either did not provide consent, were enrolled in both courses, or participated in thepilot study conducted the previous semester in a different course. As a result, the final sample included 54 studentsin the first course and 128 students across four sections of the second course.Both experimental and control materials consisted of self-guided, out-of-class activities, with studentsrandomly assigned to the experimental or control condition at the individual level. The experimental materialsfocused on three critical metacognitive skills – planning, monitoring, and evaluation – and three types ofmetacognitive knowledge – personal, strategic, and conditional. We modeled the intervention materials afteranother metacognition intervention that improved learning and motivation among middle school students (Zepedaet al., 2015). To make the current materials domain general and broadly applicable across courses, students chosethe assignments they wanted to target with each activity. The control condition received additional readings aboutcourse-relevant concepts from the popular press, along with a series of comprehension questions to ensure theywere reading the materials. Readings were selected to be relevant to the course but to not directly review contentthat would be on any course assessments. For example, when learning about operant conditioning, students receivea reading about B.F. Skinner’s pigeon-guided missile invention during World War II. The materials acrossICLS 2018 Proceedings1653© ISLSconditions were similar in length and style, so that any behavioral, motivational, or learning differences betweenthe conditions could be attributed to the content of the intervention. Due to logistical constraints, students in thenon-major course completed the intervention in eight segments, while students course for majors completed theintervention in four double segments.Students received extra credit for completing surveys at the beginning of the semester and immediatelybefore the final exam on which they self-reported their planning, monitoring, and evaluation (MetacognitiveAwareness Inventory; Schraw & Dennison, 1994) and their academic procrastination (short form; Yockley, 2016)on six-point Likert scales. We also collected data on students’ course behaviors within the online learningmanagement system for each course, including how far ahead of deadlines students accessed major assignmentinstructions, how far ahead of deadlines students submitted work, how often students viewed their grades, andwhether students accessed optional course resources. For the present submission, we focus on how far in advanceof deadlines students submitted their intervention activities during the second half of the course. To examine theimpact of the intervention on learning, we collected students’ scores on the final course exams.Results and conclusionsWe conducted a series of one-way analyses of covariance (ANCOVAs) comparing students’ post-interventionlevels of planning, monitoring, evaluating, and procrastination across conditions, controlling for eachcorresponding pre-intervention variable. Results revealed no significant differences (Table 1). An ANCOVA ofaverage submission times relative to deadlines that controlled for pre-intervention procrastination also revealedno condition effects (Table 1). An ANCOVA comparing students’ final exam grades across conditions andcontrolling for pre-intervention levels of planning, monitoring, and evaluation indicated a small effect ofcondition, with students in the metacognitive condition performing worse on the final exam than students in thecontrol condition (Table 1).While students in the metacognitive condition did not differ from students in the control condition onlevels of metacognitive awareness or procrastination did not differ, the intervention reduced their final examperformance. Further analyses of the rich behavioral data collected, along with the content of students’intervention responses, may provide greater clues regarding the reasons the metacognitive intervention reducedstudents’ learning outcomes. Based on these results, a domain-general metacognitive intervention might not bebeneficial in college classrooms, at least without a better understanding of the short- and long-term behavioraleffects of the intervention. We will encourage discussion of this curious result and more details are to come withcontinued analyses.Table 1: Preliminary results of ANCOVAs with adjusted marginal means1. Planning2. Monitoring3. Evaluating4. Academic procrastination1.156. Final examF0.010.000.900.660.684.02p.94.98.34.42.29.047η2 p.00.00.005.004.025.024Metacognitive conditionM (SE)4.12 (0.07)4.11 (0.08)4.05 (0.07)4.13 (0.07)23.64 (5.84)75.42 (1.43)Control conditionM (SE)4.12 (0.07)4.11 (0.08)4.15 (0.07)4.12 (0.07)32.38 (5.59)78.87 (1.48)ReferencesDignath, C., & Büttner, G. (2008). Components of fostering self-regulated learning among students. A metaanalysis on intervention studies at primary and secondary school level. Metacognition and Learning, 3,231–264.Metcalfe, J., Eich, T. S., & Castel, A. D. (2010). Metacognition of agency across the lifespan. Cognition, 116(2),267–282.Schraw, G., & Dennison, R. S. (1994). Assessing metacognitive awareness. Contemporary EducationalPsychology, 19, 460-475.Winne, P. H. (1995). Inherent details in self-regulated learning. Educational Psychologist, 30, 173–187.Yockey, R. D. (2016). Validation of the short form of the academic procrastination scale. Psychological Reports,118, 171-179.Zepeda, C. D., Richey, J. E., Ronevich, P., & Nokes-Malach, T. J. (2015). Direct instruction of metacognitionbenefits adolescent science learning, transfer, and motivation: an in-vivo study. Journal of EducationalPsychology, 107(4), 954-970.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1654© ISLS