Problematic Instruments:Technology, Legitimization, and Citizen ScienceKevin A. Nguyen, University of Texas at Austin, kevin.a.nguyen@utexas.eduAbstract: At the intersection of science and society lies citizen scientists, and they are taskedwith being part of the broader public as well as performing scientific legitimacy. This studyaims to explore how citizen scientists interact with technology and legitimacy. The study siteconsists of a canoeing citizen science organization. The author conducted participantobservation and collected video data. Results show that much of the anxiety related tolegitimacy is deferred to their scientific instruments.IntroductionMany citizen science programs aim to increase the public’s engagement and understanding of science. However,citizen scientists exist in a liminal space between “ordinary folk” and privileged scientists (Irwin, 1995). Indefending their claims, these citizen scientists will use the same empirical evidence and techniques that traditionalscientists do. Yet, these citizen scientists have considerably less power than the traditional scientist despitemimicking their techniques. How then do citizen scientists handle problems of scientific legitimacy?This research project aims to explore how the River Team (a pseudonym) handles issues of scientificlegitimacy. The River Team consists of a group of water quality citizen scientists affiliated with a large Tier 1university in the United States. Members of the River Team are provided water quality probes and instruments(Figure 1a) with a routinized protocol (Figure 1b) for “taking science” or collecting water quality data. This paperfocuses on how River Team members’ handles questions of scientific legitimacy centered on “taking science” andusing the water quality instruments.Theoretical frameworkI take an interactionist stance (Jordan & Henderson, 1995) towards understanding how the River Team collectswater quality data. I assume that the object of activity, talk, artifacts, and cultural norms are all crucial forinterpretation. I particularly focus on the human-technology interactions and discourse between River Teammembers and water quality instrument probes. Imbuing technology with anthropomorphic properties as well asnegotiating with them through talk provides technology with a sense of human-like agency, as previously seen inActor Network Theory (Latour, 2005) and posthuman or more-than-human frameworks (Snaza et al., 2014).In understanding scientific legitimacy, I turn towards sociologist Gieryn (1999) and his framework ofboundary-work, which suggests that traditional scientists prescribe discursive and material boundaries that drawthe line between authentic science and non-science. The boundary between scientists and non-scientists has oftenbeen shifted and continues to shift when convenient, even though there has been much effort to make schoolscience (Roth, 2012) and citizen science (Dickinson, Zuckerberg, & Bonter, 2010) closer to “authentic science.”MethodsI have conducted a multi-year ethnographic participant observation (Wolcott, 1999) study of the River Team.Using wearable cameras or GoPros, I and a few members of the team recorded instances when we stopped on andalongside the river to collect water quality data. I watched and logged all the video data related to water qualitydata collection between Spring 2016 and Spring 2018. I then coded for emergent cases (Becker, 2014) related tohow River Team members made sense of the water quality data in terms of scientific legitimacy with the waterquality instrument probes. A case based approach (Luker, 2008) was used to compare cases of when teammembers felt the instrument probes were effectively legitimizing or de-legitimizing their scientific practice.Results and discussionCase analysis of video data suggests that River Team members felt both legitimized and de-legitimized by theirusage of water quality instrument probes. Most cases however centered around team members feeling delegitimized by the instruments. Team members would often focus on the instrument probe not working, not beingaccurate, and felt that the instrument was ill or sick.For example, on a routine data collection protocol alongside the San Marcos River in Texas, Catherineand Henry (pseudonyms) are discussing the pH instrument probe. The pH, or the logarithmic concentration ofHydrogen ions, instrument probe reads a range from 1 to 14, and the pH value of water typically falls between 6ICLS 2018 Proceedings1645© ISLSand 8. The pH probe Henry is working with reads a value of 2.5 (10:00). Catherine comments that “Jerry, [thename of the pH probe], is just gonna have to sit this trip out” (10:30). Eventually Catherine comes to Henry tohelp troubleshoot the probe (11:00) (Figure 1c). Catherine concludes that “the reality of the probe is that its insideshas gone bad. It is dementia probe” (11:26). However, Henry keeps trying to get a better reading and says, “comeon baby..” to it (11:36). Eventually Henry gives up and moves on to a different probe which also fails, andCatherine later comments how “she hates science, it gets so hard” (23:50).(a)(b)(c)Figure 1. (a) pH instrument probe. (b) Water quality monitoring sheets. (c) Catherine and Henrytroubleshooting.We see here how the instruments are giving spurious and incorrect water quality values. However, these casesand type of talk regarding the faulty nature of the instruments continues throughout semesters, even if theinstruments give more reliable readings. This suggests that some of the illegitimacy attributed to citizen scienceis deferred by its members to the scientific instruments they use. The stigma citizen scientists face as non-scientistsis redirected to their scientific instruments, and their scientific instruments are often to blame for their less thanideal scientist status.To remedy the problematic instruments, in Fall 2017, the River Team spent around $1000 on newinstrument probes to improve their ability to take water quality data. Yet, they find many problems and errorswith utilizing the new probes and again begin attributing problems with probes. This also reflects the tendenciesof the River Team members to give anthropomorphic or human-like attributes to the instrument probes. Probescan go bad or have dementia or need encouragement. The instrument probes are given agentic and human-likeproperties in some hope that they will legitimize the River Team’s scientific practice.Seriously considering the role of human-technology interactions for human’s legitimacy in scientific orother practices opens a discussion of how human-technology interactions can enable or disable certain groups ofpeople. In this study, I explored how a citizen science team’s interaction with technology left them feeling delegitimized and drawn outside the boundary of science. Future work will explore how other interactions mayenable feeling or legitimacy or illegitimacy.ReferencesBecker, H. S. (2014). What about Mozart? What about murder? Reasoning from cases. University of ChicagoPress.Dickinson, J. L., Zuckerberg, B., & Bonter, D. N. (2010). Citizen science as an ecological research tool: challengesand benefits. Annual review of ecology, evolution, and systematics, 41, 149-172.Gieryn, T. F. (1999). Cultural boundaries of science: Credibility on the line. University of Chicago Press.Irwin, A. (1995). Citizen science: A study of people, expertise and sustainable development. Psychology Press.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39-103.Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor-network-theory. Oxford University Press.Luker, K. (2008). Salsa dancing into the social sciences. Harvard University Press.Roth, W. M. (2012). Authentic school science: Knowing and learning in open-inquiry science laboratories (Vol.1). Springer Science & Business Media.Snaza, N., Appelbaum, P., Bayne, S., Carlson, D., Morris, M., Rotas, N., ... & Weaver, J. (2014). Toward aPosthumanist Education. Journal of Curriculum Theorizing, 30(2), 39.Wolcott, H. F. (1999). Ethnography: A way of seeing. Rowman Altamira.AcknowledgmentsI would like to thank the River Team members for being a kind and loving community. I would also like to thankmy colleagues, Flávio Azevedo and Adam Papendieck, for always being willing to meet and chat.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1646© ISLS