Social Positioning Newcomer Roles on a High School RoboticsTeam: A Chronotopic Micro-AnalysisColin Hennessy Elliott, New York University, che217@nyu.eduAbstract: This paper uses a chronotopic analysis to map newcomer positioning and its effecton roles for an urban high school robotics team. Comparing three distinct episodes shows thatwith imminent competition, the case’s newcomer positioning changes, deprivileging herlearning through a rejection of any chronotopic contributions. In practice, the newcomer’s roleis crafted by posing choices she can make in the imagined future of competition throughchronotopic co-construction.PurposeRobotics teams are typically viewed as places where youth engage in science and engineering practices inauthentic ways (Puvirajah, et al., 2012). As Basu, Barton, Clairmont, and Locke (2009) argue social positioningis an important way to view STEM learning opportunities. A robotics team is one such opportunity where studentsopt to participate much like the informal contexts studied by others (Nasir & Cooks, 2008; Ma & Munter, 2014).The purpose of this paper is to explore the produced social spaces within one robotics team in an urban high schoolto better understand how one newcomer is positioned in three situations over two competition seasons. Thequestion for this study is: In the semi-formal learning environment of this robotics team, how is one newcomerafforded participation in learning opportunities as she takes on an important role on the team over her first twocompetition seasons?Theoretical framework: A chronotopic approachChronotopes are a dialogic unit, which theoretically acknowledges the “inseparability of time and space,”according to Bakhtin (1981). This, framed in a sociocultural view of human development (Vygotsky, 1980),means that participants in the social world bring to interactions interpretations of past-space, present-space, andimagined future-space, to contribute. This study uses the chronotope as a unit of analysis to build an understandingof how social actors collaboratively position each other in interactions as part of a community like EngineeringRobotics. Such an analysis provides a view on how power structures are producedPositioning is an “interactional, social practice” (Leander, 2004, p. 210) that builds a convergingcommunity understanding of power by crafting different roles and the members of the community that belong inthem. A learner’s position, or place in relation to power and possible action within a social space, effects whatand how they learn. Exploring the chronotopes participants bring to an interaction is an underused way to analyzelearner positioning. Leander (2002; 2004) argues that social interactions can be viewed as the co-creation ofchronotopes, building on Bakhtin’s concept; participants in an interaction bring together different chronotopes tocollectively construct social life. Chronotopes, in this view, are interpretations of space-time shared andconstructed together in an unfolding interaction. Foucault (1995) argues that power is enacted in a distributedway, through interactional discourse by participants who collectively discipline each other. Therefore, chronotopicanalysis allows us to analyze power roles crafted in a learning community and make sense of how power is enactedin a distributed way in social practice.Modes of inquiryEngineering Robotics is housed at Engineering High School, a Title 1 school that serves a majority black andLatinx students from a midsized Northeastern city. All team members and mentors featured in this research areblack, Latinx or southeast Asian. The participating coach is a white man, as am I. All participants are referred toby pseudonyms in Table 1 and throughout this paper. Episodes for this study span two competition years.Table 1: EHS Robotics Club participant listName:DenisseAveJavMajor Position/DutiesRobot DriverCoding and Robot wiringRobot Designer, BuilderMachine ShopICLS 2018 ProceedingsGrades During the studyand9th and 10th12th (mentor next year)10th and 11th1041Year #s on Team1st and 2nd1st2nd and 3rd© ISLSElizaCaptain, Fundraising leader, robotoperatorCoach and Engineering teacherMentor/ Driving coachJFJohn11th and 12th2nd and 3rdTeacherAlumnus/ Undergraduate 43rd and 4th year as Coach2nd year as mentor;Influenced by Interaction Analysis (Jordon & Henderson, 1995) I focused on taping the EngineeringRobotics team in action, while they designed the robot, practiced driving the robot, and participated incompetition. My goal was to capture a viewpoint of the participants’ experience together. I chose what to recordin an emergent way deciding where learning was happening in the moment, influenced by Goldman-Segall’s(1998) digital video ethnography.Denisse, a female Black and Latina 9th grader (during the first year of the study) and newcomer to EHS’robotics team is the focus of this paper. She becomes the driver of the robot at competitions in her first year onthe team. For this paper, I analyzed three episodes of team interactions to analyze the social patterns that result inher positioning in the role of the driver. These particular episodes occurred during instances of practice andcompetition over two seasons. Influenced by Sewell’s (2004) definition of culture as continually contested, Iselected the episodes for this study in relation to a cursory understanding of interactional patterns. I choose twoepisodes that somewhat match the typical patterns and one that is a contradiction. Video data was analyzed in thetradition of Interaction Analysis (Jordan and Henderson, 1995; Hall & Stevens, 2015).In the first video clip selected, Denisse wears the GoPro on her head as she drives a practice robot aroundthe workshop. She eventually practices picking up and shooting a large ball at the practice goal. After Avetroubleshoots a connection issue with the robot, he gives her the controller and comments on her driving. In thesecond video clip, the drive team is standing with their robot discussing the competition just behind the fieldminutes before their first match of the season. Ave, Jav, and John are all standing near the robot, trying to re-teachDenisse the controls; Ave changed them that morning with the consent of the coach but without telling orconsulting Denisse. In the third clip, Denisse and Eliza practice driving the robot in the shop during the secondyear of the study. In a different driving configuration than the year before, Denisse controls the motion of therobot with a large joystick and Eliza controls the mechanical motion of the robot. This video clip focuses on theirinteraction with John, and me (the researcher) as they practice and discuss strategy for moving around the gamemap. The clip takes place before the team’s second competition and exemplifies different positioning practices.AnalysisA focus on chronotopic contributions to an interaction shines the analytic light on how participants bring differentinterpretations of past space-time and perspectives on the future space-time to collaboratively create presentinteraction. According to Leander (2004) a “lamination” occurs when these contributions become part of theinteraction and are collaboratively positioned. In the case of this study, chronotope laminations locally constructthe development of Denisse’s role as the driver on the team and the power that comes with it.Episode 1: Becoming the driverIn the shop during practice, Ave and JF, the coach, laminate non-present chronotopes to collectively defineDenisse’s role and construct their view of the choices she could make as a driver. Once Denisse gets to use thecontroller, she beings by shooting the ball the robot holds at a high goal. Ave then challenges a choice she makes:1.2.3.4.The Robot: ((shooter motor starts))Ave: You didn't do the sequenceDenisse: I don’t care.Ave: Its' too late now.In line 2, Ave refers directly to the current choice that Denisse makes, not to use the programed shootingsequence with the push of a button but to manually turn on the shooting motor and drop the ball into the shooter.Denisse counters with “I don’t care” (line 3), laminating the chronotope with Ave’s contribution that positionsher as the driver with decision making power in the future. Later in the practice session JF, the coach, asks her tojustify why she was shooting from a certain distance, “why so far back,” a reference to a past-chronotope. Aftersome discussion, he uses her input to adjust the shooter. Both of these interactions show the influence of past andfuture chronotope laminations. They position Denisse with power as a decision-maker in the role of the driver;they incubate her development of agency in that role.Episode 2: A controlled driverICLS 2018 Proceedings1042© ISLSMinutes before their first match at their first competition of the year, Ave reviews the new driving controls forDenisse on the Xbox controller while Jav and John look on. Two important moments in this interaction chainhighlight the way Jav, Ave, Denisse, and John position Denisse’s role as thedriver. After showing Denisse the new controls, Ave places the controller inthe middle of their interaction formation towards Jav and her. Jav grabs thecontroller as both he and Denisse reach for it (see Figure 1) and says, “Alrightso run it through me” handing it to her. Paired with Jav’s words the grabbinggesture physically embodies the denial of Denisse’s chronotopic contributionto the interaction and her positioning as driver. It shifts the interaction to onebetween Denisse and Jav. Just after, Denisse challenges the button changeshe is just hearing about. John, the driving mentor, joins the interaction:1.2.3.Denisse: I thought it was Y ((looks at Ave))Jav: No we changed ((looks to John))John: You gotta learn it again. Forget what you know.Figure 1. Controller Grab.Denisse brings a chronotope contribution citing the past-space of the robot and her practice (line 1) where thecontrol was Y. Her attempted lamination is disregarded with “we changed.” Further, John’s utterance rejects anypast or future space-time contribution, bringing to bear a narrative where only the present matters.Episode 3: Learning role of being a driverIn this clip, John is visiting the shop about a year after the clip from episode 1 and 2 took place. He discussesstrategy with me (the researcher), Denisse and Eliza, as the two of them practice driving and operating that year’srobot. Particularly, he tries to share with Denisse that she should drive backways when bringing a gear back fromthe other side of the competition field to complete one of the objectives of the game for points.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.Researcher: Most people want to do it that way. Right? [Drive forward all the time]John: Yeah that’s a normal condition thing. Most people wanna do it that way anywayJohn: You shouldn’t have to.Researcher: [to Denisse] He’s saying try backing up. So trying grabbing it ((the gear))and then just backing up and dropping the gear.Denisse: Oh I can do that.John: Exactly. But you don’t do that.Denisse: I don’t?John: You haven’t been.John refers to two distinct space-times to position Denisse as a driver with decision making power, whilestill trying to persuade her that driving backwards can help her accomplish the task faster with the robot. First, herefers to an imagined future-space of the competition with “you shouldn’t have to [drive forward]’ (line 3). Thislaminates a chronotope that positions Denisse with a decision of how to drive in competition. Then, he juxtaposesthe future chronotope with an interpretation of past space-times, “you don’t” (line 6) and “you haven’t been” (line8). Therefore, in trying to get her to practice a specific technique, he argues for its possibility in an imaginedfuture, and then argues that she has not used it at all in his interpretation of past space-time of the earliercompetition. Both become laminations which collaboratively position Denisse as a decision-making drivershowing a choice she makes in the role of the driver.DiscussionIn episode 1 and episode 3 which are a year apart, different members of the interaction bring past and futurechronotopes to bear on the interaction which are them laminated, co-constructing the role of Denisse as a decisionmaking driver. Both collaboratives episodes shine the light on decisions she has the agency to make as the driver:using the sequence (episode 1) and driving backwards (episode 3). These moments show the dialogic nature ofthe robotics club where members “live in the chronotope” (Bakhtin, 1981) actively participating in theconstruction of Denisse’s driver role together embracing different viewpoints. Denisse’s development in this roleis privileged. In the competition episode, all chronotopic contributions are rejected by the participants exceptDenisse. This constructs a social narrative consistent with what Bakhtin (1981) calls “adventure time” wherebytime and space are separated, and all historical and possible futures are disregarded for a focus on the emergingpresent. Leander (2002) argues that this typically occurs in institutional spaces such as classrooms, or “classroomICLS 2018 Proceedings1043© ISLSadventure time.” Here, the social interactions framed in adventure time privileges the imminent competition anddeprivileges Denisse’s learning, positioning her as a controlled driver who operates the robot as she is told whereto go and what to do. Denisse’s disciplining deprivileges her expertise and disrupts her ability to develop a deepersense of how the robot drives. This severely limits her ability to develop as a driver during competition.This comparison, taken in a lens of Foucault’s micropower (1995), portrays a view of the socialmechanics of how Denisse’s role is collectively disciplined. The differing access to power may be driven byperceptions of her race, as an identifying Black and Latina youth, and/or her gender, as a young woman in a malegendered space. Further analysis is necessary from a feminist and anti-racist lens to consider the reasoning. Yet,the difference between the two types of episodes, practicing episodes (1 & 3) and a competition episode (2), overtwo seasons of the Engineering Robotics’ paints a picture of how imminent competition may influence newcomerspositioning and how roles are disciplined as acts of power. It also begs the question, does competition typicallyinfluence learning communities like this to reject the dialogic nature of chronotope co-construction and craft anarrative in adventure time?SignificanceThis work points to a specific instance where a STEM learning opportunity with competition as a leading activitylimited a newcomer’s development, disciplining her out of an active role in competition time. From a socioculturalperspective of participation’s relationship to learning (Rogoff, et al. 2003), we must embrace learning possibilitiesthat focus on competitions dialogically positioning learning as a leading goal and focusing on the roles it creates.ReferencesBakhtin, M., Ehre, M., Holquist, M., & Emerson, C. (1984). The dialogic imagination: four essays.Basu, S. J., Calabrese Barton, A., Clairmont, N., & Locke, D. (2009). Developing a framework for critical scienceagency through case study in a conceptual physics context. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 4(2),345–371.Foucault, M. (1995). Discipline and punish: the birth of the prison (2nd Vintage Books ed). NY: Vintage Books.Goldman-Segall, R. (1998). Points of viewing children’s thinking: a digital ethnographer’s journey. Mahwah,N.J: L. Erlbaum.Hall, R., & Stevens, R. (2016). Developing approaches to interaction analysis of knowledge in Use. In A. A.DiSessa, M. Levin, & N. J. S. Brown (Eds.), Knowledge and interaction: a synthetic agenda for thelearning sciences. New York ; London: Routledge.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: foundations and practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39–103.Leander, K. M. (2002). Silencing in classroom interaction: producing and relating social spaces. DiscourseProcesses, 34(2), 193–235.Leander, K. M. (2004). “They Took out the Wrong Context”: Uses of Space-Time in the Practice of SocialPositioning. Ethos, 32(2), 188–213.Ma, J. Y., & Munter, C. (2014). The spatial production of learning opportunities in skateboard parks. Mind,Culture, and Activity, 21(3), 238–258.Nasir, N. S., & Cooks, J. (2009). Becoming a hurdler: How learning settings afford identities. Anthropology &Education Quarterly, 40(1), 41–61.Puvirajah, A., Verma, G., & Webb, H. (2012). Examining the mediation of power in a collaborative community:engaging in informal science as authentic practice. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 7, 375–408.Rogoff, B. (1995). Observing sociocultural activity on three planes: participatory appropriation, guidedparticipation, and apprenticeship. In J. V. Wertsch, P. del Río, & A. Alvarez (Eds.), Sociocultural studiesof mind (pp. 139–164). Cambridge ; New York: Cambridge University Press.Rogoff, B., Paradise, R., Arauz, R. M., Correa-Chávez, M., & Angelillo, C. (2003). Firsthand learning throughintent participation. Annual Review of Psychology, 54(1), 175–203.Sewell, W. H. (2005). Logics of history: social theory and social transformation. Chicago: U. of Chicago Press.AcknowledgmentsThank you to the NYU Interaction Analysis lab for your thought provoking comments on this project. Particularly,thank you Dr. Jasmine Ma, Dr. Susan Kirch, and Sarah Radke for your insightful outlooks and feedback on thisanalysis. I am also thankful to the reviewers of this paper. Their comments were very helpful.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1044© ISLS