Immersive Simulation on Collaborative Learningabout a Complex Dynamic SystemFengfeng Ke, Florida State University, fke@fsu.eduPeter Carafano, Florida State University Schools, pcc03@admin.fsu.eduAbstract: This mixed methods study examined the effect of Astronaut Challenge, animmersive, flight-simulation-based learning program, on the collaborative learning processand science knowledge development of high-school students (9th graders). The study findingssuggested that simulation-based collaborative learning activities promoted students’ scientificunderstanding about the dynamics of the space flight system. Although the knowledge testresults did not indicate a significant differential effect of the two immersive settings (exclusivespace versus classroom flight simulator) on the learning outcome, qualitative findingssuggested that the higher level of the sensory immersion in a simulation-based learningenvironment may foster engagement while impeding collaborative conceptual understanding.Keywords: science learning, flight simulator, computer supported collaborative learning, simulationenvironment designIntroductionImmersion is a salient feature of the simulation-based learning environment. According to Dede (2009),immersion refers to “the subjective impression that one is participating in a comprehensive, realistic experience”(p. 66). It can be interpreted as a psychological experience that one perceives regarding how much s/he isattached to a learning environment, which can be provided via an active and dynamic interaction between thelearner and their environment, sensory information in the 3D digital space, and authentic scenarios or tasks thattap into the learner’s life experiences (Baños et al., 2004; Dede, 2009; De Freitas, Rebolledo-­‐Mendez,Liarokapis, Magoulas, & Poulovassilis, 2010). Studies have shown that immersive digital simulations, deliveredvia a computer-assisted simulator or a virtual reality, can enhance education by allowing multiple perspectives,situated learning, and transfer (e.g., Dunleavy, Dede, & Mitchell, 2009; Freitas & Neumann, 2009; Hansen,2008). However, research on the effects of immersion on collaborative learning among students with diversecharacteristics is still limited and inconclusive. Research is also needed on the learning strengths andpreferences that the different levels of immersion in the digital space of a simulation cultivate in a diverselearner group, and hence the instructional arrangement of interactive media in a simulation-based collaborativelearning environment.Prior research suggested that immersive, participatory simulation is an emerging and prominentlearning platform to help learners understand a complex, dynamic science system (Colella, 2000; Barab & Dede,2007). Learning about complex systems is difficult because complex systems aggregate multiple componentsthat interact with each other in multiple levels (Hmelo-Silver & Azevedo, 2006). Sterman (1994) argued thatapproaches to learning about complex dynamic systems require tools to frame issues and elicit/create aniterative feedback-based learning cycle, and methods to improve group or team processes that will overcomedefensive routines for individuals and sharpen scientific reasoning skills. Based on such a perspective, it iswarranted to examine the capabilities of digital immersive simulations in promoting collaborative learning andhence understanding about a complex, dynamic system (such as the engineering system of a space flight).Therefore, in this study we examined the design and effect of an immersive, simulation-based sciencelearning program on the collaborative learning process and science knowledge development of high-schoolstudents (9th graders). The major research question are: (a) What are the impact of a space flight simulatorprogram on high school students’ collaborative learning processes and their science knowledge development?(b) Is there a differential effect of the immersive settings of this simulation-based learning environment on thecollaborative learning process and outcome?MethodsThe study used a concurrent, mixed-method research approach (Clark & Creswell, 2011) to examine theimmersive environment design and effect of a simulation-based science learning program. Student AstronautChallenge, integrating a space flight simulator and a student manual on the basics of aerospace science, was theintervention program designed to promote collaborative, scientific discovery learning.CSCL 2015 Proceedings539© ISLSParticipantsTwenty 9-10th graders were recruited from the General Earth Space Science classes of a local high school toparticipate in an after-school, Student Astronaut Challenge program. Among the program participants, 50%were girls, and 45% were learning disadvantaged (e.g., at-risk to not graduate) or had special learning needs(e.g., English language learning or medical accommodation). Participants were randomly assigned to twosimulation conditions: exclusive space flight simulator condition (n=10, in two project teams) and classroomflight simulator condition (n=10, in two project teams). The wait-list students from the same classes formed acontrol group (n=22). The procedure, immersive simulation design, and simulation-based collaborative learningactivities are outlined below.ProcedureThis current study lasted 4 weeks. At the beginning of the first week, all study participants received a pre-test onscience knowledge. They were then given the Astronaut Challenge student manual to study during their weeklyearth space science class and on their own at their convenient time and space. Participants of two simulationconditions also trained on space flight procedure one hour a week after school, from week 1 to week 4.Classroom simulator participants trained on the laptop-based space flight simulation, whereas exclusive spacesimulator participants trained on a physical space flight simulator. At the end of the fourth week, all participantsreceived a posttest on the science knowledge. Each simulation project team also received a 30-minute, semistructured group interview.Immersive simulation settingThe space flight simulation encompasses the following components to provide the computer-generatedimmersion for the program participants:• Orbiter space flight simulation: Based on the freeware space flight simulator Orbiter, a 3D flightsimulation of the launch, flight, and landing of the Space Shuttle Atlantis was developed and used toenable simulated space shuttle operation and deliver sensory inputs/outputs.• PowerPoint multi-function display presentations: PowerPoint presentations, pre-timed with theorbiter program to run concurrently, were used to simulate the data displays (known as multi-functiondisplays) on the Space Shuttle. They were also used to enable the simulation of emergent situations andmission control of the space flight.• Shuttle switch control panels: Four switch control panel templates were used to simulate the locationof switches or control systems that must be turned on and off by the Mission Commander and Pilotduring the flight.• Flight operational and emergency procedure checklists: Pre-flight, in-flight, landing, andemergency procedure checklists, taken and customized from the actual ones used by space shuttleastronauts, were included as job aides for flight operations and emergency managements during flight.• Exclusive Space Flight Simulator versus Classroom Space Flight Simulator: In the Exclusive SpaceFlight Simulator, a regular RV truck was customized to simulate a realistic space flight simulator. Thephysical set up, including display monitors, seats for the flight crew members, communication devices,and control panels, tried to artificially recreate the exclusive environment of a space flight. Incomparison, the Classroom Space Flight Simulator was set up in a regular school classroom. Four deskcomputers, one overhead monitor, one computer joystick, and two radio control panels, along withregular classroom desks and chairs, were used to clone the functional setting of the space flightsimulator. It is speculated that the exclusive simulator presents a higher sensory immersion than theclassroom simulator.Simulation-based collaborative learning activitiesIn both simulation conditions, participants were assigned into five-person teams, with each team beingheterogeneous in terms of gender, ethnicity, and prior knowledge level. Each team consisted of a missioncommander, pilot, mission specialist, and two mission control personnel. The initial positions in the team wererandomly assigned among team members and eventually these positions were rotated between the teammates,allowing everyone to try multiple areas of responsibility. The students in each team would then practice as agroup flying the space flight simulator using the procedure and emergency situation checklists. The flightoperation involved normal operation controls (e.g., launching, flying, and landing) at first, and then problemsolving in managing varied technical emergency situations. Successful operation of the space flight simulatorCSCL 2015 Proceedings540© ISLSrequires all astronauts to work together effectively, practice their individual jobs, and be aware of the jobs andresponsibilities of the rest of the crew. Communication and collaborative operations among team members areessential, and the strict control of who speaks or does at what time and to whom is critical. The communicationvaried in its purposes (e.g., advises, announcements, or requests on status information), and required allmembers to swiftly identify what their responsibilities are, who they want to speak to, and what they need toknow or report. This relationship is especially important when emergencies occur, therefore consistent practicetogether is necessary for an effective team.Data collection and analysisData in this mixed methods study were collected via both quantitative knowledge test and qualitative infieldobservation and interview. The science knowledge tests were developed based on the test items used in theAstronaut Challenge program of previous years. Pre- and post-program knowledge tests were analyzed usingdescriptive and inferential statistics. Specifically, mixed design ANOVAs were conducted to examine thepotential impact of the simulation-based science learning program on participants’ science knowledge testperformance, with time of the measurement as the within-subjects factor and study conditions (e.g., treatment vscontrol, and types of the simulator) as the between-subjects factor.Participants’ collaborative learning activities during program sessions were observed and videorecorded. A semi-structured, focus group interview was then conducted with each project team after the programactivities. Interviews, classroom observations, and video recordings were transcribed and imported intoqualitative data analysis software. The qualitative coding was descriptive in nature, while focusing onunderstanding when, how, why, and with whom a simulation-based collaborative learning event occurred. Wealso conducted categorical aggregation analysis (Clark & Creswell, 2011) with the recorded and observed teamactivities, by coding the critical properties of meaningful actions or instances of simulation-based collaborativelearning and classifying them into aggregations. Peer debriefing were conducted among the two coders andmember checking were performed with the participants during the interview process. Finally, we soughtmeaningful patterns among the categories and synthesizing naturalistic conditions and consequences of themajor categories. These patterns were then consolidated with quantitative findings.FindingsThe mixed ANOVA test examining the effect of the simulation-based science learning program indicated thatthere was a borderline significance in the interaction between the within-subjects factor and between-subjectsfactor on the knowledge test outcome, F(1, 40) = 3.99, p =.06, partial η2=.17. The test-performance change fromthe pretest to the posttest differed between the treatment group (simulation-based collaborative learning) and thecontrol group, as shown by Figure 1 below. The control or no-simulation group’s knowledge test performancewere generally maintained from the pretest (Mprecrl= 28.31 SDprecrl= 5.41) to the posttest (Mpostcrl= 29.54SDpostcrl= 8.05), whereas the treatment group knowledge test performance improved from the pretest (Mpretre=24.75 SDpretre= 7.48) to the posttest (Mposttre= 33.50 SDposttre= 6.72).Figure 1. Pre-posttest performance by treatment conditionThe mixed ANOVA test examining the differential effect of the immersive settings of the simulationenvironment (exclusive simulator vs. classroom simulator) on the science knowledge test did not indicate asignificant interaction effect between the within-subjects and between-subjects factors. The result failed toCSCL 2015 Proceedings541© ISLSprovide evidence for the learning effects of varied immersive settings of the simulation program. It should benoticed that the observed power for the interaction analysis was only .13, suggesting that the small sample sizeof each simulation group might have low statistical power to detect group differences. The test did indicate asignificant main effect of the time factor (p <.001), confirming that both simulation-based collaborative learninggroups significantly improved their knowledge test performance from the pre- to the posttest, Mpremsim= 22.5,SDpremsim= 9.57, Mpostmsim= 32.25, SDpostmsim= 9.18; Mprecsim= 27.00, SDprecsim= 5.03, Mpostcsim= 34.75, SDpostcsim= 4.11.Two salient themes emerged from the qualitative data and shed light on the aforementioned trends: (a)communication-action-embodied meaning making, and (b) joint feedback process. It was found that collectiveand raced flight operation, requiring a shared understanding and a swift enactment of the space flightcommunication protocol and flight-control procedures, have enforced both conceptual and proceduralknowledge practice and construction. Flight communications among the flight personnel and mission control, ineither “advices”, “announcements,” “responses,” or “confirmations,” were filled with the externalization andconstant monitoring of the shared understanding of a variety of complicated system concepts (e.g., ReactionControl System or RCS, hydraulics). Frequently, flight crew members were required to both verbalize andembody these concepts during the shuttle operations, “APU/HYDRAULICS (1/2/3) to OFF” (accompanied bythe hand movement of turning off the corresponding buttons in the control panel). These conceptualverbalization and enactments would receive instant feedback via both naturalistic, visual/audio output of thecomputer system and the verbal confirmation/response from their teammates (e.g., “APU/HYDRAULICS 1/2/3to OFF Check!”). In other terms, the simulated flight communication and collaborative shuttle operation hascreated the joint, feedback-based learning loop in which students would collaboratively and iteratively practice,observe, and act on domain-specific concepts and procedures.Notably, we found that the sensory or physical immersion of a simulation setting might have fosteredlearners’ engagement in the procedural routine practice, while imposing impediments or distractions toward thefeedback reflection and discussion for a deep conceptual understanding. In the exclusive space flight simulator,the simulated sound effects were loud and the area was restricted, thus making beyond-routine team debriefingand peer mentoring difficult. In comparison, the teams in the classroom simulator were found to be lesscontested by the sense of emergency, involved in more reciprocal questioning and answering, and obviouslyinvolved in more exploration and peer tutoring to achieve a better understanding, rather than memorization, ofsystem concepts.Conclusions and implicationsThe study findings suggested that immersive-simulation-based collaborative learning promotes students’learning about the dynamics of the space flight system. Although the knowledge test results did not indicate asignificant differential effect of the two immersive settings on the learning outcome, qualitative findingssuggested that the higher level of sensory immersion may foster engagement while impeding collaborativeconceptual understanding.ReferencesBaños, R. M., Botella, C., Alcañiz, M., Liaño, V., Guerrero, B., & Rey, B. (2004). Immersion and emotion: theirimpact on the sense of presence. CyberPsychology & Behavior, 7(6), 734-741.Barab, S., & Dede, C. (2007). Games and immersive participatory simulations for science education: anemerging type of curricula. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 16(1), 1-3.Clark, V. L. P., & Creswell, J. W. (2011). Designing and conducting mixed methods research. Thousand Oaks,CA: Sage Publications.Colella, V. (2000). Participatory simulations: Building collaborative understanding through immersive dynamicmodeling. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 471-500.Dede, C. (2009). Immersive interfaces for engagement and learning. Science, 323(5910), 66-69.De Freitas, S., Rebolledo-­‐Mendez, G., Liarokapis, F., Magoulas, G., & Poulovassilis, A. (2010). Learning asimmersive experiences: Using the four-­‐dimensional framework for designing and evaluating immersivelearning experiences in a virtual world. British Journal of Educational Technology, 41(1), 69-85.Dunleavy, M., Dede, C., & Mitchell, R. (2009). Affordances and limitations of immersive participatoryaugmented reality simulations for teaching and learning. Journal of Science Education and Technology,18(1), 7-22.Hansen, M. M. (2008). Versatile, immersive, creative and dynamic virtual 3-D healthcare learningenvironments: a review of the literature. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 10(3).Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Azevedo, R. (2006). Understanding complex systems: Some core challenges. TheJournal of the learning sciences, 15(1), 53-61.CSCL 2015 Proceedings542© ISLSFreitas, S. D., & Neumann, T. (2009). The use of ‘exploratory learning’ for supporting immersive learning invirtual environments. Computers & Education, 52(2), 343-352.Sterman, J. D. (1994). Learning in and about complex systems. System Dynamics Review, 10(2-­‐3), 291-330.CSCL 2015 Proceedings543© ISLS