Becoming an “Expert”: Gendered Positioning, Praise, andParticipation in an Activist CommunityJoe Curnow, University of Toronto, joe.curnow@mail.utoronto.caJody R. Chan, Teachers College, Columbia University, jrc2222@tc.columbia.eduAbstract: This paper argues that gendered participation in a community of practice can createan illusion of expertise and learning based on masculine performances of expertise. Looking ata local campaign of the student climate change movement over the course of one year, weanalyze participants’ interactions and examine how gendered positioning produces “experts”.We argue that these experts achieve their expertise not through learning or achieving masteryof the core competencies of the community of practice, but rather by performing dominantforms of masculinity, which are affirmed by other members of the community and recognizedas authoritative. We argue that theorizations of situated learning must centre critiques ofsociohistorical power relations in order to accommodate for such tendencies.IntroductionClimate change is a pressing issue, disproportionately impacting low-income communities, communities ofcolour, and Indigenous peoples (Taylor, 1997). Given the gravity of the situation, we need critical and competentpeople who actively combat the root causes of climate change. The youth climate movement is actively engagedin this work and in developing the leadership and expertise of the next generation of activists. The experts theclimate movement is cultivating believe they know the facts, are willing to act decisively, and speak assertivelyto stop climate change. The problem is, this group is almost exclusively made up of privileged White men(Goldenberg, 2014). Where are the rest of the experts?This research asks how gendered forms of participation enable and constrain students’ learning andengagement in a climate activist campaign, such that men identify and become identified as experts while womendo not (1). In our analysis we overwhelmingly found men were recognized as experts while women’scontributions were likely to be dismissed or fail to gain traction. We argue that in this community becoming anexpert was deeply tied to behaving in typically-masculine ways. When certain members positioned themselves asauthorities through engaging in exclusive talk and taking up space, others came to recognize them as experts. Wefocus on three forms of interaction: ideas being accepted without discussion, exclusive talk, and affirmation.Through these practices, we see expertise being conflated with dominant masculine forms of participation, makingthose modes of participation difficult, and sometimes impossible, for women to perform.Our analysis shows that this process reinforced itself in an ongoing way. As dominant men presentedthemselves as experts, the rest of the group tended to recognize that “expertise”, which reinforced men’s viewsthat they were, in fact, more experienced and more qualified. That sense of being more qualified lead them toengage other male participants in exclusive talk, garnering more recognition and blocking other people fromparticipating. They tended to receive praise and encouragement, which we argue further entrenched men’s senseof expertise. At the same time, women’s contributions received far fewer instances of praise from fewer people,and few women were included in exclusive talk. Women’s attempts to contribute were less successful, and thedismissal of women’s contributions lead them to be less assertive and withdraw vocally and physically.We argue that becoming an expert in a community of practice may have less to do with adopting sharedpractices or acquiring new skills, and more to do with performing masculinity, even in spaces that value socialjustice and anti-oppression. In the past, communities of practice and situated learning scholars have taken forgranted that the learning process involved in becoming a full participant necessitates developing understandingsof what the community does, why, and how. We argue that this may not always the case, as participants maybecome full members based on their socialization and identity performances, regardless of their learningprocesses, just as other members can be left at the periphery. This raises an important question for situated learningtheorists—how do we accommodate for social relations of inequity in communities of practice and how does thatimpact access to learning and full participation?ICLS 2016 Proceedings146© ISLSSituated learning and communities of practice in a gendered worldSituated learning theory understands learning as a social process of becoming part of a community throughadopting its practices (Lave and Wenger 1991, Lave 1996, Contu and Willmott 2003). Learning is an active,ongoing process in which people move into different forms of participation by engaging with the activities,theories, and nuances of the group context. Communities of practice (Lave and Wenger 1991, Wenger 1998) areunderstood as groups of people engaged in collective meaning-making through joint work and mutual engagementwith shared repertoires of action. Legitimate peripheral participation describes the process by which new membersbecome proficient at skills and activities within a community of practice and become part of the community,moving from marginality towards mastery of the practices (Lave and Wenger 1991). Within situated learningtheories, learning is considered becoming – becoming a type of person, a member of a community, a recognizedexpert (Lave 1996). This is about identity development at the individual level, but also about the social productionof identity, where other participants in a community of practice support (or do not) and acknowledge one’s processof development, and through that process, community identity is developedJust as communities produce identities and are in turn shaped by the identities of their members, genderis socially produced in context. West and Zimmerman (1987) employ the notion of “doing gender” to explain theways that gender is a socially produced performance rather than a fixed category. Gender is an historical socialrelation with consistent meaning under patriarchy, yet gender is produced in an ongoing way and is specific todifferent contexts and groupings – people perform gender in nuanced ways depending on the norms of the spacethey are in. Crenshaw (1991) argues that gender is always complicated by intersecting identities and socialrelations. People perform their genders differently depending not only on the space, but also their social locationat the intersections of race, colonialism, dis/ability, class, and other relations. This is not to say that people arefree to perform their gender(s) in any way they please. Gender is a collective performance and social relation, andgender policing and recognition can constrain people’s modes of doing gender.Communities of practice tend to reproduce dominant social relations (Curnow 2013). Although they canbe subverted, gendered practices are often unintentionally part of the modes of participation, and createinequitable spaces within groups. Gender is performed in ways specific to the community, but embedded in thebroader patriarchal context. Within a community of practice, if practices reflect the dominant gender relations andperformances, some practices will be out of reach for people from different social locations (Hodges, 1998), andfor women and trans people in particular. Salminen-Karlsson (2006), Curnow (2013), and Paechter (2003)examine gendered performances and the ways women access full participation in male-dominated communitiesof practice, arguing that if women are unable to perform or access certain gendered activities, their mastery of theperformances and learning are complicated and often limited.One of the ways people do gender is through positioning themselves and being positioned by others.Positioning refers to the ways people present themselves through their actions, uses of space, ways of speaking,and physical presentation, among other things, and how other people understand those actions and situate peoplewithin the community (Holland, Lachiotte, Skinner, and Cain, 2001). Gendered participation in a community ofpractice is one aspect of how one positions oneself and is positioned by others, and gendered practices are enactedthrough different modes of positioning.We are interested in the confluence of these theoretical frameworks – how men doing gender in dominantpatriarchal ways of performing masculinity position themselves, and in turn are positioned by others, as expertswithin a community of practice. We trace how men in an activist community of practice become “experts” throughtheir positioning and examine what they learn, as well as what women in the group learn, as men’s performancesof expertise are situated as the full practices of the community, making them unattainable or at least uncomfortablefor other-gendered people. Bringing these frameworks together shows how gendered performance is disparatelyvalued. Masculine modes of participation are recognized as expert, rendering women’s forms of participation lessvaluable and limiting their access to the full practices of the community.This analysis troubles the view in situated learning theory that becoming recognized as a full participantin a position of mastery necessarily denotes learning, or vice versa. Situated learning emerged, in part, fromstudies of apprenticeship, where skill-based competencies were a core part of the practices necessary, in additionto the social performances of the community, in order to become a full participant. However, what is required tobecome recognized as a full participant may not reflect performances of particular skills or even adopting a sharedframe of the philosophies or logic of the community, as has been suggested (Lave and Wenger, 1991). While weagree that learning occurs in communities and is part of the co-navigation of communities and activities, we offera caveat that learning skills or shifting consciousness may not be required to become a full participant. As weICLS 2016 Proceedings147© ISLSdemonstrate below, participants learned to work together, and men learned, at some level, that it was not onlypossible, but also advantageous for them to perform dominant forms of masculinity. However, situated learningassumes people’s learning will include competencies and performances tied to the relevant subject – in the caseof an environmental activist group, the assumption would be that people would become masters through adoptingpractices of environmentalism, like strategizing, canvassing, or other core techniques of environmental activistcommunities. We argue that expertise was decoupled from these types of learning. Dominant male speakersmoved into full participation not through their mastery of the full practices of the community related to their work,but through their ability to position themselves and perform dominant masculinity in the group. Learning didoccur, but expert status and centrality was not available to every participant – women were prevented frombecoming recognized as experts or full participants in the community. In order to address this, we must attend topower and sociocultural relations of inequity in order to mitigate the assumptions of expertise and centre insteadon learning, rather than enactments of privilege.MethodsThis work is based on an ongoing participatory action research project that examines how student activists learnabout race, colonialism, and patriarchy through their involvement in environmental activist campaigns. Data wascollected with a Toronto-based campus climate action group. The group of young people came together to fightclimate change, primarily through a local campaign that is internationally coordinated. They meet weekly andplan different strategies to engage students. Students are regularly involved in direct actions, social mediacampaigns, and social events to move forward an environmental activist agenda. Meetings had from 11-27participants, representing all years in school, (1,2,3,4,5, Law, MA, PhD). Men and women students attended inroughly even numbers and there were no openly trans or other gendered students. Racial and ethnic make-upshifted over the course of the year, but the group remained predominantly White, even as Indigenous, Black,South-Asian, and East Asian students became increasingly involved. The group had three elected leadershippositions, one filled by a White woman, the other two by White men. Decision-making was ostensibly done bywhat they termed “working consensus”, but in practice, decisions were not made in a consistent way.These young people are all committed to the joint work of environmentalism and social justice, thoughthey do not always share understandings of what social justice encompasses. The contradiction between the socialjustice goals, the rhetoric of the group, and the way their processes play out offers a window into how difficult itis for people to identify the dominant practices of their genders, but also the subsuming nature of the dominantpractices of North American society vis a vis gender and patriarchy.Data collection and analysisVideo was collected at fourteen meetings over the course of the academic year at weekly meetings, resulting in2,009 minutes of video. Videos lasted from 60-180 minutes, depending on the meeting length. For this analysis,we include only the whole group meetings, and do not include the breakout sessions and report backs, limitingour data to 578 minutes of video. Videos are captured from one to four angles and stacked so that all four streamsare visible and can be watched and coded simultaneously.After video was collected, it was content-logged and pre-coded using preliminary codes based on theresearch question (including rough tags like race, gender, and colonialism). The first substantial analytic pass ofcoding was conducted by five women participants from the group, – two White, one South Asian, one East Asian,one Indigenous – and one Black man. We watched segments of videos from across the year together and coded“interesting” segments, asking the broad question of how gender is made salient in our group, discussing everyinstance someone raised and making extensive notes. After conducting “interesting” coding on three segmentsfrom the beginning, middle, and end of the year, we reviewed and consolidated them into codes that were mostpresent in the video we reviewed and in our experiences of the group more broadly. The codes we developedincluded overlapping talk, exclusive talk, affirmation (vocal and gesture), uptake of ideas, positioning, andrecognition. The codes were developed into sub-codes, which are described in the findings. All codes were refinedby test coding 10 minutes of two videos and iteratively clarifying the codes.After qualitatively coding, we embarked on a basic quantitative analysis as a way of demonstrating thepatterned participation that participants identified. While there are significant limitations to quantifyinginteraction and speech acts (Schegloff, 1993), we attempted it as a way of convincing participants that genderedpatterns existed and were important to acknowledge. Participants requested this data because they felt it couldprove or disprove the claims women in the group were making. We asked participants how much of our totalICLS 2016 Proceedings148© ISLSmeeting time we would need to analyze to create a compelling case for the gender-dynamics of the group. Thosepolled preferred randomly selected segments (to avoid “cherry picking” data) across all of the meetings, ratherthan extended segments from fewer meetings. To meet their requirements, we used a random number generatorto select two segments of five minutes each from 14 videos from all regular weekly meetings and did detailedanalysis of each. The samples represent 25% of the meeting video.Results were compiled to create a basic statistical view of the trends. We compiled instances based onthe segments, and ran two tailed t-tests to evaluate confidence in the comparisons we examined. Paired t-testswere selected as the most appropriate because of our small sample size, and their ability to evaluate the statisticalsignificance of a difference between two groups or results. All t-tests, except for one, noted below, demonstratedstatistical significance in the patterned difference between men’s and women’s participation. Paired t-testsdemonstrate the existence of a pattern or difference but not its magnitude, so we provide sample means to expressthe average number of instances of a code, separated out by gender, within each 5 minute segment. Statisticalanalysis was complemented with ethnographic vignettes drawn from our coding to illustrate the trends. The initialanalysis was circulated among the group who developed the codes for feedback, which was incorporated.FindingsWe look at gendered participation and positioning in three ways: the uptake of ideas, exclusive talk, andaffirmation. These three aspects of group process show us different yet complementary things about how membersof the community positioned themselves as experts and were positioned as experts by other members. Takentogether, these show how members positioned themselves in the way they contributed their ideas and had thoseideas adopted, sometimes without question. They also show how members positioned themselves as relevantcontributors with expert information or opinions, which were jointly discussed by other experts and in the processreinforced the performance of expertise. Finally, they show how other members of the community of practiceaffirmed contributions, demonstrating that certain members were deserving of praise and encouragement. Thesethree forms of participation demonstrate the processes of members positioning themselves, positioning others asco-experts, and being positioned by other members. The data highlights how these practices were highly genderedand reinforced the idea that men were experts deserving of the space they occupied in the group.Adopting ideasThe first area we examined was whose ideas were discussed and adopted in the community. We believe this servesas an indicator of whose ideas were valued, whose contributions were centred in the group, and ultimately, whohad the authority to set the agenda for the group. Through our coding process, it became clear we needed to attendto a specific form of ideas being taken up, namely the practice of ideas being adopted immediately and withoutdiscussion. This was defined as an instance of someone making a proposal for action, either around the internalprocess of the group or the external strategy, and having it be taken up by the next speaker as a given withoutfurther discussion. We argue that this is a distinct indicator of positioning oneself as an expert and of beingpositioned by the rest of the group as an expert.Statistical analysis of our coded sample showed that ideas being adopted without discussion was, in fact,a highly gendered practice. There were 58 instances of this occurring in the sample from men participants, and 11from women, with men’s ideas being five times more likely to be adopted without discussion than women’s. Thisis a meaningful act of positioning; it demonstrated how men were understood to be authorities, how men’s ideasdrove the group’s process and strategy, and how men effectively decided what everyone would do. Mostsignificantly, this shows how men had their ideas taken as given, as participants either agreed or acquiesced tothe direction of the group that dominant male speakers laid out for them.One example of how ideas might be adopted without discussion and how that had major repercussionsfor the campaign happened at a meeting in November. One of the men in leadership had talked to anotherorganizer in Ontario about a strategy they were adopting to stop a major pipeline from being built by filingdeputations as part of a consultation process. After explaining the context, he paused and asked, “So is there ageneral consensus that it’s a good way?” He waited 1.76 seconds, received a few nods, and continued, “Ok! Good”and continued to plan the details of the strategy. Though this action had no direct relationship with the goals ofthe campus campaign, participants spent significant amounts of time in mobilizing around the strategy. This idea,adopted without discussion in a meeting, became the major activity for November and December. While otherparticipants perhaps demonstrated their tacit consent by participating, and shaped the implementation throughtheir engagement, the decision-making process raises questions about what it means for a group when men’s ideasICLS 2016 Proceedings149© ISLSare disproportionately adopted. This was not an isolated incident, but a consistent pattern across the data,suggesting that men’s ideas persistently drove the actions of the group.Exclusive talkThe second area we coded for was exclusive talk. Exclusive talk is defined as an exchange between two or morepeople but that does not include the majority of meeting participants, despite being part of a larger conversation.Exclusive talk was established through gaze and body positioning directed to the included speakers, explicitlynaming the speakers who should participate, or discussing things only certain people had information about.Exclusive talk often happened at higher speeds of exchange, with no or small gaps between turns, and was oftenmarked by a decision made by the participating speakers without opening the question out to the broader audience.We argue that exclusive talk works to establish who is in charge and whose voice is necessary in discussions anddecisions, and is one of the key indicators of full participation in the community of practice.Our coding revealed 46 instances of exclusive talk across our sample, and it was a common practice inthe group. We measured instances of exclusive talk that were mixed gender and compared them against instancesof exclusive talk that were men to men. While mixed gender was more common at a sample mean of 1.07 instancesof exclusive talk per segment, men to men exclusive talk was also prevalent throughout the sample at a samplemean of 0.62 instances per segment. This demonstrates that men are highly likely to be engaged in exclusive talkthat does not include women. Men to men and women to women exclusive talk also showed significant difference,with a sample mean for women to women talk of 0.077 instances per segment. In almost every case, menoutnumbered women in instances of mixed-gender exclusive talk. Instances of male-dominated exclusive talk,with two or more men to one woman participating, were more than two and a half times more likely to occur thangender balanced (one man to one woman, or two men to two women) exclusive talk (with sample means of 1.11and 0.42 instances per segment respectively).Socially speaking, this is highly significant, in that even when women were included in the exclusivetalk, it was at much lower levels of participation. It is both a sign of who was entitled to and given license to takeup space and also served as a powerful indicator to other members of the group around who is a competent,central, full member. When a conversation could happen on behalf of the whole group but include only a smallsegment of the group, it signaled to participants of the exclusive talk and those on the periphery whose voicesmattered, whose voices were required, and whose were not.We argue that exclusive talk was one of the major ways full participation and expertise were established.They demonstrate for new members who must be included in discussions and who is unnecessary to include, forwhatever reason. The fact that participation in these exclusive talk instances was so skewed based on genderidentity demonstrates how men’s participation was affirmed as expert and necessary, while women’s was not.During these exchanges, exclusive talk speakers often shared inside information that not everyone had, furtherdemonstrating that their position was one of access and authority, and through their quick exchanges with otherknowledgeable colleagues, they affirmed those involved in exclusive talk as co-authorities, while others did notneed to be brought up to speed or included in decision making. The population of those not included in exclusivetalk included all people of colour, men and women, (2) and most White women, which had the effect ofestablishing White men as the full participants in the community who were able and entitled to participate indiscussions without including women and people of colour in the process.AffirmationsFinally, we examined the rate at which speakers received affirmations from other members of the group for theirspeech contributions. We understand affirmation as acts that express agreement, acknowledgment,encouragement, or enthusiasm for what another speaker is contributing. Affirmation was vocal or gesture, andthey were often paired. Any time a speaker received a comment during their speech turn that included “yes”,“yeah”, “yep”, “uh huh”, “mmhmm”, or explicit praise (ie: “that’s a great idea”) it was coded as vocal affirmation.For gestures, the vast majority of coded instances were nods, from slight nods timed to affirm a speaker’scontribution, to large nods with repeated head bobs and often involved the shoulders. We also see hand gestureslike pointing, thumbs ups, and applause.There were 602 instances of affirmation across our sample, averaging 26 instances per segment. Wecoded these as man to man, man to woman, woman to man, and woman to woman. First we found men receivedaffirmations at almost three times the rate of women, with sample means of 17.7 times per sample segment formen compared to 7.25 times per segment for women. Looking more specifically, we found men gave affirmationICLS 2016 Proceedings150© ISLSto other men at almost twice the rate of men’s affirmation to women, at 9.6 instances per segment compared to5.3 instances per segment. Women gave praise to men at four times the rate they affirmed women, at 8.2 instancesversus 1.9 instances per segment. It is notable that the difference between women’s praise of men and men’spraise of men is not significant, at t=0.4290, thus we would not assume the rates of affirmation to men by womenversus by men are statistically different. On the other hand, men’s and women’s praise of women is significant;women appear to affirm other women at a rate far less than men do.After analyzing the data, it became clear that though those are strong trends in the sample, they do notfully account for the positioning dynamics of the group. We identified a pattern in the ways that men receivedaffirmations that seemed distinct from how women received praise. A specific contribution by a man would oftenreceive praise from multiple people, while women received praise from only one, or perhaps two people at a time.We believe receiving widespread praise is a strong indicator of community response and how people in thecommunity position a speaker, so we analyzed affirmations based on the number of affirmation acts percontribution for men and women. The results showed men received affirmation from one speaker almost twice asoften as women from one speaker, at sample means of 10.04 compared to 5.25 affirmations per segment. Menreceived affirmation from two speakers at two and a half times the frequency of women receiving affirmationfrom two speakers, at sample means of 2 compared to 0.79 affirmations per segment. Men received affirmationfrom three or more speakers more than six times as often as women receiving affirmation from three or morespeakers, at sample means of 1.04 compared to 0.167 affirmations per segment. This shows a clear patternedbehavior of men not only receiving more affirmations overall, but also their individual contributions beingencouraged and affirmed by a larger segment of people per contribution.Since men spoke far more frequently and for longer duration, one could argue we should not expect thatwomen would receive validation at comparable rates. However, one factor serves as a control for that skew-- therate at which men give affirmation to women, a sample mean of 5.3 times per segment. This asserts that there areopportunities for women to receive praise and makes it clear that gendered practices do influence the outcomes,since women only give praise to other women an average of 1.9 times per segment, meaning men are 2.8 timesmore likely to praise women’s contributions than other women are. This raises questions of why women affirmother women differently than men affirm women, while both affirm men’s contributions at statistically significantrates.We found women did not receive praise at the same rates, and most significantly, we found that womenhardly ever gave affirmation to other women. While coding the video and recognizing this trend, some of thewomen participants noted places where they trailed off or abandoned their contribution, and when asked they saidthey felt like they were “taking up too much space”. In the video they were looking for encouragement to keepgoing or acknowledgement of their ideas (which they said they often gave to other speakers), and when they didnot receive it, they assumed other participants disliked their ideas and stopped. For some of them, that experiencechilled their participation for the rest of the meeting, resulting in reduced participation.Affirmations were distinct from the other positioning categories above, in that it is a place for peripheralmembers to actively position others; while exclusive talk is largely determined by people in positions of mastery,affirmations are given by the larger group. It reinforces and legitimates the participation of those being affirmedby the membership, not just those in positions of mastery. These instances of affirmation were far more oftendirected at men and included extended series of gestures.DiscussionThese tendencies of small-scale gendered interactions gelled to create an environment that White men did notnecessarily identify, but implicitly asserted their expertise as a group. In one exchange at a meeting halfwaythrough the academic year this crystallized in a particularly telling way. A large group of new participants attendedthe meeting, surprising everyone, and in the attempt to be welcoming to new people, members of the groupjockeyed to explain the context of the conversations we were having. Over the course of the first ten minutes inthe first meeting of the semester, with 16 women and 9 men in attendance, 4 men spoke a total of 41 times, at atotal duration of almost 9 minutes. Two women spoke a total of 20 times, with a total duration of just under oneminute. But what we argue is the most revealing was a set of comments made by White men, eight minutes apart,during the beginning of the meeting.Student 1:ICLS 2016 ProceedingsAsk us questions. And also, if you have a question you don't think you wantto ask in public, just write it down, ask one of the people that talks a lot.151© ISLSStudent 2:If you would really like to come to the retreat, I guess just talk to…any ofthe people who you see talking a lot.These statements, combined with a group dynamic in which the men were the people who participated most oftenand for the longest duration, implicitly advised new members that the men in the room were experts able to helpexplain things, and guide new members participation. What was also implied was that the women in the roomwere not expert, not able to answer questions, and not in positions of authority. Though this is just one vignette,it is a pervasive sentiment. Participants identified the most vocal and assertive members of the community ofpractice as the most central actors, capable of performing the full practices of the community.This then created a core problem for women to surmount. If the full practices of the community includedtaking up space the way the White men did and receiving affirmation, other participants are in a bind. Even whenwomen in the group had achieved some level of expertise, it was not recognized – and did not receive affirmationin the same ways men’s contributions did. Additionally, the women were unlikely to position themselves asauthorities in the same ways, which led to men asserting their expertise over the expertise of those women. Manyinstances of this exist in our sample, but one specific example is how a White woman reported on her project andthen ended with a question. We interpret this question as an invitation to the group to collaborate, rather thanseeking specific information or a definitive response. However, one of the men in positions of mastery whofrequently positions himself as an authority immediately responded (leaving no gap between the speaker’squestion and his own answer), answering the question as if it were directed to him and a clarification question,rather than a question to the group about strategic direction. His definitive answer stopped further collaborationand ended the sequence, and served to undermine the woman’s credibility as a full member because both thedirection she sought for the conversation was squashed and she was assumed to be incapable of answering thequestion that her male colleague was able to answer immediately and without equivocation.Examples like these abound in our data and demonstrate that participants’ recognition as experts had lessto do with their learning and capacity relative to the tasks of the community of activists, and more to do with theirgendered modes of participation. In one example of this, we traced the planning process of an importantpresentation to the university administration. This was considered a high-stakes activity where people needed tobe thoroughly prepared and ready to answer questions. In the planning discussions it was taken for granted thatthree of the White men were qualified and prepared, but when it came to finding additional participants, peoplewere not sure who else was qualified. The planning group talked about needing someone “quick on their feet”who could answer question swiftly, with full confidence. They dismissed the possibility of several women asparticipants because they were seen as hesitant and the planning team feared the women would give too manyqualifying hedges on their statements. The concerns of the planning team in including women in the presentationreflect assumptions that the administration would perceive only masculine performances of leadership asindicative of competence and expertise.This presentation was the truest test of who had come into the full practices of the group, and the bar thatpeople had to reach was a highly gendered and White mode of engagement. Women’s expertise in helping developor edit the document they were presenting was not valued equally, their ability to organize students was not valued,their reproductive labour in sustaining the group was not valued — the test for expertise was the ability to performmasculinity under pressure when dealing with a powerful group of mostly White men.ImplicationsThis case provides an example of how White masculine performances can be conflated with expertise in acommunity of practice and how this process can systematically block women from becoming recognized ascentral members who are capable of participating fully in the core processes of the community. Becomingrecognized as an expert can be as much about how one positions oneself as an authority through demonstrationsof masculinity as it is about building competency in relevant skills and modes of participation, and people oftengive and receive affirmation based on gendered performances. Thus researchers need to be careful about assigningexpertise and learning to these processes, which entrench and re-entrench performances of White masculinityrather than modes of participation that are more broadly available to members of a community. In order toaccommodate the material and symbolic privilege that some participants bring to communities of practice, situatedlearning theorists must attend to and theorize the ways that gender, as well as race, colonialism, and othersociohistorical relations of power and inequity, influence interactions and access to full participation. Until weICLS 2016 Proceedings152© ISLSdo, our theories will not have the full analytic power they need to articulate the dynamics of learning andpositioning within communities.This study has implications in the political realm, where these participants worked daily. If men’s voicesare over-represented and disproportionately affirmed and adopted, what does this mean for the political actionsthat social movements like the climate movement take up? Our case suggests a few outcomes: the first is thatmen’s leadership will be continually affirmed to the point that they understand themselves as experts. Whilepositioning is usually an implicit process, occasionally they explicitly posit that women in the group are notexperts and leaders, or are at least not as qualified as they themselves. This creates a feedback loop for participantsof all genders, where men seem to become more confident in their contributions, while women becomeincreasingly withdrawn and less willing to contribute. This also has the impact of shaping the political agenda;where there was contestation over group direction in our data, men’s visions prevailed. Social movements needdiverse strategies that reflect the experiences of all participants, and the more leadership and expertise is confinedto White men, the less able we are to build effective strategy and movements.Endnotes(1) In our sample, no participants openly identified as other gendered, and so our discussion centres on cisgendered participants’ experiences. We would posit that trans and other gendered people would experiencespecific but similar forms of gendered discrimination in participation, but it is outside the scope of our data.(2) The racialized nature of exclusive talk, and many of the other modes of participation is significant and linkedto the gendered patterns, and is the subject of a separate, more extensive analysis.ReferencesCrenshaw, K. (1991). Mapping the margins: Intersectionality, identity politics, and violence against women ofcolor. Stanford law review, 1241-1299.Contu, A.& H. Willmott. (2003). Re-embedding Situatedness: The Importance of Power Relations in LearningTheory. Organization Science, 14(3), 283-296.Curnow, J. (2013). Fight the power: situated learning and conscientisation in a gendered community of practice.Gender and Education, 25(7), 834-850.Goldenberg, S. (2014, May 8). Why are so many White men trying to save the planet without the rest of us? TheGuardian. Retrieved from http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/08/White-menenvironmental-movement-leadership.Hodges, D.C. (1998). Participation as Dis-Identification with/in a Community of Practice. Mind, Culture, andActivity, 5(4), 272-290.Holland, D., W. Lachicotte, D. Skinner & C. Cain. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds. Cambridge,Mass.: Harvard University Press.Lave, J. (1996). Understanding practice: Perspectives on activity and context. Cambridge University Press.Lave, J. & E. Wenger. (1991). Situated Learning Legitimate Peripheral Participation. New York, NY: CambridgePress.Paechter, C. (2003). Learning masculinities and femininities: Power/knowledge and legitimate peripheralparticipation. Women’s Studies International Forum, 26, 541– 552.Salminen-Karlsson, M. (2006). Situating gender in situated learning. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 22.Schegloff, E. A. (1993). Reflections on quantification in the study of conversation. Research on language andsocial interaction, 26(1), 99-128.Taylor, D. E. (1997). American environmentalism: The role of race, class and gender in shaping activism 18201995. Race, Gender & Class, 16-62.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning and identity. Cambridge: Cambridge Press.West, C., & D. H. Zimmerman. (1987). Doing gender. Gender & Society, 1(2), 125–151.AcknowledgmentsWe thank participating activists, especially Amil Davis, Tresanne Fernandes, Keara Lightning, and Ariel MartzOberlander for their collaboration. We also thank Andrew Kohan, Omar Sirri, Victor Veitch and the GLITTERlab for their feedback on drafts. This work was generously funded by the Vanier Canada Graduate Scholarship.ICLS 2016 Proceedings153© ISLS