Exploring Ideological Becoming for Youth of Diverse Backgrounds:Documentary Practices as Internally Persuasive DiscourseAmy Chang, amyamchang@u.northwestern.edu, Northwestern UniversityWan Shun Eva Lam, evalam@northwestern.edu, Northwestern UniversityAbstract: This study explores how youth of diverse backgrounds grappled with varying civicperspectives in a documentary storytelling curriculum in a multicultural context. Our findingsindicate that documentary making is a generative context for learning, where studentscritically examine the perspectives of their audience and interviewees against their ownthrough dialogic addressing and responding, and in so doing generates new understandings.IntroductionGiven the enormous diversity that exists in our society today, the need intensifies for educators to createtransformative environments that exploit the learning potential of encounter with differences within amulticultural framework. Much work has been invested in understanding the nature of these divides byexamining in detail ethnic, cultural and social-class differences, and advocated a reconceptualization of theheterogeneity of human experiences and practices as fundamental to learning (Gutiérrez, 2008; Rosebery,Ogonowski, DiSchino, & Warren, 2010). However, these studies tend to focus on particular groups of learnersrather than a diverse mix. Limited attention has been devoted to understanding the potential for learning fromideological differences in multicultural contexts, particularly how to support youths to deepen engagement withvariegated views through intentional design and employment of tools and artifacts.In this study, we look at how a class composed of youth from diverse populations grapple withcontentious social issues in a documentary storytelling curriculum. The curriculum is informed by funds ofknowledge (FoK) research (Moll, Amanti, Neff, & Gonzalez, 1992) and aims to bring in knowledge,experiences, and ideological resources from different spaces, especially spaces that are historicallymarginalized. These foci are reflected in our deliberate choice of documentary storytelling on issues such asimmigration. Multimedia storytelling can promote the presence of resources, artifacts, knowledge andexperiences from students’ families and communities in the educational context (Honeyford, 2014). Sociallyoriented documentaries, in particular, have the potential to cultivate youth’s civic understanding andengagement in ongoing societal conversations.We find Bakhtinian ideas of dialogism and internally persuasive discourse (IPD) helpful in thinkingabout how the curriculum in general, and the documentary making process in particular, have the potential tocreate a space for deep engagement with ideological differences. Bakhtin (1981) asserts that one’s ideologiesdevelop when she comes into contact with available resources (discourses, practices, people, etc.) in herenvironment. A learning space rich with multiple perspectives can fuel learning as it affords plentifulopportunities to develop one’s ideologies and expand understanding of the world. However, multiplicity ofvoices does not guarantee ideological growth. Particularly in terms of social controversies, much too often theengagement ends up with the monologism, where singularity of viewpoints, rather than dialogic meaningmaking, dominates. In order for learning to take place, we must “struggle” (Bakhtin,1981) and dialogically testa diversity of related ideas in relation to our own. IPD is where such ideological struggle occurs through criticalexamination and dialogic addressing and responding, and in so doing generates new understandings andexpands one’s ideological horizons. In this study, we first seek to understand the complexity of the ideologicalenvironment of the class, given the heterogeneity of students’ backgrounds and experiences, as well as ourintentional design in accessing critical perspectives. We further hone in on one focal youth group’s engagementwith these perspectives as they produced The Process, a short documentary profiling the challenges that aLatino immigrant in their community experienced in obtaining legalization of residency.MethodsThe study emerged from a 10-week documentary storytelling project with a 12th grade social studies classlocated in an urban school district. Thirty students of diverse racial and ethnic affiliations, from differentimmigrant populations as well as nonimmigrant backgrounds, worked in teams to produce a short documentaryon how immigration policy affected people in their community. Our data set includes field notes, videorecordings, and student work. We also conducted interviews with each student group at the end of curriculum,which involved watching students’ documentaries together, stopping after each cut and discussing students’choices. In order to identify the array of perspectives that emerged in the process, we used a hybrid approach ofICLS 2018 Proceedings1655© ISLSinductive and deductive coding to analyze transcribed class sessions by turns. Then, we analyzed the focalgroup’s interview in conjunction with the multimodal transcription of their video, focusing, as informed by thetheoretical frame of IPD, on: 1. Production choices, where they explicate how and why certain elements areincluded; 2. References to class discourses, where they refer to particular perspectives raised in class; and 3.References to experiential resources, where they refer to personal experiences or those in their community, andthe knowledge gained from these experiences.Preliminary findings and discussionThe class conversations were rich in diversity and comprehensiveness of discourses, ranging across humanist,reciprocity, legal, and resource security perspectives, as students were afforded both opportunities to expresstheir ideas drawing on their FoKs and to be exposed to multiple social voices of the world. Nonetheless,competing positions emerged along restrictive versus non-restrictive stances toward immigration, and fewsubstantial relationships between elements of divergent discourses were established. During the documentaryproduction process, on the other hand, the focal group not only engaged with all the above major perspectivesthat emerged in the class, but further extended and/or complicated these viewpoints through drawing on thetestimonies of their interviewees and/or their own experiential resources, while also responding to theideological conflicts in class by problematizing the opposing claims posed by their peers. More fundamentally,they restructured the relationships between the restrictive and the non-restrictive stances towards immigrationthrough extending their humanist stance to address the theme of legalization.Our analysis reveals the ways in which documentary making affords the opportunities of criticalexamination and dialogic engagement—through dialoguing externally with their interviewees and with theiraudience, and internally with themselves. As documentary filmmakers develop their ideas, they have to considerthe audiences’ viewpoints to craft an effective message. In our case, the focal group set out to inform theiraudience (mainly their classmates) of immigrants’ struggles given the ideological conflicts in class. As theywere constructing their documentary narratives, they referenced opposing viewpoints raised in class andconsciously formulated responses to their peers. Using concrete testimonies from their interviewees, theyproblematized the definition and responsibility of illegality, repositioned them as people of resilience, whichenabled deeper discussion within the legal and the resource security perspectives. The interactional spacebetween the filmmakers and their interviewees is also dialogic. While filmmakers might preplan who they willinterview, they must recognize and examine their interviewee’ viewpoints in relation to their own as they bringtheir perspective to bear on what their interview subjects have told them. Though the focal youths’ stancealigned with their interviewees, through dialogizing with them, the students got to see how a familiar idea (e.g.,struggles of undocumented immigrants) unfolded in different contexts, and created new understanding byconnecting, juxtaposing or contrasting these experiences and viewpoints. Voices of their audience andinterviewees, through the IPD supported by documentary practices, become part of the focal students’consciousness and shape the lens through which they come to understand the issue of immigration.ConclusionThese early findings suggest that documentary making is a generative context for ideological development as itsupports the creation of an IPD. In this space, students critically examine the perspectives of their audience andinterviewees against their own through dialogic addressing and responding. Building on previous research thatunderscores heterogeneity as fundamental to learning, this study further points to ways in which we can,through deliberate design and employment of tools and artifacts, foster youths’ productive engagement withdifferences in a multicultural context.ReferencesBakhtin, M. (1981). The dialogical imagination: Four essays (C. Emerson & M. Holquist, Trans). Austin, TX:University of Texas Press.Gutiérrez, K. D. (2008). Developing a sociocritical literacy in the third space. Reading Research Quarterly,43(2), 148-164.Honeyford, M.A. (2014). From Aquí and Allá : Symbolic convergence in the multimodal literacy practices ofadolescent immigrant students. Journal of Literacy Research, 46(2), 194–233.Moll, L. C., Amanti, C., Neff, D. & Gonzalez, N. (1992). Funds of knowledge for teaching: Using a qualitativeapproach to connect homes and classrooms. Theory into practice, 31(2), 132–141.Rosebery, A. S., Ogonowski, M., DiSchino, M., & Warren, B. (2010). “The coat traps all your body heat”:Heterogeneity as fundamental to learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19, 322–357.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1656© ISLS