Tracking the Flow of Discussion Topics in an Inquiry Science UnitCatherine L. Dornfeld Tissenbaum, University of Wisconsin–Madison, cldornfeld@wisc.eduSadhana Puntambekar, University of Wisconsin–Madison, puntambekar@education.wisc.eduAbstract: Inquiry-based curricula may leverage distributed knowledge by interleavingindividual, small-group, and whole class activities. We tracked topics across multipleactivities to study how topics are distributed and consolidated in a science unit. Embeddedprompts guided students’ discussion toward key topics, while the teacher helped students takegreater responsibility for managing whole class discussions over time. These findingsdemonstrate how embedded prompts and teacher facilitation can scaffold knowledge sharingacross individual, small-group, and whole class levels.IntroductionIn inquiry-based curricula, students may build knowledge by interacting with people, tools, and technology overtime (Pea, 1993; Hmelo-Silver et al., 2007). Cyclical processes of generating questions, researching concepts,and developing explanations help students to externalize, negotiate, and revise their thinking at the individual,small group, and whole class levels (Hmelo-Silver et al., 2007; Wertsch, 1984; Tabak & Reiser, 1997; Mercer etal., 2004). Interleaving individual and collaborative activities helps students to explore their own inquiry whiledeveloping deeper understandings than they could on their own, especially when teachers help students toconnect their distributed knowledge (Mercer et al., 2004; Woodruff & Meyer, 1997; Tabak & Reiser, 1997).To understand the distribution and consolidation of curricular topics during an inquiry-based scienceunit, we tracked how students discussed topics when using individual notebooks, researching in small groups,and participating in whole class discussions. We focused on e-textbook sessions that included cycles ofgenerating questions, researching content, and sharing findings with the class. In particular, we examined howembedded inquiry prompts in the notebooks shaped students’ research, and how teacher facilitation encouragedstudents’ sharing in whole class discussions. Our research question was: how do curricular topics move acrossindividual, small group, and whole class levels over time, as supported by embedded inquiry prompts andteacher facilitation? This question has implications for how students leverage others’ research as topics flowfrom individual artifacts to a collective knowledge base in an inquiry classroom.MethodsWe selected three groups of students working in groups of four (N = 12) in an eighth-grade public schoolclassroom, located in a small Midwestern U.S. city. As part of a larger study, students participated in Make YourOwn Compost, an eight-week science unit that challenged students to design an ideal compost. To inform theirdesigns, students participated in research sessions with an e-textbook (VidyaMap) at three points in the unit,which we selected for study. VidyaMap displays content about biology topics and the relationships betweenthose topics. To help students navigate toward content about compost, we embedded inquiry prompts instudents’ notebooks to guide question generation about topics that might improve their designs (e.g., abioticfactors). Students then discussed their questions and research as small groups and the whole class. Collaborativeactivities (e.g., small group and whole class discussions) created opportunities for students to share, negotiate,and revise their understanding.To analyze how topics moved across individual, group, and class levels, we tracked the presence oftopics in students’ individual notebooks (120 pages), small-group discussions (90 minutes), whole classdiscussions (129 minutes), and log data from VidyaMap (176 records). We included topics when they were partof a statement or question involving reasoning (for notebooks and discussion) or were viewed for a minimum of10 seconds (for log data). Next, we created matrices of each topic discussed by each student, group, and thewhole class. We then identified patterns across levels, which we considered to be salient topics for the class. Wealso looked at how the teacher engaged in class dialogue with students by generating Markov models for teacherand student turns of talk during the three whole class discussions.FindingsFirst, we discuss how embedded inquiry prompts guided student’s discussions. The prompt for Session 1 (Whatfactors help decomposers break down matter?) resulted in individual notes about moisture and temperature,which were also discussed by small groups and the whole class. Groups added biotic factors, carbon, compost,ecosystems, and water to their research. In the whole class discussion, students emphasized temperature (15.1%ICLS 2018 Proceedings1595© ISLSof turns) and abiotic factors (10.6%). Undiscussed topics in individual notes included air and oxygen. Next, theprompt for Session 2 (Where does the energy for life come from?) resulted in individual notes about plants,producers, and sunlight, which were also discussed by small groups and the whole class. Groups also researchedenergy and photosynthesis. In the whole class discussion, students emphasized conservation of energy andmatter (36.1% of turns) and producers (27.8%). Undiscussed topics in individual notes included air and oxygen.Last, the prompt for Session 3 (What is an ecosystem?) resulted in individual notes about abiotic factors, bioticfactors, compost, consumers, decomposers, ecosystems, and producers; these were also discussed by smallgroups and the whole class. Groups focused on compost and ecosystems in their research. In the whole classdiscussion, students emphasized dependence in food webs (70.9% of turns) as they discussed consumers,decomposers, producers, energy, plants, and soil. Undiscussed topics in individual notes included biodiversity,oxygen, and water.Next, the Markov models of whole class discussions (Table 1) showed a decrease in teacher talk overtime. The probability of a student following up after another student was 14% in Session 1, but this significantlyincreased to 46% in Session 2 (z = -8.0995, p < 0.001) and 50% in Session 3 (z = -9.1975, p < 0.001).Correspondingly, the probability of the teacher following up after a student decreased from 86% in Session 1 to54% in Session 2 and 50% in Session 3. Overall, the teacher limited his interjections into student talk over time,indicating that students took on greater responsibility for managing their whole class discussions.Table 1: Markov models of turns of talk during whole class discussionsSession 1Session 2Session 3ConclusionInquiry-based curricula may encourage students to access different resources and consolidate their knowledge asa class. In an effort to understand this process, we tracked how curricular topics moved across individual, smallgroup, and whole class levels during students’ research sessions with an e-textbook in a science unit. We foundthat embedding inquiry prompts in individual notebooks helped guide students’ inquiry toward important topicsfor understanding and improving their compost designs. Students also took on greater responsibility formanaging their class discussions over time as the teacher facilitated increasingly student-centric discussionsabout topics related to the embedded prompts. This study creates an opportunity for further research about howembedded prompts, teacher facilitation, and e-textbook content can serve as synergistic scaffolds in a middleschool inquiry science unit.ReferencesHmelo-Silver, C. E., Duncan, R. G., & Chinn, C. A. (2007). Scaffolding and achievement in problem-based andinquiry learning: A response to Kirschner, Sweller, and Clark (2006). Educational Psychologist, 42(2),99-107.Mercer, N., Dawes, L., Wegerif, R., & Sams, C. (2004). Reasoning as a scientist: Ways of helping children touse language to learn science. British Educational Research Journal, 30(3), 359-377.Pea, R. D. (1993). Learning scientific concepts through material and social activities: Conversational analysismeets conceptual change. Educational Psychologist, 28(3), 265-277.Tabak, I., & Reiser, B. J. (1997, December). Complementary roles of software-based scaffolding and teacherstudent interactions in inquiry learning. In Proceedings of the 2nd international conference onComputer support for collaborative learning (pp. 292-301). ISLS.Wertsch, J. V. (1984). The zone of proximal development: Some conceptual issues. New Directions for Childand Adolescent Development, 1984(23), 7-18.Woodruff, E., & Meyer, K. (1997). Explanations from intra-and inter-group discourse: Students buildingknowledge in the science classroom. Research in Science Education, 27(1), 25-39.AcknowledgmentsThis project received funding from the National Science Foundation (award #1418044).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1596© ISLS