Transitioning to an Integrated Science Teaching Model:Easier Said than DoneAshley Iveland, Elizabeth B. Dyer, Edward Britton, Burr Tyler, and Joshua Valcarcelaivelan@wested.org, edyer@wested.org, tbritto@wested.org, btyler@wested.org, jvalcar@wested.orgWestEdAbstract: This poster presents a study of eight school districts implementing a new integratedmodel of science instruction in the middle grades aligned with NGSS. The analysis uncovershow districts created implementation plans and how teachers and administrators initially areresponding to them, sometimes in more limited ways than envisioned. The findings suggest theimportance of attending to transitional as well as end-goal implementation phases ofinnovations, and the importance of administrators facilitating the transition.IntroductionThe Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) advocate for an integrated model of science instruction in whichdifferent science domains are connected rather than separated. For example, the NGSS calls for basing instructionon authentic phenomena, which are best explained by examining all of the science disciplines involved (NationalResearch Council, 2012). This shift is unique because it has equally important implications at the classroom level(e.g. what phenomena teachers use in instruction) and the systemic level. In particular, all scientific disciplines,such as earth, space, life, and physical science, in addition to engineering, should be included and connected in asingle year of instruction, leading schools and districts to reorganize their course sequences. During recent decadesin California and the US, middle school science has most frequently been taught in discipline specific courses(e.g. California’s sequence of earth science in grade 6, life science in grade 7, and physical science in grade 8).With the advent of NGSS, California’s State Board of Education has shifted to give preference to an integratedmodel for middle school science. This new context represents a key state-wide policy shift with important, butpotentially diverse, impacts for schools and teachers.This study investigates how teachers, schools, and districts in California initially made sense of thetransition from discipline-specific to integrated models, and the challenges teachers identify with that transition.As such, this study aims to contribute to literature on teacher change, teacher learning, and implementation acrosseducational systems. This focus on districts, schools, and teachers reflects an actor-oriented perspective towardNGSS implementation, which highlights how NGSS implementation depends on the sense-making and decisionsof relevant actors (Coburn, 2006; Penuel, Phillips, & Harris, 2014; Spillane, 2012).MethodsThe data informing this study come from a project involving eight public school districts across California thatare early implementers of NGSS (http://k12alliance.org/ca-ngss.php). This project provided ongoing and intensiveprofessional development and other support to K-8 teacher leaders and administrators around NGSSimplementation, and included integration as one of many topics. The districts represent a variety of locations,sizes, and demographics within California, and were selected through a competitive application process, whichrequired districts to commit to California’s preferred integrated model of science education at the middle grades.The following analyses are based on data from the first two years of the project, and include writtenartifacts created by the district, interviews with each district’s project director and leadership teams, and surveyscompleted with school and district administrators, as well as teacher leaders participating in the project activities.All districts created comprehensive plans for NGSS implementation. These artifacts were qualitatively analyzedfor mentioning the transition plan toward the integrated model for science instruction. Interviews with projectdirectors asked about plan for integration, and these responses were summarized holistically and triangulated withthe district plans. The surveys administered contained an open-ended question that asked respondents to identifythe “biggest challenges in implementing the integrated science model.” These responses were open-coded (Strauss& Corbin, 1998) to identify common challenges across participants.FindingsAll of the districts’ initial NGSS implementation plans included the goal of integrated middle school science.However, only two of the eight included specific, multi-year plans for transitioning to integration. Instead, mostdistricts indicated they would develop plans in the future or named activities that would support integration (e.g.teacher PD on integration with their curriculum). The two specific plans considered how to provide continuity forICLS 2018 Proceedings1387© ISLSboth students and teachers (e.g., avoid gaps in instruction and repeated science content as a result of the shift incourse sequence), and had transitional models of incomplete integration, such as a “coordinated” model in whichscience classrooms engage students in each discipline each year, without making vital connections between them.Interviews with leadership teams in the districts revealed the complicated negotiations and transitionsfor individual teachers and administrators, reflecting different concerns than continuity or dedicated projectactivities around integration, which were highlighted in the district plans. For example, one principal shared achallenge for teachers, letting go of teaching their favorite science topics, when supporting integration,The Integrated Model calls for cells to be taught in grade 6 instead of 7. But my 7th grade lifescience teacher loves teaching cells and really didn’t want to let go of this topic. And the 6thgrade teacher was intimidated…the need to transition over several years turned out to be ablessing…the 7th grade teacher still gets to teach it for one more year. But the 7th grade teacheralso had to seriously help the grade 6 teacher with cells…[after that transition year] the 7thgrade teacher initially was caught off guard by the reality of not being able to teach cellsanymore…[but] was getting excited about teaching some new things.The school administrators and teachers also noted challenges related to science equipment and materials. Oneprincipal shared her role in negotiating the transition as it related to equipment,Everyone had to be transparent about what [supplies] they actually already had…It took mylow-key involvement in some meetings to inventory everything and figure out where it shouldnow be. And since sometimes more than one grade is teaching a topic during the transition,when and how two different teachers had them had to be synchronized.These challenges were also expressed by teacher leaders in the study. In teachers’ responses to an openended prompt about the biggest challenges in transition to the Integrated model, 17% indicated a lack of existingcurricula and/or science material resources, and 16% mentioned a specific science topic that would be challengingto teach. Teachers also indicated a lack of content knowledge required by the revised courses (12%); time neededto learn, plan and implement changes (10%); opportunity to collaborate with other teachers (7%); and ability toidentify real-world phenomena that authentically involve multiple disciplines (7%).ConclusionsThe findings presented showcase how different challenges and concerns arise for actors working at different levelsin the implementation process (i.e., district, school, classroom). These challenges highlight the importance ofpaying attention to the implementation process, as well as considering the learning happening during this processacross a district or educational system. In particular, there were concerns that frame the problems with transitionin terms of a resource management logic, such as access to materials, as well as a resource development logic,such as developing teachers’ capacity to teach new science topics (Horn, Kane, & Wilson, 2015). The findingsalso highlight how school administrators can be active agents in facilitating teachers’ transition challenges,supporting teachers to work collaboratively across boundaries of grade and science discipline. Future datacollection from subsequent years of implementation in this project will shed further light about the final stages ofthe transition toward the integrated model across districts and schools.ReferencesCoburn, C. E. (2006). Framing the Problem of Reading Instruction: Using Frame Analysis to Uncover theMicroprocesses of Policy Implementation. American Educational Research Journal, 43(3), 343–349.Horn, I. S., Kane, B. D., & Wilson, J. (2015). Making Sense of Student Performance Data: Data Use Logics andMathematics Teachers’ Learning Opportunities. American Educational Research Journal, 52(2), 208–242. https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831215573773National Research Council. (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, Crosscutting Concepts,and Core Ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Penuel, W. R., Phillips, R. S., & Harris, C. J. (2014). Analysing teachers’ curriculum implementation fromintegrity and actor-oriented perspectives. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 46(6), 751–777.Spillane, J. P. (2012). Data in Practice: Conceptualizing the Data-Based Decision-Making Phenomena. AmericanJournal of Education, 118(2), 113–141. https://doi.org/10.1086/663283Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research techniques. Thousand Oaks, CA: SagePublications.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1388© ISLS