Community Science Identity: Becoming Community Scientists in aMuseum-based Genetics of Taste ProgramLeighanna Hinojosa, Rebecca D. Swanson, and Joseph L. Polmanleighanna.hinojosa@colorado.edu, rebecca.swanson@colorado.edu, joseph.polman@colorado.eduUniversity of Colorado BoulderAbstract: A museum genetics lab, following an apprenticeship model, scaffolds volunteers’participation in laboratory activities through interactions with other lab members. As volunteersinteract and complete activities in the lab they connect prior memories and experiences topresent and imagined future experiences. Using a sociocultural analytic framework fortrajectories of identification, we examined (1) how volunteers were scaffolded in labparticipation and (2) how participation directly affects trajectories of identification by analyzingprolepsis, positioning, and agency.Keywords: Community Science, Citizen Science, Informal Learning, IdentityResearch problemCommunity science, or Public Participation in Science Research (PPSR) (Bonney, et al., 2009), is an exciting andgrowing avenue whereby members of the general public contribute meaningfully to the scientific enterprise, whilesimultaneously learning science. While community science offers opportunities for PPSR, how thoseopportunities are scaffolded and received by the scientific community, and how those opportunities aresuccessfully and unsuccessfully accessed remains unclear. The purpose of this paper is to describe how trajectoriesof identification emerge for community scientists as they participate in different ways in a volunteer museumbased genetics lab program, and how age, gender, prior experience in science, and elements of participation affectidentity and future participation in science. This will ultimately be used to understand barriers and constraints tocontinued participation as a community scientist.Theoretical and methodological approachWe theorize that volunteer participants in community science hold projected identities, or trajectories ofidentification, which direct how they participate in the lab and thus in science. In this study, we examined (1) howvolunteers are scaffolded in their participation and (2) how their participation directly affects identity andtrajectories of identification by analyzing prolepsis, positioning, and agency of participants, as they occur in realtime and in narrative. Using the trajectories of identification framework (Polman & Miller, 2010), we theorizeparticipation and identity as dynamic and co-constructed through social interactions and activities.To further analyze trajectories of identification, we looked at the following elements of participation:prolepsis, positioning, scene, and agency. The distance measuring the individual’s actual identity to a futurepossible identity imagined by self and others is represented by the Zone of Proximal Identity Development(ZoPID; Polman, 2010). Using the ZoPID—similar to Vygotsky’s Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD)—weview identity development as tied to the participant’s past positioning and positioning by self and others duringsocial activities. The ZoPID for each community scientist includes trajectories of identifications (from self andothers) which “impact their participation in the learning environment on a moment-to-moment basis, and whichlead to their longer term development of identity” (Polman, 2010, p.129). We focus on three different planes ofsociocultural activity— community/institutional, interpersonal, and personal—for developmental analysis ofparticipants involved in sociocultural activities and practices. Rogoff (1995) refers to the interpersonal process asguided participation, whereby “people manage their own and others’ roles, and structure situations (whether byfacilitating or limiting access) in which they observe and participate in cultural activities” (pp. 147-148). Asparticipants move through this functioning apprenticeship they are guided in their participation and appropriateskills and knowledge to participate in the community as a more knowledgeable peer. Thus, our analytic approach“requires considering how individuals, groups, and communities transform… together” (Rogoff, 1995, p.161).Methods and data sourcesThis study was conducted in a museum-based genetics of taste lab, and all community scientists were invited toparticipate in the study. 35 participants consented. All participants were given pseudonyms. Using an ethnographicapproach, we completed participant observations and observations of the community science program in thegenetics lab beginning in July 2016 until December 2017. Observations consisted of recorded actions andICLS 2018 Proceedings1499© ISLSinteractions occurring in real time. Participant observations were conducted once a week for six months prior toobservations. Each participant observation was 4.5 hours, the length of one volunteer shift. After six months,researchers transitioned to roles as observers of community scientists as they participated in lab activities andduring social and public interactions in the lab; ethnographic observations of lab shifts continued for ten months.Formal and informal interviews were also conducted, as well as exit interviews when community scientists leftthe program due to career and life transitions. Lastly, informal events such as symposiums, workshops, outreachevents, and appreciation dinners, offered by the museum to volunteers, were observed to understand more fullythe types of interactions and forms of participation occurring for community scientists outside the lab.We deductively coded and thematically analyzed (Erickson, 1986) all field notes and interviews. Usingthe ZoPID (Polman, 2010) and trajectories of identification framework (Polman & Miller, 2010), we looked atelements of participation and identification to build individual case studies describing trajectories of identification,based on types of participation in the lab, career and life stages, and association to social categories. Career andlife stage were divided into pre-professional, early/mid-career, or late-career/retired. Pre-professional careervolunteers are in high school or college, while those in their early to middle career stages are either working,obtaining a higher degree, or in transition. The late-career/retired volunteers are those who are fully or semiretired. In addition, we coded thematically for motivation/satisfaction for volunteering, lab and scientific practices,science content, and for characteristics of the community/social environment.Major findingsLab volunteers are trained during volunteer shifts by the lab staff and other volunteers, oftentimes using labprotocols and procedures from lab binders; thus functioning as an apprenticeship (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Rogoff,1995). Upon entering the lab, all community scientists are positioned as novices to the lab, yet are expected tosuccessfully contribute to scientific research. Our overall analysis has revealed primary categories of positioningused by community scientists about themselves and other sub-categories which have emerged during laboratorymoments and interactions. Many of these have predictable relations to career and life stages, and positioncommunity scientists in different lab roles. We found that volunteers in the lab fall under “retiree” (or selfdescribed “geezer”), “resume builders”, and “more knowledgeable peer (MKP)” categories, and those identitiesare related to more sophisticated levels of scientific participation. We also found that unique communities formedacross the different shifts.Conclusion and further implicationsEvidence from this study contributes to our understanding of how identifications associated with life stages andaspirations contribute to the experiences of community scientists. Thus prolepsis, agency, and positioning (by selfand others) directly contributes to the level and type of participation exerted by the volunteer and contributes tosocial categories emerging from laboratory interactions that further reflect life stage and volunteer task preference.ReferencesBonney, R., Ballard, H., Jordan, R., McCallie, E., Phillips, T., Shirk, J., & Wilderman, C. C. (2009). PublicParticipation in Scientific Research: Defining the Field and Assessing Its Potential for Informal ScienceEducation. A CAISE Inquiry Group Report. Available: https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED519688Erickson, F. (1986). Qualitative Methods in Research on Teaching. In Handbook of Research on Teaching [3rdedition] (pp. 119–161).Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: CambridgeUniversity Press.Polman, J. L. (2010). The zone of proximal identity development in apprenticeship learning. Revista deEducación, 353 (Sep-Dec), 129-155. http://www.revistaeducacion.educacion.es/re353_05.htmlPolman, J. L., and †Miller, D. (2010). Changing stories: Trajectories of identification among African Americanyouth in a science outreach apprenticeship. American Educational Research Journal, 47(4), 879-918.Rogoff, B. (1995). Observing sociocultural activity on three planes: Participatory appropriation, guidedparticipation, and apprenticeship. In Wertsch, J. V., del Rio, P., & Alvarez, A., Sociocultural Studies ofMind (pp. 139–164). New York: Cambridge University Press.AcknowledgementsThis project was supported by the Office of the Director, National Institutes of Health under Award Number1R25OD021909-01. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent theofficial views of the National Institutes of Health.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1500© ISLS