Mapping Networks to Help Education Leaders Gain Insights IntoComplex Educational SystemsRobbin Riedy, University of Colorado Boulder, robbin.riedy@colorado.eduKatie Van Horne, University of Colorado Boulder, katie.vanhorne@colorado.eduPhilip Bell, University of Washington Seattle, pbell@uw.eduWilliam R. Penuel, University of Colorado, Boulder, william.penuel@colorado.eduTiffany Neill, Oklahoma Department of Education, tiffany.neill@sde.ok.govSam Shaw, EdReports, sshaw@edreports.orgAbstract: Developing an understanding of education as a complex, adaptive system can beuseful in helping leaders understand the impact of various interventions on the system as awhole. This paper describes the design of two learning opportunities, which draw on ActorNetwork Theory, for assisting state science coordinators in exploring complex educationalsystems in their state. We respond to a call for research on how representational tools can helpeducation leaders develop understandings of complex systems. The authors conducted adesign study to address the question, how do state science education leaders userepresentations of complex systems to understand their networks and identify leverage pointsfor change?Introduction and frameworkUnderstanding large educational systems as complex adaptive systems can provide insights that can help leadersanticipate both intended and unintended consequences of policies they devise (Maroulis et al., 2010). Tools suchas agent-based models and network maps have the potential to facilitate this understanding (Daly & Finnigan,2010; Penuel, Harrison, et al., 2015). Thinking about complex systems requires both domain knowledge and anunderstanding of systems concepts, which may violate pre-formed intuitions. However, developing thisunderstanding may prove difficult, as “learning about these systems challenge cognitive, metacognitive, andsocial resources” (Hmelo-Silver & Azevedo, 2006, p. 58). Designing for change in educational policy requirespaying specific attention to the implementation of interventions (Penuel, Fishman, Cheng, & Sabelli, 2011), therelationships between and coordination among different actants in a system (Jackson & Cobb, 2013), and thecoherence within the system (Forman, Stosich, & Bocala, 2017; Fuhrman, 1993; Linn, Kali, Davis, & Horwitz,2008). Still, a complex systems approach can be helpful in identifying specific leverage points, or places whereit may be especially productive to focus efforts, in systems, because of the disproportionate effect interventionsat those points may have. Policy efforts that focus on these specific leverage points can be helpful in achievinglarge scale change (Bryk, Gomez, Grunow, & LeMahieu, 2015).Due to their potential utility in helping education leaders re-imagine and re-organize educationalsystems, there is a need to further explore the pedagogy, and the design of activities intended to userepresentational tools to help teach complex systems thinking related to change in educational systems(Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006). Work by constructivist learning theorists has demonstrated the utility ofsimulations and visual representations for learning. For example, NetLogo, Logo and Turtle programing havebeen used to help learners foster a deeper understanding of networks (Wilensky & Rand, 2015; Colella, Klopfer& Resnick, 2001; Papert, 1972). In addition, research in the learning sciences has already identified severalaspects of good pedagogy for teaching about complex systems, such as the importance of scaffolding,collaboration, discussion, and reflection in learning (Danish, Saleh, Andrade, & Bryan, 2017; Yoon et al., 2017).Researchers have found that explicit instruction is necessary to help novices make sense of complex systems(Hmelo-Silver, Marathe & Liu, 2017).This paper addresses both the call for more attention to learning complex systems in education, as wellas the need to research how representational tools can help develop understandings of complex systems. Itaddresses the question, How do state science education leaders use representations of complex systems tounderstand their networks and identify leverage points for change? This work is part of a larger researchpractice partnership in which state leaders have multiple opportunities to map and analyze the social networksthat represent the complex science education systems in their states.This study employed a mixed methods design which included both qualitative and quantitative datacollection and analysis (Leech & Onwuegbuzie, 2009). We analyzed two techniques we constructed that weregrounded in Actor Network Theory, which we call state influence charts and actor network maps to capture theways in which state science education leaders perceive who has power and necessary relationships to makeICLS 2018 Proceedings656© ISLSchange in science education. Actor Network Theory (ANT) is concerned with the relations between bothmaterial objects and concepts within a network (Latour, 1987, 2005; Sismondo, 2003). ANT posits that there isno unmediated activity within a system, rather, all actions impact and are changed by other actors in the system.Actors—that include human and non-human kinds (e.g., policies operating in a context), have interests that needto be accommodated, and that can be managed and used. Actors work to establish networks that support andconstrain activity flowing through that network. ANT involves working to understand the interests of a varietyof actors, and translating (both in place and in form) those interests so that actors work together or in agreement(Sismondo, 2003). We use ANT-inspired tools to describe a network as it is, in order to capture an image of theunderlying system the produces observable results. Our project is concerned with the political and programmaticwork of bringing interests and elements of a network into alignment, for the purposes of increasing coherenceand equity in state science education systems. The influence charts and actor network maps capture key decisionmakers, allies, influential processes, organizations and artifacts, as well as connections between these items inorder to make visible the potentially invisible systems of influence in each state.Description of toolsNetwork influence mapsThe research project associated with this work is organizing networks of science networks, designed to improveequity in science instruction in ways that align with the vision of A Framework for K-12 Science Education(National Research Council, 2012). To this aim, the research team is working together with state based scienceteams to build networks to support coherent and equitable implementation of the new science standards. Theproject, which began in the Fall of 2016, has included several activities designed to help science coordinatorsbuild capacity for change in their state. Some of the activities have included statewide focus groups, thedevelopment of rapid assessment tools such as practical measures, and the co-design of professionaldevelopment resources. The research team has hypothesized that there are many components of coherence instate science education, including the degree to which influential actors within each state are 1) connected and2) moving in the same direction. State influence charts and actor network maps provided state leaders with anexercise to explore the connectedness and trajectory of important elements of their state systems.During the summer of 2016 a group of 13 U.S. State Science Coordinators participated in a brieftraining on how to complete their state influence chart. The purpose of the chart was to guide the sciencecoordinators as they selected a broad team to assist them in implementing a coherent and equitable plan forscience teaching and learning in their state. The chart included spaces for coordinators and one to two otherteam members to list the name and organizations of people who they might want to join their efforts, Table 1. Italso included space to write how influential each potential team member was in their state, what aspects of thestate science system they had influence over, and how familiar each person was with the Framework for K-12Science Education. Lastly, state coordinators were asked to indicate whether or not the people they listed in theirstate influence charts knew each other, entering a “1” if the key influencers knew each other, a “0” if they didnot and “IDK” if the state coordinator did not know if the potential team members knew each other. The mapswere intended to be “living documents” updated as more information was discovered and participants’ roleschange. After completing an initial chart, state coordinators met with peers from other states to discuss theircharts, the rationale for including people in the chart, and to reflect on what changes they would make to theirown charts based on insight from other states. Then state teams revised their influence charts once more duringthe meeting.Table 1: Example list of connections in state influence chartPerson 1Person 1Person 2Person 2Person 3Person 4Person 5Person 6Person 7Person 8Person 9110IDK01111110IDK011Actor Network DiagramsState Science Coordinators returned to Boulder for a meeting in Fall 2017. We designed an activity in whichmembers of each state team, including the state science supervisor and one to two other state leaders, completeda hand drawn actor network, Figure 1. Using an interview protocol the research team provided, teamsICLS 2018 Proceedings657© ISLSbrainstormed a list of actors and drew connections between them on paper. We asked state teams to respond tothe prompt: “Why does formative assessment in K-12 science classrooms look the way that it does?” Teammembers were asked to individually brainstorm and then collectively list up to nine actors of their state sciencesystems and to categorize them accordingly: organization, person, process, or artifact. Items categorized asartifacts included the local curriculum or state science standards, while teacher evaluations were an example ofan element state teams categorized as a process. Teams were then directed to classify the elements they listed assupportive, a hinderance, or neutral to their efforts to improve state science education. Afterwards, they alsoentered the information into an online spreadsheet. State teams then used the actor maps to develop detailedaction plans related to promoting coherence and equity in state systems. At a later date, the research team willanalyze states’ action plans in light of the information they provided in their actor network maps.Figure 1. Hand drawn map structure.The research team used photos of the hand drawn maps to complete any missing elements in thespreadsheets once the activity was over. The spreadsheets were used to make digital maps with an onlineprogram called Kumu. Kumu makes a social network map by showing connections between elements, twoexamples of state maps are below.Methods and analysisOnce the digital version of the actor network maps were created, they were sent to State Science Coordinators ina questionnaire, along with their state influence chart. The questionnaire was sent to the twelve state leads whoattended the meeting (1). State science leaders come from a variety of institutions in their state, including statedepartments of education, local universities, and state boards of education. The questionnaire asked state leadersto compare and contrast their state influence charts and actor network maps, and to share with us what they hadlearned from these network mapping activities. Questionnaire items included questions such as, “What revisionswould you like to make to your Actor Network Map?” and “What stands out to you about the State InfluenceChart?” Nine state leaders responded to the questionnaire request. State leader’s survey responses were codedfor content to identify broad themes in the text. Some themes that emerged included that the mapping activitieswere positive experiences for participants, that they helped state leaders identify leverage points of support oropposition in the system, and that state leaders planned to use the mapping activities in conjunction with otherpractices and activities of the partnership network to plan and make decisions. The original seven categorieswere combined into three for parsimony: seeing the whole system, planning for the future, and identifyingstructural gaps.FindingsSupportive, hindering, and neutral actors, processes and organizationsThe hand drawn maps provided more information than we had originally anticipated because they allowedparticipants to create novel connections. For instance, several state coordinators listed organizations that took onmore than one role as both supports and hindrances. In all, 15 items were listed as both supporting, hinderingICLS 2018 Proceedings658© ISLSand/or neutral to efforts to improve science education. We did not instruct state coordinators to give elementsmore than one category because we limited the Kumu spreadsheets to include only one classification. However,state coordinators mapped complexity in their state systems beyond the constraints of the representationalsystem we provided them. They recognized nuance and contingencies in relationships that allowed fororganizations to both support and hinder their efforts towards science reform. They described how organizationsoften have variable interests across individuals, and actors can have shifting interests over time, or variablecontext-driven interests. We take this to mean that there is significant systems complexity at levels of detail thatlie beyond the constraints the activity design imposed on the teams.Figure 2. example actor network maps. The map on the left represents a somewhat more coherent state withconnections between the elements, while the map on the right represents a state with more isolated elements(actants in ANT terms), suggesting incoherence within the state science system. The red elements showmisalignment with goals of state leaders, so neither system is coherent with respect to vision for equitableteaching and learning.Questionnaire findingsOur questionnaire findings suggest that representational tools can help develop understandings of complexeducation systems of which they are part. State science leaders identified several ways that the social actormapping and state influence chart experiences were positive, with one member calling the activity “reassuring”because she discovered more support in the system than she had originally thought was there. State leaderscontinued to use ANT-related exercises after the Boulder meeting to organize work in their state. For example,one state leader requested the Kumu spreadsheet so that she could create her own account and lead her teamthrough the data during a meeting. Another science leader completed the mapping activities with others in herstate in order to inform decisions regarding leadership for their advisory committee, and to help decide how toredraw regional boundaries for their STEM networks.Overall, the mapping experiences helped state participants see their state system as an integratedwhole, the activities helped them identify incongruencies in state science systems, and the mapping and chartingactivities helped teams determine their next steps toward improving coherence.See the system as a wholeRespondents felt that the actor network mapping activities helped them see the big picture regarding their statescience systems. It was useful for participants to step back to see their entire network as an integrated whole,rather than simply focusing on the parts that they interacted with on a day-to-day basis. One respondent wrote,“It helps me look at all the actors at once and to think about how we can move between them and shift themfrom hindrance to support.” This state science coordinator reflected on his opportunity to think about the systemof science education in his state as a complex whole, rather than a series of discrete, disconnected parts.Similarly, another coordinator stated:It was useful to discuss who isn't part of the conversation and why we haven't engaged them.It was also critical to see who is influencing the system for better alignment or how [they are]trying to influence a message that may not be in alignment with our vision and mission.ICLS 2018 Proceedings659© ISLSThe respondent noticed actors who were a part of the system, and yet had not been engaged in the statescience coordinator’s work. The actor network map was useful in identifying parts of the system that theirefforts had left untouched. In addition, the state leader identified potential leverage points, by finding actants intheir map that may be at odds with the work they were trying to accomplish. These state leaders benefited fromthe visual representation of the science networks in their state. These representations helped them to locateisolated actants, and started the conversation regarding how better to integrate fragmented sections of thenetwork.Identify incongruenciesThe mapping activities were helpful for illuminating structural gaps in state science systems. One respondentmentioned that there was a disconnect between two major elements on her map. She said, “If we were to look atthis, the biggest thing that stands out is that our two major PD opportunities...that get to teachers are completelydisconnected.” The recognition of this major discontinuity was facilitated by the visual representation of herstate’s science network. Without this activity, the fact that the two primary providers of professionaldevelopment activities in her state were disconnected ─not from the state leader, but from each other ─mighthave gone unnoticed. Building coherence in this network will require connections among all of the majoractants, not just between the actants and the science leaders themselves. As mentioned earlier, one participantwas surprised to find as much support in her network as she did. Another noted that some of the more influentialactants of the network were not having the impact that perhaps they should. The science leader wrote:It was interesting that not all of the groups/individuals on the influence map are included inthe actor map. That is really interesting and we need to consider how to ensure the people whohave the most influence are actually acting in our system.The participant noticed that potentially influential actants were in fact acting in isolation to the rest of thenetwork. This illuminated an incongruence between what science leaders assumed, and what was actuallyhappening upon further inspection. Taken together, the mapping activities provided an opportunity to reflect onwhether or not the system was behaving as imagined.Identify next stepsAs a result of the mapping and charting activities, state participants noted some concrete next steps that theycould take to build capacity and coherence in the state science systems. For example, participants stated thatthey needed to expand or extend their networks, and that they would use the charts and maps in order to identifythe people to whom they should reach out. One leader noted that he needed to address isolated actants in hisactor network map, stating, “I would prefer to see a system that is more tightly clustered. The long tail to theright suggests that I need to do more to bring coherence across influencers.” The same state leader also notedhow the maps informed his plan for moving forward in his state. Referring to the state influence chart, hementioned, “There are a lot of organizations and individuals listed on the document that have not been broughtinto the work. I need to revisit the document and see how I can draw more people into the work.”The social network chart and actor map provided a stepping off point for a plan to bring about morecoherence in the science network, first by identifying potentially influential people, and then by recognizing thatthose people had not been recruited into the work. Another state leader responded that the maps helped to thinkabout “specific leverage points” in their system; people and elements that they should directly target for supportin their efforts. Similarly, another state science coordinator recognized the need for targeted outreach to enhanceher work, stating, “We need more intentional interactions with our messaging to actively seek more championsto elevate the urgency of science education.” The representations of complex systems not only helped statescience coordinators visualize actants and clusters of actants of their state science networks, they also provideddirections for state coordinators to plan their next course of action.LimitationsThere are some limitations to our activity design. One respondent reported having difficulty enlarging andreading the map, some wanted to list more than the nine elements we constrained them to, and another wantedmore time to complete the mapping activity. These are ideas worth exploring. In particular, the research teamcould assist participants in using their computers’ zoom functions to increase the size of the maps. Given thetime constraints at our meeting, we were not able to spend more than 90 minutes on the actor network mappingactivity, however, we have continued to work with states who are interested in further developing their maps.Given additional time, the research team could have noted moments of agreement or disagreement as state teamsICLS 2018 Proceedings660© ISLSnegotiated regarding which elements to include in their maps. Our continued work with states can serve as anadditional source of validity, as different state team members review the maps and serve as member checks.Despite these limitations, all respondents reported gaining something of use from completing the mappingactivities.Importantly, respondents found the actor network mapping activity to be more informative than theinfluence chart creation, as the actor network maps included more varied kinds of actants (artifacts, processes,organizations, and people, rather than just people and organizations). However, respondents found that theywould need to go back to revise their influence charts after taking into account their actor network maps.Respondents noticed that people who were influential in the state science systems, represented by their actornetwork maps, were not listed as potential team members in their state influence charts. As the charts weredesigned to help state leaders compose their science education team, the lack of coordination between the chartsand the maps suggests that the two activities can be conducted in concert. Additionally, the actor networkmapping activity may be improved in future iterations by encouraging science coordinators to first list all of theinfluential actants possible before narrowing down the selection to the final nine. This would help to ensure thatthe nine elements listed were indeed the most influential, rather than simply the first recalled, and the larger listwould be a valuable set of data to collect. Participants found it informative to take the entire science networkinto account in order to build a more effective team.DiscussionThis paper addresses both the call for the use of complex systems in education, as well as the need to researchhow representational tools and practices can help develop understandings of complex systems. We use acomplex system approach to understand state systems of science education, in response to tendencies to imaginescience reform as simple and straightforward matters of implementing guidance from research. As onerespondent noted, “the system is dynamic and fluxes in one portion of the system impact all other parts of thesystem.” State science coordinators learned about their networks, the interconnections and disconnections,through using visual representations of their systems. Though state leaders may have had access to all of theinformation, it was distributed among members and not organized in a way that allowed leaders to view theirnetworks as a whole. The network maps were a helpful tool for mediation that provided the scaffoldingnecessary to help state leaders to learn about their own complex science systems.ConclusionThis paper demonstrated a use of complex systems thinking in education and showed that state science leaderscan use visual representations of their actor network and state influence charts to better understand their sciencesystems and plan future actions to improve coherence. It helped them identify organizational complexity, newactors, cross-actor tensions, and structural holes in the network to attend to in their improvement work. Theseinterventions are relatively simple and provide affordances for state leaders to think holistically andprogrammatically about their educational networks.Endnotes(1) States included were Arkansas, Iowa, Kansas, New Jersey, Michigan, Minnesota, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania,South Dakota, Utah, WashingtonReferencesBryk, A. S., Gomez, L. M., Grunow, A., & LeMahieu, P. G. (2015). Learning to Improve: How America? sSchools Can Get Better at Getting Better. Harvard Education Press. 8 Story Street First Floor,Cambridge, MA 02138.Colella, V. S., Klopfer, E., & Resnick, M. (2001). Adventures in modeling: Exploring complex, dynamic systemswith StarLogo. New York: Teachers College Press.Daly, A. J., & Finnigan, K. S. (2010). A bridge between worlds: Understanding network structure to understandchange strategy. Journal of Educational Change, 11(2), 111-138.Danish, J. A., Saleh, A., Andrade, A., & Bryan, B. (2017). Observing complex systems thinking in the zone ofproximal development. Instructional Science, 45(1), 5-24.Fuhrman, S. H. (1993). Designing coherent educational policy: Improving the system. San Francisco, CA:Jossey-Bass.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Azevedo, R. (2006). Understanding Complex Systems: Some Core Challenges. Journalof the Learning Sciences, 15(1), 53–61.ICLS 2018 Proceedings661© ISLSHmelo-Silver, C. E., Marathe, S., & Liu, L. (2007). Fish swim, rocks sit, and lungs breathe: Expert-noviceunderstanding of complex systems. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(3), 307–331.Jackson, K., & Cobb, P. (2013). Coordinating professional development across contexts and role group. In M.Evans (Ed.), Teacher education and pedagogy: Theory, policy and practice (pp. 80-99). New York,NY: Cambridge University Press.Jacobson, M. J., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educational importanceand implications for the learning sciences. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(1), 11–34.Latour, B. (1987). Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers through society. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor-network theory. New York, NY: OxfordUniversity Press.Leech, N. L., & Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (2009). A typology of mixed methods research designs. Quality &Quantity, 43(2), 265–275. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-007-9105-3Linn, M. C., Kali, Y., Davis, E. A., & Horwitz, P. (2008). Policies to promote coherence. In Y. Kali, M. C.Linn, & J. E. Roseman (Eds.), Designing coherent science education (Vol. 201-210). New York:Teachers College Press.National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. National Academies Press.Maroulis, S., Guimera, R., Petry, H., Stringer, M. J., Gomez, L. M., Amaral, L. A. N., & Wilensky, U. (2010).Complex systems view of educational policy research. Science, 330(6000), 38–39.Papert, S. (1972). Teaching children thinking. Programmed Learning and Educational Technology, 9(5), 245255.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Cheng, B., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development at theintersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331-337.Sismondo, S. (2003). Actor-Network Theory An Introduction to Science and Technology Studies (pp. 65-74).Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell.Star, S. L. (1999). The ethnography of infrastructure. American Behavioral Scientist, 43(3), 377-391.Wilensky, U., & Rand, W. (2015). An introduction to agent-based modeling: modeling natural, social, andengineered complex systems with NetLogo. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Yoon, S. A., Anderson, E., Koehler-Yom, J., Evans, C., Park, M., Sheldon, J., . . . Klopfer, E. (2017). Teachingabout complex systems is no simple matter: Building effective professional development for computersupported complex systems instruction. Instructional Science, 45(1), 99-121.ICLS 2018 Proceedings662© ISLS