Scaffolding Authentic Wearable-Based Scientific Inquiryfor Early Elementary LearnersVirginia L. Byrne, University of Maryland, vbyrne@umd.eduSeokbin Kang, University of Maryland, sbkang@umd.eduLeyla Norooz, University of Maryland, lnorooz@umd.eduRafael Velez, University of Maryland, rvelez@umd.eduMonica Katzen, University of Maryland, mkatzen@umd.eduAfe Addeh, Eleanor Roosevelt High School, addehafe@gmail.comJon Froehlich, University of Maryland, University of Washington, jonf@umd.eduTamara Clegg, University of Maryland, tclegg@umd.eduAbstract: Wearable sensors show promise in engaging youth in scientific inquiry by leveragingphysical activity for life-relevant inquiry. Prior research, however, has found that elementaryschool-age children struggle with the learner-determined aspects of an authentic scientificexperiment (e.g., asking a testable research question). We explore how to integrate wearablebased inquiry into early-elementary classrooms with Live Physiological Sensing andVisualization tools, including: designing age-appropriate scaffolds, adapting to teacherperspectives, and meeting Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). We conducted a twoyear, iterative process to develop scaffolds and implement them in four elementary classrooms(two teachers; 90 children). We present two case studies to demonstrate how our participatorydesigned scaffolds impact the authenticity of the learners’ wearable-based inquiry experience.Our findings contribute insights about facilitating wearable-based inquiry with elementarylearners and specific supports for using sensor-based learning systems to meet NGSS.IntroductionWith wearable sensors, such as heart rate monitors and accompanying visualizations, upper elementary- andmiddle-school learners can design and conduct life-relevant experiments using their bodies (Clegg, et al., 2017;Lee & Drake, 2013; Lee, Drake, & Williamson, 2015; Schaefer, Carter Ching, Breen, & German, 2016). We referto this emerging area as wearable-based inquiry (WBI). Unlike traditional classroom science experiments, inWBI, learners explore scientific concepts (e.g., exercise, stress) that are life-relevant. In this way, wearablesenable learners to scientize their everyday lives (Clegg & Kolodner, 2014)—e.g., their physical activities, bodymovements, and physiological responses. Grounded in embodied learning theory, which emphasizes the role ofthe body in facilitating learning (Lee, 2015), our work aligns with the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS;2013) and the National Research Council’s (NRC; 2012) efforts to make classroom science more inquiry driven.While existing literature has addressed the use of WBI at the fifth-grade level and higher (e.g., Lee &Thomas, 2011), we could find no prior work on how early-elementary learners (first- through fourth-graders)engage with wearables for scientific-inquiry nor the socio-technical scaffolds necessary to support their learning.Prior work in other contexts (Beyer & Davis, 2008) has shown that early learners require consistent and clearscaffolding and struggle to articulate scientific explanations and predictions, and develop procedures. Our aim isto design and evaluate scaffolds that help early learners acquire the skills necessary for conducting WBI. This aimis partially motivated by NGSS (2013), which states that learners should be able to plan and conduct scienceinvestigations before the fifth-grade. Our research addresses the following questions: (1) How do scaffolds impactthe authenticity of children’s scientific WBI across grade levels? (2) How can we design multi-dimensionalscaffolds for WBI that integrates technology tools, peers, facilitators, and paper-based materials?To address these questions, we present an evaluation of scaffolds used to support early learners inconducting authentic scientific WBI projects with two wearable sensing tools: BodyVis and SharedPhys (Figure1). These tools leverage body data for real-time inquiry through Live Physiological Sensing and Visualization(LPSV; Norooz, et al., 2016). Children wear a physiological sensor and draw evidence-based conclusions abouttheir bodies by analyzing visualizations of their live heart-rate data as displayed on an electronic textile shirt(BodyVis, Figure 1a) and a large-screen display (SharedPhys, Figure 1c; Kang, et al., 2016). Our research teamconducted two one-week deployments of these WBI tools (four in-class sessions across three classrooms): one in2016 and another in 2017. Here, learners progressed from semi-structured activities (e.g., brainstorming andtesting physical activities to see the impact on heart rate) and examples to planning and conducting their owninquiry projects. On Days 3 and 4, learners asked their own questions such as, “How does my heart rate changewhen I do the Carlton dance?” or “How does my heart rate change when I do my homework?”ICLS 2018 Proceedings64© ISLSFigure 1. Our two WBI tools: (a, b) BodyVis displays live heart and breathing rates on a wearable, e-textile shirt while(c, d) SharedPhys uses a time-series graph representation projected on a large-screen display. Images (b) and (d) showchildren testing activities with BodyVis (resting) and SharedPhys (push-ups), respectively.Through a design-based research approach (Sandoval & Bell, 2004), we iteratively designed scaffoldsusing participatory design with teachers, classroom deployments, and teacher and child feedback. Using a multiplecase-study methodology (Yin, 2014), we identify similarities and differences among the authenticity of WBIprojects and the influences of our iterated scaffolding from 2016 to 2017. Our findings illustrate how researcherscan construct age-appropriate scaffolds for early learners conducting WBI.Related workPrior work has shown that early learners can conduct their own meaningful life-relevant science inquiry (Clegg& Kolodner, 2014). Our design is therefore based on Chinn and Malhotra’s (2002) framework for scientificinquiry, which highlights learners’ freedom to select questions of interest. On a national level, elementary-agelearners are encouraged to design and conduct inquiry projects that reveal patterns in their environment and makeevidence-based claims (NRC, 2012; NGSS, 2013). Using a constructivist approach, we believe scientific inquiryis powerful for young children because it leverages their pre-existing knowledge and enables them to ask questionsabout their daily lives and bodies that then drive the inquiry process as opposed to directing their inquiries topredetermined investigations (Chinn & Malhotra, 2002; González, Moll, & Amanti, 2005; Hmelo-Silver, Duncan,& Chinn, 2007). Our embodied approach (Lee, 2015) specifically links these aspects of children’s scientificinquiry, as well as their physiological and mathematic learning to their everyday body movement.Prior work emphasizes that early learners can reach tasks that they could not independently achieve withscaffolding because the work is guided by, for example, paper-based materials (e.g., worksheets) and otherknowledgeable people (e.g., facilitator- and peer-based scaffolding; Carter-Ching & Kafai, 2008; Hmelo, Holton,& Kolodner, 2000; Wood, Bruner & Ross, 1976). Facilitator-, peer-, and paper-based scaffolding prompts learnersto consider new problem-solving strategies and reminds them of the strategy when they need assistance duringthe inquiry project (Reiser & Tabak, 2014). Additionally, technology-based scaffolding, as suggested by Quintanaet al. (2004), can help scaffold complex concepts to build on the learner’s intuitive understanding. We apply andadapt these scaffolding approaches to WBI, specifically in supporting the scientization of everyday activities withwearable sensors (Clegg & Kolodner, 2014; Metz, 2004; NRC, 2012).MethodThrough a design-based research approach (Sandoval & Bell, 2004), we iteratively designed tools, activities, andscaffolds to support children’s learning about body systems and scientific inquiry through WBI experiences. Inboth 2016 and 2017, we partnered with three elementary public-school teachers. In each teacher’s class, weconducted four, one-hour sessions of our wearable-based learning program with LPSV tools (BodyVis andSharedPhys; Table 1). To understand the range of elementary-aged children’s experiences, we analyzed casesfrom two of the three classes—the youngest group (first-grade) and the oldest group (fourth-grade). We present acase study of the 2016 deployment (45 learners) followed by an analysis of and updates to our scaffolds, whichwe analyzed as an additional case study in the 2017 deployment (45 learners). Both sequences were conducted atthe same public elementary school in the Washington, DC metro area (68% African American, 23%Hispanic/Latino, 3% Asian, 2% Caucasian, 4% Mixed Race; 65.6% free and reduced-priced meals).We designed the initial learning activities, materials, and scaffolds of our 2016 deployment to align withNGSS (2013). Before implementation, we solicited feedback from our teacher partners. After the 2016deployment, we conducted a participatory design session (Fails, Guha, & Druin, 2013) with the teachers to designthe 2017 deployment. The result yielded new learning activities and goals, assessments, and facilitation plans thatICLS 2018 Proceedings65© ISLSTable 1: High-Level Description of Learning Activities for First- and Fourth-Grade Classrooms DeploymentDay1234Session Activities for both 2016 and 2017Learners used BodyVis to identify organs in the body and to conduct group inquiry with the heart and breathingrate functions. Facilitators solicited learners’ questions about anatomy and physiology.Facilitators led semi-structured activities in which learners used SharedPhys to conduct experiments.Using their testable question from the previous day, learners designed procedures, crafted a hypothesis, and ran atrial of their procedures. Each group recorded their experiment on a sheet of chart paper.Learners conducted their experiment, interpreted results, and presented findings to the class.enhanced alignment with both NGSS (2013) and NRC inquiry standards (2012). We collected audio, video, andprototyping artifacts from participatory design sessions with the teachers as well as post-session notes.For the case studies specifically, we analyze changes among the authenticity of the WBI small groupprojects and the influences of our redesigned scaffolds from 2016 to 2017. In each case, we observed five groupsacross two classrooms: three first-grade groups and two fourth-grade groups. For each group, we collected videoand audio data, photographs, and inquiry project artifacts (e.g., easel pad paper, drawings, worksheets). We alsoperformed post-study interviews with the teachers to better understand their perspectives of WBI tools andlearning activities and to solicit design suggestions. All interviews were transcribed.Our data analysis is based on the NGSS (2013) and Chinn and Malhotra’s (2002) framework for authenticscientific inquiry which breaks the scientific inquiry process into components (e.g., asking questions, developinghypotheses) and describes each in terms of simple-to-authentic scientific inquiry. Using this framework, wedesigned a codebook to help us identify, for example, how and when students discuss controlling variables andinstances in which children discussed their data (NGSS, 2013), as well as the roles of different environmentalactors (e.g., facilitators, peers). We then deductively coded video and audio of small groups conducting inquiryprojects (Saldaña, 2015). Two researchers independently coded the same videos for one 2016 group, then met todiscuss disagreements and clarify code definitions. For the remaining videos, researchers selected and codedvideos of a random sampling of two to three groups across classrooms. This process was repeated for 2017. Codersthen discussed and summarized major themes.Teacher interview transcripts and the audio and artifacts of the teacher design session were structurallycoded by topic (e.g., design suggestion for learning activities, classroom ecosystem; Saldaña, 2015) by tworesearchers. After discussion, the researchers did a second round of coding to identify themes (Saldaña, 2015),and then synthesized the themed data for the larger research team to review. We compiled our summaries andfindings into two cases (one for 2016, one for 2017) and performed axial coding to identify themes across groupsby year (Saldaña, 2015). By grouping themes by year, we could look across the two iterations to identifydifferences in how learners designed and conducted their WBI projects. Our cross-case analysis thus considersthe ways our iterated scaffolds (Table 2) influenced the learners’ authentic inquiry experiences.FindingsWe present six themes regarding struggles learners faced in 2016 that we addressed with scaffolding changes in2017. First, a vignette from our 2016 case illustrates the identified challenges. Then, we provide a description ofthe themes and map the scaffolding changes to ways in which learners’ WBI projects changed in 2017 with respectto scientific authenticity. We demonstrate the influence of these scaffolds by presenting two 2017 vignettes, whichillustrate the impact of the scaffolding across grades and spread among facilitators, peers, and materials.2016 deployment findingsIn 2016, first-and fourth-graders were engaged with their inquiry projects and could follow the facilitator’sdirections, however, they needed scaffolding to conduct WBI projects and not merely play with the LPSV tools.On Days 3 and 4, first-grade Group B’s assigned facilitator explained how to conduct a scientificexperiment, facilitated their brainstorming and decision making, and assisted them in recording their ideas. Sittingin a circle, the facilitator began the experience by asking each learner to share a question they wanted to test withthe LPSV tools. Learners struggled to either think of or share ideas on the spot. They instead silently reached formarkers to draw on chart paper. When they did share, learners discussed how the physical activity would be doneinstead of the impact on their heart rate (e.g., addressing who could run the fastest instead of the impact of runningon heart rate). Often these ideas could not be tested with the LPSV tools or within the classroom. The burden wason the facilitator to determine what was testable, but she did not share her criteria. For example, when a childasked to measure the heart rate of their pregnant teacher, the facilitator said no but did not explain her rationale.Instead, she gave suggestions for questions, one of which the group selected to test (e.g., the impact on heart rateICLS 2018 Proceedings66© ISLSwhen running across the room). When the group conducted their experiment, they became so excited about whichchild would “win” (i.e., have the highest heart rate) as displayed by verbal and physical cheering, they did notdiscuss the overall data trend.Across groups, we observed limitations in the authenticity of learners’ experiments that were exemplifiedby this group. First, learners struggled to articulate their ideas into a testable question without a facilitator torephrase their ideas. The facilitator also did not reveal a rationale for guiding the group towards a particularquestion. Thus, while learners were excited by their ideas (e.g., who could run the fastest), they overlooked howthe LPSV tools could be used in experimentation. We also observed that children struggled to interpretSharedPhys’s visual line graph to make claims. During the SharedPhys experiments, children often became sofocused on those performing activities (e.g., running) that they did not pay close attention to the live datavisualization—which only showed the last one-minute of data and could not be paused. This became a challengewhen attempting to draw conclusions because children could not actively refer to the graph during discussions.After the experiments, students did not make theoretical claims, rather they observed without asking whyor discussing the connection between physiology and their WBI projects. The burden was on facilitators to connectthe experimental results to the human body. All scaffolding was provided by just-in-time facilitation in the formof question prompts, reminders about next-steps, and feedback about learners’ ideas for experimental questionsor procedures. We recognize that this high-touch facilitation model would likely be intractable in a typicalclassroom where student-to-teacher ratios are much higher. Though the above vignette focuses on first-grade, weidentified similar issues in the fourth-grade class; however, we found that fourth-graders were more comfortablein developing hypotheses and, with facilitator support, interpreting line graphs.Iterating scaffolds for 2017 deploymentGiven our 2016 deployment findings, we iterated our scaffolds to support more authentic WBI experiences andto reduce adult facilitation requirements. First, we reviewed the NGSS on how elementary learners should beconducting experiments. We then partnered with our teachers to design facilitation prompts and materials. Ouranalysis of teacher interviews and design ideas identified six key themes:Constrain research questions to a set of testable criteria. In 2016, it was apparent that learnersmisunderstood the constraints of the LPSV tools by suggesting questions that moved outside of the classroom,were untestable within the time limit (e.g., sleeping), or otherwise problematic (e.g., taking poison). In 2017, wepresented learners with a visual guide (Figure 2a) and testable question criteria (Table 2). Learners were thenasked to self-check their questions with these criteria.Vocabulary definitions (e.g., increase, decrease) for language to express ideas in a testable frame. In2016, we observed that learners struggled to put words to their science questions and hypotheses. In 2017, weintroduced an active learning vocabulary lesson and posted the words on the wall for the duration of ourdeployment (Figure 2b). In addition, we provided the first-graders with worksheets containing a word bank andTable 2: Comparison of 2016 and 2017 Scaffolds for First- and Fourth-Grade Classrooms DeploymentScientificInquiry StageQuestionDevelopmentProcedureDesignDataInterpretationTheoryBuilding2016 ScaffoldsAnatomy vocabularylesson consisting of alarge group discussionand scavenger hunt.Assigned facilitatorsassisted brainstormingand rephrased ideas into atestable format.Assigned facilitators leddiscussion and posterrecording.Conducted experiments asa class on Day 2.Facilitators led largegroup discussions.ICLS 2018 Proceedings2017 Scaffolds with Developmentally-Appropriate Scaffolds byGradeBoth classes were provided with an anatomy and inquiry-relatedvocabulary lesson consisting of a class discussion, scavenger hunt,slideshow, and posters of words. Criteria were set for creating a testablequestion—the procedure for testing the question needed to be: conductedwithin one minute, conducted in the classroom with available materials,and measurable with an LPSV tool. First-graders were also provided withembodied definitions, a word bank on all worksheets and an assigned afacilitator who used sentence framing cards to aid learners to rephrasetheir ideas. Fourth-graders collaborated through online writing activities.Both classes were provided with a chart paper with empty boxes withheadings for each stage of the inquiry process. First-graders used agraphic organizer worksheet to draw and annotate ideas before facilitateddiscussion. Fourth-graders had access to floating facilitators for feedback.During Day 2 large group experiments, facilitators taught embodiedmethods of analyzing changes in SharedPhys’ visualization. First-graderspracticed interpreting line graphs by drawing their hypotheses for theworked example and comparing it to the results.Facilitators synthesized findings after experiments were conducted andled a large group discussion. First-graders were provided with a poster onwhich the facilitators recorded the results of all experimental findings.67© ISLSsentence structure cue cards. We also taught first-graders embodied definitions (i.e., Total Physical Response;Asher, 1969) for words beyond the NGSS (e.g., circulatory system). These body movements ground complexphysiology content in gestures and meanings familiar to children (Lee, 2015).Figure 2. WBI Scaffolds: (a) testable question criteria, (b) vocabulary posters, (c) paper-based drawing worksheets,(d) experimental findings posters, and (e) large chart paper with a WBI template.Figure 3. First-Graders’ drawings of procedure ideas.Grade-specific writing activities to aid idea expression and procedural thinking. Noting how learners ofboth grades struggled to develop questions and experimental procedures, we designed writing activities to reducethe burden on the facilitators. As recommended by the teachers, we took a grade-specific approach. We providedfirst-graders with a three-panel graphic organizer worksheet on which they could draw and write before beingasked to verbalize their ideas (Figure 3). Graphic organizers guided learners to make chronological sense of theprocedures by having them describe steps in order. By using drawing instead of text to explain abstract ideas, webridge the learner’s intuitive understanding of complex concepts to the inquiry process (Quintana et al., 2004).For the fourth-graders, learners collaboratively brainstormed research questions, shared knowledge, and remixedeach other’s ideas through online collaborative writing activities (in Google Docs). The fourth-graders discussedtheir ideas and received peer feedback.Opportunities to practice prediction and interpreting line graphs. In 2016, we found that while fourthgraders could develop hypotheses and interpret line graphs, first-graders struggled to connect the SharedPhysvisualization to their abstract understanding of physiology. In 2017, we scaffolded hypothesis development byincluding discussions, embodied interpretation (e.g., using their arms to trace the line in the air; Asher, 1969),drawing, and recording after each experiment. Realizing their need to doodle or draw their understanding beforediscussing it, we asked first-grade children to imagine performing an activity and then draw a prediction of theirheart rate on graph paper resembling the SharedPhys screen (Figure 2c). We facilitated discussions on learners’graphs and corrected misinterpretations (e.g., Maya is the blue line, Ed is the green line). We encouraged childrento use embodied definitions of increase and decrease by physically acting out their predictions (Asher, 1969).Using paper arrows, we posted the learners’ predictions onto the SharedPhys screen before learners wearing thesensors (i.e., wearers) did the activity. During the experiment, the class could observe how the real-time heartrates change compared to their prediction heart rates. Finally, we asked wearers to describe what their heart ratefelt like. Wearer testimonials and SharedPhys results were then compared to the predictions.Synthesis of results across groups for collective understanding and building theory. To bridgeconnections across experiments and reaffirm understanding, facilitators rephrased the findings of each experimentafter the class had drawn their own conclusions and supported learners in theory building in a way that wasdevelopmentally-appropriate. In 2016, first-graders often could not state the findings of a past experiment. So, in2017, facilitators recorded each first-grade group’s experimental findings on a large poster so that learners couldsee and reference prior findings (Figure 2d). Fourth-graders were better able to remember prior findings indiscussions but facilitators helped them to synthesize data from across the experiments into a theory.ICLS 2018 Proceedings68© ISLSVisualization of the inquiry process so that learners are aware of next steps. In both years and in bothclasses, small groups were given markers and large chart paper (Figure 2e) to record their names, researchquestion, hypotheses, procedures, heart rate data, and findings. In 2017, however facilitators drew boxes on thechart paper corresponding to the stages of WBI for learners to fill-in. This template was meant to guide learnersthrough the WBI process by revealing what they needed to complete and record at each stage.2017 deployment findingsIn 2017, we observed that with our iterated scaffolds, early elementary learners needed less high-touch facilitationto develop a testable question and procedures, and accurately interpret visualized data into evidence-based theory.They still needed more facilitator guidance, however, when synthesizing results across experiments. Todemonstrate the impact of our scaffolds, we present two vignettes:Vignette 1: First-graders investigating the effect of the Nae-Nae dance on the bodyAfter providing learners with testable question criteria, they brainstormed activities that were personallymeaningful and met the provided criteria. One boy, Alex, shared his excitement to test dancing because of hislove of dancing—especially doing the Nae-Nae. The facilitator, Omar, asked the group for feedback and theyagreed to investigate the impact of doing the Nae-Nae dance on their heart rate.The three-panel drawing worksheet allowed learners to externalize abstract ideas into a sequence ofdrawings and annotations (Figure 3). Without facilitation, many students used the three panels to draw a sequenceof observation – action – observation. Omar presented learners with sentence structure cue cards with ideationand sentence framing words (e.g., If, Then) to enable them to format their ideas into a procedure for investigatingcausal relationships. These cards did not appear to be impactful, however, because the learners paid little attentionto the cards and continued to draw their ideas. After drawing and writing on their individual sheets, the childrenshared their ideas, formalized their procedure, and wrote it in the inquiry template on the large chart paper.As a class, each group conducted their experiment and Omar used the poster (Figure 2d) to visuallydisplay each group’s findings. We observed that learners referred more to past findings to make claims than inprior years, often while looking at or pointing to the visual repository. This visual repository made it easier forlearners to refer to past findings to make claims and for Omar to bridge together findings to pose theories. Afterthe Nae-Nae experiment, Omar wrote “increased a little” because the class concluded that the dancing increasedthe wearers’ heart rate but not to the same extent as some prior activities. After all experiments were done, Omarhad the class refer to their poster of results to synthesize their findings into a theory (e.g., “activities like runningand galloping lead to a bigger increase in heart rate”). When asked what they learned, children volunteered newtheories (e.g., when you exercise big muscles like the legs, they need more oxygen and so your heart beats faster),which helped demonstrate their grasp of the relationship between physiology and activity.Vignette 2: Fourth-graders investigating the effect of being scared on the bodyIn the fourth-grade class, facilitators floated between groups instead of being assigned to a group as in the firstgrade class. Group A needed facilitator attention because they could not agree on a physical activity to test. Thefacilitator, LaSonya, in trying to mediate the group tension, talked about how emotional reactions (e.g., laughing,feeling scared) also impact our heart rate. After some debate, the group decided to test how being scared affectsheart rate. Group A's conversations focused on completing each section of the chart paper WBI template andimagining how much their idea would impress their peers. Without prompting, Group A identified ideas that werenot testable (e.g., “Seeing a scary movie would take too much time”). Group A’s ideas for how to scare someonewere shared as personal stories from when they remembered being scared (e.g., "We should do the thing my sisterdid…”). They generalized from life experiences when they were most scared and developed a list of ways to scarethe wearers. The group was able, then, to narrow this list based on what fit the testable criteria.For their SharedPhys experiment, the group tested three scare tactics (e.g., being poked, grabbed, andscreamed at) and observed the wearer, Janet’s, resulting heart rate. In response, however, Group A’s classmateshad concerns about the validity of the experiment. They questioned if the increase in heart rate was caused byJanet jumping or laughing instead of being scared (e.g., "She was laughing which got her heart rate up"). GroupA was also skeptical of the accuracy of the SharedPhys data and voiced concern that they could not identify onthe graph when each scare tactic was implemented.2017 case summaryThese vignettes illustrate how learners asked life-relevant, testable questions and developed their ownexperimental procedures. Our findings suggest that providing testable question constraints lessened thecomplexity of asking inquiry questions and planning procedures for learners (Quintana, et al., 2004) while alsoICLS 2018 Proceedings69© ISLSoffering freedom to explore life-relevant investigations. This was evident in our observations of learners using thetestable criteria to discuss and decide among themselves which ideas and procedures were testable. Our analysisof first-graders’ discussion contributions and drawings suggests that learners in our 2017 case had a clearerunderstanding of how to interpret the visual line graphs in SharedPhys. We attribute their increased interpretationof line graphs to the drawing scaffolds in which learners mapped their own visual hypotheses to the real-timeresults visualized on SharedPhys (Figure 2c). Lastly, after conducting the embodied experiments, first-gradestudents made theoretical claims about the connection between physiology and physical activities–a keycomponent of the Chinn and Malhotra (2002) framework that we did not see in the 2016 case. We did not observea difference in how fourth-graders across both years developed theories across experiences, suggesting that theLPSV tools and 2016 activities were enough to help them make connections to physiological phenomena. Whilefacilitators still had to help learners develop questions and procedures in their small groups in 2017, they wereable to make use of paper-based scaffolds (e.g., chart paper, worksheets) that reduced the burden on how muchhelp they needed to provide to each group. Facilitators provided more scaffolding in 2017 during whole groupconversations for recording observations and synthesizing results across experiments.DiscussionAlthough some prior work in WBI notes the importance of scaffolding children’s use of technology for inquiry(e.g., Lee, Drake & Williamson, 2015), we provide the first examination of the impact of scaffolds on the inquiryprocess. Through our iterative design process, we considered how multiple dimensions of scaffolds (i.e., tools,peers, facilitators, and paper-based materials) could be integrated to support early-elementary learners’ WBI. Byintegrating facilitation-based scaffolds, paper-based scaffolds (e.g., the prediction drawing worksheet), peerbased scaffolding, and the wearable tools themselves, we found that learners could test and accurately interpretinvestigations of two types of questions. First, changes in heart rate over time (e.g., change in heart rate whendoing the Nae-Nae dance for a minute) and, second, changes in heart rate across learners or activities (e.g., changein heart rate for three different scaring tactics). Paper-based scaffolds bridged facilitator- and peer-basedscaffolding so that after some guidance, peers could support each other, compare drawings, and self-check thefeasibility of an idea. When learners supported each other in groups, facilitators could focus on synthesizing pastfindings on large sheets of paper, which learners referred to when trying to generalize across experiments. Thistheory building process is a key component of Chinn and Malhotra’s framework (2002) and the NGSS (2013).With respect to authentic inquiry, we found that, as in prior work with older children (e.g., Lee & Drake,2011; Lee & Thomas, 2011), early elementary learners could design and conduct life-relevant WBI by examiningeveryday activities (e.g., dancing, scaring, laughing). Although many of the WBI projects in our study includedgym or recess activities like prior embodied WBI research (e.g., Lee et al., 2015), three of the five 2017 smallgroups we analyzed also included other activities such as homework and dancing. We found that, with ourintegrated scaffolds and LPSV tools, early learners explored the embodied connection between physical activitydata and the physiological phenomenon of their bodies (e.g., the circulatory system). Beyond the scope of priorWBI studies, which emphasized interpreting trends in visualized data (e.g., Lee & Thomas, 2011), learners in ourstudy recognized the physiological impacts of stress and fear. Our multi-dimensional scaffolds supported learners’exploration of their physiological functioning and ability to relate findings back to their own everyday activities.We also observed limitations in our current scaffolds. We found that despite our integration of differingscaffolds, first-graders still needed facilitator help with literacy-based aspects of the inquiry process (e.g.,articulating questions and evidence-based claims). Future research is needed to further enhance such scaffolds forWBI. Additionally, as is common among design-based research studies with multiple sources of data, we had toexclude some details of our study that would have been included in a longer article. Finally, our vignettes representsome of the more life-relevant WBI projects. Half of the groups in each class tested comparisons of physicalactivities (e.g., galloping, lunges). We therefore need additional scaffolds to help learners more systematicallydevelop creative questions unique to their specific interests and experiences.Our findings contribute to how educators can implement wearable sensors for inquiry and embodiedlearning in early elementary classrooms and more broadly, how educators can use sensor-based learning to meetNGSS (2013). Our work differs from and expands on prior WBI work by focusing on early-elementary learners,iterating and comparing inquiry scaffolds across two deployments, and working with teachers to explicitly alignwith NGSS. While we found that a multi-dimensional scaffolding approach can support early learners in planningand conducting authentic WBI, more work is needed to understand how peer scaffolding can be leveraged tolessen the burden on educators so that WBI is more realistic to the typical student-teacher ratio.ReferencesICLS 2018 Proceedings70© ISLSAsher, J. (1969). The total physical response approach to second language learning. The Modern LanguageJournal, 53(1), 3-17.Beyer, C. J., & Davis, E. A. (2008). Fostering second graders' scientific explanations: A beginning elementaryteacher's knowledge, beliefs, and practice. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17(3), 381-414.Carter Ching, C., & Kafai, Y. (2008). Peer pedagogy: Student collaboration and reflection in a learning-throughdesign project. Teachers College Record,110(12), 2601-2632.Chinn, C. A., & Malhotra, B. A. (2002). Epistemologically authentic inquiry in schools: A theoretical frameworkfor evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86(2), 175–218.Clegg, T., & Kolodner, J. (2014). Scientizing and cooking: Helping middle-school learners develop scientificdispositions. Science Education, 98(1), 36–63.Clegg, T., Norooz, L., Kang, S., Byrne, V., Katzen, M., Velez, R.,…Froehlich, J. (2017). Live physiologicalsensing and visualization ecosystems. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors inComputing Systems (pp. 2029–2041). New York, New York, USA: ACM Press.Fails, J. A., Guha, M. L., & Druin, A. (2013). Methods and techniques for involving children in the design of newtechnology for children. Foundations and Trends in Human–Computer Interaction, 6(2), 85-166.González, N., Moll, L., & Amanti, C. (2005). Funds of knowledge: Theorizing practice in households,communities, and classrooms. Mahwah, N.J.: L. Erlbaum Associates.Hmelo, C., Holton, D.L., & Kolodner, J. (2000). Designing to learn about complex systems. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 9(3), 247-298.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Duncan, R. G., & Chinn, C. A. (2007). Scaffolding and achievement in problem-based andinquiry learning: A response to Kirschner, Sweller, and Clark. Educational Psychologist, 42(2), 99–107.Kang, S., Norooz, L., Oguamanam, V., Plane, A. C., Clegg, T. L., & Froehlich, J. E. (2016). SharedPhys: Livephysiological sensing, whole-body interaction, and large-screen visualizations to support shared inquiryexperiences. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children(pp. 275-287). Manchester, UK: ACM.Lee, V. (Ed.). (2015). Learning technologies and the body: Integration and implementation in formal and informallearning environments (Routledge research in education, 135). New York: Routledge.Lee, V. R., & Drake, J. (2013). Quantified recess: Design of an activity for elementary students involving analysesof their own movement data. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Designand Children, (pp. 273-276). New York, NY: ACM.Lee, V. R., Drake, J., & Williamson, K. (2015). Let’s get physical: K-12 students using wearable devices to obtainand learn about data from physical activities. TechTrends,59(4), 46-53.Lee, V. R., & Thomas, J. M. (2011). Integrating physical activity data technologies into elementary schoolclassrooms. Educational Technology Research and Development, 59(6), 865-884.Metz, K. E. (2004). Children’s understanding of scientific inquiry: Their conceptualization of uncertainty ininvestigations of their own design. Cognition and Instruction, 22(2), 219–290.National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Next Generation Science Standards. (2013). NGSS. Washington DC: The National Academies Press.Norooz, L., Clegg, T., Kang, S., Plane, A., Oguamanam, V., Froehlich, J. (2016). “That’s your heart!”: LivePhysiological Sensing & Visualization Tools for Life-Relevant & Collaborative STEM Learning. InProceedings from 12th International Conference of the Learning Sciences. Singapore: ACM Press.Reiser, B. J. & Tabak, I. (2014). Scaffolding. In R. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learningsciences (Second edition). (44-62). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Saldaña, J. (2016). The coding manual for qualitative researchers (Third edition). Los Angeles, Calif.: SAGE.Sandoval, W. & Bell, P. (2004). Design-based research methods for studying learning in context:Introduction. Educational Psychologist,39(4), 199-201.Schaefer, S., Carter Ching, C., Breen, H., & German, J. (2016). Wearing, thinking, and moving: Testing thefeasibility of fitness tracking with urban youth. American Journal of Health Education,47(1), 8-16.Quintana, C., Reiser, B., Davis, E., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R.,…Soloway, E. (2004). A scaffolding designframework for software to support science inquiry. Journal of the Learning Sciences,13(3), 337-386.Wood, D., Bruner, J., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child Psychologyand Psychiatry,17(2), 89-100.Yin, R. (2014). Case study research: Design and methods (Fifth edition. ed.). Los Angeles: SAGE.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by NSF Grant (IIS-1441184). We thank the participating children and teachers.ICLS 2018 Proceedings71© ISLS