Turning to Experience Negative Signs as OperationsJulie Nurnberger-Haag, Kent State University, jnurnber@kent.eduAbstract: Conceiving of negative sign notation as an operation is crucial for algebra. Thus,this study compared student learning with two integer models to explore how physicalmotions influenced conceptions of this notation. Preliminary results with 70 fifth-gradestudents suggested that physically turning the opposite direction better represented thisnotation as an opposite operation than moving objects with a chip model (p=0.001). Thesefindings contribute to mounting evidence that how humans physically move influenceslearning.IntroductionInternationally, it is well known that middle and high school students find operations with negative numbersdifficult. Although research has studied representations of number, such as number lines (e.g., Siegler, 2016),such representations are just one part of a model. I define models as the patterns of physical motions and wordsused with particular representations that are intended to foster learning. Multiple integer models, such as chipand number line models are used in classrooms (van de Walle, et al., 2010). Comparisons of how specificmodels support or interfere with learning aspects of integer operations, however, are just beginning(Nurnberger-Haag, In Press; Tsang, Blair, Bofferding, & Schwartz, 2015). A crucial aspect of integerunderstanding that is difficult for students is to think of the symbol “-” as an operation that means “take theopposite of” (Ryan & Williams, 2007; Vlassis, 2008). Although this may seem a narrow research focus,consider that most equations in algebra and calculus require students to coordinate a negative sign as anoperation (e.g., –(-2x – 4) or –X, "the opposite of X”) as well as part of the structure of a number (e.g., -5;Vlassis, 2008).Drawing on embodied cognition that how humans move influences how they think (e.g., Antle, 2011;Barsalou, 2008), this study tested a prediction that different models would differentially influence understandingof integer notation. Students who use the walk-it-off number line model physically “turn the opposite direction”for subtraction and negative signs (Nurnberger-Haag, 2007). For example, students stand next to the point -5 ona large number line, turn the opposite direction twice (once for the subtraction sign and once for the negativesign of -2) and walk two, resulting in an answer of -3. Students who use a chip model take away objects tosubtract (e.g., students act out -5 - -2 with five white chips then remove two, resulting in -3). Thus, this reportaddressed the question: Do students who use a “turn the opposite” meaning of the “-” symbol learned with thewalk-it-off model interpret a negative sign as an operation better than students who used a chip model.MethodIn a larger study eight classes at a fifth and a sixth-grade site were randomly assigned to learn with either a chipor number line model (Nurnberger-Haag, In Press). The chip model used black and white chips to representpositive and negative numbers respectively. The walk-it-off number line model emphasized the “-” symbol asmeaning “turn the opposite direction” (unlike traditional number line models that treat subtraction as backwardmotion; Nurnberger-Haag, 2007). The researcher instructed all classes in eight parallel lessons differing onlydue to model. During instruction students only learned to add, subtract, multiply and divide negative numbersand represent opposite numbers (not operations) using the assigned model. To eliminate the possibility thatstudents who memorized notational patterns would be indistinguishable from those who understood the meaningof the negative sign as an operator, opposite operations was assessed as a transfer construct (i.e., students werenot taught these types of problems during instruction).After five phases of piloting with 388 students, a written open-response scenario was finalized to elicitwhether students could conceive of the “-” notation as an operation. An abridged description of the item is that“(negative number)” was presented in blue font and “–(negative number)” in green to elicit students to describehow the quantities differed. Post and delayed posttests of the three fifth-grade classes are reported (n=70students), because no fifth-graders correctly answered at pretest. These responses were coded in terms ofwhether students offered a non-negative solution, and then integer model groups were compared with a chisquare analysis. Using embodied cognition, qualitative analyses are being conducted to provide insights aboutthe ways and reasons students’ physical motions on a number line or ways they moved objects related to theirconception of the symbol “-”.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1667© ISLSResultsGiven the difficulty of the construct, it was expected that few students would successfully answer this transferitem. Overall 7% transferred at posttest and 11% did so on the delayed posttest. Although 1.7 times as manystudents learned with a chip (n= 44) than number line model (n= 26), just 2% of students who used chipsprovided a non-negative solution whereas 15% of students who used the walk-it-off model did so. The chipstudent who was successful at posttest, regressed at delayed post, so 0% (0/40) of students who had used chipsanswered correctly at delayed posttest. In contrast, 27% (7/26) of students who learned with the walk-it-offmodel explained that the solution would be non-negative. A chi-square analysis using Fisher’s exact testconfirmed this difference was statistically significant (p=0.001) at delayed posttest. At posttest, the significancewas close to threshold, but did not meet it (p=0.06). On the poster, student drawings and explanations will showhow walk-it-off students used physical motions, arrows, and words like “turn opposite” to reason through thistask that was beyond their instructional experience in contrast to students who moved chips and did not expressthese conceptions of negative signs.ConclusionsBy delayed posttest more than one-fourth of students who learned with the walk-it-off model could conceive of–(negative number) as a positive number, whereas no students who used a chip model did. Although the eighthgrade students in Vlassis’ (2008) study had difficulty conceiving of the “-” symbol as an operation and evensometimes confused it with a subtraction sign, a substantial number (for a transfer item) of the fifth-gradestudents in this study were able to apply their experiences of adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividingnegative numbers to also conceive of the operation “opposite of” without explicit instruction on those problemtypes. This preliminary analysis suggests that physically turning the opposite direction on a number line incombination with related language “turn the opposite direction” better supports students to extend the meaningof the “-” symbol to an operation than the symbol meanings students act out with a chip model. This finding isconsistent with other studies of cognition and learning which found that how humans move to represent ideasmatters (Antle, 2011; Nurnberger-Haag, In Press), but extends this to how learners apply their physicallyconstructed understanding to make sense of new ideas. More embodied cognition research is needed to studyhow each model supports or thwarts the complex meanings students need to develop about integers. Next stepsinclude investigating students who learned with multiple integer models, disentangling effects of therepresentation from physical motions, and uncovering relationships between the effects of physical motions andthe language used to describe them. These future studies could contribute to understanding how humanmovement relates to cognition and learning.ReferencesAntle, A. N. (2011). Balancing justice: Comparing whole body and controller-based interaction for an abstractdomain. International Journal of Arts and Technology, 6(4), 388-409.Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 617-645.Nurnberger-Haag, J. (In Press). Take it away or walk the other way? Finding positive solutions for integersubtraction. L. Bofferding and N. Wessman-Enzinger, Eds., Exploring the Integer Addition andSubtraction Landscape: Perspectives on Integer Thinking. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.Nurnberger-Haag, J. (2007). Integers made easy: Just walk it off! Mathematics Teaching in the Middle School,13(2), 118-121.Ryan, J., & Williams, J. (2007). Children's Mathematics 4-15: Learning from Errors and Misconceptions.Berkshire, England: Open University Press.Siegler, R.S. (2016). Magnitude knowledge: The common core of numerical development. DevelopmentalScience, 19(3), 341-361.Tsang, J.M., Blair, K.P., Bofferding, L., & Schwartz, D.L. (2015). Learning to “see” less than nothing: Puttingperceptual skills to work for learning numerical structure. Cognition and Instruction, 33, 154-197.Van de Walle, J., Karp, K., & Bay-Williams, J. (2010). Elementary and Middle School Mathematics: TeachingDevelopmentally (7th ed.). New York: Allyn and Bacon.Vlassis, J. (2008). The role of mathematical symbols in the development of number conceptualization: The caseof the minus sign. Philosophical Psychology, 21(4), 555-570.AcknowledgmentsThis research was supported by a National Academy of Education/Spencer Foundation Dissertation Fellowshipand Michigan State University Dissertation Research Expense.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1668© ISLS