A Method for Determining the Extent of Recent Temporal Context inAnalyses of Complex, Collaborative ThinkingAndrew R. Ruis, University of Wisconsin–Madison, arruis@wisc.eduAmanda L. Siebert-Evenstone, University of Wisconsin–Madison, alevenstone@wisc.eduRebecca Pozen, University of Wisconsin–Madison, rnpozen@gmail.comBrendan R. Eagan, University of Wisconsin–Madison, beagan@wisc.eduDavid Williamson Shaffer, University of Wisconsin–Madison & Aalborg University, david.shaffer@wisc.eduAbstract: This study presents an empirical method for measuring recent temporal context incollaborative interactions, which can be used to warrant a choice of window length in movingwindow analyses of complex, collaborative thinking and other interactive learning processes.Keywords: recent temporal context, moving window, collaborative learning, discourseanalysis, epistemic network analysisIntroductionIn the learning sciences, complex thinking is often conceptualized as a process of developing cognitiveconnections among concepts. In collaborative work, individuals make connections not only within their owncontributions but also to the contributions of their collaborators (Shaffer, 2017). To model complex,collaborative thinking, researchers need to identify the context in which such connections are meaningful. Priorwork has approached this problem using moving windows (Siebert-Evenstone et al., 2016), where each turn oftalk in a collaborative conversation is associated with some prior segment of the discussion that forms its recenttemporal context (Suthers & Desiato, 2012).A key challenge for window models of complex, collaborative thinking is selecting a window lengththat is sufficiently long to capture the recent temporal context but not so long as to overrepresent connectionsthat are not meaningful. This study presents a novel empirical method that minimizes the need for humanannotation while providing both qualitative and quantitative warrants for determining a window length toanalyze collaborative connection-making. We evaluate the method by analyzing conceptual connectivity in thesame dataset using different window lengths to explore the effects of window length on the resulting models.MethodsWe analyzed the collaborative interactions of students in the engineering simulation Nephrotex (Chesler et al.,2015). In Nephrotex, students interact in 4-5 member teams with their engineering advisor through an onlineinstant message program (chat), and the system automatically records all chat conversations for subsequentanalysis. Nephrotex takes approximately 15 hours to complete. Chat conversations (N = 54,896 chats) werecollected from 20 implementations of Nephrotex at five institutions in the United States. Participants (N = 652)were first- and second-year college students using Nephrotex as part of an engineering course. To measurerecent temporal context in this setting, we randomly selected 200 utterances from the 54,896 chats in theNephrotex dataset. For each chat, two independent raters identified all immediately preceding chats in theconversation to which the given chat referred. These annotations indicate the window containing a givenutterance and its recent temporal context, where window length is the number of chats from the referringutterance to the earliest referent, inclusive.To calculate agreement between the two independent raters, we computed Cohen’s κ (kappa) for eachwindow length. Kappa was calculated for each window size, x, by assigning a “1” to any utterance that a givenrater determined to have window length x and a “0” to all other utterances. Kappa thus indicates the extent towhich the two raters agreed in their assessments of which utterances’ recent temporal context could be modeledwith the same window size. To determine whether kappa scores could be generalized to the population fromwhich they were drawn (> 50,000 chats), we computed Shaffer’s ρ (rho) to estimate the expected Type I errorrate of kappa given the sample size (Shaffer, 2017). This method (a) allows researchers to empirically determinean appropriate window size by rating a small sample of utterances, and (b) provides a statistical warrant forgeneralizing from the sample to the population as a whole.We then tested our technique for empirically determining window length by analyzing a portion of theNephrotex dataset using epistemic network analysis (ENA) (Shaffer, 2017). Specifically, we used ENA to modeldata from two implementations of Nephrotex (48 students; 5,757 chats) at window length x for each 𝑥𝑥 ∈{1, 2, … , 13}, and for each window length, we compared the networks of (a) students using an engineering virtualICLS 2018 Proceedings1625© ISLSinternship for the first time (novices; n = 24), and (b) students using Nephrotex after using a differentengineering virtual internship (relative experts; n = 24).ResultsFor all window lengths up to nine, agreement between the two raters was statistically significant for κ > 0.65 (allκ ≥ 0.84, N = 200, ρ(0.65) < 0.05), which indicates that the level of agreement between the two raters wouldhave been κ > 0.65 for those window lengths had they evaluated the entire dataset. Of the 200 chats examined,49 (24.5%) made no reference to prior chats, and 51 (25.5%) referenced only the previous chat. However, it isnot until a moving window with a length of seven (MW7) that the relevant connections were captured for morethan 95% of the sample utterances. No utterance required a window length of more than 18 chats.To evaluate this method, we computed ENA models at each window length to determine (a) at whatwindow size(s) the model indicates a statistically significant difference between the novices and relative expertsthat is consistent with our qualitative analysis of the data, and (b) at what window size the ENA metric spacestabilizes, such that increases in window size produce no significant changes in the space and thus no changes inmodel interpretation. While the ability of ENA to discriminate between novices and relative experts is relativelyrobust to window length, MW7 was one of the best models, and the ENA metric space stabilized at MW7.DiscussionOur goal was to develop a method that (a) provides both qualitative and quantitative warrants for determiningthe optimal window length for use in moving window analyses of conceptual connectivity, while (b) minimizingthe number of items requiring human evaluation. To assess this approach, two independent raters analyzed arandom sample of 200 student chats (< 0.01% of the 54,896 chats in the dataset). This method identified MW7as the most appropriate window length for analyzing these data. We then constructed ENA models of the datathat differed only in the choice of window length. This analysis confirmed that a model with MW7 both (a)provides statistical discrimination between groups hypothesized to exhibit different patterns of conceptualconnectivity based on a qualitative analysis and (b) provides a stable interpretation of the ENA model.As a result, we argue that annotating a subset of data for furthest referents makes it possible to analyzerecent temporal context and thus determine an appropriate window length to be used in analyses of complex,collaborative thinking. Importantly, this method minimizes the need for human annotation while providing bothqualitative and quantitative warrants for choosing a particular window length. While we describe this method bypresenting results from one learning context (Nephrotex) and one learning analytic technique (ENA), we believethat a similar approach of annotating data by furthest referents will be compatible with different learningsettings, different theories of collaborative discourse, and different methods for modeling conceptualconnectivity using moving windows. Of course, future research should test our method by repeating this studyusing other data and models of connectivity. Critically, this method provides a warrant for makinggeneralizations to the population from which the hand-annotated sample was drawn, making it suitable foranalyses of complex, collaborative thinking at scale.ReferencesChesler, N. C., Ruis, A. R., Collier, W., Swiecki, Z., Arastoopour, G., & Shaffer, D. W. (2015). A novelparadigm for engineering education: Virtual internships with individualized mentoring and assessmentof engineering thinking. Journal of Biomechanical Engineering, 137(2), 024701:1-8.Shaffer, D. W. (2017). Quantitative ethnography. Madison, WI: Cathcart Press.Siebert-Evenstone, A. L., Arastoopour, G., Collier, W., Swiecki, Z., Ruis, A. R., & Shaffer, D. W. (2016). Insearch of conversational grain size: Modeling semantic structure using moving stanza windows. In C.K. Looi, J. Polman, U. Cress, & P. Reimann (Eds.), Transforming learning, empowering learners: TheInternational Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) 2016 (Vol. I, pp. 631–638).Suthers, D. D., & Desiato, C. (2012). Exposing chat features through analysis of uptake between contributions.In 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Science (pp. 3368–3377). IEEE.AcknowledgmentsThis work was funded in part by the National Science Foundation, the MacArthur Foundation, the SpencerFoundation, the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation, and the Office of the Vice Chancellor for Researchand Graduate Education at the University of Wisconsin–Madison. The opinions, findings, and conclusions donot reflect the views of the funding agencies, cooperating institutions, or other individuals.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1626© ISLS