Designing Simple Tools for Socially Shared Regulation:Experiences of Using Google Docs and Mobile SRL Tools inMathematics EducationJari Laru, Jonna Malmberg, Hanna Järvenoja, Vesa-Matti Sarenius, and Sanna Järveläjari.laru@oulu.fi, jonna.malmberg@oulu.fi, hanna.jarvenoja@oulu.fi, vesa-matti.sarenius@oulu.fi,sanna.jarvela@oulu.fiFaculty of Education, University of OuluAbstract: The aim of this paper is to describe how simple SRL tools can be used forsupporting collaborative learning in the context of a mathematics education course. Inparticular, we will first introduce the pedagogical design building on a theoretical frameworkof socially shared regulation of learning (SSRL) and seamless learning. Second, we willintroduce simple tools that were used at different points of the collaborative task to increaseteacher and student awareness of situation-specific regulation. Third, we will provide caseexamples to illustrate how the collaborating groups with varying profiles benefit from use ofthe tool in practice. The results show that highly self-regulating collaborating groups saw theadded value of the tool designed to support SSRL. However, the collaborating groups withlow levels of self-regulation felt that it was merely an additional tool which needed to'“perform”.Keywords: socially shared regulation, regulation tools, web2.0, mathematics, teacher educationIntroductionDuring recent years, methodological and technological developments in information and communicationtechnologies have changed the ways in which people communicate, collaborate and learn in fundamental ways.Yet merely providing opportunities to use technology is not enough to guarantee deep learning (Järvelä &Hadwin, 2013). Recently, Laru, Naykki, & Järvelä (2014) carried out an analysis of ubiquitous technologies usein educational contexts, and they concluded that more pedagogically grounded instructional design is needed. Inparticular, effort is needed to put emergent technologies to effective use in promoting learning skills, namelyself-regulated learning and collaborative learning, in order to train people with 21st century skills.Personal, portable and wirelessly networked technologies are becoming more prevalent in the lives oflearners, while the development of social media has simultaneously led to new ideas about what it means toparticipate in educational activities. The interplay between Web 2.0 tools and mobile technologies, as well asthe interplay between individual and collective activities is setting new challenges for supporting collaborativelearning, as teachers have to integrate these new technologies into more or less traditional learning methods,curricula and everyday school life. On a more general level, a major challenge in the technology enhancedlearning field is overemphasis on designing tools and instructional activities for sharing and communicating,while the potential role of tools and appropriate instructional design for guiding and supporting learningprocesses has been virtually ignored (Järvelä & Hadwin, 2013).More recently researchers have started to explore how mobile devices, social media or personallearning environments can support or promote self-regulated learning (Kitsantas & Dabbagh, 2011). In acontinuation of these research efforts Laru & Järvelä (2014) have developed a pedagogical framework forseamless learning based on the levels of interactivity and self-regulation of learning that different tools andactivities enable. The pedagogical framework bridges the gaps between individual and collaborative activities aswell as face-to-face and mobile social media activities. The ultimate aim is to promote active learning byfacilitating interaction and sharing for engaged learning (Järvelä & Renninger, 2014). Recently, Järvelä et al.(2014) introduced design principles for CSCL tools, enhancing socially shared regulation of learning incollaborative groups. The current paper is based on these theoretical ideas and is a part of larger research projectnamed PROSPECTS (Investigating and Promoting Individual and Socially Shared Regulation of Learning inPrimary School and Teacher Education Contexts) (See e.g. Järvelä et al., 2014). In the PROSPECTS project oneof the objectives has been to study how to support teacher education on students’ effective regulation of learningwith regulation tools, during collaborative learning. One of the guidelines in the project is that various forms oftechnology can be used to increase students’ awareness of their regulatory processes and stimulate theircognitive, motivation, and emotion regulation to better achieve their learning goals (Järvelä et al., 2014;Järvenoja & Järvelä, 2009). Furthermore, by harnessing technology to support self and socially sharedCSCL 2015 Proceedings403© ISLSregulation of learning, the technology can be channeled to scaffold learners’ regulation processes and helpstudents to understand how they learn (Järvelä et al., 2014).AimThe aim of this paper is to describe how simple SRL tools can be used to support collaborative learning in thecontext of a mathematics education course. In particular, we will first introduce the pedagogical design, buildingon our earlier empirical research and the theoretical framework of SSRL (Hadwin, Järvelä, & Miller, 2011 ) andseamless learning (Laru & Järvelä, 2014). Second, we will introduce the simple tools which were used atdifferent points of the collaborative task to increase teacher and student awareness of situation-specificregulation. Third, we will provide case examples to illustrate how the collaborating groups benefit from the tooluse in practice. These case examples were selected for analysis using extreme case sampling. The idea ofextreme case sampling is to select information-rich cases that could increase the depth of understanding ratherthan providing empirical generalizations (Patton, 2002).Theoretical backgroundRegulated learning involves effective strategy use in order to regulate aspects of learning individually, withpeers and among groups (Järvelä & Hadwin, 2014; Winne, Hadwin, & Perry, 2011). Successful learners use arepertoire of strategies—cognitive, behavioral and motivational—to guide and enhance their learning processeswhile completing academic tasks (Schunk & Zimmerman, 2008). It is often assumed that once students have agood basic understanding of relevant strategies, they are all set, but this is not the case. Many students are notable to apply effective learning strategies when they are needed, and thus give up in the face of difficulty(Winne & Jamieson-Noel, 2002). In other words, those students who cannot realize adaptive regulation fail(Boekaerts & Corno, 2005).Recently, in research on self-regulated learning (SRL), there has been an ongoing discussion about thesocial aspects of SRL. Earlier mainstream SRL models focused heavily on the individuals as regulators ofbehavior and examined how social context plays a role in the generation of cognition and the pursuit of personalgoals (Boekaerts, Pintrich, & Zeidner, 2000). The model suggests that even if SRL can be assisted by externalmodeling and feedback, it develops within each individual. Another approach is to frame regulation process byusing the notion of shared cognition and recent research on collaborative learning (Järvelä & Hadwin, 2014).The idea is, in essence, that shared understanding is co-constructed (Roschelle & Teasley, 1995), and thusrequires collective regulation, in which groups develop a shared metacognitive awareness of goals, progress,and tasks, thereby sharing regulation processes as a collective (A. Hadwin & Oshige, 2011; Järvelä &Järvenoja, 2011).Methods and participantsThis study followed the principles of the design based research (DBR) method (Brown, 1992), and byapproaching the research from design-based research perspective the aim was to conduct design andpedagogical interventions in formal educational settings and to study the effect of the interventions on learningevents. Mixed methods have been employed, such as qualitative analysis of data gathered from mathematicseducation lessons, collaborative group work and analyses of the server logs generated by the use mobile SRLapps and other tools.Participants and contextThe participants were 44 undergraduate students (36 females and 8 males, mean age 24.9 years) enrolled on afive-year primary teacher education program at the Faculty of Education at a Finnish university. All of thestudents were enrolled on a compulsory course titled “Mathematics education, part II” during the springsemester of 2014. The participants worked in groups of three to four students for 8 weeks. Groups were dividedinto high, mixed and low regulators based on their individual scores in the Motivated Strategies for LearningQuestionnaire (MSLQ) (Pintrich, Smith, Garcia, & Mckeachie, 1993). The pedagogical design of themathematics education course consisted of lessons and collaborative group tasks. Each of the lessons involved asmall collaborative group task. The students worked in the same four-member groups to complete both thelecture assignments and the course assignment. All together there were eleven collaborative groups. Bothlessons and group tasks took place at the LeaForum interaction laboratory, which is a versatile teaching andobservation facility equipped with various modern devices (internet tablets, interactive video projectors etc.) andflexible fittings to provide for different group compositions.CSCL 2015 Proceedings404© ISLSPedagogical design for socially shared regulation of learningIn the context of the mathematics education course, a prototype regulation tool (S-REG) and Google Docs wereused as learning tools, and tablet computers as devices during the lessons and collaborative tasks (see Figure 1).Students were offered guidance for using the S-REG regulation tool and Google Docs. In order to introduce themain principles of self-regulated learning at the start of the math lessons a short newsflash was given at thebeginning of every lesson.1.2.Mathematics education lesson (8 x 2 hr mathematics education topics): (see also Figure 1)A. News flash [coaching in self-regulated learning]: In this phase different SRL topics wereintroduced to the studentsB. Grounding [introduction to the topic]: Each of the eight course weeks started with an introductionto a topic, in which students were grounded in main concepts related to mathematics education.The specific themes were in the following order: 1) introduction to the course, 2) approximationand mental calculation 3) teaching percentages 4) assessment and evaluation 5) problem solving 6)teaching algebra 7 and 8) coursework presentations.C. Regulation phase [increasing awareness of regulation]. Students used the S-REG tool to increaseawareness of their regulatory processes and stimulate their cognitive, motivational, and emotionalregulation to better achieve their learning goals.D. Collaborative problem solving [transferring knowledge to practice]. In this phase aim was totransfer mathematical knowledge to practice by solving problems connected to the lesson's topicsin working groups.Coursework (5 x 3 hr): Create a mid-term plan for mathematics:The groups were required to design a mid-term plan in the form of a Google Docs document by the endof the semester. Topics for the mid-term plans were: Numbers and calculations for the 6th grade (12–13-year-olds), Primary algebra and functions for the 5th grade (11–12-year-olds), Data processing andstatistics for the 6th grade, Geometry and measurement for the 4th grade (10–11-year-olds), Numbersand calculations for the 4th grade. The students chose more refined topic from these larger topics. Inorder to complete mid-term plan project, the students needed to write two documents: a planningdocument and a mid-term plan document. The mid-term plan consisted of six sections: 1) Introductionand theoretical framework, 2) Aims of the plan and description of how the school curricula will be usedin the plan 3) Evaluation of learning materials 4) Assessment plan 5) Planned lessons 6) Bibliography.The pedagogical design of the group task was as follows: (see also Figure 1)A. Planning phase [promote SSRL and keep track of the process]: In the first meeting groups createdsocially shared planning document (described in the tools section). This plan was revised a) afterproblems with group work and b) at the beginning of each collaborative group workshopB. Regulation phase: [increase awareness of regulation]. Students used the mobile regulation tool toincrease their awareness of their own regulatory processes and stimulate their cognitive,motivational, and emotional regulation to better achieve their learning goalsC. Execution phase: [task execution] in this phase the student groups did their group work: a midterm plan for mathematics education.D. Problem phase (if any): If students had any problems with their task execution they were advisedto carry out phases A and B again and then continue their task execution.E. Execution phase (continues after the problem phase and phases A and B): [task execution] in thisphase the student groups concentrated on their group work: a mid-term plan for mathematicseducation.Tools to support socially shared regulation of learningIn this study the design of the S-REG tool and the Google Docs planning template followed three designprinciples for supporting SSRL (as presented in Järvelä et. al (2014)): awareness, externalization and promotingregulation. The design of the S-REG tool and the use of Google Docs as a planning tool reflect experiencesgained in the first design cycle where the VCRI tool was used to support SSRL activities.Google Docs as socially shared planning tool. The collaborative task included a planning phase (seeFigure 1) in which group members created (new plan) or revised (existing plan). In this phase the groupCSCL 2015 Proceedings405© ISLSmembers used a Google Docs template (see table 1) which prompted groups to identify and develop SSRLstrategies (Järvelä et. al, 2014).Figure 1. Task flow during the course. Left: Math lesson. Right: Collaborative group taskTable 1: Questions in the socially shared planning document template tool#1234Primary question in templateDescribe the topic and the structure of your mid-term planWhat issues do you need to consider for planning your mid-term plan?How you will structure your work? What concrete steps and targets will you use?How you will organize your work?TheoryTask understandingTask understandingPlanning and goal settingStrategy use#123Additional questions in the templateHow challenging does your group think this task is? Explain why?What is your goal for this group work exercise?How are you going to work as a group to achieve this goal?Internal task conditionsGoal settingStrategy for collaborationThe S-REG mobile web app is a simple and responsive HTML5 application which was designed to run onsmartphones, tablets and desktops, unlike the VCRI tool, which was limited to desktop computers runningMicrosoft Windows. S-REG uses Google API for Oauth 2.0 authorization. In practice students were providedwith a seamless user experience, with Google Docs used for planning and S-REG for supporting individualgroup members' awareness; externalization of motivational, emotional and cognitive aspects; and promptinggroups' socially shared regulation. Both task types (mathematics lesson and collaborative task) included aphase(s) (see Figure 1) in which the regulation tool was used to support SSRL. The activity flow when using SREG consists of five sections, which were shown to individual students after all group members had completedtheir respective activities in the current section (see Table 2).CSCL 2015 Proceedings406© ISLSFigure 2. Left: Recognition of cognition/emotional/motivational status, Middle: Synthesis of group members’responses, Right: Pre-stocked options for targeted regulationTable 2: User interface sections of the regulation toolSectionFrontpageUser interface component(s)User login,task selectionDefinition for componentUser and context identificationLevelIndividualPhase-IndividualstatusThree rounded sliders(cognition/motivation/emotion)Recognition ofcognition/motivation/emotionIndividualSelf-awarenessGroupstatusThree color indicators(available colors: red, yellow,green)Synthesis of group membersresponses[If lowest between 0–33 then redIf lowest between 34–66 then yellowIf all 67–100 then green]GroupGroup-awarenessGrouppromptImage: two persons talkingDiscussion – What is the reason foryour group color?GroupReflectionActionpromptPre-define options for thetargeted regulationGroupReflectionActionpromptRegulation promptWhen the color is red or yellow therewill be a list of options to label themain reason coming up in a groupdiscussion. When the color is greenthere will be an open space to specifythe reason.Targeted feedback about regulationpossibilitiesGroupAdaptation ofappropriate RegulationData collectionThe data consists of self-reported data (i.e. questionnaires and interviews), time based sampling data (i.e. logdata) and the learning results collected in the context of the mathematics course.• MSQL questionnaire data from previous design cycle: Existing MSQL questionnaire data wascollected from the students prior the course.• Students’ products collected for learning assessment: All products created in student groups werecollected not only for research purposes, but also for students' learning assessment. This data consistsof two self-evaluation questionnaires, mid-term plans (coursework) and voluntary extra calculations.• Interviews conducted after the course: The interview data consisted of 43 interviews, on average 15–20 minutes, which were conducted at the end of the course.• Log-files generated by use of the S-REG tool: Use of log-file data produced by the S-REG tool,which included: 1) activity path [students actions within the UI] 2) values entered by subjects: a)session selector [lesson/coursework]; b) rounded SRL-dials [cognition, motivation, emotion]; c)textboxes [explanation for green color]; d) list menu [SRL-prompt chosen from the suggested list ofprompts].CSCL 2015 Proceedings407© ISLSData analysis••••MSQL data was used for grouping the students: In the context of this paper MSQL data (which wasalready processed in an earlier design cycle) was used to choose and contrast a group of low-regulatingstudents against a group of high-regulating students.Scoring procedures for the assessment data: The course grade for students s was given using thesum Grade(s) = midterm plan(s) + self-evaluation(s) + voluntary calculations(s). The Midterm planwas graded from 0 to 3 by the math teacher. Self-evaluation was the students own assessment, dealingwith topics such as "I can explain what is the most important issue in teaching percentages? Why?"(this was asked in the questionnaire, using the likert-scale). The math calculation was a voluntary taskwhich was graded as either pass or fail (this task dealt with the topics presented during the lectures).Log-files: Log-file data was exported from the S-REG tool in Excel-format. Although the log-files hadfine-grained data about individual students' actions, only group level values were calculated for thispaper.Interviews: The interview data was transcribed and analyzed in order to explore students' opinions onhow the S-REG tool supported their learning activities. In the excerpt from the interviews which wasused in this paper, students were asked to rate the S-REG tool on a scale of 0–10 and explain how itsupported their group during the course.ResultsAssessment and MSQL scoresAssessment and MSQL scores (see table 3) were used to choose and contrast low and high regulating group inthe comparison of the usefulness of the S-REG-tool. Based on the results, group B3 was chosen as the lowregulating group, because both their course average score and their MSQL average were the lowest on thecourse. Group A1 was chosen to be the high regulating group because their MSQL average score was highest.Table 3: Assessment and MSQL questionnaire average scores at group levelGroupMSQL(avg)424397360.5400.8355.8323.3399355346A1A2A3B1B2B3C1C2C3Self (avg) [0-2]1.8211.81.51.31.71.82Teacher (avg)[0–3]3332.32.32333Exercise score (avg)[0–1]0.30.51110.30.70.50.5Course score[0–5(6)]55.54.8553.55.35.35.5Differences in the synthesis of the cognitive, motivational and emotional statesbetween high and low regulating groupsTable 4 shows the differences in cognition, motivation and motivation between a group of high-regulators(group A1; avg MSQL score 424(24.83)) and a group of low-regulators (group B3; avg MSQL score323.3(5.74)). The synthesis of group members’ responses (collected from the problem solving task in the mathlessons) suggests that students who had a low score in the MSQL test also had lower group level cognitive,motivational and emotional values from the S-REG tool. However, as table 4 shows, both groups got yellow orred values each time while they were using the tool.Table 4: Topics of mathematics lessons and group level values from the S-REG toolGroupA1#1Inspiration Talk TopicTool introductionA12Collaborative learningA13MotivationCSCL 2015 ProceedingsTopicFirst lectureApproximation &MentalCalculationTeachingpercentages408Need forregulationR+CognitionRedMotivationYellowEmotionRedR+GreenYellowYellowR+GreenYellowYellow© ISLSGroup#Inspiration Talk TopicA14EmotionA1A156CognitionWrap upB3B31Tool introduction2Collaborative learning3Motivation4Emotion6Wrap upB3B3B3TopicAssessment &evaluationProblem-solvingAlgebraAverage:First lectureApproximation &MentalCalculationTeachingpercentagesAssessment &evaluationAlgebraAverage:Need forregulationCognitionMotivationEmotionR-GreenGreenYellowR+RR+GreenGreenGreenRedGreenYellowRedRedYellowR+RedRedRedR+RedRedRedGreenYellowYellowYellowRedRedGreenYellowRedRedRedRedR+R+R+R+Students’ opinions about how the use of S-REG tool supported their learningactivitiesThe results from the interviews reveal that students in the high regulating group show the potential of the SREG tool for supporting socially shared regulation in their activities, but low regulating students felt that it wasmore of a joke than a useful learning tool."My score for the app is 9. It forced us to think about our emotions and intents regarding thetask. It forced me to think about my emotions and to regulate the task" (Iris. Group A1,MSQL 417, course grade 5, app evaluation 9)"Score is 7. It was a bit dull, but it forced us to think and discuss topics that are not normallydiscussed at all." (Julia, Group A1, MSQL score 416, course grade 5, app evaluation 7)"Maybe it did support our learning. Maybe not. We already knew each other’s emotions,motivations etc. After brief discussions we knew what was going on. I don’t think that itsupported us." (Aleksi, Group B3, MSQL 326, course grade 4, app score: 8)"Well it was interesting to know fellow students' feelings. It sometimes made me change myown feelings. But quite often it was just joke, we just filled in the values and then continuedwith our task. We got bored very quickly" (Juliaana, Group B3, MSQL 315, course grade 2,app evaluation 6).Members of both groups argued that the S-REG tool was used only at the beginning of the activity, whichrendered it quite useless. This finding supports the idea that a change of design to suit learning activities wouldincrease the frequency of tool use."I didn't feel that it was important. It was filled just at the beginning of the lesson" (Juliaana,Group B3, MSQL 315, Course grade 2, app evaluation 6)"My grade for the app is only 7 because it was just used very briefly and rapidly. It was only aquick phase that had to be completed before starting the real tasks" (Julia, Group A1, MSQLscore 416, Course grade 5, app evaluation 7)"Well, it had a lot of good functions, but I felt that it wasn't an interesting application, it wasjust something to be completed and that's all. But still I want to give 9 because it made methink about emotions and intentions" (Iris. Group A1, MSQL 417, Course grade 5, appevaluation 9)DiscussionThe aim of this paper was to describe how simple SRL tools can be used for supporting collaborative learning inthe context of a mathematics education course. First, the pedagogical design presented may help other scientistsand educators to create designs for collaborative learning which follow the theoretical framework of SSRL.CSCL 2015 Proceedings409© ISLSSecond, the tools used in this study were off-the-shelf social media tools (Google Docs) and simple HTML5based www-apps (S-REG) which can easily be customized in order to suit different types of pedagogicaldesigns. In this study, these tools were used at different points of the collaborative tasks to increase teacher andstudent awareness of situation-specific regulation. Earlier research has shown that students who receive supportfor their regulated learning tend to learn better in comparison to students who do not receive support (Azevedoet al., 2012). However, the results indicate that the students’ SRL skills determine the added value of the S-REGtool. Therefore, the importance of pedagogical design is key in enhancing skills for regulated learning.ReferencesAzevedo, R., Landis, R. S., Feyzi-Behnagh, R., Duffy, M., Trevors, G., Harley, J. M., ... & Hossain, G. (2012,January). The effectiveness of pedagogical agents’ prompting and feedback in facilitating co-adaptedlearning with MetaTutor. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Intelligent TutoringSystems, ITS2011. LNCS Vol. 7315, S. A. CERRI ET AL., Eds., Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, 212221.Boekaerts, M., & Corno, L. (2005). Self-Regulation in the Classroom: A Perspective on Assessment andIntervention. Applied Psychology, 54(2), 199–231. doi:10.1111/j.1464-0597.2005.00205.xBoekaerts, M., Pintrich, P. R., & Zeidner, M. (2000). Handbook of self-regulation. San Diego: Academic Press.Brown, A. L. (1992). Design Experiments: Theoretical and Methodological Challenges in Creating ComplexInterventions in Classroom Settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141–178. Retrievedfrom http://www.jstor.org/view/10508406/ap050005/05a00030/0Hadwin, A. F., Järvelä, S., & Miller, M. (2011). Self-regulated, co-regulated and socially shared regulation oflearning. In B. J. Zimmerman & D. H. Schunk (Eds.), Handbook of Self-regulation of Learning andPerformance (Vol. 30, pp. 65–84). Routledge.Hadwin, A., & Oshige, M. (2011). Self-Regulation, Coregulation, and Socially Shared Regulation: ExploringPerspectives of Social in Self-Regulated Learning Theory. Teachers College Record, 113(2), 240–264.Retrieved from http://www.tcrecord.org/Content.asp?ContentId=15976Järvelä, S., & Hadwin, A. F. (2013). New Frontiers: Regulating Learning in CSCL. Educational Psychologist,48(1), 25–39. doi:10.1080/00461520.2012.748006Järvelä, S., & Järvenoja, H. (2011). Socially constructed self-regulated learning in collaborative learning groups.TeachersCollegeRecords.,113(2),350–374.Retrievedfromhttp://www.tcrecord.org/Content.asp?ContentID=15980Järvelä, S., Kirschner, P. A., Panadero, E., Malmberg, J., Phielix, C., Jaspers, J., … Järvenoja, H. (2014).Enhancing socially shared regulation in collaborative learning groups: designing for CSCL regulationtools. Educational Technology Research and Development. doi:10.1007/s11423-014-9358-1Järvelä, S., & Renninger, A. (2014). Designing for learning: Engagement, interest, and motivation. In R. K.Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (2nd Edition). CambridgeUniversity Press.Järvenoja, H., & Järvelä, S. (2009). Emotion control in collaborative learning situations: do students regulateemotions evoked by social challenges? The British Journal of Educational Psychology, 79, 463–481.Kitsantas, A., & Dabbagh, N. (2011). The Role of Web 2.0 Technologies in Self-Regulated Learning. NewDirections for Teaching and Learning, 126(126), 99–106. doi:10.1002/tlLaru, J., & Järvelä, S. (2014). Integrated use of multiple social software tools and face-to-face activities in orderto support self-regulated learning: a case study in higher education context. In L.-H. Wong, M. Milrad,& M. Specht (Eds.), Seamless Learning in the Age of Mobile Connectivity. Springer Verlag.Laru, J., Naykki, P., & Jarvela, S. (2014). Four stages of research on the educational use of ubiquitouscomputing. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, (1), 1–1. doi:10.1109/TLT.2014.2360862Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.Pintrich, P. R., Smith, D. A. F., Garcia, T., & Mckeachie, W. J. (1993). Reliability and Predictive Validity of theMotivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire (Mslq). Educational and Psychological Measurement,53(3), 801–813. doi:10.1177/0013164493053003024Roschelle, J., & Teasley, S. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in paired problem solving. In C. E.O’Malley (Ed.), Computer-supported collaborative learning (pp. 69–97). Springer-Verlag.Schunk, D. H., & Zimmerman, B. J. (2008). Motivation and self-regulated learning: Theory, research, andapplications. Taylor & Francis.Winne, P. H., & Jamieson-Noel, D. . (2002). Methodological issues and advances in researching tactics,strategies, and self-regulated learning. In M. Maehr & P. R. Pintrich (Eds.), Advances in motivationand achievement (Vol 12). Greenwich: CT: JAI Press.CSCL 2015 Proceedings410© ISLS