Meaning-Making in Collaborative Activity:Effort toward Coherent, but Not Shared,Interpretations of the ProblemLisa Hardy, University of California, Davis, lahardy@ucdavis.eduTobin White, University of California, Davis, twhite@ucdavis.eduAbstract: In this paper we report results from a first iteration of design-based research projectexploring the potential of classroom networks of handheld tablets (iPads) to supportcollaborative reasoning in physics. This paper examines the interpretive acts performed in thecollaborative discourse of a group of physics students as enactments of personalunderstandings, with the goal of understanding how distinct interpretations arise and areelaborated and negotiated by collaborative groups. Specifically we focus on a case in which‘incompatible’ interpretations arise, and argue that the group makes efforts after coherent, butnot necessarily shared, interpretations.Keywords: interpretation, classroom networks, handhelds, design-based research, physicsIntroductionCSCL is centrally concerned with intersubjective meaning-making: the processes by which groups of learnersconstruct shared meaning (Suthers, 2006). Still there are various views on the relationship between individualand group meaning-making processes, and individual and group learning. Particularly, this paper looks closelyat the role of individual interpretation of the meaning constructed in face-to-face collaborative settings.Interpretation has been conceptualized several ways in the CSCL literature. Suthers (2006) focuses on theactions that constitute interpretation—interpretations are enacted in verbal utterances, gestures, manipulations ofartifacts; by acting, learners make their interpretations visible, both to their group members and to researchers.Producing an interpretation adds to the available artifacts to interpret, changing the meaning-making landscapefrom which the other students can form interpretations. In this way, individual contributions take up and buildon one another dynamically. On the other hand, interpretations have been conceptualized as personal preunderstandings (Stahl, 2003)—specific to each student, dependent on their prior knowledge and experience—which become problematized, elaborated, and modified during group activity. Meaning is constructed ininteraction, however, and exists in the interpersonal space. In this view, learners have (tacit or explicit)interpretations of collaboratively constructed, shared meaning. The distinction between interpretation andinterpretive acts might be useful in distinguishing these views; interpretation being a personal understandingassociated with an individual, and interpretive acts being the ways in which those understandings are enacted ingroup discourse and made visible to the group and to researchers.Roschelle (1992) found that individuals working in groups tend to converge on a shared conception ofa problem; later work conceptualized collaborative learning as the result of efforts made to maintain such a jointconception (Roschelle & Teasley, 1995). The view of interpretive acts as each building on and modifying oneanother lends itself to a ‘gradual changes’ view of the evolution of a joint problem conception. However, it isdifficult to use such a lens to understand the collaborative processes behind the major, paradigmatic shifts ofinterpretation and understanding that are sometimes necessary to solve and understand a complex problem. Thispaper seeks to examine the interpretive acts performed in collaborative discourse as enactments of particularpersonal understandings, with the goal of understanding how distinct interpretations arise and are elaborated andnegotiated by collaborative groups. Specifically we focus on a case in which ‘incompatible’ interpretations ariseand must be reconciled.Learning environment designWe locate this design work relative to two distinct axes of prior research. Research in collaborative learningindicates that tasks are likely to be most effective when they are sufficiently open-ended and complex tonecessitate contributions from each member (Cohen, 1994), and when participants engage the task and oneanother in ways that sustain that variety of contributions (Barron, 2003). Relative to this axis, networkedhandhelds can facilitate greater communication, coordination and negotiation among peers (Zurita & Nussbaum,2004), and expand and enrich avenues for active participation in joint problem-solving activity (White & Pea,2011). Along an axis of research more focused on the individual learner, simulations and interactive multimediaCSCL 2015 Proceedings435© ISLScan be engaging and assist in complex visualization (Adams et al, 2008); contemporary personal devices such astablet PCs offer the potential to further enrich those supports through more continual mobile access andintuitive, touch-based interfaces. One aim of this project is to design technology-supported activities thatsynergistically draw on both the individual and collaborative offerings of networked handhelds.TechnologyOur learning environment is designed to support groups of undergraduate physics students in making sense ofthe physics of mechanical waves. Each student is given an iPad Air running our iOS application: an interactivesimulation of many independent mass-spring oscillators set at equal intervals along the horizontal axis. Theoscillators’ vertical motion is animated on each iPad when the student pushes a “play” button; the oscillators arereturned to their initial positions when the student stops the simulation with a “pause” button. The initialposition and direction of each oscillator can be adjusted using an interactive “unit circle” tool, a representationof the unit circle with angle markings at intervals of π/16. To adjust the position and direction of a selectedoscillator, the student drags a point around the circumference of the unit circle to the corresponding phase angle.When the phases of the oscillators are set at regular intervals, the oscillators will together form atravelling wave, the wavelength and direction depending on the phase interval between adjacent oscillators. Thedirection of the wave is determined by whether the phase is increasing or decreasing as you move along the xaxis. Each iPad connects to a local server that assigns each student in a group control over a subset of theoscillators. When one student makes changes to the position or direction of one of his or her oscillators, the appmessages the server, which then communicates those changes to the rest of the group. When each student rerunsthe simulation on her own device, the initial oscillator positions are updated. Thus, in order to build a wavetogether, the students must coordinate the phases of their individual oscillators.Task designOur design is intended to encourage student interactions around concepts related to mechanical waves and wavemotion. Specifically, we intend the activity to occasion talk about the concepts of phase, relative phase andphase intervals, and how these relate to observable aspects of wave phenomena such as wavelength and wavedirection. In order to build a wave, the students must coordinate the phases of their individual oscillators, andperforming this coordination will likely require students to take up the concept of phase, and its representationon the unit circle, as meaningful and useful to the wave-building task. Students were given worksheets with taskdirections. The task progression was to: 1) build a wave with a wavelength of 16 units, 2) build a wave with awavelength of 8 units, and 3) build a wave with a wavelength of 8 units, but moving in the opposite direction.MethodsContext and participantsThe Physics 7 series at University of California, Davis is a three-quarter introductory Physics sequence forbiological science majors. The sequence is unusual in that Physics 7 students spend 5 hours per week in a hybridDiscussion/Laboratory, and only about an hour per week in a traditional lecture. The goal of theseDiscussion/Laboratory sections is for students to engage in high-level conceptual reasoning about physicsconcepts, in what the course designers call "active sense-making" (Potter, 2012). Two main instructionalstrategies serve that goal: small group collaboration, and a focus on a small number of conceptual models.Nearly all class work is done in a face-to-face setting in groups of four to six. Additionally, the course content isstructured around a relatively small set of physics models designed to focus the students’ attention on the “bigideas” of Physics. In these Discussion/Lab sections students work through problems, discuss, argue, explain andmake sense of physics problems. A typical class session has small groups working through conceptual reasoningactivities, each group presenting their results on a shared whiteboard, followed by a whole-class discussion ofthe results led by the graduate teaching assistant.Our classroom implementation of the Making Waves activity was conducted in the final course of theCLASP series, during the first two consecutive, three-hour discussion/lab sessions at the beginning of thequarter. These first two class sessions are devoted to oscillatory motion and waves. For our interventionsections, we replaced an activity in which students primarily produced and reasoned with graphicalrepresentations of waves with modified worksheets with the Making Waves task prompts. We conducted one‘pilot’ session in Winter quarter 2013 with one participating class section of twelve students, and a second inSpring 2014 with four course sections (of thirty students each) using this design.CSCL 2015 Proceedings436© ISLSEpisode selectionIn a typical Physics 7 activity, the TAs walk around the classroom and interact with student groups. Many ofthese interactions throughout our activity sessions involved the TAs explicitly telling the students what to do toaccomplish the assigned task. As we were primarily interested in supporting student-student interactions insmall groups, we looked first for episodes in which students reasoned together without substantial guidance bytheir TA. We chose to analyze an episode in which four students reason about a strategy for changing thedirection of the wave they had just built, and construct an accompanying explanation of why their strategyshould work. This episode was chosen primarily because it was an instance of group members clearly enactingdistinct interpretations—one group member leaves the table while the group discussion continues, then returnsand offers his own, very different strategy for reversing the wave direction. Additionally, this episode waschosen in part because these students were particularly vocal and articulate about their strategies, and becauseeach student in the group participated in the reasoning session. The selected episode is representative of thebroader data set in that the strategy the students came up with the same as the other groups, but was notable inthat the TA did not play a direct role in the construction of the final explanation.Analytic approachThe goals of our analysis are to uncover the ways in which this group of students enacted distinct interpretationsand subsequently negotiated those interpretations—particularly in the instance in which the interpretations weresubstantially different. As such enactments involve verbal utterances, gesture, body language, gaze andinteractions with materials, we employed interaction analysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995), in which repeatviewings of the selected episode allowed us to make sense of the interaction at both the “macro” and “micro”interactional levels. We first transcribed the episode fully, additionally annotating hand movements used incommunication, beginning at the ‘problem statement’ by the TA and ending when the group had changed thetopic of conversation. Within the video segment and using the transcript, we then identified for further analysisthree episodes in which distinct interpretations arose.ResultsThe selected episodes featured a group of four students: two men (J and S) and two women (A and B). Theepisode took place after the group had just successfully constructed a wave with a wavelength of 8 units, pointby-point. Some of the group’s wave-building activity prior to the selected episode is relevant to understand it: asthis was a group of four, their wavelength was divisible by the number of people in the group. This had theeffect of J’s oscillators each alternating phase between 0 and π —and because of this coincidence, he foundduring the initial wave building task that these two phases each corresponded to his oscillators each being at the“equilibrium point,” in the y = 0 position. He noted aloud that both phases corresponded to the same position,but that the difference between a phase of 0 and a phase of π is in which direction the oscillator is going—zerocorresponding to upward motion, and π corresponding to downward motion through equilibrium.The selected video segment began as J left the group for a trip to the restroom, and the TA asked theremaining three students how they would reverse their wave’s direction. The episode has three parts: in PartOne, the group (S, A and B) constructed an initial strategy and accompanying explanation of why that strategyshould work; in Part Two, J had returned and proposed an alternative strategy. In Part 3, the full group discussesa reinterpretation of the original strategy.Episode one: A joint production without shared knowledgeAs they finished building their first wave, J left the table for a trip to the restroom, and the other three studentsremained at the table. The TA approached the group and prompted them with the next question from the activitysheet, asking how they would change the direction of the wave they had just built.TA:So… we decided it’s moving left, right?B:Mh-hm.A:Yeah.TA:How do you guys think you could make it move right?A:What!TA:How could you make it move to the right instead?B:Change the pha:se/? <tentative>TA:I mean yes, but… [everything is changing the phase, right.CSCL 2015 Proceedings437© ISLSA:S:TA:A:TA:A:S:A:S:A:S:A:S:A:[Everybody would shif:t…<<gobackwards>>.[Yeah.[Yes:[[<<Like instead of going this way, [we would all go that way.>>[Why would that work?Cau:se…Cause you’re reversing the direction of… you’re reversing theoscillation. So initially, one of these points either starts[[going u:p<elevated>like I’m assuming this starts [up.[oh: <elevated>Or down. If you reverse thatyou’re going to now be goingyou’re going tochange the way everything else moves. Like that changes the direction.[oh: <elevated>The TA initially posed the question to the group as “how could you make it move to the right instead[of left]?” B’s initial suggestion to “change the phase” was tentative, as indicated by her uptalk and elongationof the word “phase.” Her hesitation suggests that she suspected that the strategy would involve phase, but didnot yet have a definite picture of how ‘phase’ related to the making the wave “move to the right.” B’s suggestionwas rejected by the TA as not incorrect (“I mean yes”) yet not satisfactory (“but”), and in particular, too general(“everything is changing the phase, right?”).S and A then jointly constructed a chain of concepts linking phase to wave direction. A first positedthat everybody would “go backwards,” and elaborated this meaning with “go this way,” coupled with a gestureof a smooth rotation motion along the unit circle. The TA immediately affirmed this strategy, but asked for anelaborated explanation (“why would that work?”). A began an explanatory response (“cau:se…”) but S filled inthe content, explaining that it would work “cause you’re reversing the direction of… you’re reversing theoscillation.” As A did earlier, he related his explanation as a modification to the group’s prior activity (“initially,one of these points starts up” … “if you reverse that”). He then continued to relate “reversing the oscillation” to“changing” the wave direction. S’s and A’s talk is intertwined in this segment, A saying “oh:” and usingelongated and elevated tones to indicate a realization or new understanding, while also implying her acceptanceof S’s contribution. This strategy, and accompanying explanation, was a socially distributed productioncomprising contributions from each of S, A and B.What is interesting about this particular exchange is that the two students, S and A, appear to have beentalking about two physically different situations—in particular, two distinct interpretations of the relationshipbetween going “backwards” and the oscillators’ motion. A appeared to be talking about the effect on thedirection of motion of each of the oscillators, while S was talking about the effect on their position: A used thephrase “going up,” while S used just “up.” While these may be subtle differences in language use, they areaccompanied by significant differences in gestural activity. A showed a smooth motion clockwise around theunit circle, then mimicked going up. S didn’t refer to the unit circle in his explanation, but continued the verbalexplanation (beginning with repetition of A’s “cause”) of A’s “go backwards” strategy, mimicked oscillationwith pinched fingers moving up and down, then as he said “starts up” he moved his pinched fingers verticallyupward, paused, then as he said “down,” pulled his hand backward and moved his pinched fingers to a lowerposition. He continued “if you reverse that,” repeating this up-to-down motion, “you’re going to change theway,” mimicking waves in place, “everything else moves,” with a rightward-moving flat hand, indicating arightward-moving wavefront. His gestures suggest that he interpreted “reversing the oscillation” not asreversing each oscillator’s direction, as A did, but reversing their initial positions from “up” to “down.” S evenstopped his initial explanation mid-sentence to repeat it specifically omitting the word direction (“Cause you’rereversing the direction of… you’re reversing the oscillation”), suggesting that direction wasn’t relevant to hisinterpretation.CSCL 2015 Proceedings438© ISLSThis further suggests a possible difference in interpretation of the verbal phrase “go backwards.” A’sinitial “go backwards” was accompanied by a smooth clockwise motion around the unit circle. Coupled withher focus on changing the oscillators’ directions, this may suggest that she took going backwards to mean thateach point should progress, as time goes on, clockwise on the unit circle rather than counterclockwise (thiswould indeed have reversed the wave direction). On the other hand, S did not gesture referring to the unit circle(he took up the explanation from there)—yet his emphasis on changing position would be consistent with aninterpretation of “going backwards” to mean a reversal of their initial wave construction strategy: to nowsubtract phase as each person sets their points, rather than to add phase with every point.Episode two: Making two interpretations coherentAt the end of the above segment, J returned from his trip to the restroom, and S asked him how he would changethe direction of the wave:S:How do you think you’d change the direction… how do you think you’dchange the direction of the wave?J:Change the direction… it’s like, oka:y (turning on iPad and looking down atit) well you change the equilibrium points from… right… you change thezeros… when you change the equilibrium points you like you flip the uh…(looks up from iPad at A) wait… what was zero, you’d flip that to pi? Right,and everything? And all the two Pi equivalents… right?A:I think so:… it’s just the direction also flips with it. Yeah.S:[Yeah. Yeah, yeah.As J thought aloud in the beginning of this sequence, his reasoning seemed to hinge on the word“change” (“change the direction… you change the equilibrium points… you change the zeros… you change theequilibrium points, you flip the…”). “Change the direction” appears to have been a verbal cue for J, bringingabout a recollection of his prior experience during the wave-building activity of “changing the direction” of the“equilibrium points.” J made this prior experience relevant to the current conversation through his repetition ofthe phrase “change the direction,” first in reference to the wave, and then in referring the “equilibrium points.”He then made the “change” more specific by transitioning from “change” to “flip” (“when you change the[direction through the] equilibrium points… you flip the [zeros to Pis]”).While this contribution also related the wave to the individual oscillators to the unit circle, it did so in away that was inconsistent with the group’s already proposed strategy. According to J, the group would take eachof the points along their existing wave and adjust the phase on the unit circle to the “equivalent point”—wherethe position was the same but the direction of motion was reversed. This would indeed have worked. Thestrategy constructed by the other students, however, was to redo the point-by-point building of a wave, this timegoing clockwise on the unit circle. This strategy also works, and ultimately differs from J’s only by an initialphase factor. However, the processes being suggested for building the reversed wave are substantially different,and not obviously compatible.Now we focus on how the group responded to these distinct strategies. In response to J’s newlysuggested strategy, A began with a statement of agreement (“I think so:…”), elongating the “so” to hold herconversational turn as she thought. When she spoke again, she began with “it’s just,” then followed it with apoint of similarity between her interpretation and J’s (“it’s just the direction also flips”, emphasis mine). Thissuggests that the effort she was making while silent was to reconcile J’s “flipping points” with her owninterpretation of the original group strategy by finding ways in which they were, effectively, the same. Sheenacted this reconciliation both verbally and gesturally, by repeating J’s use of the word “flip”, and modifyingher original “direction” gesture to end in a “flipping” motion (see Figure 1).A and S jointly accepted this connection between the strategies: as she said “Yeah,” she gesturedtoward S with an open hand, palm upward, referring to their previous exchange, that (in A’s interpretation)meant that “reversing the oscillation” was sufficient to “change the [wave] direction.” A’s contribution here,gesturally “flipping the direction” of the oscillator and then gesturing to S indicates that her interpretation of theinitial explanation was indeed focused on flipping each of the oscillator directions, not their positions. While Sdid not seem to be interpreting direction as meaningful before, he nevertheless accepted here that flipping thedirection was in accordance with the explanation of their previous strategy.CSCL 2015 Proceedings439© ISLSFigure 1. “(a) It’s just (b) the direction also (c) flips with it. (d) Yeah.”Episode three: Purposeful reinterpretationThe group had now introduced two qualitatively different strategies: “going backwards,” which required thegroup to restart their coordination efforts, and “flipping points,” which involved taking each point as it is in theleftward-travelling configuration, and transforming it by “flipping” it to a new position. J next attempted to reexpress his strategy:J:So we all need to find an equivalent point that's like… would you not movethe dot, would you want it the same area, but like… what did he say, likewhat did you guys figure out?[ A responds, J asks her to repeat.]A:Like you know how when we did our first one? You were here and like ohshe was there and he was there and I was here ... Now we'd have to go.. Wehave to go the other direction.J:Is there a way to think about it mathematically though?A:That's what I was think- the negative Pi/? Is there a way/?B:This would be pi/2 instead of 3Pi/2, but…S:YeahB:Negative?J:Like I'm saying if you shift that over…B:Isn't that math though, isn't it like this way is positive but if you go this wayit's negative?A:Negative. So in a way it is mathematically correct?S:Yeah.B:like it'd be negative pi/2?J:OK so if we… we added pi/8 right? So if we subTRACT pi/8 from theequilibrium point…A:now you're going in the other direction.B:negative pi/8…A:Now it makes sense.S:So we shouldn't think about it as flipping points, but we should think aboutit as going the opposite direction on the unit circle.A:which makes it negative.S:Because… waves behave… he says wave behaves like a sine curve. Sinecurve is like… choo, choo… it's oscillating. So we oscillate the otherdirection…J:that makes a lot more sense.J attempted to elaborate his “flipping points” strategy, suggesting that they each needed to find“equivalent points” (positions along the unit circle) that would keep their “dots” in the same vertical positions,but change their directions of motion. (This strategy would indeed have worked.) However, A provided noCSCL 2015 Proceedings440© ISLSpositive feedback while J made this contribution—no indication she shared his interpretation. A then related herstrategy to J without taking up any aspect of his “equivalent points” idea. This effectively suppressed J’s“equivalent point” idea, as they didn’t discuss the way in which this strategy might maintain the “equivalence”of the points, and there was no further effort to reconcile these two strategies.As A related the strategy, she reminded J of the group’s original strategy (“you know how like beforewhen we started”) and replayed it gesturally, touching her finger to each point along the unit circle, progressingcounter-clockwise at equal intervals (“I was here he was there and you were here”). She then switched to thenew strategy in contrast by switching tense (“we would have to go”) and replaying her motions along the unitcircle but this time moving clockwise (“you are here… I’m here”). In doing so, she ued the group’s prioractivity to explain the new one to J. She summarized the new strategy (“go this way”). J then, without referenceto any details of what A had just said, asked if there was a way to think about A’s strategy mathematically. Thiscontribution is noteworthy in that it was a shift from “tool talk” to “concept talk”—rather than being about theprocedure of building a specific wave, it was about a particular way to understand that procedure. The groupthen tried to come up with a way to think about their strategy mathematically, their discussion initially centeredon the negative/positive distinction between going clockwise/counter-clockwise on the unit circle. Then, J’smathematical interpretation of the strategy as subtracting in contrast to the previous strategy of adding became anew explanation for why A’s strategy should work. Adding/subtracting π/8 likely had a higher degree of relationto the strategy A had gesturally enacted than positive/negative.Saying “now you’re going in the other direction” with a tone of relief, A accepted J’s interpretation.Her gesture coinciding with the word “other” is interesting—instead of mimicking direction on the unit circle orthe direction of an oscillator as she had done before (or taking up S’s gesture for the direction of the wave), shesummed it all up with a “hand flip” gesture that simply emphasized the word “other.” She then gestured “palmup” at S again (the first time she did so, she was referring to flipping the oscillator directions being sufficient toreverse the wave direction). Now repeating that gesture, she effectively completed the explanation. This was inline with A’s (apparent) interpretation that the essence of the wave reversal strategy was to make everything(unit circle, then oscillator, then wave) go the other direction. S took this up and positioned “flipping points”and “going the opposite direction” as two different ways of thinking about this. However, he did not adopt J’s“adding/subtracting” language—he simply reiterated the initial idea about going around the unit circle, nowemphasizing “other” as A did, but accompanied by a different ambiguous gesture.DiscussionThe analysis presented highlights the need to attend to distinct, personal interpretations in accounts of meaningmaking. In Stahl’s (2003) sense, meaning is shared because it is constructed through an interpersonal process ofmutual recognition: a reference to something takes on a function in the ongoing discourse and therefore meanssomething to the participants. However, trying to understand the group’s discourse through this lens isproblematic. For example, the initial explanation co-constructed by S and A made use of the phrase “gobackwards.” However, “go backwards” had two distinct functions in the activity as interpreted by S and A, asevidenced by their distinct gestural activity: either reversing oscillator position, or reversing oscillator direction.Thus it was not that there were two interpretations of the meaning of “go backwards,” but that the phrase itselfhad two meanings, which were not in any useful sense shared by S and A. An alternative to a focus onindividual interpretations of shared meaning might be found in Greeno and van de Sande’s (2007) theory ofperspectival understandings, which posits that individuals have personal perspectives – points of view thatforeground one particular set of concepts and relationships between them. In this sense, A and S took differentperspectives on the relationships between “going backwards” on the unit circle, oscillator position, oscillatordirection, and wave direction, without requiring that each of these concepts had a meaning shared by theparticipants.The analysis presented also highlights the ways that attention to individual interpretations can helpresearchers make sense of the interpretive acts by which the group accomplishes meaning-making. Taking theview proposed in Suthers (2006) that intersubjective meaning-making involves the joint composition ofinterpretations— the producing, taking up, modifying or elaborating a set of shared verbal, gestural or materialartifacts— we can interpret A’s utterance in Episode Two as taking up both J’s statement about “flipping points”alongside her earlier idea about changing directions, and connecting these two conceptually. However, without afocus on individual interpretations it is difficult to see why A might have made that particular connection, orwhy it was A who made it. Attending to interpretations as personal understandings, her contribution representsan effort to reduce J’s proposed idea to something consistent, or coherent, with her own currently heldinterpretation in which oscillator direction change was important. Additionally, A may have played thisreconciliation role because her interpretation enabled her to see potential connection with J’s. S’s interpretation,CSCL 2015 Proceedings441© ISLSon the other hand, in which position change was important, may have made it more difficult for him to make aconnection to “flipping points”— an action which changes the direction, but not the position, of the oscillators.Lastly, attention to interpretations helps make sense of J’s attempt to shift to a mathematical interpretation inEpisode Three. In J’s own words, he was looking for “a way to think about that”— not for new information, or a“missing” artifact, but a new organization of what was already available to him— a new way to interpret theconcepts relevant to their wave building activity.While these students achieved a degree of intersubjectivity sufficient to successfully accomplish thewave building and reversal tasks, and to collaboratively construct an explanation of their reversal strategyacceptable to their TA, they did so without ever sharing interpretations of their activity. To some extent, thestudents’ conceptions of the problem of building a wave, or reversing its direction, must have converged—theycould reliably, successfully build arbitrary waves together as a group by the end of the activity, and could not atthe beginning. However, their interpretations-- specifically related the conceptual mechanisms of directionreversal-- did not converge, either during the wave-building activity or during the subsequent discussion. Thissuggests that conceptual convergence, in Roschelle’s sense, may pertain to the more pragmatic features of theproblem at hand, on which the group must agree to coordinate their actions-- while interpretations may be of theunderlying conceptual structure of the problem, which need not be shared to succeed. It is an interesting futureresearch question how these two layers relate to one another, and co-evolve in discourse.ReferencesAdams, W. K., Reid, S., LeMaster, R., McKagan, S. B., Perkins, K. K., Dubson, M., & Wieman, C. E. (2008). AStudy of Educational Simulations Part I-Engagement and Learning. Journal of Interactive LearningResearch, 19(3), 397-419.Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 307-359.Cohen, E. (1994). Restructuring the classroom: Conditions for productive small groups. Review of EducationalResearch, 64(1), 1-35.Greeno, J. G., & van de Sande, C. (2007). Perspectival understanding of conceptions and conceptual growth ininteraction. Educational Psychologist,42(1), 9-23.Hake, R. R. (1998). Interactive-engagement versus traditional methods: A six-thousand-student survey ofmechanics test data for introductory physics courses. American journal of Physics, 66, 64.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39-103.Potter, W., Webb, D., West, E., Paul, C., Bowen, M., Weiss, B. & De Leone, C. (2012). Sixteen years ofCollaborative Learning through Active Sense-making in Physics (CLASP) at UC Davis. arXiv preprintarXiv:1205.6970.Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. Journal of the LearningSciences, 2(3), 235-276.Roschelle, J. & Teasley, S.D. (1995). Construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving. In C.O’Malley (Ed.), Computer-supported collaborative learning. New York: Springer-Verlag.Suthers, D. D. (2006). Technology affordances for intersubjective meaning making: A research agenda forCSCL. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 315-337.Stahl, G. (2003). Meaning and interpretation in collaboration. In Designing for change in networked learningenvironments (pp. 523-532). Springer Netherlands.White, T., & Pea, R. (2011). Distributed by design: On the promises and pitfalls of collaborative learning withmultiple representations. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20(3), 489-547.Zurita, G., & Nussbaum, M. (2004). Computer supported collaborative learning using wirelessly interconnectedhandheld computers. Computers & education, 42(3), 289-314.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1252508.CSCL 2015 Proceedings442© ISLS