Multimodal Texts and Tasks in Elementary Project-based ScienceMiranda S. Fitzgerald, University of Michigan, mfitzge@umich.eduAnnemarie Sullivan Palincsar, University of Michigan, annemari@umich.eduAbstract: This paper describes a study conducted in the context of a larger design-based researchproject investigating the integration of science, English language arts, and mathematics inelementary grades project-based learning. This study focuses on one third-grade unit in whichstudents read and created multiple multimodal texts, in print and digital forms. Focusing on thedesign and enactment of two focal texts and associated tasks, we ask: (1) How did the design andenactment of the texts and tasks support third-graders’ science and literacy learning? (2) How mightmodifications to the design of the texts and tasks better support student learning? Findings indicateways in which the design of the texts and tasks, and the teacher’s enactment, synergisticallysupported students’ science and literacy learning, but also point to missed opportunities in the designof the curriculum and its enactment, for further supporting the learning of all students.Keywords: Multimodal literacy, science learning, designed learning environments, project-based learningIntroduction and purposeInfluenced by the growing range of digital technologies for communication, literacy scholars (e.g., Jewitt, 2008) havecalled for instruction that builds toward multimodal literacy; that is, the ability to learn from text in which words areused in combination with audio, visual, and spatial modes (Mills, 2010). Dalton (2012) argued that the Common CoreState Standards (CCSS, 2010) “assume that being literate means being digitally literate” (p. 333) and that to beprepared for the 21st century demands of school, life, and work, students must be able to analyze and create both printand non-print texts using traditional and new forms of media (p. 333). However, some studies have found that, evenwhen multimedia texts were recommended, elementary-grades teachers did not use these resources (e.g., Brenner,Hiebert, & Tompkins, 2009). Hence, studies that investigate the processes and outcomes of incorporating multimodaland digital texts into elementary-grades instruction are needed.The present study was conducted in the context of a multi-year design-based research project that integratesscience, English language arts (ELA), and mathematics in elementary grades project-based learning (PBL), calledMultiple Literacies in Project-based Learning (MLs). PBL hypothetically provides opportunities for students tointerpret and produce multimodal text as they explore real-world problems. Project-based science instruction, inparticular, may provide unique opportunities to explore how students and their teachers use, create, and learn withmultimodal text because, as Lemke (2004) argued, scientific literacy is inherently multimodal and scientific disciplinesare “leading the way” in the use of video, graphical displays, and simulations to pursue research questions.While project-based science may provide opportunities for students to interpret and produce multiple modes,we know very little about how young students and their teachers take up these opportunities in diverse classroomsettings. Prain and Waldrip (2006) found that, while teachers incorporated multiple modes into science instruction,they did not systematically support students to translate across modes, and students required varying levels of supportto interpret modes. This raises questions about how young students and their teachers can be supported to interpretand produce multiple modes of representation as they engage with disciplinary texts and with one another. The currentstudy is consistent with the ICLS 2018 focus on unpacking the complexity of the learning and teaching process,exploring learning in real-world settings, and understanding how learning may be facilitated with and withouttechnology. Reflecting this call, design-based studies are needed to understand how multimodal texts and tasks can bedesigned and used to support students’ knowledge building and literacy development.This study was conducted in the context of one third-grade project-based unit, framed by the driving question:Why do we see so many squirrels but we cannot find any stegosauruses? The unit was enacted in a diverse third-gradeclassroom, in which the class studied organisms’ traits and interdependent relationships in ecosystems. The unitfeatured multimodal texts and tasks designed to advance students’ literacy and science learning. To investigate thedesign and enactment of the texts and tasks, we ask: (1) How did the design and enactment of multimodal texts andtasks support third-graders’ science and literacy learning in the context of PBL? (2) How might modifications to thedesign of the texts and tasks better support third-graders’ science and literacy learning?ICLS 2018 Proceedings616© ISLSTheoretical perspectivesThe RAND Reading Study Group (2002) proposed that reading comprehension can be explained by considering thereader, the text, the activity in which the reader and text are involved, and the sociocultural context in which theactivity takes place. This study focuses on students’ interpretation and knowledge building in the context of reading,interpreting, and creating multimodal texts. This work is also informed by sociocultural theories of learning, whichreject the view that knowledge is located within the individual and, instead, embrace the view that learning andunderstanding are inherently social, occurring through interaction, negotiation, and collaboration (Wertsch, 1991).The present study’s focus is on the classroom community as the students and their teacher interact and collaboratearound reading, interpreting, and creating multimodal text. From sociocultural perspectives, cultural activities (e.g.,scientific modeling) and tools (e.g., computers, language) are integral to knowledge building.Methods and data sourcesThis study was conducted in one third-grade classroom with 32 students in a K-5 elementary school in the MidwestUnited States. Students were diverse with respect to race/ethnicity and academic achievement. On state achievementmeasures, only 20% of students demonstrated proficiency in ELA. The teacher was an experienced third-grade teacherand a second-year participant in the MLs research project.Data sources included field notes, transcribed video of instruction, and artifacts. Informed by Brenner et al.(2009), observations and qualitative field notes focused on instructional events in which students were engaged inreading and using information from text to: discuss ideas, inform the development of artifacts, and synthesize ideasacross texts and experiences. Focal lessons were videoed and transcribed. Artifacts included curriculum materials andstudent and whole-class work. Artifacts provided evidence of how students incorporated ideas from text in studentor class-generated products and provided insight into students’ knowledge building and literacy development.We use design-based research (DBR) (Brown, 1992) and case study (Stake, 1995) methods focused on thedesign, evaluation, and improvement of an intervention as it interacts with the contextual variables integral toenactment (Fishman et al., 2004). In this study, we analyzed the design and enactment of a set of texts and tasks inone MLs unit of instruction. Through analyzing multiple data sources and constructing in-depth cases, our goal wasto uncover the features of the design and enactment of texts and tasks to identify how these supported or failed tosupport knowledge building and literacy development. Identification of missed opportunities and modificationsprovides evidence to support design revisions that might better support student learning in this context.Analyses began with reading through transcript data line-by-line to identify relevant episodes of instructionand applying notes and codes responsive to our research questions. The next phase of analysis involved directinterpretation (Stake, 1995) of episodes within transcripts, and use of connecting strategies (Maxwell, 2013) toconstruct cases. This holistic examination of transcript episodes, designed curriculum, and related artifact data allowedus to uncover the ways in which the focal lessons unfolded – specific to the design and enactment of texts and tasks,and the ways in which students took up these opportunities – in order to develop assertions that were responsive toour research questions. Analyses supported our construction of narrative summaries to develop our case study report,in which we sought to maintain both the context and story of the ways in which instruction unfolded in the classroomduring focal lessons (Maxwell, 2013).Instructional context: The unit of instructionTo launch the unit, the teacher introduced the driving question and students viewed a video clip of Jurassic eraorganisms to identify similarities and differences between the organisms in the video and those that students see aroundtheir homes and school. Students then conducted observations of squirrels and other organisms in their habitats. Basedon observations, students created initial models to explain how squirrels survive. In science, models are used torepresent a system under investigation, develop explanations, make predictions, and communicate ideas (NGSS, 2013,Appendix F). Because this was students’ first experience with modeling, their models took the form of concretedrawings of squirrels in their habitat (NRC Framework, 2012).In the next set of lessons, students investigated squirrels’ structures (e.g., teeth, tail, legs) by observingphotographs, videos, and a squirrel’s skull. The teacher then read aloud a text designed to introduce, describe, andengage students in making close observations of structures that enable squirrels to climb headfirst down trees. Theresearcher-designed text was paired with a video clip, illustrating the ideas in the text. After reading, the studentsreturned to their initial models to make revisions to reflect new learning. After revising, students explored structure-ICLS 2018 Proceedings617© ISLSfunction relationships of – and interactions among – organisms that share habitats with squirrels. Students selectedand read one text from a set of researcher-designed texts, which provided written and visual information about a setof organisms found in squirrel’s habitats (e.g., ant, coyote, tree). In small groups, students read and answered questionsabout the organism, drew and labeled organism structures, and identified interactions with other organisms. Studentsthen used this information to co-construct a class model to explain interactions among the organisms in an ecosystem.FindingsIn this section, we describe findings from our analyses of the design and enactment of two sets of texts and tasks.For Squirrels, It’s Headfirst and Down and paired video: Design and enactmentFor Squirrels, it’s Headfirst and Down was designed to: (a) illustrate core ideas related to adaptations that enableorganisms to survive in particular habitats, (b) provide information that built upon students’ first-hand observations,(c) include multimodal features (written text and images), and (d) motivate and provide new information to supportengagement in scientific modeling based on new learning. The paired video was selected to illustrate the ideas in thetext and to provide an opportunity for students to observe a squirrel using the structures depicted in the text andphotographs. We found that the design of the texts and tasks, and the teacher’s enactment, synergistically supportedthird-graders’ science and literacy learning. We also identified missed opportunities, within the design of thecurriculum and enactment, for further supporting the science and literacy learning of all students.Before reading: Setting the purpose and preparing to readThe teacher leveraged the text and task to support students’ science and literacy learning by supporting students to:(a) connect to prior knowledge and experiences, (b) identify the purpose of the text and task, and (c) make predictionsprior to reading. The teacher began the lesson by asking students to recall their recent experiences in the PBL unit,which included priming students’ thinking about squirrels’ structures investigated during previous lessons usingmultiple modes of representation (photographs, videos, skeletons). Specific to literacy learning, supporting studentsto activate prior knowledge before reading creates opportunities for students to draw on related knowledge andexperiences to interpret new information in text (Brown, Pressley, Van Meter, & Schuder, 1996). In this case, students’prior knowledge was shared knowledge the class developed through analyzing multiple modes of representation.One purpose for reading this text was to provide new evidence that students could add to their models, inorder to explain squirrel survival. After prompting students to think about their earlier observations and investigations,the teacher explained, “We’re going to read this together, but as we’re reading, I’m going to ask you some questions.And then we’re going to…look at our models.” This excerpt illustrates how the teacher connected the purpose of thereading to the modeling task. In research investigating teachers’ differential enactments of an inquiry curriculum,Puntambeker, Stylianou, and Goldstein’s (2007) findings emphasized the teacher’s role in helping students understandconnections among instructional activities and concepts in order to drive student learning.During reading: Supporting students to read and interpret informationDuring the interactive read aloud, the teacher supported students’ reading and interpretation by: (a) engaging studentsin visualizing and acting out the ideas in the text, and (b) checking for understanding. After reading a section thatdescribed how squirrels use their sharp claws to grip a tree (“With its sharp claws, a squirrel can grip the bark of atree. The strong grip of the front claws allows the squirrel to hold on while it moves its back feet. Then, the back feetcan hold on while the front feet move.”), the teacher asked students to “picture” the description in their mind. Theteacher reread this portion of the text and made several gestures, which multiple students imitated, to demonstrate thesquirrel’s movement. This echoes Glenberg’s (2010) findings that one way to enhance reading comprehension is bysupporting students to make connections between the text and its embodied meaning.The teacher also paused frequently to check for understanding as the class read the text aloud together. Herquestions focused on the meaning of the words in the text as well as supporting students to analyze and interpretinformation in photographs. In one example, the teacher paused and, as prompted in the text (“Look closely at theback feet of the squirrels in these photographs.”), asked students to closely observe two photographs.Teacher:ICLS 2018 Proceedings[Reading aloud] “To find out about the last feature that helps squirrels to climbdown the tree headfirst, look closely at the back feet of the squirrels in these618© ISLSKaylee:photographs.” … you should be on those two pictures…they’re telling you tolook closely at what?The pictures!Student:Student:The squirrels.The feet.Student:The back feet.Teacher:The back feet. They’re specifically telling you to look closely at the back feet…What did you notice about those back feet, Jessica?Jessica:I noticed that the tree one is actually like hanging upside down on the tree andthe other claws are just leaning on it.Okay, so it’s hanging upside down… What else do you notice about him,Aiden?Teacher:Aiden:That I notice that it’s not exactly hanging down. It’s actually using its back feetto push off and using its front feet also to push off.In this excerpt, the teacher asked students to study the photographs and invited them to share their observations. Theteacher then guided students to clarify what, specifically, they should examine in the photographs (i.e., squirrels’ backfeet). After clarifying, the teacher invited students to share their observations before continuing to read the text.After reading: Using information from the text to inform revisions to scientific modelsThe teacher used the text and task to scaffold students’ science and literacy learning by supporting students to identifyand use text ideas to revise models in whole-class, small-group, and one-on-one contexts. The teacher also leveragedthe text and task to scaffold students’ understanding of and engagement in scientific modeling.After reading, the teacher made a number of instructional moves to scaffold students’ use of the informationin the text to inform revisions to their models. For instance, immediately after reading, the teacher prompted studentsto apply the reading to the modeling task and asked students to summarize the structures that squirrels use to climbheadfirst down trees. The teacher then played a video clip of a squirrel climbing and leveraged this as anotheropportunity to illustrate the structures students read about using a different mode of representation (e.g., Teacher:“Look how its…back leg is completely turned around.” Brody: “I can see it!”). Once students began revising theirmodels, the teacher scaffolded their use of information from the text, photographs, and videos by conferring withindividual students, inviting them to share their revisions with the class, and guiding them to integrate visual andwritten modes of communication with their models.Teacher:Ellie:Oh, Ellie’s adding something… Ellie, what are you adding?I’m adding…another squirrel in the position that it can be.Teacher:Teacher:Okay, you’re adding another squirrel, and you’re putting it in what kind ofposition? Can you describe that for me?In the position going down where its legs are facing backwards and its frontpaws are facing forward.…what else could you do in your models once you’ve drawn that squirrel…?Sam:Label.Teacher:Sam:Label it. Label the back legs. What specifically would you label, Sam?Claws.Teacher:Aiden:Okay, it has claws. What else does it have? Aiden?It has an anklebone.Teacher:It has an anklebone, right? Those are the structures that allow it to go headfirstand down.Ellie:ICLS 2018 Proceedings619© ISLSThis excerpt illustrates how the teacher used an individual student’s model to launch continued review and discussionof the structures introduced in the reading. Also, one purpose of scientific models is to communicate ideas to others(NGSS, 2013, Appendix F). This example illustrates how the teacher used Ellie’s model to introduce the idea ofcombining labels and drawings to clearly communicate science ideas. Figure 1 (a) shows a portion of Ellie’s model.After the above exchange, Ellie added labels for the squirrel’s anklebone and claws.(a)(b)(c)Figure 1. Ellie’s model (a) includes drawings and labels. Jenna’s (b) and Malik’s (c) models provide more examples.On the second day of enactment, the teacher continued to scaffold students’ use of the information in the textto inform revisions to their models by (a) sharing and discussing additional students’ models, (b) frequently directingstudents’ attention back to information in the text, and (c) clarifying the purpose of the modeling task.Constraints of the text and task revealed through enactmentSpecific to our second research question, one limitation was the written curriculum’s lack of guidance for engagingstudents in text-based discussion. While the teacher frequently paused to check students’ understanding of images andwords, many questions did not elicit high-level thinking, which is important for supporting comprehension in thecontext of discussion (Soter et al., 2008). Further, both the written curriculum and the teacher’s enactment missedopportunities for students to integrate ideas in the text with related activities, such as investigations and observations,done prior to reading. This echoes Prain and Waldrip’s (2006) finding that teachers did not systematically supportstudents to translate across modes. These findings suggest that teachers may benefit from additional support to enacttext-based discussions, particularly when reading tasks call for translating across modes and making connections torelated unit activities. In revisions, we have begun to design more interactive reading guides (Arias, Palincsar, &Davis, 2015) to support students’ discussion and sense-making with multimodal texts in our PBL units.Structure-function cards and paired map: Design and enactmentThe organism structure-function cards were designed to: (a) illustrate core ideas related to adaptations that enableorganisms to survive in a particular environment; (b) provide information that connected to and built upon students’first-hand observations within and beyond the classroom; (c) include multimodal features (written text and images),and (d) motivate and provide information to support students’ engagement in the practice of scientific modeling. Inthe focal classroom, students used digital versions of the structure-function cards, accessed via Chromebooks. Also, apaired digital map (Google Map of the area around the students’ school) was selected to engage students in using theirclass interactions model to make predictions about organisms that live and interact in a local context. We found thatthe design of the texts and tasks, and the teacher’s enactment of the organism structure-function cards synergisticallysupported third-graders’ science and literacy learning. Again, we found missed opportunities, both within the designof the curriculum resources and the enactment of the lessons, for further supporting science and literacy learning.Before reading: Setting the purpose and preparing to readAnalysis of the written curriculum and transcripts of classroom enactment revealed that the teacher leveraged the textsand task to support students’ science and literacy learning prior to reading by: (a) supporting students to activate priorknowledge, (b) clarifying key vocabulary, and (c) setting a clear purpose for reading.During reading: Supporting students to read and interpret informationThe teacher leveraged the texts and task in support of students’ science and literacy learning by supporting studentsto read and interpret information in the texts. Students’ partner reading and interpretation of their chosen structure-ICLS 2018 Proceedings620© ISLSfunction text was scaffolded by the guiding questions included in the curriculum materials and the teacher’s use of thequestions as she conferred with individual and small groups of students about their reading and learning with text.During reading, students worked with a partner or group to respond to a set of guiding questions as they readtext and analyzed images about their organism. The guiding questions were: (1) What is your organism? (2) List thestructures you read about. (3) Choose one of the structures you listed. How does this structure help the organism meeta basic need? (4) Does your organism live in the same environment as squirrels? (5) What foods does your organismneed to survive? (6) What predators eat your organism? These questions were designed to support students to identifyinformation about how their organism interacts with other organisms in its habitat, in order to support the coconstruction of the organism interactions model. In one-on-one, small group, and whole-class conversations, theteacher used the guiding questions to support students to read and interpret multiple modes (i.e., text, photographs).Analysis of students’ responses to guiding questions provided additional evidence of how the questionsscaffolded students’ reading and interpretation of the organism texts. While ten of sixteen focal students completedall six questions, all focal students identified their organism, listed structures, and described how one of thosestructures enables the organism to survive. The NRC Framework (2012) explains that, “The quality of a studentdeveloped model will be highly dependent on prior knowledge and skill and also on the student’s understanding ofthe system being modeled” (p. 59). In other words, the quality of the class-developed interactions model depended onstudents’ prior knowledge and understanding of the environment as a system, including the organisms that are a partof that system. We argue that, in hand with students’ firsthand observations and investigations, the multimodalinformation in the structure-function cards and the scaffolding provided by the guiding questions supported studentsto build the prior knowledge necessary to co-construct their organism interactions model as a class.After reading: Using text information to inform construction of the interactions modelAfter reading, the teacher used the lesson plans, texts, and task to scaffold students’: (a) sharing of learning from textto develop shared knowledge, (b) use of shared knowledge to co-construct the interactions model, and (c) applicationof the model to explain organisms’ interactions in a local context. The teacher provided opportunities for students toshare what they learned about their selected organism with the rest of the class. This was important because, in orderfor students to co-construct a model to explain how organisms in the environment interact, the students needed tobuild shared knowledge about the organisms. After responding to the guiding questions, the teacher invited studentsto debrief their findings. To conclude this day of enactment, two groups had the opportunity to: (a) present theirlearning by sharing their responses to the guiding questions and also (b) show the class how they navigated andidentified information in the digital text (e.g., tapping to select the text, scrolling to locate information).On the next day of instruction, the teacher introduced the interactions modeling task, and students used whatthey had learned about their organism to create a small drawing, on which they labeled one or more of the organism’sstructures and described how it interacts with squirrels. After completing this step, each group shared and taped theirorganism card on the chart paper where the class would co-construct the interactions model. After attaching the cardsto the chart paper, students had additional opportunities to share their learning about the organisms’ structures andhow the organism interacts with squirrels (e.g., the coyote is a predator of the squirrel). Transcripts of whole-classdiscussions revealed that the students were developing shared knowledge of the different organisms, structures thatenable them to survive in their environment, and ways in which they interact with the squirrel and other organisms.The teacher supported students to leverage their learning from the readings to co-construct the interactionsmodel, and asked students to suggest ways they could represent and communicate interactions among organisms.Initially, students proposed that they could “look on the Chromebook” to show relationships,” “act it out,” or “writeit.” The teacher pressed students to think of ways they could clearly communicate the relationships among organismsdirectly on the chart paper. The design of this modeling task and the way in which the cards were arranged on thechart paper called for students to create a more abstract representation than the previous squirrel environment models,in which students drew and labeled concrete pictures. As the teacher pressed for more ideas, one student proposed thatthey could draw and label lines between organisms to communicate the nature of their relationships (e.g.,predator/prey, shelter, etc.), a proposal which was taken up by the class.Zayn:Teacher:ICLS 2018 ProceedingsLine with the squirrel to the red-backed salamander. The squirrel is a predator…The squirrel is a predator to the red-backed salamander…what’s the specialstructure that the salamander has that allows it to get away…?621© ISLSZayn:Teacher:Its tail.What does its tail do? …Go ahead, Zayn.Zayn:Falls off so it can run away, and once it run away, far away, it grows a new one.This excerpt illustrates the ways in which the teacher enlisted students’ contributions in order to co-construct theinteractions model to explain relationships among organisms in a habitat. Understanding and being able to explain theorganisms’ unique structures and their functions, supported students to co-construct representations of complexinteractions among the organisms included in the model (see Figure 2, below).Figure 2. Co-constructed interactions model prior to and after identifying and labeling organisms’ interactions.After constructing the interactions model, the teacher extended the written curriculum by engaging studentsin analyzing a digital text – a satellite view Google Map of the area around their school – and in using their model tomake predictions about where on the map students might find squirrels and why. Prior to asking students to use theirmodel to apply the phenomenon under study, she first supported students to interpret the map more generally (“Tellme what this is a map of. How do you know? What do you see?”). While the digital satellite map was an unfamiliarmode to students, they were able to draw on prior knowledge of landmarks and buildings because the map representedan area with which all students were familiar. After completing an initial “reading” of the map, the teacher askedstudents to make connections between the model and the environment around their school (“Based on our interactivemap [and] based on what we know about squirrels and their environment…where do you think we would be able tofind the most squirrels?”), and supported students to use evidence from the model and their firsthand experiences tomake predictions about organisms they might find in the area (e.g., frogs, coyotes, etc.).Constraints of the text and task revealed through enactmentOne limitation of the written curriculum, revealed in analyses, was the lack of science content knowledge supports forthe teacher to facilitate enactment of the organism text-reading and modeling task. Analyses revealed two instances,in the context of clarifying vocabulary before reading, when enactment may have contributed to confusion amongstudents about what does and does not qualify as an organism. One potential contribution of providing educativecurriculum materials, such as interactive reading guides, is to enhance teachers’ content knowledge (Arias, Bismack,Davis, & Palincsar, 2016). Providing this type of information in future iterations of the curriculum may better supportteachers to scaffold students’ understanding of science vocabulary and concepts prior to, during, and after reading.SignificanceThis work is significant because, as Lemke (2004) urged, students need to be able to interpret, analyze, and producemultiple modes of representation in service of disciplinary knowledge building. Aligned with the 2018 conferencetheme, this work also helps us to understand the grainsize at which we need to study teachers’ practice in order tounpack the complexity of the learning and teaching process. In the present study, this complexity is revealed throughanalyzing teacher discourse, teacher-student interactions, and students’ use and development of multimodal texts.Additionally, characterizing students’ opportunities to learn requires the close analysis of teaching and learning inreal-world settings (Litman et al., 2017). This kind of analysis can support curriculum designers to engineerICLS 2018 Proceedings622© ISLSopportunities to learn that are different from those typically offered in K-12 classrooms, and to more fully supportteachers in managing the complexity of maximizing all students’ opportunities to learn in diverse classroom settings.ReferencesArias, A. M., Palincsar, A. S., Davis, E. A. (2015). The design and use of educative curricular supports for text-baseddiscussions in science. Journal of Education, 195(1), 21-37.Arias, A. M., Bismack, A. S., Davis, E. A., & Palincsar, A. S. (2016). Interacting with a suite of educative features:Elementary science teachers’ use of educative curriculum materials. Journal of Research in ScienceTeaching, 53(3), 422-449.Brenner, D., Hiebert, E. H., & Tompkins, R. (2009). How much and what are third graders reading? Reading in CoreProgram Classrooms. In E. H. Hiebert (Ed)., Reading more, reading better (pp. 118-140). NY: Guilford.Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.Brown, R., Pressley, M., Van Meter, P., & Schuder, T. (1996). A quasi-experimental validation of transactionalstrategies instruction with low-achieving second-grade readers. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 1837.Common Core State Standards Initiative. (2010). Retrieved November 14, 2017, from www.corestandards.org.Fishman, B., Marx, R. W., Blumenfeld, P., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (2004). Creating frameworks for research onsystemic technology innovations. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 43-76.Glenberg, A. M. (2010). Embodiment as a unifying perspective for psychology. WIREs Cogni Sci, 1, 596-596.Jewitt, C. (2008). Multimodality and literacy in school classrooms. Review of Research in Education, 32, 241-267.Lemke, J. L. (2004). The literacies of science. In E. W. Saul (Ed.), Crossing borders in literacy and scienceinstruction: Perspectives on theory and practices (pp. 32-47). Arlington, VA: NSTA Press.Litman, C., Marple, S., Greenleaf, C., Charney-Sirott, I., Bolz, M. J., Richardson, L. K.,…Goldman, S. R. (2017).Text-based argumentation with multiple sources: A descriptive study of opportunity to learn in secondaryEnglish language arts, history, and science. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 26(1), 79-130.Maxwell, J. A. (2013). Qualitative research design: An interactive approach (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Mills, K. A. (2010). A review of the “digital turn” in the new literacy studies. Review of Educational Research, 80(2),246-271.National Research Council (NRC). (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next generation science standards: For states, by states. Washington, DC: The NationalAcademies Press.Puntambekar, S., Stylianous, A., & Goldstein, J. (2007). Comparing classroom enactments of an inquiry curriculum:Lessons learned from two teachers. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(1), 81-130.Prain, V., & Waldrip, B. (2006). An exploratory study of teachers’ and students’ use of multi-modal representationsof concepts in primary science. International Journal of Science Education, 28(15), 1843-1866.RAND Reading Study Group. (2002). Reading for understanding: Toward an R&D program in readingcomprehension. Santa Monica, CA: RAND.Soter, A. O., Wilkinson, I. A., Murphy, P. K., Rudge, L., Reninger, K., & Edwards, M. (2008). What the discoursetells us: Talk indicators of high-level comprehension. International Journal of Educational Research, 47,372-391.Stake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Wertsch, J. V. (1991). Voice of the mind: A sociocultural approach to mediated action. Cambridge: HarvardUniversity Press.AcknowledgementsThe research and development reported in this paper is being supported by a generous grant awarded to Joseph Krajcik,Annemarie Palincsar, and Emily Miller from the George Lucas Educational Fund entitled, Multiple Literacies inProject-based Learning. The research is further supported by a generous grant awarded to Miranda Fitzgerald fromthe AERA Division C Student Research Grant. The authors gratefully acknowledge Emily Miller, who led the designof this unit of study. Any opinions, findings, and recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the authors.ICLS 2018 Proceedings623© ISLS