The Visual Test of Science Identity (VTSI)Amy R. Semerjian, Boston College, amy.semerjian@bc.eduLuke Duesbery, San Diego State University, duesbery@sdsu.eduJames D. Slotta, Boston College, slotta@bc.eduAbstract: In science identity perception research, there is a need for tests that can estimatestudent beliefs without presenting a reading burden for young students and low-proficiencyreaders. We respond to this challenge by developing a visual assessment, employing photos toquery opinions about scientists’ gender and ethnicity/race. In two samples, adults (n=162) andchildren (n=42), we found a bias: males chose images of men more than females chosewomen. Future directions are discussed.IntroductionYoung students’ perceptions of themselves and others as scientists impact the coursework they might laterchoose in secondary school and higher education. In particular, female students and students of color often stayaway from the natural sciences (National Science Foundation, 2017). This imbalance has compelled the USInstitute of Educational Sciences (IES) to prioritize investigating methods by which to change this trend andencourage students traditionally underrepresented in STEM disciplines to consider pursuing those areas (Chen,2013). It is also widely recognized that K-12 education must support students to gain vital STEM competenciesand to develop a sense of self-efficacy in learning and reasoning within STEM domains (Collins & Halverson,2009). To support the engagement of students in STEM fields, we require not only assessments of students’understanding of the nature of those disciplines, but also assessments of students’ STEM identity (Stets,Brenner, Burke, & Serpe, 2017; Taconis & Kessels, 2009). Toward building capacity to make changes indemographic underrepresentation among scientists, this report describes our development and evaluation of aninstrument, the Visual Test of Science Identity (VTSI), designed to measure students’ identity in science using avisual modality. Using less verbiage than traditional verbal-modality assessments, the visual modality can openparticipation opportunities for younger students (Chambers, 1983; Losh, Wilke, & Pop, 2008; Walls, 2012) andfor low-proficiency readers of the assessment language, as well as lessening potential linguistic and culturalbiases (Creswell & Miller, 2000; Guba, 1981).Visual tests of science identityVisual assessments hold great promise, as they can potentially reveal student thinking with low linguisticdemands. A visual mode of querying has also been useful in breaking up typical language-based modes ofassessment (Walls, 2012). Further, incorporating visuals in assessments can decrease construct irrelevantvariance by maintaining students’ interest when they might otherwise have felt the assessment to be too lengthy.While previous work in visual assessments has been limited, there have been efforts that offersuggestions for our development of image-based survey items. In the Draw a Scientist Test (DAST; Chambers,1983), for example, students who were asked to draw a scientist often drew iconography associated withprototypical scientists (Chambers, 1983; Losh et al., 2008; Walls, 2012) – perhaps because iconography is whatstudents thought the people testing them would recognize (Reinisch et al., 2017) – and did so to the extent thatLosh et al. (2008) believed that the DAST assessed stereotypes. Walls’ (2012) Identify a Scientist (IAS) tooladdressed the Nature of Science concurrently with science identity by asking students to choose one personamong groups of gender- and ethnicity-balanced photos who they thought was a scientist, revealing a studentpreference for science iconography (e.g., 96% of students believed scientists wore glasses). Chapman andFeldman (2017) obtained mixed results when using the IAS task to gauge differences in perceptions about whocan be a scientist before and after an inspirational intervention led by a female scientist. After the intervention,more students selected their own demographic as the scientist, but fewer selected women. Recently, Reinischand colleagues (2017) called for the development of closed-ended testing solutions to remove threats to validity.Method: Instrument development, sample, and resultsThe VTSI was developed to build on Walls’ (2012) IAS design in a manner that excluded science iconographyfrom the interpretation of results, leaving gender and ethnicity/race. Like the IAS, photographs were collectedfor the 10 categories of the fully crossed factors of gender (at two levels: male, female) × ethnicity/race (at fivelevels: Black, White, Latinx, East Asian, South Asian). The VTSI further categorizes photographs to enable theconstruction of 10-photo panels that control for science iconography, e.g., differences in lighting, subjects’ ages,ICLS 2018 Proceedings1639© ISLSeyeglasses, formality of attire, and males’ facial hair. Presented with a panel of 10 photographs, participantswere asked to identify which person was most likely to be a scientist and the degree to which they thought eachperson was a scientist. Multiple panels were administered to support reliably interpreting results.Two samples were collected. A pilot study was performed on adults to test the VTSI for flaws beforeuse on the higher-stakes sample of interest, children. We recruited 154 adults (male=80, female =74), of whom65% were White ethnicity/race. No changes were needed after the VTSI pilot. Next, 41 middle- and secondaryschool students (male=29, female=12) were recruited from demographics underrepresented in science as part ofan existing after-school program, with an ethnic composition of 17 Black, 19 Latinx, 1 White, and 4 students ofother ethnicities. The analysis of both the adult and student samples was conducted using McNemar’s test forrelated nominal groups to compare the choices made by different gender and ethnicity groups, e.g., women andgirls were related to photos of female scientists, and men and boys to photos of male scientists.Results and discussionFor the adult pilot test, results indicated women were less likely to choose photographs of females as scientiststhan men were to choose male scientists (χ2 = 9.23, p < 0.01). This result held up for the sample of students, inwhich girls chose females as scientists less frequently than boys chose men (χ2 = 10.83, p < 0.001).The efforts to control factors in photos other than gender and ethnicity appeared to have beensuccessful, because when students were taking the VTSI, many expressed not knowing how to choose. Whenstudents did choose a photo, the results were still biased in favor of men. However, our study found thatstudents did not appear to disproportionately select White ethnicity/race photos (χ2 = 5.08, p = 0.28). Even so,many students still did not endorse photos of people of their own ethnicity as scientists.Future validation for the VTSI will ask students the reasons for their photo choices, to ensure thatscience iconography is not among the reasons. Future developments for the VTSI will continue to leverage thevisual mode by incorporating controlled interactions between existing photos of people, imagery of tools ofscience, and settings in which science is performed. Accompanying interviews would elicit students’ beliefs asto what the people depicted in photographs would do with the tools in the settings depicted.In this work, a practical tool with many potential applications has been developed for the measurementof beliefs held by people of many ages – young children through adults – concerning who is a scientist; byremoving traditional “science” iconography, gender and ethnicity/race remained to elicit responses. This methodcan be easily ported to other fields where similar questions are being asked.ReferencesChambers, D. W. (1983). Stereotypic images of the scientist: The Draw-A-Scientist Test. Science Education,67(2), 255-265.Chapman, A., & Feldman, A. (2017). Cultivation of science identity through authentic science in an urban highschool classroom. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 12(2), 469-491.Chen, X. (2013). STEM attrition: College students' paths into and out of STEM fields. Statistical analysisreport. (NCES 2014-001). Jessup, MD: National Center for Education Statistics.Collins, A., & Halverson, R. (2009). Rethinking education in the age of technology: The digital revolution andschooling in America. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.Creswell, J. W., & Miller, D. L. (2000). Determining validity in qualitative inquiry. Theory into practice, 39(3),124-130.Guba, E. G. (1981). Criteria for assessing the trustworthiness of naturalistic inquiries. Educational TechnologyResearch and Development, 29(2), 75.Losh, S. C., Wilke, R., & Pop, M. (2008). Some methodological issues with "Draw a Scientist Tests" amongyoung children. International Journal of Science Education, 30(6), 773-792.National Science Foundation. (2017). Women, minorities, and persons with disabilities in science andengineering: 2017 digest. (NSF 17-310). Arlington, VA: National Science Foundation.Reinisch, B., Krell, M., Hergert, S., Gogolin, S., & Krüger, D. (2017). Methodical challenges concerning theDraw-A-Scientist Test: A critical view about the assessment and evaluation of learners' conceptions ofscientists. International Journal of Science Education, 39(14), 1952-1975.Stets, J. E., Brenner, P. S., Burke, P. J., & Serpe, R. T. (2017). The science identity and entering a scienceoccupation. Social Science Research, 64, 1-14. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ssresearch.2016.10.016Taconis, R., & Kessels, U. (2009). How choosing science depends on students' individual fit to "scienceculture". International Journal of Science Education, 31(8), 1115-1132.Walls, L. (2012). Third grade African American students' views of the nature of science. Journal of Research inScience Teaching, 49(1), 1-37.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1640© ISLS