Reflective Structuration of Knowledge Building Practices inGrade 5 Science: A Two-Year Design-Based ResearchDan Tao, University at Albany, State University of New York, dtao@albany.eduJianwei Zhang, University at Albany, State University of New York, jzhang1@albany.edu,Dandan Gao, East China Normal University, ddgao@deit.ecnu.edu.cnAbstract: This study was conducted in two Grade 5 classes (A and B) taught by the sameteacher in two successive school years. Each year students studied human body systems over awhole school year using Knowledge Forum (KF). Both classes worked with an idea-centered,principle-based framework of knowledge building; students in class B (year 2) particularlyengaged in reflective structuration to co-construct structures of inquiry as their work unfolded.Qualitative analyses of rich classroom data elaborated the reflective structuration process inclass B. The analyses of student online discourse showed that compared to class A in year 1,class B made more purposeful and sustained contributions to understanding various human bodysystems and developed more sophisticated explanations.IntroductionDespite the advances made in understanding the social and cognitive interactions in collaborative inquiry andknowledge building, the field of computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL) still faces the challenge ofhow to bring sustained inquiry and collaborative knowledge building to classrooms so as to transform educationalpractices (Stahl & Hesse, 2009; cf. NRC, 2012). Beyond understanding the specific social and cognitive processesof idea development, research on knowledge building and collaborative learning needs a social practicesperspective, to incorporate a larger focus on the social practices enacted by students and their teacher to sustainand channel their cognitive and social moves for long-term productivity (Hakkarainen, 2009; Stahl & Hesse, 2009).In real-world knowledge building practices, participants continually build on and advance the knowledge assetsof their community by generating and identifying promising ideas and improving the ideas through sustainedinquiry and discourse; by formulating deeper problems as solutions are developed; and by assuming leadershipand responsibility at the highest levels instead of relying on the leader to tell them what to do (Amar, 2002; Dunbar,1997; Sawyer, 2007). They do not simply enact repeated procedures but continually create and adapt their socialpractices as their knowledge is advanced (Knorr Cetina, 2001, Zhang et al., 2009). To address the dynamic natureof social practices for knowledge building in classrooms, a principle-based, as opposed to procedure-basedapproach to inquiry is needed (Scardamalia, 2002). Drawing upon the Knowledge Building pedagogy(Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006), a renowned inquiry-based program to cultivate authentic knowledge-creatingpractices, we explored how students and teachers worked with a set of principles to co-design their classroompractices and chart the unfolding course of inquiry (Zhang et al., 2011). This line of research has led to thediscovery of an important socio-epistemic mechanism enabling sustained practices of knowledge building:reflective structuration by which knowledge building communities co-construct, adapt, and use collectivestructures to guide their collaborative deepening work on ideas (Zhang, 2012).Different from many other inquiry-based learning programs (e.g. project-based learning) in whichstudents are required to work on predefined tasks/problems using step-by-step procedures and scripts, KnowledgeBuilding adopts an idea-centered and principle-based approach to classroom design. Guided by a set of knowledgebuilding principles (e.g. epistemic agency, authentic problems and real ideas, improvable ideas, collectivecognitive responsibility) (Scardamalia, 2002; Zhang et al., 2011), students and their teachers co-construct andreconstruct the flow of inquiry as their work proceeds. A conceptual as well as practical challenge arises pertainingto how the idea-centered, open-ended actions/interactions are translated into coherent, supportive, long-termclassroom practices without extensive teacher pre-scripting.We identify reflective structuration as a potential solution to this challenge, and elaborate this conceptbased on social practice theories (Giddens, 1984; Sewell, 1992). The key to understanding how knowledgebuilding as a social practice can be possibly sustained lies in the dynamic relationship between human agency andsocial structures that presuppose each other. Social practices become organized and sustained over time becauseof their relatively stable structures. Such structures both constrain and enable human agency. Actors appropriateexisting structures which are historically formed in their institutional contexts, use the structures to plan and guidetheir ongoing actions, and reflexively monitor what is going on. The actors’ agency is reflected in their capabilityto reinterpret, modify, reorganize, and recreate the structures, influencing future practices by themselves and byother members (Sewell, 1992). In line with the social practice theories, our empirical analysis of productiveCSCL 2017 Proceedings644© ISLSknowledge building communities revealed that members engage in dual-level construction driven by their agency:as members contribute content-specific questions and ideas to build knowledge, they co-construct collectivestructures of knowledge practices to guide and support their collaboration and contribution (Tao et al., 2015, 2016).The collective structures serve as shared frames of knowledge building activities signifying structural propertiesof inquiry, including the epistemic objects/issues to be investigated as the focus of unfolding strands of practices(epistemic structure) (Knorr Cetina, 2001), productive ways to conduct research and discourse (pragmaticstructure), and who should work with whom in what roles (participatory structure) (Zhang, 2012). Students usesuch co-constructed structures to monitor and regulate their joint inquiry and position their roles and contributions.Our prior exploratory studies have analyzed how students generated and adapted epistemic and pragmaticstructures to guide their knowledge building (Tao et al., 2015, 2016; Zhang et al., 2015). The current study furtherexamines the processes and impacts of reflective structuration more systematically through a two-year designbased study, with students in year 2 engaging in reflective structuration more intentionally to frame/reframe sharedareas/objects of inquiry for unfolding inquiry practices. Our research questions ask: How did the teacher and herstudents implement reflective structuration? Did the reflective structuration design in year 2 leverage sustainedknowledge building practices among students? To what extent, and in what ways?MethodClassroom contexts and designsThis design-based research was carried out in two Grade 5 classrooms (A and B) taught by the same teacher intwo school years, with 21 students (10-to-11-year-old) in each year. In both classrooms, students investigatedhuman body systems over a whole school year following Knowledge Building pedagogy supported by KnowledgeForum (KF), an online collaborative knowledge building platform (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006). Knowledgebuilding practices in both classrooms unfolded based on student-generated questions and ideas without pre-setprocedures. Specifically, students engaged in individual and small group reading, whole class face-to-faceconversations, individual and small group modeling and demonstrations, student-directed presentations, and soon. Major ideas, questions, and findings generated through various inquiry activities were contributed to KF forcontinual discourse. While both classes worked with an idea-centered, principle-based framework of knowledgebuilding; students in class B (year 2) particularly engaged in reflective structuration to co-construct collectivestructures to frame/reframe shared objects of inquiry as the focus of their unfolding strands of knowledge buildingpractices. The detailed processes of reflective structuration are analyzed and elaborated in Results.Data sources and analysesTo elaborate the implementation of reflective structuration, we conducted qualitative analyses of rich classroomdata, including classroom observation notes, the teacher’s reflection journals, student-generated classroomartifacts, and classroom videos. To examine students’ knowledge building practices in each year, we analyzedtheir online knowledge building discourse. First, we compared the areas (objects) of inquiry addressed in theonline discourse by the two classrooms and coded students’ online contributions using a five-category codingscheme created to capture productive discourse patterns (questioning, theorizing, evidence, referring resources,and connecting and integrating) (Zhang et al., 2011). Each note coded as “theorizing” was further rated based ona 4-point scale: 1-pre-scientific, 2-hybrid, 3-basically scientific, and 4-scientific (Zhang et al., 2007).ResultsReflective structuration of knowledge building practicesQualitative analyses identified the reflective processes in classroom B related to the co-generation and adaptionof epistemic structures. These include: (a) co-formulating collective wonderings (e.g. how does the brain work)based on individual interests and questions; (b) deep search, framing, and collective mapping of interrelated areasof inquiry as the shared focus of the community; and (c) individual and small-group reflection on specializedinquiry aided by the collective map of inquiry objects. The teacher engaged in ongoing noticing and envisioningof idea progress related to the inquiry areas in her reflective journals to co-engage with her students in theunfolding inquiry. Specifically, the inquiry began with ten out-door games, which triggered students’ initialquestions about human body. Emergent groups formed after the kids categorized individual questions. As theinquiry went deeper, students began to move on to new areas. After two months of inquiry, students reflected onhis/her previous inquiry, current work, and future research. Five new areas proposed by them were furthereddiscussed and rephrased in a whole class discussion. As new questions and areas were proposed, the communityCSCL 2017 Proceedings645© ISLSdecided to reflect on the areas of inquiry. Students started with a review of individual inquiry trajectory andconnections among the specific issues of inquiry. Based on this reflection, the whole class worked together toidentify new areas of inquiry based on interconnected issues. The epistemic structures thus evolved from a list ofcollective wondering areas to a collective map of connected areas/objects. With the support of this collective map,student continued inquiry in more specialized areas.The impacts of reflective structuration on online knowledge building discourseEach epistemic area of inquiry emerged from reflective interactions became a shared focus of inquiry in theclassroom and online. In class A, students and the teacher co-identified five areas of inquiry as a list of overarchinggoals. In class B, students co-framed similar overarching goals in the beginning. However, through continualreflection on their ongoing research and unfolding directions, students in class B kept searching for progressiveand connected directions of inquiry. Figure 1 shows the areas (objects) of inquriy identified by the two classes andthe number of online notes written about each area. Class B made more systematic contributions to addressing abroader set of human body topics.Figure 1. Areas of inquiry and the number of online contributions in each area in class A (left) and B (right).Quantitative analysis of the KF notes shows that students in class B wrote more notes than those in classA on average (24 notes per students for class A and 36 for class B). We further coded the KF notes based onpatterns of discourse contributions, focusing on the contributions that addressed a common set of five inquiryareas shared between the two classes. As Figure 2 shows, compared with class A, class B made more purposefulcontributions involving asking questions, developing theories/explanations to answer their questions, integratingdifferent ideas.Figure 2. Contributions to shared objects of inquiry from class A and B.The understandings related to each area of inquiry were further coded based on scientific sophisticationto examine the extent to which students’ explanations align with a scientific framework of human body systems.Through sustained and purposeful knowledge building work supported by collective structures, students in classB (M=3.41, SD=0.17) were able to develop a higher level of scientific sophistication of ideas in shared areas ofinquiry than class A (M=2.70; SD=0.37); t (8)=3.91, p=0.01.DiscussionThis design-based study investigated reflective structuration as a way to sustain knowledge building practices inGrade 5 science classrooms. First, we documented the implementation of reflective structuration in class B. Thecollective inquiry areas emerged and evolved through several reflective cycles: formulating an initial list of fivebig “juicy” questions based on diverse individual interests and questions, expanding the list to a network of inquiryareas to include new epistemic objects (e.g. dreams, nervous system, cancers, and cells) emerged from studentongoing discourse and continual searching for interconnected areas of inquiry. The collective areas of inquirywere co-constructed and continually adapted by the community through metacognitive conversations in reflectionof members’ diverse input and progress. These collective goals were represented and highlighted using classroomartifacts (e.g. collective question list, and a collective map of all objects of inquiry) to guide student’s attentionand participation. Second, the analyses of online discourse of the two classes illustrated the impacts of reflectivestructuration on students’ sustained and productive engagement in knowledge building. Both classrooms used theinitial wondering list to organize their continual discourse online. Through continual reflection on undergoingCSCL 2017 Proceedings646© ISLSinquiry and emergent deeper questions, students in class B kept searching for progressive and interrelated issuesof inquiry to adapt existing framing of shared focus, leading to more productive and sustianed knowledge buildingdiscourse and more sophisticated scientific ideas online.The adaptive structuration perspective provides a framework to understand and support sustainedknowledge practices driven by distributed student interactions without extensive pre-scripting. Leveraging theirknowledge building actions and discourse to advance collective knowledge, members in a community coconstruct adaptive collective structures, which help frame what they do as a whole community and further informindividual participation and reflection. Further advancements of collaborative learning environments need toprovide opportunities and supports for students to co-construct/reconstruct structures of knowledge practices andmake the structures visible to students. We recently designed a timeline-based structuration tool: Idea ThreadMapper (ITM) (Zhang et al., 2015) to support student co-construction of collective structures as they engage inongoing knowledge building discourse. Deeper understandings of how students co-construct and use collectivestructures to support knowledge building will shed light on the pathways towards transforming educationalpractices.ReferencesAmar, A. D. (2002). Managing knowledge workers: Unleashing innovation and productivity. Westport, CT:Quorum books.Dunbar, K. (1997). How scientists think: Online creativity and conceptual change in science. In T. B. Ward, S.M. Smith & S. Vaid (Eds.), Conceptual structures and processes: Emergence, discovery and change (pp.461-493). Washington, DC: APA Press.Hakkarainen, K. (2009). A knowledge-practice perspective on technology-mediated learning. ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, 4, 213-231.Knorr Cetina, K. (2001). Objectual practice. In T. R. Schatzki, K. Knorr Cetina & E. Savigny (eds.), The practiceturn in contemporary theory (pp.175-188). London: Routledge.National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.Sawyer, R. K. (2007). Group genius: The creative power of collaboration. New York: Basic Books.Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.),Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago, IL: Open Court.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In R. K. Sawyer(Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97-115). New York: Cambridge University.Sewell, W. H. Jr. (1992). A theory of structure: Duality, agency, and transformation. American Journal ofSociology, 98(1), 1-29.Stahl, G., & Hesse, F. (2009). Classical dialogs in CSCL. International Journal of Computer-Supported Learning,4(3), 233-237.Tao, D., Zhang, J., & Huang, Y. (2015). How did a grade 5 community formulate progressive, collective goals tosustain knowledge building over a whole school year? In O. Lindwall & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.),Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning(CSCL2015). International Society of the Learning Sciences.Tao, D., Zhang, J., & Gao, D. (2016). Co-generation of pragmatic structure to support sustained inquiry over aschool year. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of American Educational Research Association(AERA 2016), Washington, D.C.Zhang, J. (2012). Designing adaptive collaboration structures for advancing the community’s knowledge. In D.Y. Dai (Ed.), Design research on learning and thinking in educational settings (pp.201-224). Routledge.Zhang, J., Chen, M.-H., Tao, D., Lee, J. Sun, Y., & Judson, D. (2015). Fostering sustained knowledge buildingthrough metadiscourse aided by the Idea Thread Mapper. In O. Lindwall & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.),Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL2015). International Society of the Learning Sciences.Zhang, J., Hong, H., Scardamalia, M., Teo, C. L., & Morley, E. A. (2011). Sustaining knowledge building as aprinciple-based innovation at an elementary school. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20(2), 262-307.Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Lamon, M., Messina, R., & Reeve, R. (2007). Socio-cognitive dynamics ofknowledge building in 9- and 10-year-olds. Educational Technology Research and Development, 55,117–145.AcknowledgmentsThis research was sponsored by the National Science Foundation (IIS #1441479).CSCL 2017 Proceedings647© ISLS