Materiality of Online Students’ Peer-Review Activitiesin Higher EducationTeresa Cerratto-Pargman, Stockholm University, tessy@dsv.su.seOla Knutsson, Stockholm University, knutsson@dsv.su.sePetter Karlström, Stockholm University, petter@dsv.su.seAbstract: In spite of the widespread use of technology in higher education, discourses onlearning technologies commonly account for their features as disembodied from their use.There have so far been few theoretical approaches that have delved into "the technologyquestion" in CSCL. We present an empirical study that investigates how students’ peerreview activities are entangled with sociomaterial aspects of mediated collaborative learning.The students' peer-review activities were analyzed according to the Collective Instrumentmediated Activity Situation (CIAS) model, and findings show that the materiality of twodifferent tools had considerable influence on how students engaged with the texts and howthey interacted with each other.Keywords: peer-review practices, web-based commenting tools, technology, higher education,learning, design, socio-materiality.Introduction: The technology question in CSCLTechnologies matter. They are not neutral (Haas, 1996; Säljö, 2010; Rabardel, 1995), but “imbued with historyand values” (Haas,1999:209). Yet, in the field of technology in education, most research refers to technologyeither as a “glass box”, transparent to the user and not altering learning or our understandings of our learningpractices in any significant way or as a “black box”, all-powerful, self-determining and having “one-way”effects (Haas, 1996). As a consequence of such view on technology, little attention has indeed been paid to itsmaterial properties (i.e. “the arrangement of an artifact’s physical and/or digital materials into particular formsthat endure across differences in place and time and are important to users” Leonardi, 2012:161). Thesociomaterial nature of technology and its concomitant role in enacting change in our learning practices has sofar been overlooked (Johri, 2011; Sörensen, 2009). Drawing on recent conceptualizations of “CSCL artifacts”(Stahl et al. 2014; Overdijk et al. 2012) and the instrumental perspective on CSCL systems (Rabardel andBourmaud 2003; Lonchamp, 2012), this paper addresses the question of technology while taking heed of itsmateriality, in this case embedded in higher education institutions. We argue thus for an approach able todescribe how students’ peer-review is bound to the material characteristics (affordances) of the artifacts in useand intertwined with peer-review practices accepted and legitimated at their educational institution. The aim isto address the constitutive entanglement of material and social aspects of CSCL artifacts in collaborativelearning and in particular students’ peer-review practices. Within CSCL, the interest for the imbricationbetween material and social aspects of human activities is not really new; questions pertaining to the materialaspects of human activities have been the object of attention within, for instance, the cultural historical approach(Vygotsky, 1934/1997); Scribner and Cole, 1981; Engeström,1897; Rabardel,1995; Nardi and Kaptelinin, 2006;Säljö and Wyndhamn, 1993). These concerns and questions about the role played by technology in educationhave recently been renewed and conceptualized by Johri (2011); Sörensen (2009) and Fenwick et al. (2011).Sörensen in particular has pointed at “a blindness toward the question of how educational practice is affected bymaterials” and how these materials are much more than mere artifacts to advance educational performance(Sörensen, 2009:2). Such understandings of sociomaterial aspects embedded in CSCL practices seem to resonatewith Pierre Rabardel’s (1995) instrumental genesis approach as introduced into the CSCL community byLonchamp (2012).In this paper, we will first introduce the contribution of the sociomateriality perspective to theunderstanding of contemporary forms of collaborative learning as introduced by Johri (2011), Sörensen (2008)and Fenwick et al. (2011). Second, we present the Collective Instrument-mediated Activity Situation (CIAS)model (Rabardel, 1995) for the analysis of sociomateriality in CSCL practices. Third, we describe the empiricalstudy investigating how does the design of online commenting functions of social tools (i.e. Google doc andWordPress) come to embody university students’ online peer-review practices? To this end, we focus onstudents’ electronic comments and their reflections post-experience. Third, we report our findings particularlylooking at how emergent multiple instrumental mediations, established during peer-review, are on the one hand,bound to the materiality embedded in the design of the tools’ features and on the other hand, presentCSCL 2015 Proceedings308© ISLSimplications for the inner organization of students’ peer-review activity. We conclude with a brief discussion onthe role that a sociomateriality approach can play in the field of CSCL.Sociomateriality and CSCL practicesThe technology question introduced by Haas (1996) in the field of literacy, refers to the relationship betweentechnology and materiality that we consider be at the center of our CSCL practices. In our view, learningbecomes material through the use of technologies and this materiality has implications for the development of“human culture and the shape of human consciousness” (Haas,1996:4). In the field of CSCL, Haas’s technologyquestion brings us to study the sociomaterial perspective on learning (Johri, 2011; Sörensen, 2008; Fenwick etal. 2011). This perspective has mainly drawn from research on science studies conducted by scholars such asLatour (2005), Barad (2003), Knorr Cetina (2001), and in the field of education by Engeström (1987, 2001) andMiettinen et al. (1999). Its main tenet is that learning, which is situated in the material world (i.e. classrooms,worksites, virtual spaces, community projects, social movements, and so forth), is sociomaterial as its “energies,processes, motives and outcomes are fully entangled with material practice, knowledge representations (e.g.text, pedagogy, curriculum content) nature, time, space, technologies and objects of all kinds” (Fenwick et al.2011:vii). Such a conception of sociomateriality conveys an understanding of learning that is situated andembedded within an activity, context and culture (Lave, 1988) and bounded to the artifacts making such activitypossible (Vygotsky, 1997; Rabardel, 1995; Nardi and Kaptelinin, 2006). It refers to learning as everydaypractice where technologies are at a central position between the individual learner or teacher and the culturalpractice within which learners and teachers as individuals operate (Lave, 1988; Wenger 1998; Stahl and Hesse,2009; O’Malley et al. 2009). Moreover, a perspective on sociomateriality questions the idea of treating CSCLtechnology as a given and disembodied from aspects pertaining to learning practices that technologies embodyin its design and are enacted when they are used. A focus on the sociomaterial invites us to dig into theheterogeneous and multiple relationships that assemble and configure contemporary CSCL practices.Analytical frameworkOne of the analytical models within the sociocultural tradition that seizes the technology question in CSCL isthe one proposed by Pierre Rabardel in his conceptualization of the instrumental genesis approach (Rabardel,1995). This approach is built around the concepts of instrument (a mixed entity constituted by the constraintsand potentialities of the artifact and the subject with her knowledge and former habits), instrumental genesis,and artifact’s instrumental field (Lonchamp, 2012; Ritella and Hakkarainen, 2012). Central to thisconceptualization of instrument is the notion of utilization scheme designating a cognitive structure thatdescribes an invariant organization of behavior for a given class of situations including both technical andconceptual aspects (Lonchamp, 2012). Such structure underlies the inner organization of mediated humanactivities and constitute the social, behavior part of the instrument whilst the artifact, the technical or materialpart. Rabardel distinguishes two sub-process in the development of the instruments: the instrumentalizationprocess that is artifact-oriented and concerns the evolution of the artifact, material side of the instrument and theinstrumentation process, subject-oriented and relative to the emergence and evolution of the utilization schemes.Two analytical models are proposed by the instrumental genesis approach, of which the CollectiveInstrument-mediated Activity Situation (CIAS) model is of particular concern here. The CIAS model consists offour poles: the subject, the other subject(s), the tool and the object of the activity and distinguishes between twokinds of subject–object mediations: i-the epistemic mediation oriented toward comprehending the object, itsproperties and evolution, and ii-the pragmatic mediation oriented toward the transformation of the object andthe achievements of the results. Building on the work of Cerratto Pargman (2003) and Folcher (2003), Rabardeland Bourmaud (2003), distinguish the interpersonal mediation between subjects that may also be epistemic orpragmatic in nature depending on whether it is a question of knowing the object or transforming it. Finally afourth mediation is introduced as the subject also relates to herself (Rabardel and Samurcay, 2001). This latter iscalled reflexive or heuristic mediation and aims to explain how the subject manages her activity in relation toher goals, means, resources etc.These four instrumental mediations may or may not be established during CSCL activities. Theirestablishment and development will depend on how the user deals with and adapts to changes introduced by thetool, and how well the user succeeds in transforming and approaching the artifact. The strength of the model isthe identification of emergent mediations that constitute themselves from the imbrication of the materiality ofthe artifacts in use (its design rationale) and the sociocultural organization of human activities (subject’srepresentations and utilization schemes).CSCL 2015 Proceedings309© ISLSMethodsContext and participants of the studyA qualitative study comprising 12 recruited bachelor students (10 males and 2 females) using online web-basedcommenting tools was set up in May 2012 at a department of Informatics at a Swedish university. The purposeof the study was to understand how undergraduate students appropriate online web-commenting tools in theirpeer-review tasks. Students were divided into 2 groups of 6 participants each who in pairs discussed 6 texts,consisting of students’ own early drafts of bachelor theses (e.g. 4-9 pages). Each text had two authors (as it isaccepted at the institution studied), and two reviewers made comments. For commenting, half of the groups usedGoogle docs (GD), and the other half used Wordpress (WP). The crucial difference between the two systems isthat the commenting function in GD allows the reviewer to directly anchor the comment in the text while theone provided by WP offers instead a common writing field at the end of the document. These tools wereselected because of the learning promises associated to online collaborative annotations tools in highereducation (Su et al. 2010; Glover et al. 2007).The respondents were enrolled in a mandatory course aimed at scaffolding students in their academicwriting. Central to the course is the review of others’ bachelor drafts. Most students perform their reviews usingthe university’s in-house developed Learning Managing System (LMS). Using the LMS entails students irespond to a list of pre-formulated questions that embody peer-review criteria accepted at the chosen institutionand ii- grade different key sections of the text reviewed. As such students’ peer review (before introducing GDand WP) presents a summative character, is private between the reviewer-author, and is organized aroundproviding feedback and/or answering questions (Aghaee and Hansson, 2013).Participants’ peer-review tasksThree texts from three groups were posted on three different blogs in WP, and three groups uploaded their textsto GD. Two reviewers critiqued each text and the pair of authors of each draft could reply to the critique for theduration of the review phase (72 hours). The reviewer pairs were not the same as the author pairs. Eachparticipant had two assignments: i) giving critique and ii) discussing the critique given.Data collection techniquesWe collected both interaction and reflective data. Interaction data consisted of participants’ written comments(153 comments). Reflective data consisted of focus group discussions (80 min with 10 participants) andquestionnaires (11 out 12). The interaction data was analyzed according to principles for the analysis of verbalinteractions (Cerratto-Pargman, 2003). Responses to the questionnaires and transcriptions of the focus groupwere analyzed using Graneheim and Lundman’s (2004) method of qualitative content analysis.Coding schemes for data analysisThe data collected was analyzed with the CIAS model. The unit of analysis chosen was students’ comments andstudents’ self-reflections on their use of online web-based commenting tools in peer-review. The instantiation ofthe instrumental mediations emerging from the data was conducted in the following manner:• Epistemic mediations were understood as those relationships oriented toward the comprehension of thecontent of the text to be reviewed. More precisely, epistemic mediations were identified from theanalysis of the function of critique given (see table 1).• Pragmatic mediations were understood as those relationships oriented toward the transformation ofreading the text into the writing of the critique. More precisely, these mediations were identified fromthe analysis of the forms of the comments (e.g. anchor, compound, detached).• Interpersonal mediations were understood as those relationships oriented toward the interaction withthe other. These mediations are identified from the amount, length of the comment as well as type ofexchanges generated (e.g. minimal, complete).• Reflexive mediations were understood as relationships oriented toward one-self, intending to managethe own individual activity within a collaborative effort. These mediations were identified from thesemantic analysis of the transcriptions generated from the discussion during the focus group and theanswers to the questionnaire post-study.CSCL 2015 Proceedings310© ISLSThe electronic comments generated by both commenting tools were coded in terms of initiative-onlycomment and exchanges. Exchanges were further coded based on 1-type, 2-form and 3-function. 1-Type wasdistinguished between minimal (e.g. initiative-reactive) and complete (initiative-reactive-evaluative); 2-Formwas distinguished among anchored (inserted in the text), compound (inserted and highlighted in the text) and,detached (disassociated from the word, sentence or paragraph being commented). 3-Function consisted of thefollowing categories (see table 1). These categories were identified according to the ultimate purpose of thepeer-review critique given. They were identified from the iterative analysis performed on participants’comments and exchanges (not established a-priori).Table 1: Categories for the analysis of the critique conveyed in the commentsConceptual critique (CC)Form and structure (FS)Cohesion and coherence (COCO)Textual errors (TE)Overall critique (OC)Non-critique (NC) entails anyaddresses the quality of the thinking underlying the text and theconstruction of the arguments written.addresses how the text is put together, the order of the sections,subsections and overall structure of the text.addresses how the different parts of the text are linked together andhow they make sense.points out at minor elements as specific faults in the text, likespelling errors or omitted words.focuses on providing an overview of the text and may containelements of all other categories in one comment. It is oftenpresented as a short report.comment, which discusses topics outside of the text itself. It may becomments regarding the critique process or social comments ofvarious kinds.FindingsFrom the different types of relationships that were instrumented with both commenting tools GD and WP in thestudents’ peer-review, we observed the emergence of interpersonal, epistemic, pragmatic and reflexivemediations. These instrumental mediations accounted for both, material characteristics (affordances) of thedifferent commenting functions (that were reflected in the amount, type, form and function of the students’comments) and students’ utilization schemes underlying the organization of their peer-review practice. Morespecifically, we observed that the materiality of the tools had implications on the function (purpose) of thecritique as it differed according to the online tool used. With GD, students focused more on “form and structure”and “textual errors” whilst with WP they focused more on “cohesion and coherence” and “overall critique”.Moreover, interacting with both tools reflected the presence of a specific peer-review organizationstudents enacted in their activities. We refer in particular to students’ peer-interaction that was organized ininitiate-only comment and/or minimal exchange indicating the presence of utilization schemes bound in part toi-characteristics of the commenting tools constituting GD and WP but also to other features previously andcommonly used (i.e. university’s LMS, MS word, e-mail) and, to ii-students’ particular understandings of whatperforming an academic peer-review entails at their educational institution (i.e. tacit knowledge conveyedthrough instructions, assessment criteria, discussions at research seminars, feedback from supervisors, thesisdefense). Students’ peer-review critique also reflected a colloquial, informal character that deviated from theformal tone that is often chosen in the students’ peer-reviews performed in the university’s LMS (Aghaee andHansson, 2013). Such a deviation introduced confusion in some occasions. We elaborate on these findings fromthe four instrumental mediations instantiated from the analysis of the data.Interpersonal instrumental mediationA macroscopic view of this mediation shows that the amount of comments (interpreted here as an indicator ofinteractivity between authors and reviewers) with GD was of 97 with a median length of 16 words. 56comments were made in WP, with a median length of 40 words. Taking into account that the 12 respondentswere involved during 72 hours, the degree of interaction between respondents seems low independently of thetool used. Firstly, this might be due to the synchronicity afforded by the tools that was deviated and thusinstrumentalized in an asynchronous mode of interaction by students’ peer-interaction. In this sense, the studentsin their activity attributed a different function to the interactivity mode afforded by the tools. Secondly, such aninstrumentalization was certainly due to students’ previous experiences of interacting asynchronously with peersCSCL 2015 Proceedings311© ISLSin their academic peer-reviews. The asynchronous property attributed to the online tools might be due tostudents’ needs to organize their peer-review according to pre-existing social, behavioral invariants underlyingthe organization of the interactions between the students vis-à-vis the text and, vis-à-vis the reviewing task to beaccomplished.Furthermore, the use of GD encouraged more exchanges than WP but shorter in length; whilst WPpromoted less exchanges but longer in length. Reviews conducted with GD presented a higher number ofminimal exchanges whilst WP presented a slightly higher number of complete exchanges. These differences canbe explained in relation to the quotations (copying) of paragraphs under discussion that students were re-writingin the blogs (WP). The length of the exchanges in WP can be related to reviewers’ necessity to recreate authors’sentences (and thus to write more) in order to make sure the semantic context of the detached comments in theblog was available to the authors. The design of WP disregards in fact the location of the comments in relationto the text (i.e. section, paragraph, sentence, word) being commented. As such the reviewers contributed withtheir comments to connect detached (critique) note with text being critiqued.These results can be seen in relation to students’ previous and established practices of peer-reviewassociated to specific asynchronous tools such as the university’s LMS, E-mail and MS Word and students’mode of interaction most often organized around question-answer. As such, this observation accounts forstudents’ needs to change the instrument (instrumentalization) and their utilization schemes (instrumentation) asthey attempt to organize their interaction on a question-answer basis rather than on a argumentative discussion.Figure 1. Type of exchangesEpistemic instrumental mediationsThe materiality of the commenting tools mattered. For instance, the amount of comments on “conceptualcritique”, were higher in WP than in GD. Functions such as “form and structure” and “textual errors” wereprevalent on GD whilst “overall critique” dominated in WP. The category “cohesion and coherence” waspredominant with more comments on both tools. It was also the category that contained the most minimalexchanges in GD, and the most complete exchanges in WP. This difference probably stems from havingdifferent thresholds of effort facilitated by each of the tools used. GD makes it easier for an author to respondwhile commenting, as the dialogue is embedded in the text being commented. In WP, responding to commentsis more cumbersome as the dialogue is detached from the text.These results reflect differences in the students’ ways to engage with the texts that had implications onhow they understood the peer-review activity from their interaction with the online commenting tools.Figure 2. Function of critique with GD and function of critique with WPCSCL 2015 Proceedings312© ISLSPragmatic instrumental mediationsTransforming the object of the peer-review activity (i.e. composing comments in order to improve the quality ofthe other’s text), pointed to differences between how the comments were composed on both tools. Commentscomposed in GD were anchored comments – directly inserted in the paragraph or word being discussed-. Assuch, their topology made it easier to understand what the critique was pointing out. Comments in WP weredetached notes that topologically speaking were not connected with a particular paragraph or word but with amore general understanding of conveyed ideas. In addition, comments composed in GD were in the form ofcompound annotations, consisting of both an anchor (highlighted text) and textual content (the comment) – or areply to another of comment. GD also allows participants to only highlight text, or to make a comment without ahighlight, but commenting without highlighting did not happen during the study.During the focus group, students explained it was central for them to communicate their critique asclear as possible in order to facilitate author’s comprehension of what the critique was specifically pointing out.The material characteristics of the commenting features in GD appeared to encourage short, concise commentson specific, local parts of the text. Since the comments are placed right beside the text, the tool let reviewersbegin adding their comments immediately during their very first read-through. WP’s commenting function isinstead placed at the bottom of the text. This compels the reader to read through the complete text before leavingthe first comment. This was one of the major issues the students brought up during the focus group discussion,stating that it felt silly commenting on minor details when the comments were topologically speakingcompletely disconnected from the text.The materiality of the commenting tools encouraged participants to engage differently with the textsunder review and then to critique them dissimilarly. Students using compound comments commented on moresections of the texts but their comments were succinct and local in relation to students’ detached notes whocommented on fewer sections of the texts, but with a larger number of words and with a more global or holisticapproach. Comments with GD were embedded in the text promoting a narrow context for the critique (i.e. thecontext was the word, the sentence, or a paragraph). In comparison, comments with WP presented a broadercontext (i.e. the whole text or sections of the text) encouraging students to recreate the relation betweencomments and focus of the critique provided.Reflexive instrumental mediationsDuring the focus group, the students explained that most of them often print the texts to be reviewed so they canwork off-line, highlighting, making annotations on paper and then reviewing their comments, structuring,organizing them and rewriting those they will send to the authors via the university’s LMS platform. In thissense, students mentioned that great part of the review is done first privately, off-line and then it iscommunicated to the author. With the use of GD’s and WP’s commenting functions the private, off-line phaseof the peer-review was apparently absent.Moreover, students mentioned that they were unsure and some confused about the new possibilities thecommenting tools were bringing to their peer-review process. Some questioned the idea of discussing academiccritique: “Does one discuss critique in a an academic peer-review process?”; “We have learned that one shouldonly accept feedback and do not discuss it”. They perceived that commenting tools were shaping the peerreview with a dialogic format some of them were skeptic to adopt as they mentioned they usually do not discussor socialize around critique that is given. The use of emoticons in the comments was also source of discussionamong the participants as some argued that such an element might sometimes influence the direction of theongoing discussion.Furthermore, 5 out 10 students commented on the distraction that reading others’ critique can introducein their own reading and understanding of what they consider important to comment on. Three studentsexpressed concerns about “becoming influenced by others’ voices on the text under review”; Student Amentioned: “one changes the level (of the comment) because of group pressure”. Student B” you are inhibitedby seeing others’ comments. You only see what is already commented on and may struggle to find your ownthings”. These concerns may be seen as conflicts students experienced in their interaction with onlinecommenting tools that came to challenge established reviewers’ utilizations schemes bound to tools lacking asocial and synchronous dimension. Engaging with an open peer-review opened thus questions pertaining tosocial and public aspects of critiquing texts in relation to students’ own understanding of what academic critiqueentails at their educational institution.CSCL 2015 Proceedings313© ISLSImplicationsBeyond commonalities and differences observed at the level of the comments produced with the different onlinecommenting tools investigated, this study sheds light on the type of relationships CSCL artifacts mediate. Moreimportantly, the study shows how instrumental mediations emerge from the imbrication of sociomaterialities ofcollaborative learning practices such as peer-review.In particular, materiality of the commenting tools in use or previously used had implications on i- howstudents engaged in with the text and transformed it as well as on ii-how their interaction with the other(s) andwith oneself was organized. More precisely, the peer-interaction observed, was mainly based on initiative-onlycomments and minimal exchanges. This specific organization in the students’ interaction reflected the presenceof a utilization scheme underlying the activity of peer-review that does not disappear with the advent of newtools. At the opposite, students’ utilization schemes associated to peer-review were challenged but notcompletely destabilized. Students’ schemes of utilization were challenged by the synchronous, open and publiccharacter of the tools studied but not completely destabilized as the underlying organization of their peer-reviewpractices (e.g. question-answer interaction) was maintained. Students’ utilization schemes accommodated to thenew conditions opened by the online commenting tools that led the development of instrumentalizationprocesses (Rabardel, 1996). For instance, the synchronous mode of interaction was diverted into asynchronousinteraction and the lack of a feature establishing the connection between critique and component of the textcritiqued in WP, conducted reviewers to created it through establishing a semantic connection between commentand text being commented (i.e. students make use of quoting- rewriting- that in turn contributed to longercomments structured in some occasions, in complete exchanges). Such changes in the artifact, material-side(instrumentalization) and the subject, social-side (instrumentation) become observable as they were i-enacted inreviewers’ behavior (type of peer-interaction) and ii-bound to the affordances and constraints of the tools in use(i.e. anchored, compound and detached comments).Finally, the study contributes to show that sociomaterial aspects of CSCL practices are necessary toembrace in order to gain a deeper understanding of the relational, dynamic and complex ties between learningand technology (Chaiklin and Lave, 1996). Such an understanding will be beneficial for better seizing thechanges that learners and teachers interacting with contemporary technologies enact in their daily learningexperiences (Dewey,1938/1998) and practices (Lave, 1988; Wenger, 1998).ReferencesAghaee, N. and Hansson, H. (2013). Peer Portal: quality enhancement in thesis writing using self-managed peerreview on a mass scale. International review of research in open and distance learning. Vol. 14(1).186-203.Barad, K. (2003). Posthumanist performativity: Toward an understanding of how matter comes to matter. Signs,28(3), 801-831.Cerratto-Pargman, T. (2003). Collaborating with writing tools: an instrumental perspective on the problem ofcomputer support for collaborative activities. Interacting with Computers. Volume 15 (6). 737-757.Chaiklin, S., & Lave, J. (Eds.). (1996). Understanding practice: Perspectives on activity and context.Cambridge University Press. New York.Dewey, J. (1938/1998). Experience and education. New York. Macmillan.Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity-theoretical approach to developmental research.Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit Oy.Engeström, Y. (2001). Expansive learning at work: Toward an activity theoretical reconceptualization. Journalof education and work, 14(1), 133-156.Fenwick, T., Edwards, R., & Sawchuk, P. (2011). Emerging approaches to educational research: Tracing thesocio-material. London:Routledge.Folcher, V. (2003). Appropriating artifacts as instruments:when design-for-use meets design-in-use. Interactingwith Computers. Volume 15 (6) 647–663.Glover, I.; Xu, Z.; Hardaker, G. ( 2007). Online annotation-Research and practices. Computers and Education49, 1308-1320.Graneheim, U. H., & Lundman, B. (2004). Qualitative content analysis in nursing research: concepts,procedures and measures to achieve trustworthiness. Nurse education today, 24(2), 105-112.Haas, C. (1996). Writing technology: Studies in the materiality of writing. Mahwah, N: Lawrence Erlbaum.Haas, C. (1999). On the relationship between old and new technologies. Computers and Composition, 16(2),209-228.Johri, A., & Olds, B. M. (2011). Situated engineering learning: Bridging engineering education research and thelearning sciences. Journal of Engineering Education, 100(1), 151-185.CSCL 2015 Proceedings314© ISLSKaptelinin, V., & Nardi, B. A. (2006). Acting with Technology: Activity Theory and Interaction Design. MITPress. Cambridge, MA.Knorr Cetina, K. (2001). Objectual practice, in T.R. Schatzki, K. Knorr Cetina and E. von Savigny (eds). ThePractice Turn in Contemporary Theory. London, Routledge.Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social – an introduction to actor-network-theory. Oxford University Press.Oxford.Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice: Mind, mathematics and culture in everyday life. Cambridge UniversityPress. New York.Leonardi, P. M. (2013). The Emergence of Materiality within Formal Organizations. In P.R.Carlile, D. Nicolini,A. Langley and H. Tsoukas (Eds.).How Matter Matters? Objects, Artifacts and Materiality inOrganization Studies (pp. 142-170).Oxford: Oxford University Press.Lonchamp, J. (2012). An instrumental perspective on CSCL systems. International Journal of ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, 7(2), 211-237.O’Malley. C., Suthers, D., Reimann, P. and Dimitracopoulou, A. (2009). Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning Practices. CSCL 09. Conference Proceedings. ISLS.Overdijk, M., Van Diggelen, W., Kirschner, P. and Baker, M. (2012). Connecting Agents and Artifacts inCSCL: Towards a rationale of mutual shaping. International Journal of Computer SupportedCollaborative Learning, 7(2), 193-210.Miettinen, R. (1999). The riddle of things:activity theory and actor-network theory as approaches to studyinginnovation. Mind, Culture and Activity, 6(3). 170-195Rabardel, P. (1995). Les hommes et les technologies: Approche cognitive des instruments contemporains. Colin,Paris.Rabardel, P., & Bourmaud, G. (2003). From computer to instrument system: a developmental perspective.Interacting with Computers, 15(5), 665-691.Rabardel, P., & Samurçay, R. (2001). From artifact to instrument-mediated learning. In Symposium on Newchallenges to research on Learning, 21-23.Ritella, G., & Hakkarainen, K. (2012). Instrumental genesis in technology-mediated learning: From doublestimulation to expansive knowledge practices. International Journal of Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning, 7(2), 239-258.Scribner, S., & Cole, M. (1981). The psychology of literacy (Vol. 198, No. 1). Cambridge, MA: HarvardUniversity Press.Stahl, G., & Hesse, F. (2009). Practice perspectives in CSCL. International Journal of Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning. 4:109-114.Stahl, G., Ludvigsen, S., Law, N. & Cress, U. (2014). CSCL artifacts. International Journal of ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, 9(3), 237-245.Su, A. Y.S.; Yang, S.J.H.; Hwang, W-Y. and Zhang, J. (2010). A Web 2.0-based collaborative annotationsystem for enhancing knowledge sharing in collaborative learning environments. Journal of Computerand Education 55, 752-766.Säljö, R. (2010). Digital tools and challenges to institutional traditions of learning: technologies, social memoryand the performative nature of learning. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 26(1), 53-64.Säljö, R. & Wyndham, J. (1996). Solving everyday problems in the formal setting: an empirical study of theschool as context for thought. Understanding practice: Perspectives on activity and context. CambridgeUniversity Press. New York.Sörensen, E. (2009). The Materiality of Learning: Technology and Knowledge in Educational Practice.Cambridge University Press, New York.Vygotsky, L. S.(1934/1997). Penseé et language. La Dispute. Paris.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge University Press.Cambridge MA.AcknowledgementsThis work has been conducted within the frame of the project “Writing to learn In Digital Environments”(WIDE) funded by the Swedish Research Council. Our work is also indebted to bachelor students Tommy Feldtand Anders Näslund for their invaluable participation in the study.CSCL 2015 Proceedings315© ISLS