Integrating Eye-Tracking Activities Into a Learning Environment toPromote Collaborative Meta-Semiotic Reflection and DiscourseStephen Sommer, Leighanna Hinojosa, Hilary Traut, Joseph Polman, and Joanna Weidler-Lewis,stephen.sommer@colorado.edu, leighanna.hinojosa@colorado.edu, hilary.traut@colorado.edu,joseph.polman@colorado.edu, joanna.weidler-lewis@colorado.eduUniversity of Colorado, BoulderAbstract: At the beginning of a one week science summer camp designed to promote studentvisual, scientific and data literacy, participants were recorded viewing infographics by an eyetracking-machine. Data were shared with participants the following day as fodder fordiscussion about data literacy, visual representations, and information processing. The eyetracking activities helped make visible and public students' private visual strategies. Utilizingthese data and other multi-modal representations students participated in a collaborative,metacognitive, reflective process regarding their own visual strategies, the mental processes ofothers, and comparisons within. This activity was one of an ensemble of technologicalactivities and artifacts that afforded students a way to collaboratively engage with otherwiseprivate, and often tacit thoughts. Results of this work in progress suggest that this sort ofcomputer-supported intervention could be used productively to enhance student multisemiotic discourse and collaborative reflective inquiry.Introduction and major issues addressedWhile there has been a growing interest in utilizing eye-tracking technology for educational research, much ofthis inquiry considers students subjects of research rather than active participants in learning environments. In aliterature survey of 81 recent education research studies utilizing eye tracking technology, Lai et al (2013) foundthat overwhelmingly this work focused on attention, perception, or language while only 10 such studiesconsidered learning strategies and instructional design. We have been exploring the promise of eye-trackingtechnology to be integrated in the design of computer-based learning environments, supporting collaborativeand reflective meta-cognitive work and student centered discussion regarding multi-modal representationalstrategies, data literacy, and scientific communication (Kirsch, 2005). In this paper, we focus on how an eyetracking computer intervention can be integrated into the reflective and discursive activity structures of alearning environment. The specific intervention reported on here consisted of youth summer camp participantsdoing a laboratory supported study on the first day of camp, then collaboratively reflecting on otherwise privateaspects of their visual processing and interpretation. The student generated meaning making that happenedthrough a multi-semiotic, collaborative discussion of this activity served as a starting point for a series ofactivities and instruction leading up to students researching, designing, and publishing their own science newsinfographics.We are concerned with how the use of technology and various representational modalities, eye trackingor otherwise, can bolster student self-reflection, discourse, and learning. Using a situated and distributedapproach to cognition, we identify instances where metacognitive reflection occurs in the public sphere throughdiscursive practice (Kirsh, 2005). In this work in progress, we aim to identify how a varied sociotechnicalensemble of discourse and action with technology (Hall, 2011) affords for productive collaborative, multirepresentational engagement with otherwise private and tacit processes and thoughts.Background and theoretical approachWe aim to expand the use of eye tracking technology in educational research beyond making claims aboutperception, cognition, or attention and more towards how such technology may be used to support collaborativelearning activity within designed learning environments. Our small sample size (two interventions, nine studentseach) and methods do not allow us to make claims about intra-mental processes. Rather, our focus is thecollaborative inter-mental meaning making processes that occurs when peer groups engage in multi-semioticreflective discourse.The InfoX camp and eye-tracking intervention are part of our broader study [STEM Literacy throughInfographics] that considers how to best design learning environments to prepare students for STEM (science,technology, engineering, and mathematics) literacy in an era where 'text' captures many communicativepractices above and beyond the written word. Following Halsanova et al (2005) we are interested in how multimodal forms of information presentation attentive to spatial continuity and dual scripting may render complexCSCL 2017 Proceedings648© ISLSconceptual scientific content accessible to broad and diverse audiences across boundaries of languagecommunity or prior training. Beyond an explicit focus on learning environment design, we see cognition assituated and distributed, extending "beyond the skin" and utilizing social and material resources (Kirsh 2005;Pea, 1993; Schoenfeld, 1987). We see mediating artifacts as means to publically create and access knowledge.We consider that metacognition is not only a private phenomenon, but rather is frequently mediated throughpublic interaction. Technology and media advances in the last twenty years allow, and in fact challenge us toexpand the idea of meta-pragmatics and think deeply about multi-semiotic levels of communication that harnessmultiple forms of communicative tools towards information literacy (Silverstein, 1993; Stein, 2008). Buildingon Palincsar & Brown's (1987) notion of reciprocal teaching, we seek to design learning environments withcognitive tools for meta-cognitive awareness of visual perception and interpretation. We proceed in the spirit ofVygotsky's (1978) 'general genetic law', facilitating learners to first participate in the social exchange of culturaltools and ideas on the inter-mental plane (public) and later take up these ideas on the individual or intra-mentalplane (Polman, 2004). Our hope is that technologically supported, multi-semiotic artifacts may help makevisible private intra-mental processes, make these private processes public, and then encourage dialogic metacognitive reflection that has lasting inter and intra-mental consequence. In this sense our theoretical focus is onthe design of learning environments that utilize technologically supported artifacts to scaffold activities drawingon student experience and collaborative reflection to build knowledge from experience.Research contextThe eye tracking intervention and reflective debrief were developed as part of a week-long science summercamp, Infographic Expression (or InfoX) designed to engage middle and high school students in a meaningfulprocess of researching a topic of scientific relevance, analyzing related quantitative data, and designing andpublishing a science news infographic of their own. We worked with staff from our institution's CognitiveDevelopment Lab to design an activity that exposed students to computer supported data collection, helpedthem gain deeper insight into how they process visual representations, and produced a series of artifacts anddata to serve reflection and discussion. Infographics were selected and modified to include variousrepresentational forms (e.g., text, maps, images, charts, etc.) and content into four specific pre-defined areas ofinterest (AOI) throughout an infographic. Each infographic had a variety of representational forms, redundancyin where and how information was presented, and a variety of complexity concerning specific information. Theeye tracking software captured millisecond-level records of saccadic movement, time spent in each AOI, andoverall gaze pattern. The nine participants were divided into three groups of three; each group with a unique setof infographics. Students viewed three infographics with different instructions for each trial. In trial 1 studentswere asked to offer written responses to specific questions that could be answered by looking at the infographic.Trial 2 allowed students thirty seconds to study a new infographic and remember what they deemed mostimportant and striking. The third trial was like the first (specific questions asked) though all three groups sawthe same infographic. After each question, the real time gaze tracing was played back for students. Uponcompletion of the three tasks, students were escorted to a second room to complete a question worksheet andoffer immediate reflections. The following day, each student group reviewed the data collected by the eyetracker and together discussed the experience with the entire class. They discussed their prior beliefs about theirvisual strategies, reactions to the data collected on their gaze, and the trends, patterns, and differences revealedby comparing the results of their peers. In this sense, students’ own innate private processes were made visibleto them and also made public to the rest of classroom.MethodsWe conducted a qualitative case study with a particular focus on the artifacts and data collected in the 2016cycle of InfoX. During the camp itself, members of our research team rotated roles as facilitators, participants,and data collectors. A video camera and audio device recorded the entire summer camp to capture instruction,student work time, class discussions, and peer-to-peer interaction. Other data collected and analyzed includestudent pre-intervention worksheets, worksheets filled out during the intervention, the eye tracking data itself,student drafts of infographic, group work documents, exit interviews, and running observational notes. TheInfoX team debriefed daily and later discussed key findings, trends, and other observations with the largerresearch group of our ongoing study. For the scope of this short paper, we focus our attention on Group 2;William, age 14 and in the first year of secondary school, Vera, age 15 and in the second year of secondaryschool, and Abby, age 15 homeschooled.CSCL 2017 Proceedings649© ISLSFindingsOn day two of the camp, student groups had an opportunity to review and explain the infographics they saw tothe other groups in the class. While explaining their initial reactions, where they believed they looked, andstrategies for finding specific information during the question prompted infographic trial, the members of Group2 each explained that they looked at different parts of the infographic and justified their response. Vera believedshe focused mainly on bar charts and text. William indicated that he focused elsewhere, “but mainly that’sbecause I am naturally drawn to maps, cuz I am actually really good at [that]. ” Abby explained “I think I spenta lot on [AOI] 1 and 3… Not exactly sure why, I say I like colors, but then I would have gone to 1 and 4. ” Theinstructors then presented the actual quantified data (by way of bar charts) showing exactly how manymilliseconds blinded participants spent in each AOI answering the questions; the students did not know whichset of charts corresponded to whom. They speculated about which 'subject' of the study they were, based on therecollection they had just offered. William rightly guessed which data was his, stating, “Well I know who I am.It’s simple… Well I mean it's kinda important to note that both [participant ID] 1608 and 1602 the numberswere ultimately the same. 1605 had like, spent a crazy amount of time on AOI 2. Just wanted to point that out.”Though William rightly claimed that he was subject 1605, this evidence was contrary to his earlier claims,revealing that that he did not primarily look at the map representation, but instead focused on a technicaldoughnut chart.Group 2 then explained to their peers what the content and their responses were to the secondinfographic trial with no specific questions. Vera, Abby, and William explained in what order and where theybelieved they focused their attention in thirty seconds of viewing this infographic, referring back to theirperceived habits or visual preferences. Instructors then showed the thirty second real time gaze track of one ofthe subjects, noting during the video that the data presented did not line up to the students' earlier claims.William quickly responded, “Well whoever did this one honestly has a hard time digesting a lot of information,”and Abby claimed “I don’t think it was me cuz I definitely looked at the pictures.” Though Vera did not have astrong reaction, she did not argue that this might have been her info, as in fact it was. Groups A and B similarlyshared out. In all three groups students recognized that their particular visual strategies varied from their peers,even when looking at the same infographic. Some students accurately identified what 'subject' they were basedon the charts showing time spent in particular AOIs, though other students could not, and in some cases actuallychallenged that the computer did not accurately capture where their eyes 'really went'.Lastly the class collectively reflected on and discussed their intuitions about their own ways of seeing,patterns about their visual processes revealed by the eye tracker, variations regarding visual literacy,considerations of different forms of data representation, and overall feedback for the design of the activity andwhat makes a 'good' infographic.Through the course of the one-week InfoX program we observed that students gained an increased andchanging awareness of their own visual processing and interpretation strategies. At the start of the week,students articulated their pre-existing expectations about how they believed they viewed complex visualinformation, noting that that this was not something they regularly thought about. The eye tracking activity andsubsequent group reflection revealed where students actually did look in three trials. For some, these datasupported their pre-existing ideas. For others, these data challenged student expectations and self-images. As thestudents designed their own infographics, they regularly mentioned 'AOI's' and referred back to gaze pattern andrepresentational forms that had grabbed their own or others' attention. These conversations influenced their draftversions and final products. Regarding the eye tracking intervention and creation of her infographic Verareflected, “It was interesting. The results weren’t exactly what I expected. ” Rather than assuming all peoplewould view the infographic the same way, she said she created her infographic “how I would like to see it andalso how people might want to see it.” Vera’s claims suggest that the eye tracking intervention served to promptstudents’ collaborative meta-cognitive reflection, perhaps revealing surprising insight. Further, the exercise anddebrief appears to have influenced how students might focus in on the data rich components of visualization.Lastly, this activity informed students own communicative practice as they designed an infographic drawing onthe principles observed in the activity.Significance and implications of this workThe technology and multi-semiotic representational tools used in this program were intended to give studentssome exposure to an experience where they were both the 'subjects' of the study and also the researchers,interpreters and meaning makers. These interventions show promise at bolstering students' capacity to reflect onand discuss mental processes that were otherwise private and tacit. Once students gained an awareness of theirown and also peer visual processed, InfoX instructors sequenced further activities to build upon this knowledge.CSCL 2017 Proceedings650© ISLSThe InfoX program provided an opportunity to consider how technologically mediated lessons andactivities can be utilized as early interventions to make students' visual processing visible to themselves andtheir peers. This work in progress illuminates how the processes of visualizing complex data, publically makingsense of these data, and dialogically moving between the inter and intra-mental plane may empower students todraw from their own and their peers' prior and emergent knowledge to interpret and design infographics. Thiscan inform the design of computer-supported collaborative learning environments that increase students'epistemic agency and ownership.Future studies and learning environment design work might expand upon this line of inquiry in severaldirections. We will continue to explore how learning environments can be designed to expose otherwise privatemental processes as a means towards guided, collaborative multi-semiotic discourse to drive understanding ofSTEM content. In these student-centered environments knowledge is built by the students, using technologicallymediated semiotic 'texts,' and the instructors work mostly as collaborators or coaches. Further, we hope tobolster students' ability to communicate complex ideas with broad audiences. We support continued veins ofresearch that consider how technologically informed learning environments might be developed to prioritizedata accessibility, make mental processes visible, and bolsters students' ability to collaboratively engage inmeta-cognitive work utilizing multiple representational forms.ReferencesHall, R. (2011). Cultural forms, agency, and the discovery of invention in classroom research on learning andteaching. In T. Koschmann, Theories of learning and studies of instructional practice (pp. 359-383).New York: Springer.Kirsh, D. (2005). Metacognition, distributed cognition and visual design. Cognition, Education andCommunication Technology, 147-180.Lai, M. L., Tsai, M. J., Yang, F. Y., Hsu, C. Y., Liu, T. C., Lee, S. W. Y., & Tsai, C. C. (2013). A review ofusing eye-tracking technology in exploring learning from 2000 to 2012. Educational ResearchReview, 10, 90-115.Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehensionmonitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1(2), 117-175.Pea, R. D. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. Salomon (ed),Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations (pp. 47-87). New York:Cambridge University PressPolman, J. L. (2004). Dialogic activity structures for project-based learning environments. Cognition andInstruction, 22(4), 431-466.Schoenfeld, A. (1987). What's all the fuss about metacognition? In A.H. Schoenfeld, Cognitive Science andMathematics Education (pp. 189-215) Hillsdale, NJ; Lawrence Erlbaum AssociatesSilverstein, M. (1993). Metapragmatic discourse and metapragmatic function. In J.A. Lucy, Reflexive language:Reported Speech and Metapragmatics (pp. 33-58). Cambridge; Cambridge University PressStein, P. (2008) Multimodal instructional practices. In. J. Coiro, M. Knobel, C. Lankshear, & D. LeauHandbook of Research on New Literacies (871-898). New York, NY: Lawrence ErlbaumVygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.CSCL 2017 Proceedings651© ISLS