Co-Navigating Mobilized Student Inquiry Across Multiple ContextsRyan M. Rish and Aijuan Cunryanrish@buffalo.edu, aijuancu@buffalo.eduUniversity at Buffalo (SUNY)Abstract: This study traces the learning trajectories of secondary students who conductedinquiry projects based on their personal interests. The study conceptualizes the activities,practices, and tools associated (and not associated) with the inquiry projects within the learninglives of the student participants. The university researchers and the classroom teachers wereactive participants who assisted the students; shared their own learning lives; and providedresources, tools, and opportunities that helped shape the students’ inquiry projects. The analysisfeatures a co-navigation (with the researchers, the teachers, and the students) of learningtrajectories across multiple contexts and social interactions. Findings reveal the agentive waysstudents took up and cast aside opportunities and artifacts in unexpected, yet fruitful, ways forthe development of their inquiry projects. The paper concludes with implications for the designand facilitation of student inquiry across multiple contexts.Major issuesThe purpose of the study is to understand the divergent and agentive ways students co-navigated the learningtrajectories related to an inquiry project. We use the term co-navigate rather than follow or trace in relationshipto their learning trajectories because the university researchers and the teachers were both involved in the designof the learning opportunities; the facilitation of the inquiry projects across contexts, and the mapping of thelearning trajectories across time and student-produced artifacts. The research study was conducted with andalongside the participants, and the data analysis serves as a partial reconstruction of the learning trajectories weco-navigated as a group. Our objective is to represent the participants’ learning in the ways they agentively wovetogether learning opportunities and resources across activity in the classroom, the library, the hallways in between,and various locales in the community, including their homes. This study intentionally disrupts classroom-ascontainer discourse and constructs (Leander et al., 2010) to consider how students weave different contextstogether (and break them apart) to chart a learning trajectory within their learning lives (Erstad, 2012). We sharewith other researchers the goal of tracing learning across multiple contexts “as a means to generate new knowledgeabout the borders and edges of different practices and the boundary crossings these entail in the learning lives ofyoung people” (Erstad, et al., 2016, p. 1).Potential significanceOur approach to facilitating student inquiry projects based on their personal interests stems from two mainarguments about designing and supporting learning opportunities for youth. The first argument is that learningopportunities can be designed to connect multiple places and spaces of learning (e.g., Ito, et al., 2013). Weintentionally seek to disrupt the notion that learning is limited to the attainment of isolated skills withinclassrooms. From our perspective, youth are engaged in complex mobilities and trajectories that establishrelationships between the different physical places and virtual spaces they navigate when learning andestablishing/maintaining social relationships. We draw on Leander and his colleagues (2010) framing of mobilityas encompassing: physical mobility, the embodied movement from place to place; virtual mobility, the use oftechnology and media to build social connections across time and space; and educational mobility, the distributionof learning opportunities across people, tools, and learning environments. Additionally, our aim is to understandhow learning takes shape in different ways in distinct places (e.g., classroom, playground, corner store), but weare also interested in supporting learning across these places in terms of what adolescents bring along with themfrom place to place, as well as what learning is supported and brought about in those places.The second argument is that learning opportunities should be oriented toward the lived experiences ofpeople as they grapple with the social complexities that shape their lives (Bruce & Bishop, 2008). Our goal is towork with students on inquiry foci that they consider relevant to their lives. We argue that inquiry projects aslearning opportunities should begin with an orientation toward issues that are relevant to youth and eventuallybuild toward issues that impact others. Therefore, our approach to inquiry is conceptualized not only as a learningopportunity for an individual, but also as a learning opportunity that involves many people who share their livedexperiences and collaboratively identify issues that are collectively considered to be relevant. To support learningopportunities such as these, we argue that youth should be conducting inquiry alongside people of a range of ages,ICLS 2018 Proceedings1145© ISLSdiverse lived experiences, and different life trajectories and mobilities. This argument further highlights theinherent limitations of learning opportunities that only involve youth of a certain age or school grade level.Theoretical frameworkThe study is informed by a learning lives approach (Erstad, et al., 2009) that considers the longer (life-long) andbroader (life-wide) learning trajectories that young people are involved with as they move within and acrossdifferent social settings. This perspective eschews the conceptualizations of learning and the enactment of socialand literacy practices as contained exclusively within imagined geographies such as classrooms (Leander, Phillips,& Taylor 2010). As a generative alternative, this study considers how learning and the enactment of social andliteracy practices are both brought along with people and brought about in particular sites along trajectories thatare most often only apparent in hindsight.The learning lives approach to a broader conceptualization of learning is based on two interrelated setsof theories: socio-cultural learning theory and social practice theory (Erstad, 2012). Socio-cultural theory accountsfor the relationship between the mental functions of people and the social, cultural, and historical situations inwhich, and tools with which, people take action. In particular, this approach identifies mediated action as the unitof analysis in consideration of how people exercise agency and take action with mediational means within andacross contexts (Wertsch, 1998). However, these mediated actions aggregate over time into social practices thatare shared among people within and across contexts (Scollon, 2001). Therefore, this approach considers mediatedaction on the micro level and social practice on the macro level (Scollon & Scollon, 2004). These constructs areparticularly generative for conceptualizing what the social and learning significance of particular mediated actionswithin and across contexts and for how social practices are related to one another within a nexus of practice,unencumbered by assumed social, physical, virtual, geographic and spatial boundaries (Rish, 2015; 2017).MethodologyWe are referring to the hybrid methodology used in the site as co-navigation, as we attempt to reconstruct andrepresent the learning trajectories that we navigated alongside the students in the study. The metaphor andparticular analytical methods of navigation are derived from nexus analysis (Scollon & Scollon, 2004) and thetransliteracies framework proposed by Stornaiuolo and colleagues (2016). Nexus analysis is an ethnographicmethod that involves three recursive analytic activities: engaging the nexus, navigating the nexus, and changingthe nexus in future iterative phases. Engaging the nexus of practice accounts for the roles of the researchers andthe teachers in the design of the learning opportunities meant to bring about a nexus of practice that will supportstudent inquiry. Within this phase of data analysis, the history of the participants is considered in terms of thepractices they bring to bear on the design of and participation within the learning opportunities. The researchershad worked with students on inquiry projects before, the teacher had facilitated the inquiry projects in previousyears, and the students had completed comparable tasks before. All of these prior experiences inform how thepeople involved with the student inquiry engaged the nexus of practices at work. The second phase of the analysisis navigating the nexus, or as we are calling it, co-navigation, which involves mapping thecycles of the people, places, discourse, objects, and concepts which circulated through thismicro-semiotic ecosystem looking for anticipations and emanations, links and transformations,their inherent timescales, and to place a circumference of relevance around the nexus ofpractice. (Scollon & Scollon, 2004, p. xx)We consider this phase of the data analysis to be co-navigation, because as researchers, we did not make theseconsiderations and decisions absent from the participants. Rather, as a point of emphasis, we privileged theparticipants’ (both teachers’ and students’) understandings of what was relevant within the nexus of practice.Within the co-navigation analytic phase, we have also found the transliteracies framework to be helpfulin naming and following mediated actions and practices within and across contexts (Stornaiuolo, Smith, & Philips,2016). In particular, we have found the concept of emergence to be helpful for accounting for (or not) the“indeterminacies of meaning making across interactions” and for allowing “the unprecedented, surprising, andmeaningful to emerge in observations of human activity without predetermined and text-centric endpoints ofexplanation” (pp. 10-11). As the nexus is co-navigated, there is a risk of dismissing or misunderstandingephemeral practices (Pahl, 2002) and proto-practices early in ontogenesis.The third phase of changing the nexus accounts for the mediated actions and related social practices thatare enacted to change the linkages within the nexus. Change is a constant process; therefore, this phase of theanalysis is not considered to be tertiary, but rather an ongoing recursive and iterative phase of analysis.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1146© ISLSThe focal data of this paper include three students from each school and their learning trajectories,derived from video recordings, audio interviews, field notes, and teacher-provided and student-produced artifacts(digital and print). Student and teacher histories with inquiry were constructed with retrospective interviews. Datacollection involved capturing activity with video and audio recorders while working alongside students as theconducted their inquiry in the classroom, the library, and the hallways in between.Research participants and multiple contextsThe multi-sited study was conducted concurrently in two different high schools (one urban, one suburban) duringan academic semester. The student inquiry projects in both high schools were initiated by English teachers andwere designed to allow students to explore an issue they were interested in learning more about and/or an issuethey felt passionate about in the world. The issues identified by the students within the inquiry projects variedvastly, changed frequently for some students, and gained complexity and nuance over time for most students.Each English teacher planned the instructional unit separately. Though, they knew each other and hadboth taught in the same building in the past, they were not in contact during the inquiry projects (purely due totime constraints). The English teachers each had a different way of structuring and supporting the students’learning that included drawing on previous iterations of the student inquiry project to adapt and orchestrate aseries of learning opportunities with accompanying artifacts (e.g., handouts, graphic organizers, brainstormingdocuments) in consultations with the university researchers.At the encouragement of the researchers, both English teachers incorporated options for students tocollect their own data on their focal issue, in addition to the published research literature they were locating andreading. The researchers facilitated learning opportunities wherein students created online surveys and semistructured interview protocols. The researchers and the teachers supported the students in the design of theirsurvey instrument or interview protocol and the interpretation of the data they collected. The students were alsoprovided guidance by the researchers on ways to use the data they collected in relationship to the publishedresearch they were gathering within their findings of their final papers and presentations.In brief, the students’ learning trajectories variously and divergently wove together classroom and librarylearning opportunities; artifacts designed to organize the inquiry; online informational resources; collected data;and conversations with peers, family members and other people in the community.FindingsTentative findings for six focal student participants (three from each high school) demonstrate the divergent andunexpected learning trajectories related to the inquiry project. Each student wove together contexts of learning inways that were shaped by their histories and social relationships, but also in ways that were informed by theirneeds in the moment for moving the inquiry project forward. Though each teacher carefully designed a sequenceof learning opportunities, each meant to build on the one prior, the six focal students did not all demonstrateparticipation and uptake in those learning opportunities as designed. In fact, some of the learning opportunitieswere revisited when they were considered to be relevant by the students, and other learning opportunities wereeither not completed or the participation was attributed to “going through the motions” or “only for the grade.”For some of the students, the most salient learning opportunities were those afforded by the data collection and/orinterviews, indicating that some of the student inquiry projects were bolstered by involving more aspects of thelearning lives of students.A full articulation of the findings demonstrates how moments of emergence that were initiallyoverlooked by the researchers and the teachers as not directly related to the development of the student inquiryproject were either some of the more salient moments that supported the students’ inquiry or held meaning for thestudent that transcended beyond the purposes of the inquiry project (e.g., interviewing a family member about aninquiry issue and gaining a better understanding of the family member as a result). The findings demonstrate howthe inquiry project unfolded as a nexus of practice, but for some of the students this nexus was interrelated andlinked with purposes and practices that extended beyond the project. This consideration allows for a fullerunderstanding of how an inquiry project based on personal interests works within the learning lives of students.ImplicationsThe focal students in this study demonstrate the agentive and unpredictable ways that young people weavetogether contexts of learning. The focal students wove together learning opportunities afforded by instructionaltime in the classroom, online resources and social interaction, conversations with peers in official and unofficialplaces and spaces, and social interactions that accompanied the online survey data collection and semi-structuredICLS 2018 Proceedings1147© ISLSinterviews. These examples expand our imagined geographies of learning to include moments and conversationsthat otherwise may be overlooked or dismissed in the learning lives of youth.The focal students in this study also demonstrate the participation and learning trajectories that are notwholly accounted for by the sanctioned learning opportunities they are presented with and often disrupt theintended timescale of instructional planning. Some but not all of the focal students completed project-related taskswithin the suggested times. However, others navigated learning trajectories that leveraged learning opportunitiesat times other than when they were meant to fall in a sequence. These examples help us consider the assumedlinearity in instructional design and value the examination of the actual learning trajectories that students createin relationship to the instructional design.The focal students also demonstrated ways with which they negotiated among the practices at workwithin the inquiry project. Often, the practices that students brought along to learning opportunities were not theones supported there, which required negotiation on behalf of the students, the teachers, and the researchers. Howstudents negotiated among these practices within the nexus that linked together the inquiry project helps usunderstand how students shift practices across time and context, beyond simplistic notions of transfer.ReferencesBruce, B. C., & Bishop, A. P. (2002). Using the web to support inquiry-based literacy development. Journal ofAdolescent and Adult Literacy, 45(8), 706–714.Bruce, B., & Bishop, A. (2008). New literacies and community inquiry. In J. Coiro, M. Knobel, C. Lankshear &D. Leu (Eds.), The handbook of research in new literacies (pp. 699 –742). New York, NY: Routledge.Bruce, B. C., Bishop, A. P., & Budhathoki, N. R. (Eds.). (2014). Youth community inquiry: New media forcommunity and personal growth. New York, NY: Peter Lang.Bruce, B. C., & Davidson, J. (1996). An inquiry model for literacy across the curriculum. Journal of CurriculumStudies, 28(3), 281–300.Erstad, O. (2012). The learning lives of digital youth: Beyond the formal and informal. Oxford Review ofEducation, 38(1), 25-43.Erstad, O., Gilje, O., Sefton-Green, J. & Vasbo, K. (2009). Exploring ‘learning lives’: community, identity,literacy and meaning, Literacy, 43(2), 100–106.Erstad, O., Kumpulainen, K., Mäkitalo, Å., Schrøder, K.C., Pruulmann-Vengerfeldt, P., & Jóhannsdóttir, T. (Eds.)(2016). Learning across contexts in the knowledge society. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingston, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., Schor, J., Sefton-Green, J., Watkins, S.C.(2013). Connected learning: An agenda for research and design. Irvine, CA: Digital Media and LearningResearch Hub.Leander, K., Phillips, N. C. & Taylor, K. H. (2010) The changing social spaces of learning: Mapping newmobilities. Review of Research in Education, 34, 329-394.Pahl, K. (2002). Ephemera, mess and miscellaneous piles: Texts and practices in families. Journal of EarlyChildhood Literacy 2(2):145–165.Rish, R.M. (2015). Researching writing events: Using mediated discourse analysis to explore how students writetogether. Literacy, 49(1), 12-19.Rish, R.M. (2017). Mediated discourse analysis. In K. Peppler (Ed.), The Sage encyclopedia of out-of-schoollearning. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.Rish, R.M., Cun, A., Gloss, A., & Pamuk, M. (2018). Mobile asset mapping as community inquiry. In S. Arafeh,D. Herro, R. Ling, & C. Holden (Eds.), Mobile learning: Perspectives on practice and policy (pp. 119141). Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.Scollon, R. (2001). Mediated discourse: The nexus of practice. London: Routledge.Scollon, R., & Scollon, S. (2004). Nexus analysis: Discourse and the emerging internet. London: Routledge.Stornaiuolo, A., Smith, A., & Phillips, N.C. (2016). Developing a transliteracies framework for a connected world.Journal of Literacy Research, 49(1), 1-24.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1148© ISLS