Mauá Project: Citizenship and Environment Educational asPathway to Critical Thinking and Students' EmpowermentGlauco S. F da Silva, Marcília E. Barcellos, and Elisabeth G. de Souzaglauco.silva@cefet-rj.br, marcilia.barcellos@cefet-rj.br, elisabeth.souza@cefet-rj.brCEFET/RJ- Campus PetrópolisAbstract: This article aims to present preliminary results of an ongoing research project linkingenvironmental education and citizenship engagement. We will illustrate the actions of thestudents engaged in the project to draw their classmates’ attention to the school and theenvironmental issues surrounding them. Particularly, we will focus on the particular on aseminar prepared and presented by the students to disclose the results of a survey conducted ofall students in the school. Our preliminary findings suggest that citizenship engagement actionsin the school provide students with social leadership (empowerment), and that they thus becomeagents of transformation in the school environment with a personal responsibility andparticipatory attitude.Keywords: environmental education, students engagement, citizenship, generative themesIntroductionThe popular discourse in the media concerning the environment is also present among educators and teachers;however, the relationship between environmental education and civic engagement has yet to be fully explored.Consequently, according to Reis & Oliveira (2014), teachers are striving to incorporate this topic in scienceclassrooms.This study presents preliminary results of an ongoing research project linking environmental educationand citizenship. The objective of this article is to present the project steps taken to date, with emphasis on thecollaborative aspects. We will illustrate the endeavors of the students engaged in the project to draw theirclassmates’ attention to the school and the environmental issues surrounding them. The concept of “generativethemes” (Freire, 1989) and the conceptions of the good citizens proposed by Westheimer & Kahne (2004) will beused to analyze the actions of those involved in the project.This article focuses in particular on a seminar prepared and presented by the students to disclose theresults of a survey conducted of all students in the school. Our preliminary findings suggest that civic engagementactions in the school provide students with social leadership (empowerment), and that they thus become agents oftransformation in the school environment. Thus, environmental education no longer remains only a theory whenpresent in the school’s curriculum; it becomes praxis.The projectThe project is referred to as “Citizenship and Environmental Education: Rediscovering the Capabilities of MauáHigh School,” and it is funded by FAPERJ (Research Support Foundation of the State of Rio de Janeiro) throughPublic Notice 36/2014 for improvements in public High Schools. The project’s primary objective is developmentof actions, in cooperation with students and teachers, that promote concrete improvements in the school throughenvironmental education and citizenship.The Mauá High School is located at Anil Beach, Mauá district. The school offers morning, afternoon,and evening classes for middle and high school students. It is small, comprising eight classrooms, a cafeteria, akitchen, a 35-person auditorium, a library, a staff room, an office, the principal’s office, a courtyard, and a largeoutdoor area. The school is named after the Viscount of Mauá.Mauá is a district of the city of Magé, which is located in the state of Rio de Janeiro (RJ); the district isnamed in honor of Irineu Evangelista de Sousa, the Viscount of Mauá, a Brazilian businessman and banker. Thecity is located on Guanabara Bay. It was historically the main entry point to Rio de Janeiro City, where vesselsarriving from Portugal docked. Another of its important historical landmarks is the first railway built in SouthAmerica, constructed by the Viscount of Mauá. This railway linked the coast to the country’s inland areas, passingthrough the city of Petrópolis, at mountains region of Rio de Janeiro State, and became the gold trail, because ofthe transportation of gold and other ores coming from all way inland.Given the surrounding social context, there is considerable opportunity for discussion in the high schoolregarding the environment. Even before the project started, some initiatives were already in place, such as wastesorting and water quality consideration.ICLS 2016 Proceedings962© ISLSThe project team includes three university professors (authors of this paper), who drafted the project andsubmitted it to FAPERJ; four scholarship Mauá High School students and one volunteer; and three schoolteachers, two of whom receive grants (the third is a volunteer). The project was submitted to FAPERJ inSeptember 2014 and was approved in December of that same year. The students’ scholarships and professors’grants began in May 2015, however, and funding for the project was released in October 2015. We have thereforebeen conducting the project since August 2014, when we started visits to the school. Notably, the school’sprincipal gave us full support from the outset of the project.Methodological proceduresOur methodology is based on qualitative research methods according to Erickson (2012), with the socialenvironment and relations among subjects being the objects of analysis. The Freirean perspective is also used inour methodological procedures, as it regards the emergence of generative themes driving our actions. Generativethemes, according to Freire (1989), are those extracted from problematization of the practice of students’ lives.As a springboard for the teaching and learning process, a generative theme is a methodology based on thedialectical theory of knowledge, because “outside of the quest, outside of the praxis, men cannot be” (p. 66).Thus, our methodological procedures inform the project’s developmental stages. Immersion of theresearchers in the school allowed for identification of environmental issues as a generative theme for preparationand submission of the project. Once the team was formed, actions were collectively guided (Freire, 1989) throughwork meetings, which took place at the school approximately once every two weeks.Work meetingsThe team’s work meetings take place at the school on a two-week basis, and began in mid-May 2015. Audio ofthe meetings is recorded for record-keeping purposes. The recorded conversations, which raise problems and theirsolutions, as well as the meeting’s conflicts and dilemmas are then transcribed, functioning as an instrument ofboth data collection and group reflection.Following the Freirean perspective, meetings are characterized by equal rights of speech and opinion,allowing for the emergence of generative themes and the actions resulting therefrom. In this way, two topics werebrought up: the source of the school’s water, proposed by the teachers; and the need to know what other studentsthought about the school, proposed by the scholarship students. The team decided to address the second issue,because before the water issue could be proposed as a topic, it had to be recognized as a problem affecting thestudents (Freire, 1989). In the process of raising awareness, it was necessary to determine what the studentsthought—that is, what their opinions and perceptions were about the school in which they studied.The quest to understand what students thought about the problems existing in the school mobilized theteam to take the following actions: (a) Drafting of a questionnaire given to the majority of the students, withquestions regarding problems found in the school, teaching methods used by teachers, and their students’ ownmotivation to study; (b) Tabulation and organization of data in charts; (c) Presenting the results to all students inthe school during a seminar, facilitated by the scholarship students participating in the project; (d) Interviewingthe school’s teachers about the student questionnaire results (still in drafting stages).The seminar: A space for citizenship and students' empowerment arousalMultiple sessions of the seminar were held on October 6, 2015 so that most of the students could participate. Thescholarship students were responsible for presenting the data and promoting dialogue with the other students. Toexplain the subject of the presentation, one of the scholarship students wrote a rap with lyrics describing theobjectives of the project and the completed questionnaire presentation. The rap was sung in each session, followedby presentations by the scholarship students, who took turns in showing their classmates the questionnaire’sresults.The question “Do you think that teaching at Mauá High School enables critical thinking in students?”caught everyone’s attention. During analysis of the questionnaire, it was reported that although students whoanswered did not know the meaning of critical thinking, the majority nevertheless responded “yes.” In the seminar,this issue was reviewed and widely debated. The argument put to their classmates by the scholarship students wasthat it would be impossible to induce a transformation of reality without critically analyzing it.We are going to present some of Esther and Robert's point (both scholarship students) about criticalthinking during the seminar. At the following table it is possible to see their statements and how they make pointsto the other students.Table 1: Esther and Robert's point made during the session of the seminarICLS 2016 Proceedings963© ISLSEvent1(session 1)2(session 2)3(session 2)4(session 2)TranscriptionEsther: I would like to ask you a question that isn't here at the presentation, but it wasin the questionnaire. Do you know what critical thinking is? Someone else knows it? Couldsomeone else give me its definition?Student 1: Speak out your own opinion?Esther: Yes, it does count! I gonna give an example (...) there was this question " Doyou think that teaching at Mauá High School enables critical thinking in students?" What do youthink? (...) I would like to hear you guys! [silence]Student 2: It is ... when people keep on track to achieve their rights, and so do teachersand students have to be motivated.Student 3: It is missing in our classroomEsther: Noop! It is missing everywhere! We realize many students run away from thistopic (...) but it is very important. We have to apply critical thinking everywhere and everymoment (...) For instance, I cannot impose to you my will and you just accept it (...) thus we needto learn to criticize and to claim (...) But remember, to claim it is necessary to be within thecompliant.Esther: Here [she points to the graphic showed in the projection screen] the of thestudents responded "yes" [to the same question of event 1), but will the most of students knowwhat was critical sense? [some students say "no"] Why did students respond "yes" then? [silence]Guess or what?Students: Lack of interestEsther: Lack of interest, what else you think? (...) they didn't answered what they reallythink, they didn't use their critical thinking (...)Student 1: They were manipulated ...Esther: Yes! Exactly, you gotta!Esther: Now listen up, how about social enviornment, what could critical thinkingcontribute to you later?Student 2: to have own opinion, right?Esther: Yeap! What else?Student 3: Don't let be manipulated!Esther: Let me say this: if nowadays we don't have critical sense to respond thisquestionnaire, will we have critical think to vote or to claim our rights? [silence] ... no!Robert: Hey guys, listen to me, I gonna ask you three questions: do you think MauáHigh School needs to change? Please, hands up! ... ok! now... who wanna the school changes?Please, hands up again! ... all right ... so among those who said wanted the changes, who wannado something to change it?[there some silent moment followed by students comments]Robert: Ok! Now, who has already thought to do something? [one or two students saythey have]So why didn't you do it?Student 4: Because nobody cannot do anything, don't you remember when I waspunished [he is talking about something in the past]Student 5: None take us seriously since first grade of High School [Note: High Schoolin Brazil has three years 1st to 3rd grade] before I wanted to something, I had this attitude, youknow, of change something, but not anymore.(...)Esther: I gotta, you try to something but they [administrators] don't let them do it, Igotta! so you need be critical just for these situations (...) but I am hereby to speak up it is possible(...) you gotta have the perseverance, because it is something you gonna use it later. I just say itbecause I know it is possible [to change].Discussion and first conclusionsThe conceptions of the good citizens proposed by Westheimer & Kahne (2004) can be used to briefly analyzeEsther and Robert's discourse during the seminar presentations as well as the whole project. Westheimer & Kahne(2004) defined: personally responsible as the responsibility of someone else within the community by working,paying taxes, obeying the laws; particpatory the act of leading or organizing events, it is expected this leaderknows how government work; justice-oriented those who seeks out, critically assesses for social justice.ICLS 2016 Proceedings964© ISLSThus, Esther's point about the critical sense issue is considered as personally responsible andparticipatory ways of citizenship act. For instance, at the event 1 when she says "but remember, it is necessary tobe within the complaint", she is pointing out to students' personal responsibility to deal with different situations.Event 2 shows her attitude tending to the participatory perspective once she is trying to make other students thinkabout. In other words, she acts like a school leader. Nevertheless, her leadership is more evident at the event 3when she calls for students' attention about voting. Robert is more around the personally responsible attitude atthe event 4, when he asks the three questions. Neither Esther nor Robert had trained or planned to do thepresentation with the researchers, which were there for supporting them.Environmental issue was addressed both in the beginning and in the end of each session. Usually Estherasked to students their opinion about environment. After some students' responses such as "green; water; air;pollution" she turned to social environment, in which their school is part of. At this point, the issues regarding towater and environment were discussed again as a critical perspective. Therefore, the seminar was an importantstep in the project’s development in that the students themselves engaged their classmates in dialogue.Based on the theory of dialogic action (Freire, 1989) we can see the seminar promoting collaboration,generating themes and perspectives of changing in teaching through empowerment of students. The theory ofdialogic action is based on four characteristics: collaboration, unity, organization, and cultural synthesis.Collaboration brings subjects together to transform the world: “Subjects meet in cooperation in order to transformthe world. Collaboration can only be achieved through communication. Dialogue, as essential communication,must underlie any collaboration” (Freire, 1989, pp. 167-168). Unity must occur in favor of liberation andtransformation, a form of exercising collective praxis. Organization “is not only directly linked to unity, but is anatural development of that unity. Accordingly, the leader's pursuit of unity is necessarily also an attempt toorganize the people, requiring witness to the fact that the struggle for liberation is a common task” (p. 176).Finally, cultural synthesis is based on the different views of subjects. “Cultural action is always a systematic anddeliberate form of action which operates upon the social structure, either with the objective of preserving thatstructure or of transforming it” (p. 180).The dialogue established among students reinforced the characteristic of collaboration, particularlyregarding to the issue of critical thinking, which became a vehicle for communication among them. The students’speech during the seminar demonstrated characteristics of unity and organization, and the structure of the seminarcan be considered a cultural synthesis. For example, the scholarship student who wrote the rap communicated tohis peers through the artistic and cultural language of the community in which the school is located. At the sametime, the arguments presented by the scholarship students point out a democratic leadership whose definition ofcritical thinking is a method for communication and transformation.As our first findings we are able to state the issue about critical think emerged as one of main points inthis whole process so far is related to how people act in their own environment, that is, how they are citizens. Thuswe point out the lack of any participatory attitude of Mauá High School Students is related to the history of Mauádistrict. Despite its historical importance, the Mauá district is plagued by environmental pollution, including debrisfrom the bay and from the community, which still lives with a precarious urban infrastructure and a lack of basicsanitation. At the context of the school, students do not understand this situation as a problem. No problem, noconscious about either water quality or other social conditions they have.In conclusion, in the context of the Mauá High School, environmental education has to foster the criticalthink as way to make student conscious about their own problem (FREIRE, 1989), as opposed to a curriculumthat fails to develop students and teachers' critical thinking ability. Then in our point of view, empowering studentsmeans to make them conscious about their own problem, consequently, to push them up to take up higher levelsof citizenships.ReferencesFreire, P. (1989). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York, NY: The Continuum Publishing Company.Erickson, F. (2012). Qualitative research Methods for Science Education. In: FRASER, J. B., TOBIN, K. G.,CAMPBELL, J. M (Ed.). Second International Handbook of Science Education. Part two. Dordrechit,Heidelberg, London, New York: Springer, 1451-1469.Reis, G. & Oliveira, A. (2014). Environmental Discourses in Science Education: contributions to democracy,citizenship and social justice. Revista Brasileira de Pesquisa em Educação em Ciência, 14(2), 9-26.Westheimer, J. & Kahne, J. (2004). What kind of citizen? The politics of education for democracy. AmericanEducational Research Journal, 44(2), 237-269.AcknowledgmentsWe thank participating teachers and students. This project is funded by FAPERJ Grant 205588.ICLS 2016 Proceedings965© ISLS