Contextual Dimensions of an Ambient Intelligent ClassroomMatthew Montebello, University of Malta, matthew.montebello@um.edu.mtAbstract: The classroom is the classical environment where the formal education processtraditionally takes place. Ambient intelligence is the artificially intelligent way of how to rendera specific environment aware and responsive to a human being within that same environment.In this paper, we present a case of how the engagement of ambient intelligence within aclassroom can be apportioned into three basic aspects that collectively can change the way wevisualise classical teaching spaces. Three contextual dimensions of ambient intelligence arepresented and espoused within an academic framework to shed instrumental insights andstrategic directions on the future of ambient intelligent classrooms.IntroductionThe use of technology within an educational environment has proved to increase learner engagement levels aswell as enhance the learning process in general (Oakman, 2016). Nowadays we find classrooms that areoverflowing with technology that not only enhances the learners’ engagement levels, but also ameliorates thelearning process as it is able to adapt to the diverse learning styles of the same learners. Ambient Intelligence(AmI) is a digital technology that employs Artificial Intelligence (AI) to manage an electronically controlled andenclosed environment in a way that it responds and adjusts to the specific needs and characteristics of a personwithin that environment. This paper has been motivated by the ongoing research within the domain of intelligentlearning environments where we exclusively focus on the academic and pedagogical connotations of AmI appliedto the classroom, merging AI in education (AIED) with numerous other areas.Ambient intelligence in educationThe notion of personalisation has been applied to various domains especially when the goal is to enhance a serviceor a product that closely fits the corresponding requirements of a human user. Personalizing education is perhapsthe goal of every educator to ensure that each learner experiences a learning scenario that perfectly fits thebackground, academic needs and interests of the same learner (Montebello, 2017). In order to achieve suchpersonalisation capabilities, the use of artificially intelligent techniques are required, as a user profile needs to begenerated in order to match the specific service attributes or product specifications to the intended user. Theapplication of AmI to education is not abundant, comprehensive and coherent even though it can be traced backto prior to the millennium. A number of research studies investigated the physical aspect of the classroom(Ramadan, 2009; Winer & Cooperstock, 2002) that involves monitoring students and teacher occupying theclassroom, and automatically controlling the lights, air-conditioning, multi-media displays and acoustics. OtherAmI researchers (Antona, et al., 2010) investigated how to create a smart educational environment through thedevelopment of some kind of piece of furniture that sits in the classroom. Additional AmI projects, like those byShen, Wu, & Lee, (2014) and Ramadan (2009) made use of wireless technologies, NFC (Near FieldCommunication) and RFID respectively, to be less intrusive and remain loyal to the covert nature of AmI whileproviding a context-aware environment. To some extent the above mentioned AmI research projects failed tofocus directly on the academic content in a way that accommodates the unique learning needs of each individualstudent, which is what AmI in education should be focusing on. Leonidis, et al., (2010) offer a better insight inthe way they tackle the application of AmI to education as they present a theoretical framework, calledClassMATE, that enables pervasive interactive and context aware instruction within a smart classroom. Apartfrom the indispensable contextual awareness and a technologically-enhanced classroom, is the need of adaptiveeducational content coupled with the learning profile of each individual student. What we propose in the nextsection is conceivably a deeper and thorough insightful analysis of what the key elements are as we investigatethese factors within an academic context and substantiated within sound and established learning theories.Case for the classroomApplying AmI within a classroom presents a delicate situation due to the complex and sensitive nature of dealingwith learners within an environment that is susceptible to major disruptions at the minimal change in theconditions. The fact that the same learners are the source of such changes, one has to keep in mind ourresponsibility towards each learner and their education, as it is imperative and indispensable that an AmIclassroom is optimally designed and precisely devised. We propose a model made up of three dimensional aspectsthat collectively make up the AmI environment required within a classroom. The first of the three dimensions,ICLS 2018 Proceedings1373© ISLSthat we believe forms an essential part of the AmI paradigm when applied to education, is the human aspect. Thisaspect is obviously part of any AmI application as the enhanced environment is purposely boosted to add valueto people’s quality of life. However, we specifically chose to use the social concept rather than the human onedue to the classroom’s social connotations and the intricately dynamic complexities that occur within a traditionalclassroom. Group dynamics play an important role within the social aspect of a class, and the Connectivismlearning theory, that was proposed in 2005 by Siemens (2004) and Downes (2005), is frequently associated withthe use of social networks for educational purposes. This theory justifies how learners employ networkedresources, as potentially those within an AmI classroom, to form connections and links to learn and shareknowledge and ideas. The second dimension from the AmI paradigm within a classroom being proposed is thetechnological aspect that, apart from the physical instrumentation, incorporates the application of artificialintelligent technologies to personalize the entire process and match the respective profile of every learner. Wepropose the use of learners’ academic portfolios as part of the learning profiling process and personalisation whichare generated with the help of established machine learning techniques that AI researchers have employed overthe years. Modelling the specific characteristics of a learner requires a direct mapping of the individual portfolioto the unique learner as they map the distinctive attributes and academic features including educationalbackground, extra-curricular interests, personal preferences, and specific learning goals. Associated with this lineof thought is the adaptive learning theory as it supports the personalisation and customisation of services,information, and products to the specific requirements and profile of each individual user. The final dimension ofthe proposed smart classroom paradigm is the educational aspect, that requires the support and adoption ofrelevant learning theories to which the researcher subscribes and associates his or her philosophical reasoning. Inour third dimensional aspect, we apply the connectivism and adaptive learning theories as the basis of ourpedagogical methodologies to address the education aspects of our proposed model. This model is based on theconcepts of a personal learning environment whereby technology and social aspects come together within aclassroom as learners and educator interact through electronic and face-to-face interventions. The educator isresponsible of setting up the learning ‘scene’, providing potential resources, physical and/or electronic, give anyrequired support, while facilitating the entire educational process. The students, on the other hand, have access totheir personal portal, which acts as an arena for all of them to share resources and experiences, as each of them isindividually assisted and supported through the smart environment. This support is manifested through classroomdisplays, interventions by the educator to a single student or the class, or through the networked peers themselves.ConclusionsIn this paper, we have presented a proposal on a systematic and thorough way on how to deploy an AmI classroomthrough the proper analysis and investigation of three basic aspects, namely: social, grounded within theconnectivism learning theory; technological, grounded in the adaptive learning theory; and educational, that bringstogether the other two aspects. This has enabled us to ensure that a proper and structured process has beenestablished to develop comprehensive and complete AmI classrooms in the near future.ReferencesAntona, M., Margetis, G., Ntoa, S., Leonidis, A., Korozi, M., Paparoulis, G., & Stephanidis, C. (2010). AmbientIntelligence in the Classroom: an Augmented School Desk. 3rd Inter. Conf. on AHFE. Miami: AHFE.Downes, S. (2005). An Introduction to Connective Knowledge. Retrieved 10 13, 2017, fromhttp://www.downes.ca/post/33034Doyle, W. (2006). Ecological Approaches to Classroom Management. In C. Evertson, & C. Weinstein, Handbookof classroom management (pp. 97-125). New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates .Leonidis, A., Margetis, G., Antona, M., & Stephanidis, C. (2010). ClassMATE: Enabling Ambient Intelligencein the Classroom. International Journal of CEACIE, 4(6), 1058-1061.Montebello, M. (2017). Personalised e-Learning, EdD thesis. Sheffield: University of Sheffield.Oakman, H. (2016). The rise of game-based learning. Retrieved 09 15, 2017, from Education Technology:http://edtechnology.co.uk/Article/the-rise-of-game-based-learningRamadan, R. (2009). Leveraging RFID Tech. for Intell. Classrooms. 4th Inter Design & Test Workshop, 1-6.Shen, C., Wu, Y., & Lee, T. (2014). Developing a NFC-equipped smart classroom: Effects on attitudes towardcomputer science. Computers in Human Behavior, 30, 731-738.Siemens, G. (2004). Connectivism: A Learning Theory for The Digital Age. Retrieved 10 13, 2017, fromElearnspace: http://www. elearnspace.org/Articles/connectivism.htmWiner, L., & Cooperstock, J. (2002). The "Intelligent Classroom": changing teaching and learning with anevolving technological environment. Computers & Education, 38, 253-266.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1374© ISLS