Let Kids Solve Wicked Problems... Why Not?!Rachel Lam and Michelle Lowrachel.lam@nie.edu.sg, michelle.low@nie.edu.sgNational Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, SingaporeAbstract: We describe the first iteration of design experiments that aim to assess aninstructional framework we call Preparation for Future Collaboration, which consists of threemain phases of learning activity: 1) individual cognitive preparation in the content to-belearned, 2) discussion/collaboration of ideas generated during preparation, and 3) directinstruction. We conducted an experimental study in situ in three fourth-grade classes in a publicschool in Singapore, manipulating the way that students prepared for a collaborative activity ina topic in environmental education. Future analyses will include using measures of studentartifacts to assess the effectiveness of different forms of preparation on both the process oflearning and post-activity outcomes. In this paper, we share two cases to illustrate student abilityto generate solutions to a wicked problem.Keywords: preparation for collaboration, collaborative learning, complex problem solvingWe should put a sensor on the ground so that when someone litters there will be a small space that will openand the litter...will drop into a place with treadmills on the ground and a thin magnetic roof so the cans thathave been littered will be attracted by the magnetic roof... when litters are on the treadmill a smart computercan identify the plastic and paper and pick it up with fake metal hands. (Fourth-grade female student and malestudent, 2015).IntroductionThe above quote comes from two Singaporean students who discussed how to solve a typical wicked problem onwaste production and disposal during a class lesson on environmental sustainability. Despite being a highlyteacher-centered and assessment-driven educational culture (Hogan et al., 2013), Singapore’s education system isshifting towards student-centric instruction. With the shift towards 21st century learning, students should be givenopportunities in class to not only apply content that is taught, but to engage in learning activities that involvecreative thinking, authenticity, and idea generation. In this paper, we present work from the first iteration of aseries of design experiments (Brown, 1992) being conducted in Singaporean classrooms that are founded on atheoretical framework we call Preparation for Future Collaboration (PFC). At the core of PFC is designingindividual preparatory tasks that aim to invoke the generation of ideas and naïve conceptions in ways that lead toeffective collaborative discussion and learning. We further explicate our framework below, describe the design ofour study, and share preliminary findings based on two cases of student collaborative work.Preparation for Future Collaboration (PFC)The notion of PFC involves activation of particular cognitive processes through the design of the instructionaltask, subsequent engagement in peer collaboration, and then teacher-led instruction following. This approachencourages students to freely discuss ideas with a peer, rather than imposing structures on their interactions (e.g.through collaborative scripting or prompting, or training on how to collaborate). We are examining two ways tocognitively prepare for collaboration: a) studying/working with the canonical forms/representations of a topic andb) generating one’s own ideas before learning the canonical forms. In both cases, the preparation promotes adifferent degree of “readiness” for learning in the subsequent collaboration. According to the Preparation forFuture Learning paradigm, preparing by generating knowledge promotes readiness to learn in a future lecture byhelping students to: differentiate prior knowledge in ways that draw attention to deep principles of the concepts(Schwartz & Martin, 2004; Schwartz, Sears & Chang, 2007), and become sensitive to both the deep structural andsurface features of the concepts (Schwartz, Chase, Oppezzo, & Chin, 2011), which then helps to consolidateknowledge during the subsequent lecture. PFC similarly addresses how preparation influences readiness to learnin a future task, however, our interest is in learning in a future collaboration, prior to receiving direct instruction.The PFC model is theorized across three phases. We borrow from Kapur and Bielaczyc’s (2012) workon design principles for Productive Failure to show how the mechanisms of generation, exploration, andconsolidation and knowledge assembly spread across the PFC phases, as shown in Fig. 1. Ultimately, ourconjecture is that the instructional context drives the learning processes that occur during preparation, which drivethe process of collaboration, which affects learning during the direct instruction.ICLS 2016 Proceedings902© ISLSPhase 1Instructionalcontext(degree ofgenerative activityin learning tasks)Preparation(Exploration andGeneration)Phase 2Collaboration(Exploration andGeneration andConsolidation andKnowledge Assembly)Phase 3Receiving DirectInstruction(Consolidationand KnowledgeAssembly)Figure 1: Phases of the Preparation for Future Collaboration (PFC) approach.Lam’s (2013) prior work investigating different forms of preparing to collaborate has shown similar post learningoutcomes from both generative and non-generative preparation, however, the degree of learning during thecollaboration differed across the types of preparation (unpublished data). In this paper, we share two cases fromthe current study to further unpack student collaborative work.Complex problem solving and wicked problemsAccording to Funke (2001), complex problem solving has two main features: connectivity and dynamics.Connectivity refers to links between the different variables within a problem, and includes the complexity thateach variable entails. Real-world problems (described below regarding our study) can be addressed through avariety of complex solutions, and each solution typically has its own set of interconnected variables. For example,for a problem of excessive waste being produced in a community, a solution focused on reducing waste couldstem from individual action (e.g. by producing less, by reusing more, by recycling), which could be influenced bya government policy imposing a quota on waste production, which might encourage communities to organizeways to educate residents about the problem. Dynamics refers to the fluctuations that arise within a problem,which signal changes that develop over time. For instance, the solution of a government ban on plastic bags couldlead to the long-term effect of producing less plastic waste. However, as communities shift away from plasticbags, there might be an increase in the use of paper bags subsequently increasing paper waste, or a shift towardsusing reusable bags, leading to the development of a new material. The connectivity and dynamics of suchproblems often makes them messy, and it is difficult to determine “right/wrong” solutions, thus deeming them“wicked” problems (Hung, 2013). The work on complex problem solving is mostly conducted in older populations(Ventura, 2014; Wickman, 2014). The shift to 21st century learning in K-12 education has emphasized the abilityto transfer problem-solving skills (OECD, 2013), and students will be required to engage in complex, real-worldproblem solving when they enter the workforce (Fournier, 2002).The present studyOur interest was to investigate how primary school students would engage in complex problem solving, whiletesting the Preparation for Future Collaboration instructional approach. We designed a problem question thatfocused on the growing production of waste in Singapore, a country with a great scarcity of landmass. Studentswere introduced to the problem and given information on the country’s space constraints for landfills. They werealso presented with the concepts of “reduce, reuse, and recycle,” as aids to solve the problem. Students participatedin all three PFC phases. We present two cases of student paired collaborative work from the study.MethodsWe used an experimental design to test how two different kinds of preparation would affect collaborative learningand problem-solving outcomes in three fourth-grade classes. The experiment was run in situ, and replaced theteachers’ original activities for the topic.Student and school sampleA total of 100 students across the three classes participated. The school was a typical public primary school, andone of the lower ranked schools in its area (1). Our larger project targets low-achieving students, but we haveincluded classes at a range of levels in our first iteration.ProcedureThe PFC lesson was conducted in 1.5 hours. The same researcher facilitated the lessons in all three classes, while1-2 research team members and the classroom teacher helped to manage the students. Students were first briefedon basic logistics of the study and then listened to a 15-minute presentation by the instructor-researcherintroducing the problem question. Students were then randomly assigned to a condition: Select a solution orICLS 2016 Proceedings903© ISLSGenerate solutions. In the Select condition, students individually selected one of three given solutions to theproblem and wrote down why they chose the solution. In the Generate condition, students individually generatedas many solutions as they could in the given time period. All students worked for 15 minutes during the preparationphase. At the collaboration phase, students were randomly assigned a partner in the same condition. Theydiscussed their individual ideas with each other and then jointly recorded onto a worksheet their “best” solution.Students worked collaboratively for 35-40 minutes. The instructor then engaged students in a whole classdiscussion by allowing them to share (by volunteering) their collaborative solutions out loud, and afterwardpresented information about various elements of complex problem solving (e.g., sharing multiple perspectives,complexity/simplicity of solutions, feasibility of solutions, cost-effectiveness, etc.).AnalysisThe larger study will include a post-problem-solving activity that measures problem-solving and transferoutcomes, and we will conduct quantitative analyses of the individual, collaborative, and post-activity measuresto compare the two conditional groups. However, here we share two cases of student collaborative work from thegenerate condition in order to highlight some of the ways that students solved the wicked problem. We presenteach case of written solutions and our interpretation of the comprehensiveness, novelty, and feasibility of thesolutions (2), and also provide excerpts of the student discourse to illustrate negotiation of ideas.FindingsCase 1:.Our quote above was taken from a pair in a mid-level class. The students also wrote about making “newstuff” out of disposed plastic and reusing paper and they introduce the idea of recycling ash in landfills to “makeit into a flower vase and use it as soil.” For comprehensiveness, this pair’s use of details to describe their hightech solution is noteworthy. They mention a way to handle metal (“cans” being “attracted by the magnetic roof”)and using a smart computer to differentiate materials. They describe a “sensor on the ground” to detect trash andusing treadmills to transport trash to the appropriate places. In addition, they address what to do with recycledmaterial, such as make “coins” from melted metal. Regarding novelty, compared to the other pairs in our sample,this pair’s solution was unique. Many pairs mentioned separating the types of recyclable material, but into theexisting recycle bins in Singapore. This pair weaves elaborate use of smart technology into their solution. Forfeasibility (that a solution is adaptive to reality), although complex and costly, such a solution is not outlandish.The idea to make soil out of ashes, in fact, aligns to one of Singapore’s strategies, in which non-toxic ash ofincinerated waste is dumped on an off-shore landmass and covered with a layer of soil to form a self-sustaininggreen landscape (see http://www.nea.gov.sg/energy-waste/waste-management/semakau-landfill).The student dialogue included frequent turn-taking and negotiation of ideas, with little to no externalguidance to facilitate their interactions. Excerpts are included below:Excerpt 1S1: The litter will go inside, then go on a treadmill and then[imitating machine noises], all the cans will be [imitatingmachine noises] attracted from the magnetic...S2: How are they gonna do that? How you know, how youknow you gonna do that? How they know how to do that?S1: So you must dig the whole Singapore ground. And thenputs like a sensor and then every time someone litters... adoor open, drop inside.S2: Okay, I think I agree on that also.S1: You agree?S2: Ya, write down.Excerpt 2S1: The waste can be put in—S2: Container.S1: —the landfill. To the landfill—S2: Landfill.S1: —into a landfill or put it in a volcano.S2: What? How can they be transportedintoa volcano?S1: Cannot ah?S2: Ya. ... [skipped utterances] ...S2: Go to, go to erm Indonesia for that.S1: Ya, put it into the Indonesia volcano.Case 2: In this case, students from a low-achieving class discuss how recycled items can be donated to“poor people” to essentially start small businesses, whereby they remake the items into new things for sale. Thestudents write about donating recycled items to poorer countries so that people can earn money. They also addresshow they, themselves, can save money by using recycled items to make gifts. In additional, they include the ideathat such practices could motivate people to continue to recycle. For comprehensiveness, this pair’s solutioncentered on different ways of using recycled materials to earn money for the poor. The level of detail contraststhe first pair, but is still elaborated with several separate ideas (e.g., make “things” to sell; buy food; build houses;buy pencils, books, toys, phone; buy gifts) and the idea of motivation to sustain new practices. For novelty, similarICLS 2016 Proceedings904© ISLSto pair 1, the solution was unique relative to the sample, in particular, with regard to the altruistic focus on reusingrecycled material to help the poor or to make gifts for others. Finally, the solution is highly feasible because itrequires few resources and is a low-cost solution.Conclusions and implicationsDespite the typical highly teacher-centric instruction, i.e., first learning the “right” answers and then applyingthem to problem questions, our experience has shown that a task designed to first elicit students’ naïve conceptionsof yet-to-be-learned topics can lead to substantive interesting collaborative work. Our early analysis has shownthat grade 4 primary students are capable of collaboratively generating interesting and elaborate ideas to solve awicked problem, with little teacher intervention or direct instruction on common elements of complex problemsolving. In the next iteration of our work, we will improve the design of the learning activities based on initialfindings, examine how different types of preparation affect the collaborative process, and investigate how the PFCinstructional design influences performance in novel problem-solving activities.Endnotes(1) Singapore uses an educational streaming system that relies on student performance on national exams.(2) These three factors were borrowed from Galati (2015), which provides a comprehensive guide to asses difficult-tojudge solutions to complex problems.ReferencesBrown, A.L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.Fournier, E.J. (2002). World regional geography and problem-based learning: Using collaborative learning groupsin an introductory-level world geography course. The Journal of General Education, 51, 293-305.Funke, J. (2001). Dynamic systems as tools for analyzing human judgment. Thinking & Reasoning, 7, 69-89.Galati, F. (2015). Complexity of judgment: What makes possible the convergence of expert and nonexpert ratingsin assessing creativity. Creativity Research Journal, 27(1), 24-30.Hogan, D., Chan, M., Rahim, R., Kwek, D., Maung Aye, K., Loo, S. C., … Luo, W. (2013). Assessment and thelogic of instructional practice in Secondary 3 English and mathematics classrooms in Singapore. Reviewof Education, 1(1), 57–106. http://doi.org/10.1002/rev3.3002Hung, W. (2013). Team-based complex problem solving: A collective cognition perspective. Education TechResearch Dev, 61, 365-384.Kapur, M., & Bielaczyc, K. (2012). Designing for productive failure. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(1),45-83.Lam, R.J. (2013). Maximizing learning from collaborative activities. In M. Knauff, M.Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I.Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. (pp.2814-2819). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (2013), The Programme for InternationalStudent Assessment (PISA) 2015 draft collaboration problem solving framework. Retrieved fromhttp://www.oecd.org/callsfortenders/Annex%20ID_PISA%202015%20Collaborative%20Problem%20Solving%20Framework%20.pdfSchwartz, D.L., Chase, C.C., Oppezzo, M.A., & Chin, D.B. (2011). Practicing versus inventing with contrastingcases: The effects of telling first on learning and transfer. Journal of Educational Psychology, 103(4),759-775.Schwartz, D.L. & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare for future learning: The hidden efficiency of encouragingoriginal student production in statistics instruction. Cognition and Instruction, 22(2), 129-184.Schwartz, D.L., Sears, D., & Chang, J. (2007). Reconsidering prior knowledge. In M. Lovett & P. Shah (Eds.),Carnegie Symposium on Cognition, 319-344. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.Ventura, M. (2014). Problem-based learning and e-learning in sound recording. International Journal ofInformation and Education Technology, 4, 427-429.Wickman, C. (2014). Wicked problems in technical communication. Journal of Technical Writing andCommunication, 44, 23-42.AcknowledgementsThis work was funded by a grant from the Singaporean Ministry of Education, #OER 06/15 RJL.ICLS 2016 Proceedings905© ISLS