Designing an Educative Curriculum Embedded Within anInteractive Web-Based Platform to Facilitate Teacher LearningMiray Tekkumru-Kisa, Florida State University, mtekkumrukisa@fsu.eduChristian D. Schunn, University of Pittsburgh, schunn@pitt.eduAbstract: Educative curricula are often considered as one potential vehicle to support changesin how students learn science in classrooms, especially for instruction currently not alignedwith ambitious instructional reforms. Our work presents one such effort, focused on teachersas a community of learners. Using a design-based approach, we developed a web-based tool,iPlan, which provides online access to educative curriculum materials in an interactivelearning platform. The purpose of this study is to examine design features of iPlan in terms ofaffordances and challenges. We examine an implementation in an integrated math-sciencecurriculum unit. Through qualitative analysis of interviews with 13 high-school biologyteachers across two cycles of design and testing, we identified the ways in which teachersused and learned from the iPlan tool; which features seem to work and why. The studyprovides implications for developing online learning environments for teachers.IntroductionScience education has recently been the focus of ambitious instructional reforms in the United States. TheFramework for K-12 Science Education (National Research Council, 2012) together with the Next GenerationScience Standards (NGSS; NGSS Lead States, 2013) emphasize in-depth development of core explanatory ideasand engagement in scientific and engineering practices. This will mean substantial instructional changes formany teachers (National Academies of Sciences, 2015). Well-designed, reform-based curriculum materials inscience can be used to anchor discussions about efforts to put these reforms into practice and as tools to guideinitial attempts in the classrooms (Schneider et al., 2005). Particularly, educative curriculacurriculummaterials designed to address teacher learning (Ball & Cohen, 1996; Davis & Krajcik, 2005)can be leveragefor large-scale instructional improvement. Moreover, given the scale of the need for the kind of complexlearning called for in these ambitious reforms, another promising area for supporting teachers’ learning is onlineenvironments (Moon et al., 2014; National Academy of Sciences, 2015).This paper presents an effort that was conducted for instructional improvement in biology classroomsby considering teachers as key players for successful implementation of reform-based curriculum that aims toaddress goals for student learning as envisioned in the NGSS. As part of this effort, educative curriculummaterials that integrate biology and mathematics ideas within an engineering problem context were developed.The curriculum targeted key goals for students’ learning as defined in the NGSS, and was educative forteachers. They were situated in an online platform, iPlan, that creates a web-based community of learnersamong teachers implementing the reform-based curriculum materials. Our goal in this study is to uncoverdesign features of iPlan in terms of affordances and challenges during the implementation of these curriculummaterials. Specifically, we are interested in identifying specific design features of iPlan that were (or were not)taken up by teachers and the reasons for why. Consistently, this study aims to answer: (1) How did teachers useeducative curriculum materials embedded in the designed online learning environment? (2) How did teachersuse collaborative aspects of the online environment in which curriculum materials were embedded?Theoretical frameworkAmong all different instruments for conveying reforms on a large scale, curriculum has the most direct effect onwhat teachers do in their classrooms, making curriculum a frequently used tool for reformers and policymakersto influence practice (Brown & Edelson, 2003). Curriculum is often transformed and goes on to influencestudents’ learning through teachers (Stein, Remillard & Smith, 2007). Therefore, curriculum materials should bedeveloped by placing teachers’ learning at the center of these development efforts (Ball & Cohen, 1996).There has been growing knowledge base about the design and use of educative curriculum materials.Davis and Krajcik (2005) proposed a set of design heuristics for educative curriculum materials that facilitateddiscussion about how curriculum materials support teachers’ learning. Designing curriculum materials that arewritten to speak to the teachers about the tasks and the ideas underlying them has also been emphasized(Remillard, 2000) because it is important to engage teachers in the ideas underlying curriculum designers’decisions and suggestions. One consideration in the design of educative curriculum materials is how and whatICLS 2018 Proceedings1009© ISLSteachers read, and where they focus (e.g., Beyer et al., 2009). These studies suggest that more needs to be doneto understand what teachers focus on in the curriculum materials.Educative curriculum materials could be more effective if they are used in conjunction with otherforms of support for teachers (Davis & Krajcik, 2005). For example, in a study of three beginning teachersForbes and Davis (2007) suggested the formation of materials-based teacher communities especially forbeginning teachers who have little or no expertise in using particular curriculum materials. Davis and colleagues(2004) discuss design principles of one such design for new elementary science teachers.Given the potential of the online learning environments for creating rich opportunities for teachers’learning that are scalable and accessible to large numbers of teachers (National Academies of Sciences, 2015),we brought together educative curriculum materials and online learning environments in our design to facilitatescience teachers’ learning. By doing so, this study stands out contributing to the limited knowledge base giventhe general focus on teachers as isolated learners in prior research on educative curriculum materials. In general,little research has examined online learning environments for teachers, especially science teachers (NationalAcademies of Sciences, 2015).MethodsBackground and contextThe study was situated within a project that focused on the design of scalable STEM units aimed to teachrigorous mathematics tied to big ideas in biology in high school science classrooms. We focused on theimplementation of one of these units in Fall 2013 and Spring 2014. The curriculum that we focused on was afour-week genetics unit situated within a large design challenge for students to help an imaginary local zoo todevelop a plan to breed rare geckos. The tasks in the unit were developed to help students to explore howgenetic information is inherited and expressed. NGSS-based emphases on greater depth, connections tomathematics, and engagement in scientific practices were incorporated into the design of this four-week unit.The unit differs from traditional curriculum in inheritance in important ways, including its impact on students’learning gains (Schuchardt & Schunn, 2016).The design of the iPlan tool was grounded in design-based research (The Design-Based ResearchCollective, 2003). In Fall 2013, 3 high-school biology teachers voluntarily participated in the study. They usedthe iPlan tool during their implementation of the curriculum described above. Based on the feedback that theyprovided, iPlan was revised and was used again in Spring 2014 by another 10 teachers during theirimplementation of the same curriculum. We focused on a broad range of science classrooms with students thatdiffer in their achievement levels and socio-economic status.iPlan: Educative and interactive learning platform for teachersiPlan tool is both a learning environment for teachers designed to support interactions among the teachers aswell as a resource that provides access to educative curriculum materials. iPlan was designed to create a webbased community of users, thereby giving implementing teachers access to peer resources but also by locatingexpertise and knowledge-building in the participating teachers. The web community extends across space(geographical boundaries) and time (teachers can access discussions and implementation notes from others evenif they are not implementing at exactly the same time).Educative curriculum materials embedded in iPlan were designed to support teachers’ learning as theyenact our reform-oriented curriculum materials. Representative set of the curriculum materials were analyzedfor educative aspects using the criteria for educative quality by Beyer, Delgado, Davis, and Krajcik (2009).These analyses revealed that curriculum materials address all three domains of knowledge in Beyer et al.’scriteria: PCK for science topics, PCK for scientific inquiry, and teacher’s subject matter knowledge (Schuchardtet al., 2017). These analyses provided justification for the claims about the educative nature of the materials.Table 1 provides features of iPlan designed to structure and support learning interactions amongteachers as well as features of educative curriculum materials and structures built in iPlan to make these featuresvisible for the teachers (also see Figure 1). The first three features focused on facilitating teachers’ learningthrough their implementation of the curriculum materials and also supporting them in making adaptations thatwere consistent with the intended learning goals. The latter two features focused on supporting teachers morebroadly in productive adaptations (i.e., considering broader pragmatic and local context issues) and alsoleveraging distributed expertise to support curricular innovations.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1010© ISLSTable 1: iPlan Design Features and RationalesDesign RationalesConceptually connected arc of tasksModeling a vision for qualityscience teaching as emphasized inthe NGSSTransparency of the designers’intentLocating expertise and knowledgebuilding in the participating teacherswith an encouragement to shareSupporting learning interactions forknowledge-buildingStructures and Functionalities Embedded in iPlanEach task in the curriculum has a macro and micro view. The macroview clarifies the connections between tasks through two specificsections: “Why this task now?” situates the task within the larger unit;“Moving on from here” how it conceptually relates to the next tasks.Micro view of each task makes clear the relevant NGSS practices andconcepts involved completing the task. For example, “target” boxesindicate the core ideas that students should develop in the task;“important” boxes indicate why the teacher or students are suggested todo certain things during the implementation of the task.iPlan has tools and structures to bring teachers’ attention to “why”regarding the purposes and timing of recommended task components.iPlan provides space for teachers to take notes about the lessonimplementation (e.g., lesson planning notes, reflection, modifications,reminders, etc.) and to share these notes with others.iPlan allows dialogue with other teachers and developers withindiscussion sections.Figure 1. iPlan: Micro view, discussion space, implementation notes (from left to right).Data analysis and preliminary findingsTeachers were interviewed just after their implementation of the curriculum. Questions targeted the ways inwhich iPlan supported teachers’ implementation of the curriculum. For example, one of the questions was: Werethere particular sections of the iPlan tool that helped you to understand not only what we wanted you to do butalso the reason for why we recommended you to do certain things? We analyzed the interviews to find patternsin the aspects of the educative curriculum features that were (or not) found to be helpful by the teachers, theways in which they used collaborative aspects of the curriculum materials, and why. Therefore, in our analysisour purpose was not only to identify what works but also why.The analysis from the first round of data collection informed the revisions in the iPlan tool, which werequickly implemented before the second round of implementation/data collection with the second set of biologyteachers (a given teacher covers this topic only once a year). In the first round, teachers were satisfied withhaving access to the curriculum materials online because they liked having everything organized in one placeand easy to access from everywhere. They did not find the interactive features as useful. Some of theirchallenges informed the redesign (e.g., difficult to find earlier posts; not located in a visible space on the page).However, some of the reasons for not using these features were related to their issues of their current constraints(e.g., finding the time to write implementation notes).The second-round interviews have already revealed that most of the teachers found the detailedguidance with designer intent information to be helpful. While some teachers found it helpful to readimplementation notes posted by other teachers in the online platform, some stated that they did not find otherteachers’ implementation notes as useful since other teachers’ classroom context seemed to be different thantheir own classroom context and student composition. Some of the teachers also expressed hesitation aboutposting in an online platform. These (preliminary) analyses have begun to reveal that teachers did not see thebenefit or necessity of collaborating with other teachers virtually. Future analysis will examine the patterns forthe reasons for why teachers did not choose to use interactive features of iPlan as intended by the designers.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1011© ISLSDiscussionGiven the recent ambitious instructional reforms and the scale of the need to successfully implement thesereforms, designs for teacher learning that can reach out to more teachers in meaningful ways have gained moreimportance. Curriculum is often seen as a tool to influence practice on a large scale. Similarly, there has been agrowing attention to online learning environments. In this study, we combined these features for teachers’learning within a new tool, iPlan. This study will reveal key and effective design features of on an onlineplatform that supports enactment of NGSS-aligned curriculum materials.Evidence base on the online programs designed to support teacher learning is not very robust (NationalAcademy of Sciences, 2015). Moon and colleagues stated (2014), “as a field, we know little about how theseweb-enabled and social media capacities interact with teacher learning ... By connecting particular designelements to the theoretical basis for the design and to a set of research questions about that design, the importantwork of theory building for online PD, indeed PD more generally, can proceed.” (p. 175) Addressing this call,this study has the potential to contribute the knowledge base on teachers’ learning in online environments.ReferencesBall, D. L., & Cohen, D. K. (1996). Reform by the book: What is or might be the role of curriculum materials inteacher learning and instructional reform? Educational Researcher, 25(9), 6–14.Beyer, C. J., Delgado, C., Davis, E. A., & Krajcik, J. (2009). Investigating teacher learning supports in highschool biology curricular programs to inform the design of educative curriculum materials. Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching, 46(9), 977–998.Brown, M., & Edelson, D. (2003). Teaching as design: Can we better understand the ways in which teachersuse materials so we can better design materials to support their changes in practice. (Design Brief).Evanston, IL: Center for Learning Technologies in Urban Schools.Davis, E. A., & Krajcik, J. S. (2005). Designing educative curriculum materials to promote teacher learning.Educational Researcher, 34(3), 3.Forbes, C. T., & Davis, E. A. (2007). Beginning elementary teachers' learning through the use of sciencecurriculum materials: A longitudinal study. In Annual Meeting of the National Association of Researchin Science Teaching, New Orleans, LA.Moon, J., Passmore, C., Reiser, B. J., & Michaels, S. (2014). Beyond comparisons of online versus face-to-facePD: Commentary in response to Fishman et al.,“Comparing the impact of online and face-to-faceprofessional development in the context of curriculum implementation”. Journal of TeacherEducation, 65(2), 172-176.National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2015). Science teachers learning: Enhancingopportunities, creating supportive contexts. Committee on Strengthening Science Education through aTeacher Learning Continuum. Board on Science Education and Teacher Advisory Council, Division ofBehavioral and Social Science and Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.National Research Council. (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, CrosscuttingConcepts, and Core Ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Remillard, J. T. (2000). Can curriculum materials support teachers' learning? Two fourth-grade teachers' use ofa new mathematics text. The Elementary School Journal, 100(4), 331–350.Schneider, R. M., Krajcik, J., & Blumenfeld, P. (2005). Enacting reform‐based science materials: The range ofteacher enactments in reform classrooms. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42(3), 283-312.Schuchardt, A. M., & Schunn, C. D. (2016). Modeling scientific processes with mathematics equationsenhances student qualitative conceptual understanding and quantitative problem solving. ScienceEducation, 100(2), 290-320.Schuchardt, A. M., Tekkumru‐Kisa, M., Schunn, C. D., Stein, M. K., & Reynolds, B. (2017). How muchprofessional development is needed with educative curriculum materials? It depends upon the intendedstudent learning outcomes. Science Education, 101(6), 1015-1033.Stein, M. K., Remillard, J., & Smith, M. S. (2007). How curriculum influences student learning. SecondHandbook of Research on Mathematics Teaching and Learning, 1, 319–369.The Design-Based Research Collective. (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educationalinquiry. Educational Researcher, 5-8.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1012© ISLS