Listening Versus Looking: Learning About Dynamic ComplexSystems in Science Among Blind and Sighted StudentsRan Peleg, University of Haifa, rpeleg@gmail.comSharona T. Levy, University of Haifa, stlevy@edu.haifa.ac.ilOrly Lahav, Tel-Aviv University, lahavo@post.tau.ac.ilNoha Chagab, Tel-Aviv University, K_noha@walla.comVadim Talis, Tel-Aviv University, talisv@yahoo.comAbstract: Listening to Complexity (L2C) is a novel sonified representation of complex systemsthat addresses the lack of exploratory materials in science for students who are blind. Itcomplements agent-based models of systems by representing a micro-level individual’sproperties, events and location, together with macro-level variables of the system. The studyexamines whether this perceptual compensation creates a comparable learning environment.Students who are blind worked with auditory models; sighted students used visual models.Conceptual understanding and systems reasoning were assessed with pre- and post-testquestionnaires. Learning processes were captured by analyzing their workbook writings. TheL2C environment not only supported blind students’ learning similarly, but also furthered theirlearning with one of the more challenging concepts, diffusion. Some concepts relating to themicro-level were learned earlier among the blind students. It seems that auditory representationincreases sensitivity to the micro-level interactions in a way less accessible in visualrepresentations.Keywords: model-based learning, complex systems, science education, special education, sonificationProblem statementHow can we support students who are blind in gaining access to exploratory learning materials in science? Blindstudents have been integrated into public schools for decades. However, since most learning materials in scienceclasses are based on visual information, they are often excluded from full participation (Beck-Winchatz &Riccobono, 2008). Several manuals have been written on how to teach science to students who are blind andvisually impaired (Kumar et al., 2001; Willoughby & Duffy, 1989). Few learning environments based on assistivetechnologies have been created to support science learning and research regarding such technologies is sparse(Farrell et al., 2001, 2008; Wies et al., 2000; Zaborowski, 2006).Addressing the problem: Listening to complexity (L2C)Listening to Complexity (L2C) addresses a central need among people who are blind: providing equal access tothe science classroom, allowing them to interact with exploratory materials, independently collect data, adapt andcontrol their learning process. Its design is based on the assumption that the supply of appropriate informationthrough compensatory sensory channels may contribute to science learning among blind students (Passini &Proulx, 1988). L2C is a representational form designed to overcome the lack of visual information, by providingdynamic auditory feedback to models of complex systems. Sonification, the use of non-speech audio to conveyinformation (Kramer, 1994), is used to represent micro-level individuals, their properties and related events inspace (via stereo), and macro-level descriptors of the system. Over the years, several auditory technologies havebeen developed for blind people (e.g. vOICe, Meijer, 1992; Lahav et al., 2008). The L2C models enables users tointeract with dynamic objects that are computed in real time, providing a heightened sense of reality while learningabout complex scientific phenomena. It is unique with respect to state-of-the-art learning technologies for blindpeople, in its sonified representation of dynamic complex systems, providing access to quickly changinginformation of both the micro- and macro-levels in a system. Important to future dissemination, it is a low-costtechnology based on the robust and continually developing free NetLogo platform (Wilensky, 1999).In this project, we addressed the learning of Kinetic Molecular Theory and the Gas Laws in middleschool chemistry, topics fundamental to the understanding of many advanced concepts in the physical sciences(NGSS, 2013). The learning environment is based on two earlier successful curricula (Levy & Wilensky, 2009ab;Samon & Levy, 2013). It consists of eight activities and includes guided exploration of agent-based NetLogocomputer models, laboratory demonstrations and class discussions. The models represent a gas in a container inthe form of particles (points) located within a rectangle (representing a vessel). The first models introduce studentsto the concept of a scientific model and to the use of NetLogo. With each additional model students explore newICLS 2016 Proceedings514© ISLSconcepts, relationships and phenomena, which allows them to discover a different characteristic of the nature ofgases. A workbook for the use of the students accompanies the unit. For most of the unit, students can progress attheir own rate with the workbook that provides guiding information and questions.The models were adapted for blind students by sonifying events and properties of a single particle suchas collisions and speed, as well as global variables such as pressure. It is important to note that the informationprovided in the visual model is not identical that delivered in the auditory model. Individual events and propertiesare highlighted to a greater extent in the auditory mode. Global information such as spatial patterns of multipleindividuals is provided in the visual but not the auditory model. Finally, in the auditory mode, information isprovided in real time, but cannot be accessed later, as in a visual graph. The curriculum was available to theparticipants as text-to-speech files and in Braille. Figures were presented as tactile images.In previous studies (Levy & Lahav, 2011) we had investigated the viability of such an approach with onemodel and one activity with a small sample of blind adults and found learning gains for some but not all scienceand systems concepts. Later studies (Lahav et al., 2014) have investigated various properties of sound that wouldoptimally convey the most information in a way convivial for our target audience. In the present study, we examinewhether such perceptual compensation creates a comparable learning environment for blind and sighted students.We compare learning outcomes and processes for a set of curricular materials in an auditory mode among blindstudents and in a visual model among sighted students. The research expands knowledge about how the auditorychannel may compensate and complement for the visual channel among blind individuals for learning complexsystems.Theoretical perspectivesOne of the challenges of gaining a well-developed understanding is that chemical systems can be described in atleast three different modes: an invisible molecular submicroscopic level, an experienced macroscopic level andsymbolic representations (Johnstone, 1993). Research has shown that students often lack deep understanding ofall three modes and often fail to coordinate between them (Novick & Nussbaum, 1981; Gilbert & Boulter, 2000).Complex systems approaches have come into the limelight in several different domains of science andin education and are based on the following idea: a system can be modeled as many entities that operate accordingto a small set of simple rules, their concurrent actions and interactions emerging into global patterns (Bar-Yam,1997). This research aligns with the recently published US framework for science education (NGSS, 2013) thatunderscores system models as one of the central crosscutting concepts. A complex systems approach to teachingchemistry has been shown to help students overcome these obstacles (Levy & Wilensky, 2009ab; Holbert &Wilensky, 2014). One way of introducing students to dynamic complex systems is by means of agent-basedmodeling (ABM) in which a computer model simulates the many autonomous, interacting entities (agents) of thesystem.We assess both conceptual learning in science and reasoning about complex systems among sighted andblind students with guided exploration of an ABM learning environment in which micro- and macro-levelvariables and events are either visual or sonified. Our research question is: How do conceptual learning, systemsreasoning and learning processes with sonified feedback models for blind students compare with such learningthrough a visual feedback model for sighted pupils?Methodological approachTo investigate the comparative learning of blind and sighted students a two-group pre-test-intervention-post-testquasi-experimental design was used. The process of learning is examined through analyses of the students’writings during four periods interspersed throughout the activity span.ParticipantsThe experimental group consisted of ten students, who are totally blind with no additional impairments (cognitive,auditory), their ages ranging 17-33, high school and university students, as well as two teachers. They all hadexperience in using computers and had studied science in junior- and high-school. The comparison groupconsisted of 31 seventh grade sighted students who attend a school serving a high socioeconomic population.Students were distributed approximately evenly between genders. Seven students’ data was excluded (completedless that 18/24 questionnaire items, workbook was largely empty). The differences between the two groups resultsfrom the scarcity of individuals who are blind and recruitment issues.Data sourcesData collected included students’ responses to pre-post questionnaires and workbook items.ICLS 2016 Proceedings515© ISLSThe questionnaires included three open items and 22 closed items, and were developed to align with thecurriculum. To do so, the items in the workbook were coded for scientific content, systems thinking and reasoningtypes (declarative, procedural, schematic or strategic, Shavelson et al., 2003). Questionnaire items were designedin similar proportions. Most items were validated and used in previous research (Levy & Wilensky, 2009b; Samon& Levy, 2013) and printed in four differently-ordered versions.The workbooks included 229 items, out of which four groups of items were selected as windows foranalyzing students’ ideas as they change throughout the learning process.ProcedureBlind students worked and were observed individually. Each session lasted 60 minutes, and the research consistedof ten sessions that were distributed over 5-8 weeks.Sighted students worked in their school’s computer lab, 1-2 students to a computer, during four doubleperiods over two weeks. Each student had a workbook. The teacher and researchers conducted relatively fewconversations, mainly to support students’ understanding of the workbook instructions.Both groups completed identical pre- and post-test questionnaires. Data collection was conducteddifferently for the two groups. While blind students worked individually with a researcher, sighted studentsworked individually or in pairs within a classroom setting. The choice results from the study’s main goal tocompare the blind students’ learning with learning in normal school settings, and the scarcity of blind individuals.Analysis schemesOverall learning gains: An overall score for each pre- and post-questionnaire was calculated by awarding 1 pointfor each correct answer. From this data overall scores for each student were calculated. The aggregated scores forsighted and blind students were compared.Learning of specific scientific concepts and systems reasoning: Questionnaire items were groupedaccording to the scientific concepts and central systems ideas. Scores were computed for individual students andwere then aggregated and compared. In terms of scientific concepts, students’ answers were coded for 26 conceptsand principles that relate to the particulate nature of gas, various particle interactions and behaviors, macroscopicproperties such as pressure and temperature, relations between these properties as seen in the Gas Laws andprocesses, such as diffusion. With respect to systems reasoning, the answers were coded for ideas regarding levels(micro, macro), emergence, interactions among micro-level entities, control, randomness and dynamicequilibrium.Learning process: In-depth analysis of four groups of items or ‘windows’ in the workbook providedinformation about the learning process. Answers were analyzed according to a coding scheme for both scientificcontent as well as systems reasoning as described above for the science concepts and systems reasoning in thequestionnaires.ValidityThe construct and criterion validity was determined by having five experienced science teachers and two scienceeducation experts the content knowledge questionnaires. All confirmed that the test items were appropriate forexamining the issues studied in the two learning environments. Coding was checked by the researchers and by anexternal expert in science education. Agreement was high and disagreements were resolved uniformly bydiscussion.FindingsOverall learning gainsGroup scores rose significantly from pre- to post-tests (Table 3). Blind students started out with a similar score tothat of the sighted students, but their post-test score is significantly higher (Mann-Whitney U=36.0, p<.01).Learning gains are comparable, though insignificantly higher for the blind students.Science conceptual learning and systems reasoningWith respect to conceptual learning in science, the sighted students mainly learned the Gas Laws, KMT anddensity to a certain degree and regressed with respect to understanding diffusion. Blind students' learning gainswere higher than those of sighted students. Quite distinct from the sighted students, their largest learning gainrelates to diffusion. Distinct from the sighted students the Gas Laws showed least improvement, this, however,may be a ceiling effect, as the score in the post-test is 85%. Regarding systems reasoning, the groups are similarICLS 2016 Proceedings516© ISLSin the pre-test and in the post-test.Learning processesProcesses of learning along the four windows for both groups are presented in Appendix A. Comparing thesetemporal curves shows that for most concepts, the shapes of the curves are similar for the two groups. This is nottrue for including interactions, uncertainty and decentralized control, where the blind students provided more suchexplanations earlier in the learning process. Another result from the comparison is the higher proportion ofstudents expressing each of the concepts (systems, science) among the blind group with respect to the sightedgroup.Table 3: Pre-test and Post-test Scores (%) and Learning Gain Comparisons for the Blind and Sighted Students,Overall, by ConceptBlind StudentsSighted StudentsLearningComparisonLearning Concepts(# of items)Pre-testM (SD)Post-testM (SD)Pre-testM (SD)Post-testM (SD)Mann-Whitney UOverall (22)58 (12)83 (10)53 (17)64 (18)90.0KMT (10)48 (19)78 (14)50 (21)60 (21)177*Diffusion (4)45 (20)80 (16)53 (32)47 (39)145**Density (3)47 (28)77 (16)56 (35)72 (25)138Gas laws (9)68 (13)85 (7)55 (19)72 (20)112GainScience conceptsSystems thinkingMicro-level (7)49 (22)87 (16)43 (22)58 (24)158Macro-level (7)70 (8)93 (14)57 (21)64 (21)160Emergence (8)56 (17)70 (9)57 (21)70 (20)107Conclusions and implicationsThe study compared blind students’ use of auditory computer models to sighted students use of visual models.With respect to sighted students, the auditory representation not only supported blind students’ learning similarly,but was even related to greater learning of diffusion, a challenging concept. In analyzing the progressions we cansee that the individual science and systems concepts were learned at similar times, corresponding to the learningmaterials. However, regarding two central systems concepts: interactions between individuals and uncertainty,the blind students learned and applied these concepts earlier.Earlier, we have compared the visual and auditory models, noting the greater salience of micro-levelindividuals. The L2C’s auditory representation seems to have increased sensitivity to micro-level interactions(e.g. colliding) in a way that is less accessible in visual representations. We had chosen to sonify particular eventsfor one particle and time progressions of global variables such as pressure. In fact, much information in the visualarray is missing in the auditory array: many other particles, each moving about, colliding and bouncing off walls.It would seem that this filtering of information helps students focus on these very interactions that are subtle inan array of many particles, and notice their random changes over time, evidence from which uncertainty can bederived.Limitations to this study include the different character and treatments of the two groups: theexperimental group included young adults, who interacted one-on-one with a researcher, while the comparisongroup included middle-school students who worked in pairs within a classroom. Such limitations were inevitabledue to a limited sized blind population.Given the success of this low-cost learning environment, extending this design to learning of other STEMsystems by using sonified models opens the way to equitable participation of blind people. It also raises questionsfor further research into the use of auditory representations to facilitate learning among sighted learners.ICLS 2016 Proceedings517© ISLSReferencesBar-Yam, Y. (1997). Dynamics of Complex Systems. Reading, MA: The Advanced Book Program.Beck-Winchatz, B., & Riccobono, M. A. (2008). Advancing participation of blind students in Science,Technology, Engineering, and Math. Advances in Space Research, 42, 1855–1858.Connell, B. R., Jones, M., Mace, R., Mueller, J., Mullick, A., Ostroff, E., et al. (1997). The Principles of UniversalDesign, Version 2.0. NC State University, Raleigh, NC: The Center for Universal Design.Farrell, B., Baldyga, D. D., & Erlandson, R. (2001). Force feedback mouse used for a physics experiment.Mansfield, CT. In J. D. Enderle & B. Hallowell (Eds.), NSF 2001 Report: Engineering Senior DesignProjects to Aid Persons with Disabilities. Wayne State University, Creative Learning Press, Inc.Gilbert, J.K., and Boulter, C.J. (1998). Learning science through models and modeling. In Fraser, B.J. & Tobin,K.G. (Eds.), International Handbook of Science Education (pp. 53-66). Great Britain: Kluwer AcademicPublishers.Holbert, N., & Wilensky, U. (2014). Constructible authentic representations: Designing video games that enableplayers to utilize knowledge developed in-game to reason About Science. Technology, Knowledge andLearning, 19(1-2), 53–79. doi:10.1007/s10758-014-9214-8Johnstone, A. H. (1993). The development of chemistry teaching: A changing response to changing demand.Journal of Chemical Education, 70(9), 701–705.Kramer, G., (1994). An Introduction to auditory display. In: Kramer, G. (Ed.), Auditory Display: Sonification,Audification, and Auditory Interfaces. Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity,Proceedings vol. XVIII. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.Kumar, D., Ramassamy, R., and Stefanich, G. (2001). Science for students with visual impairments: Teachingsuggestions and policy implications for secondary learners. Electronic Journal of Science Education,5(3),1-9.RetrievedJuly27,2010,fromhttp://wolfweb.unr.edu/homepage/crowther/ejse/kumar2etal.htmlLahav, O. & Levy, S.T. (2011). Listening to Complexity: Blind people’s learning about gas particles through asonified model. International Journal on Disability and Human Development, 10(1), 87-91.Lahav, O., Kittany, J., Levy, S.T., & Furst, M. (2014). Perception of Multi-varied Sound Patterns of SonifiedRepresentations of Complex Systems by People who are Blind. Paper presented at 10th InternationalConference Series on Disability, Virtual Reality and Associated Technologies, Gothenburg, Sweden.Lahav, O., Schloerb, D., Kummar, S. & Srinivasan, M.A. (2008) BlindAid: a learning environment for enablingpeople who are blind to explore and navigate through unknown real spaces. Paper presented at the VirtualRehabilitation 2008 International Conference, Vancouver.Levy, S.T., & Lahav, O. (2011). Enabling blind people to experience science inquiry learning through soundbased mediation. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 28(6), 499-513.Levy, S.T., & Wilensky, U. (2009a). Crossing levels and representations: The Connected Chemistry (CC1)curriculum. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 18(3), 224-242.Levy, S.T., & Wilensky, U. (2009b). Students’ Learning with the Connected Chemistry (CC1)Curriculum:Navigating the Complexities of the Particulate World. Journal of Science Education andTechnology, 18(3), 243-254.McGuire, J. M., Scott, S. S., & Shaw, S. F. (2006). Universal design and its applications in educationalenvironments. Remedial and Special Education, 3, 166-175.Meijer, P.B. (1992). An experimental system for auditory image representations. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng, 39,112-121NGSS. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, DC.Novick, S., & Nussbaum, J. (1981). Pupils’ understanding of the particulate nature of matter: A cross-age study.Science Education, 65(2), 187–196.Nussbaum, J. (1985). The Particulate Nature of Matter in the Gaseous Phase. In R. Driver, E. Guesne, & A.Tiberghien (Eds.), Children’s Ideas in Science. Milton Keynes: Open University Press.Passini, R., and Proulx, G. (1988). Wayfinding without vision: An experiment with congenitally blind people.Environment and Behavior, 20, 227-252.Samon, S., & Levy, S.T. (2013). What Does a Complex Systems Perspective Offer Science Learning? JuniorHigh-school Students’ Learning of Chemical Systems with an Agent-based Viewpoint versus aDisciplinary Viewpoint? The Annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, April27-May 1, 2013, San Francisco, USA.Shavelson, R., Ruiz-Primo, M., Li, M., & Ayala, C. (2003). Evaluating New Approaches to Assessing Learning.CSE Report., 1522(310).ICLS 2016 Proceedings518© ISLSWies, E. F., Gardner, J. A., O’Modhrain, M. S., Hasser, C. J., & Bulatov, V. L. (2001). Web-based touch displayfor accessible science education. In S. Brewster & R. Murray-Smith (Eds.), Proceedings of Haptic HCI2000 (pp. 52–60).Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo. Center for Connected Learning and Computer-Based Modeling, NorthwesternUniversity. Evanston, IL. Retrieved July 27, 2010, from http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo.Willoughby, D., and Duffy, S. (1989). Handbook for itinerant and resource teachers of blind and visually impairedstudents. Baltimore, MD: National Federation of the Blind.Zaborowski, B. (2006). Research issues from the consumer perspective [Message 1]. Retrieved July 27, 2010,fromhttp://ecampus.pco.edu/webapps/portal/frameset.jsp?tab=course&url=%2Fbin%2Fvommon%2Fcourse.pl%3Fcourse_id%3D_355_1ICLS 2016 Proceedings519© ISLSAppendix A: Learning Progressions for Systems Reasoning and Conceptual Learningin Workbook Activity WindowsICLS 2016 Proceedings520© ISLSICLS 2016 Proceedings521© ISLS