AutBlocks: Using Collaborative Learning to Develop JointAttention Skills for Children with Autism Spectrum DisorderBryan Boyle, Trinity College Dublin, boyleb5@tcd.ieInmaculada Arnedillo-Sanchez, Trinity College Dublin, macu.arnedillo@tcd.ieAejaz Zahid, Mada Qatar Assistive Technology Center, azahid@mada.org.qaAbstract: The development of Joint Attention skills for children with Autism SpectrumDisorder is an important pre-requisite to them achieving their full potential in terms of socialand emotional interaction skills as they progress through childhood. This paper describes thedevelopment of a multiuser collaborative game using gestural interaction to provide autisticchildren with social interaction difficulties a means to build, practice and consolidate theirjoint attention skills. The feedback and experiences of a group of teachers of children withAutism are also presented for analysis and planning for future work.Keywords: autism spectrum disorder, joint attention, gesture control, game designIntroductionSocial interaction and communication skills play a pivotal role in the development of a child’s ability to formmeaningful social and emotional relationships in later life. For typically developing children the developmentof social interaction skills follows a predictable developmental trajectory. For children with Austism SpectrumDisorder (ASD) the ability to correctly understand social behaviours is impaired such that they have difficultiesidentifying, interpreting and reproducing the general palette of behaviors that we use when interacting withothers.ASD is a neurodevelopmental disorder that is characterized by the presence of a triad of symptoms:communication disabilities, impairment of social interaction and the presence of repetitive, restricted andstereotyped patterns of behavior (Wing & Gould 1979). Difficulties in social interaction presents as one of themost significant problems faced by children with ASD, impacting upon their ability to communicate andcooperate with parents, siblings, peers and other adults. Children with ASD will often be unable to interpretverbal and non-verbal social cues such as speech, facial expressions or gestures and are less likely to initiateinteractions with others or engage in cooperative play. This leads to more limited opportunities socialinteraction or to practice social strategies restricting children to playing on their own or engaging in a narrowrepertoire of behaviours and interests. Joint attention refers to a child’s ability to “coordinate attention betweeninteractive social partners with respect to objects or events in order to share an awareness of the objects orevents” (Mundy et al 1986). It can include verbal and non-verbal behaviours such as visual attention, followingthe attention of others and directing the attention of others. Children develop joint attention in a developmentalmanner evolving through three types of joint attention: shared gaze, dyadic and triadic. Typically children witha diagnosis of Autism do not demonstrate joint attention on a consistent basis with care-givers, or otherchildren. Joint attention has also been indicated as a predictor of future cognitive, socio-emotional, languagedevelopment and verbal and communication skills (Sigman and Ruskin 1999).Computers have been used widely as a tool to assist in learning and skill development for children withASD in a range of different domains (Kagohara et al 2013). Some authors suggest that children with ASDdemonstrate an affinity for using computers and technology (Ploog et al 2013). To this end, there has been avariety of development projects reported exploiting the multi-media, interactive and flexible features oftechnology such as special input devices (touch screens and surfaces), interactive and virtual environments, eyetracking and social robotics (Boucenna et al 2007).Related workComputers assisted learning (CAL) approaches that support and facilitate the learning of children with ASD arewell reported in the literature (Watson 2014). The value of educational games as a medium for collaborativelearning for the general population of typically developing children is also documented (Wang et al., 2009).Moreover, recent work has examined the potential of newer technology interfaces to support collaboration andlearning for children with ASD. Giusti & Zancanaro (2011) describe the development and use of a suite ofgames on a tabletop device to support the training of social competence skills for children with ASD. It has alsobeen suggested that direct touch interfaces may be more effective than using multiple traditional input devicesCSCL 2015 Proceedings529© ISLSsuch as mice or switches. Regardless of the technology being used, Battocchi and colleagues (2009) indicatethat children with ASD required more support and encouragement from teachers or therapists during the initialphases of using collaborative or cooperative games.Virtual reality or virtual worlds also present a viable alternative to more traditional ASD CALapproaches. People with ASD understand, or have the potential to understand, virtual worlds are arepresentation of reality (Parsons & Mitchell 2004, Moore et al 2004). To this end, such environments can beused to repeatedly practice and rehearse social skills while eliminating the stresses often experienced bychildren in face to face activities. For instance, Fabri (2006) suggests that using avatars, particularly emotionallyexpressive avatars, is a key element in enhancing the experience of the teacher-learner and learner-learnerinteraction. A further area of related research explores the use of motion or gesture based control to allowchildren with ASD to engage with a CAL game. Bartoli and colleagues (2014) point to the potential of usingcommercial solutions such as the Kinect™ by Microsoft as a tool for working on specific social interactionskills such as attention. Although her work offers some positive outcomes, it is made clear that to date, there isstill a significant lack of empirical evidence demonstrating efficacy of such systems.Game developmentThis section describes the development of a prototype collaborative game called “AutBlocks”. The game itselfis a simple, block building or tower game for two players requiring a range of behaviours from participants tofoster collaboration and develop joint attention skills.Figure 1. AutBlock ScreenshotThe game environment was built using the Unity SDK (http://unity3d.com/) a popular cross platformgame creation environment. The game interaction was designed using the Kinect for Windows SDK version 1.7to control and utilize the four main data streams: Video, Skeletal, Color and Depth. In order to speed thedevelopment process a further development tool, ZDK for UNITY3D (http://zigfu.com/en/zdk/unity3d/) adevelopment kit for developing motion controlled applications to provide a set of pre-defined C# scripts thatinitialize skeletal detection and Skeletal / player tracking. In terms of the user model around which this gamewas designed a constraint from the outset was the high variability of social interaction skills amongst thepopulation of children with ASD as a whole. Unlike other similar projects targeting children and young adultswith a diagnosis of High Functioning Autism or Asperger’s Syndrome the target population for this particularapplication are those children with more significant impairment of social interaction skills. This suggested amore minimalist and simplified interface with a simple gameplay narrative involving a small number of coreactivities, such as moving, selecting, grasping and carrying.Game based collaboration patternsRelated studies have applied a model defining four patterns of collaboration that encourage collaborativelearning amongst users with ASD, although primarily for those with High Functioning Autism, these were usedto guide the storyboarding of this game during development. The table below presents the collaborativepatterns adapted for use in this project from the original with the required game tasks and the levels of jointattention demanded by the activity. In the proposed model, collaboration patterns are defined as follows:Passive sharing pattern: users engage with their own objects, using visual attention skills to identify theirassigned block and follow patterns of play as demonstrated by the avatar. Active sharing patters: users begin toselect from shared resources (blocks from a shared pile) moreover, users have to understand turn taking in orderto select their own block for use. Active sharing and joint performance pattern: users must build on their turntaking skills to assist each other in building the tower, it is expected that they will shift attention from their ownblocks to the other player’s block either when prompted by the game narrative or by each other.CSCL 2015 Proceedings530© ISLSTable 1: Collaborative patters for game elements linked with joint attentionCollaborative PatternPassive Sharing PatternActive Sharing PatternActive Sharing and JointPerformance PatternGame ElementIdentifying own avatarIdentifying assigned bricksSelecting bricks frompersonal storeMoving bricks to “TowerBuilding” areaSelecting from sharedresourcesTurn taking for selectionsand actionsSharing and giving blocksRequesting missing blocksProblem solving thebuilding pattern for thetowerJoint AttentionRequires visualattention skills(individual) and sharedgazeRequires dyadic jointattention skills andturn takingRequires active, triadicjoint attention skills,including sharing andMethodologyAfter the development of the game prototype, informed by the literature, related projects and the experiences ofthe authors working with children with ASD in a specialist Assistive Technology service, our objectives wereto: 1) test the relevance of the overall concept with users/stakeholders; 2) get a firsthand perspective of teachers’requirements from games addressing social interaction, and specifically Joint Attention. Since case studies offerthe possibility to study ideas and/or theories as they regard people in their real settings, and they enableresearchers to establish cause and effect relationships as they occur in their authentic context (Cohen et al.,2000; Yin, 2003) we opted for this methodology. The case study took place at specialist school for children withASD outside of school hours and comprised 6 teachers and 5 therapists (2 OT, 1 SLT, 2 ABA Therapists)working at the center. Both groups were facilitated by the same researcher, both groups felt uncomfortable withvideo as such data was gathered using the fieldnotes collected by a second researcher.FindingsGenerally both groups reported that they were positively inclined toward the use of a game to develop jointattention skills, although both groups reported concerns with the transferability of skills learnt outside of thegame environment. Group 2, comprising mainly therapists (4 therapists, 2 teachers) were very interested inmotion based games, particularly for children with difficulty sitting at desks for any functional time period.Furthermore, they expressed an interest in further developing the game to provide more simulation activities forreal-life scenarios with the avatar developing a role demonstrating key behaviours in specific contexts. Oneissue that emerged for both groups independently was that for multiplayer games to be truly practical in aclassroom setting they must be extendable beyond two players to include up to 6 children playingsimultaneously. Group 1, comprising mainly teachers (4 teachers, 1 therapist) highlighted the role played byteachers, parents and others in facilitating gameplay for children suggesting that the role played by humanassistance in the process is sometimes more important that the feedback or encouragement provided by thegame itself. Group 1 continued in their elaboration to suggest that in until a child has developed a certainmastery of the procedural elements of any game that adult guidance is required. This issue in particular was themost valuable gained from this process and requires further analysis and consideration prior to embarking uponfurther work.Conclusions and implicationsConsidering the fact that the game described here is at the earliest stage of development and that the use ofFocus Groups for evaluation is far from robust as a methodology it was heartening to hear that most feedbackhas been generally positive. Future work should give consideration to the need to incorporate more than twoplayers into games was also noted and may be possible as the Kinect™ technology matures further. Furtherwork on the game should also incorporate the wider context within which the game is played. It was clear fromthe feedback on teachers in this study that a host of other people facilitate children with ASD playing games.This can range from verbal encouragement and reinforcement through to explanation of rules and sometimesphysical facilitation. This should inform future development of games aimed at developing skills such as socialinteraction for children with ASD. Attention should be given to exploring the use of collaborative scripts as aCSCL 2015 Proceedings531© ISLSmeans of ensuring that the “players’ involved in the overall game environment are utilized to the maximum(Dillenbourg 2002). One area that requires careful examination in any future work is the measurement of jointattention by children with ASD. A potential area for development however would be the integration of gazetracking technology such as that used in marketing, usability and advertising research. More recently itspotential is being recognized as a tool in computer supported collaborative learning (Jermann et al 2013).ReferencesBartoli, L., Corradi, C., Garzotto, F. & Valoriani, M. (2014). Designing and evaluating touchless playfulinteraction for ASD children. Proceedings IDC ’14, pp 17 - 24Boucenna, S. and Narzisi, A. and Tilmont, E. and Muratori, F. and Pioggia, G. and Cohen, D. and Chetouani,M. (2014). Interactive technologies for autistic children: A review. Cognitive Computation,6(2)Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructionaldesign. In P. A. Kirschner (Ed). Three worlds of CSCL. Can we support CSCL (pp. 61-91). Heerlen,Open Universiteit Nederland.Fabri, M., (2006), Emotionally Expressive Avatars for Collaborative Virtual Environments, PhD Thesis, LeedsMetropolitan University,Fletcher-Watson, S. (2014) A Targeted Review of Computer-Assisted Learning for People with AutismSpectrum Disorder: Towards a Consistent Methodology. Review Journal of Autism and DevelopmentalDisorders, 1(2) 87 - 100Jermann, P., Gergle, D., Bednarik, R., & Dillenbourg, P. (2013). DUET 2013: dual eye tracking in cscl.Computer Supported Collaborative Learning Conference Proceedings, CSCL. 2013:Vol2. 446- 450Kagohara , D. , van der Meer , L. , Ramdoss , S. , O ’ Reilly , M. F. , Lancioni , G. E. , Davis , T. N. Sigafoos , J. (2013). Using iPods and iPads in teaching programs for individuals with developmental disabilities.Research in Developmental Disabilities, 34, 147 – 156Moore, D., Cheng. Y., McGrath, P., & Powell, N.J. (2005). Collaborative virtual environment technology forpeople with autism. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities 20(4), 231 – 243.Mundy, P., Sigman, M., Ungerer, J., & Sherman, T. (1986). Defining the social deficits of autism: thecontribution of nonverbal communication measures. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 27,657-669Parsons, S., & Mitchell, P. (2002). The potential of virtual reality in social skills training for people withautistic spectrum disorders. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 46(5), 430 – 443Ploog, B.O., Scharf, A. Nelson, D., Brooks, P.J (2013). Use of computer-assisted technologies (CAT) toenhance social, communicative, and language development in children with autism spectrum disorders,Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 43(2):301-22Sigman, M., & Ruskin, E., (1999), Continuity and change in the social competence of children with autism,Down Syndrome and developmental delays. Monographs of the Society for Research in ChildDevelopment, 64, 1 - 114Wing, L., & Gould, J. (1979). Sever impairments of social interaction and associated abnormalities in children:epidemiology and classification. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 9, 11 – 29.AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank participating teachers and therapists at the Step By Step Center in Doha, Qatar and thestaff of the Mada Qatar Assistive Technology Center, Doha, Qatar.CSCL 2015 Proceedings532© ISLS