Computation, Constructivism, and Curriculum DesignShayan Doroudi, Carnegie Mellon University, shayand@cs.cmu.eduAbstract: Existing methods for automating curriculum design have had limited impact overthe past fifty years. I propose two ways to potentially get around this limitation: developingadaptive content selection policies that are robust to different conceptions of student learningand taking an orthogonal approach to automated curriculum design that uses learner-generatedsolutions to help students learn.VisionFrom the mechanical teaching machines of the early twentieth century to intelligent tutoring systems and thewave of massive open online courses (MOOCs) in recent years, many have been motivated by the dream ofpersonalized, adaptive instruction for all students. To achieve this dream, learning scientists and educationaltechnology researchers have largely focused on rule-based systems that rely on extensive domain andpsychology expertise. To do adaptive content selection, these systems use simple forms of rule-based AI(possibly combined with constrained machine learning algorithms). While this approach has led to thedevelopment of successful intelligent tutoring systems with high quality content, (1) such systems use a verylimited form of adaptive content selection, and (2) developing such systems can be very costly. In contrast,some researchers are now starting to apply black box machine learning algorithms to do adaptive contentselection. However, in my dissertation I will show through a comprehensive literature review that theseapproaches have had relatively limited impact.Instead, I hope to demonstrate that combining insights from both approaches can help in automatingcurriculum design. In particular, I focus on three aspects of automated curriculum design: content creation,content curation, and adaptive content selection. I propose a number of methods for impactful, cost-effectiveautomated curriculum design that combine machine learning, human computation, and principles from thelearning sciences.First, I will describe how reasoning about model mismatch (i.e., the fact that our statistical models ofstudent learning do not accurately describe student learning) can help point out limitations in existingapproaches [Doroudi and Brunskill, 2017] and help in creating more robust adaptive content selection policies[Doroudi et al., 2017].Second, I will show experiments that demonstrate how we can leverage the work that students naturallydo to create new content in a cost-effective way [Doroudi et al., 2016]. In doing so, I will take motivation fromthe constructivist philosophy of education, whereby I view learner-generated solutions as being a projection ofstudents’ constructions on the written plane, which can then be used to inform other students as they constructtheir own understandings.Third, I propose to demonstrate how using machine learning (in particular, multi-armed bandits) canhelp curate the best content among a pool of learner-generated solutions that continues to grow over time.Finally, I propose to show how we can use learning science principles to constrain the search for goodcontent selection policies. In particular, I hope to show that constraining adaptive content selection algorithmswith insights from the expertise reversal effect can help improve upon strictly black box approaches to adaptivecontent selection that disregard what we know about student learning.ReferencesShayan Doroudi and Emma Brunskill. The misidentified identifiability problem of Bayesian KnowledgeTracing. In Educational Data Mining, pages 143–149. International Educational Data Mining Society,2017.Shayan Doroudi, Ece Kamar, Emma Brunskill, and Eric Horvitz. Toward a learning science for complexcrowdsourcing tasks. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in ComputingSystems, pages 2623–2634. ACM, 2016.Shayan Doroudi, Vincent Aleven, and Emma Brunskill. Robust Evaluation Matrix: Towards a more principledoffline exploration of instructional policies. In Proceedings of the Fourth (2017) ACM Conference onLearning@ Scale, pages 3–12. ACM, 2017.1882