Fostering a Knowledge Building Community in a Primary SocialStudies Class to Develop Humanistic View on Real World ProblemAndy Ng Ding Xuan, St Hilda Primary School, Ding_Xuan_Ng@moe.edu.sgTeo Chew Lee, MOE Singapore, Teo_Chew_lee@moe.gov.sgZahira Mohd Sedik, Ang Mo Kio Primary School, Singapore zahira_mohamed_sedik@schools.gov.sgLee Yu Ling, National Institute of Education, Singapore, Yuling.lee@nie.edu.sgAbstract: This study examined the nature of reasoning of 30 primary five students workingon a social studies topic on ‘Appreciating the World and Region We Live In’, contextualizedto a local community, Kampong Buangkok. Results showed that students not only becameincreasingly motivated in the processes of theorizing and collective solutioning, they werealso developing a higher level of consideration for the people and their activities, amongspatial and temporal considerations. We found clear evidence that students’ subject-basedliteracy skills improved significantly over the course of the KB lessons.IntroductionMuch educational research is motivated by the need to build students’ competencies in the face of the rapidlychanging world and its demand. What qualifies our students to fluently navigate and make sound decisions inthis complex world? A series of lectures designed for Harvard graduates dealing with moral dilemma heightenedthe need to look into the affective domain of learning including developing humanistic perspective toapproaching problems (Krathwohl et. al.). The aim of this study is to detail enactment of knowledge building(KB) pedagogy and technology in a primary five class working on the topic of preservation of “KampongBuangkok” in Singapore and investigate the impact of such an approach on developing 21st centurycompetencies, including a humanistic perspective in their decision-making process.BackgroundIn the past decades, educational research and learning sciences have motivated educators to shift their practice.Many changes in educational context have indeed happened. Plainly using the ‘inquiry’ method and thinkingskills in the teaching of history is an archaic approach dating decades back to the 1950s and 1960s (Woodhouse& Fleming, 1976). Around the world, especially during transition phases, history teaching plays a formative rolein empowering students to “become good citizens of their own nations, of troubled continents and of ourendangered global village” (Harkness, 1994). In Singapore, we are in the transition from our founding 50 yearsof nationhood to the next 50. According to PM Lee (2015), we must preserve what has worked for us:multiracialism and interdependence, and strive for what will forge a stronger 50 years for Singapore: identityand community. The concepts that PM Lee mentions as crucial for Singaporeans requires much more than justan intellectual exercise to deconstruct them in class: it requires a direction from a “values agenda” approach thatempowers students to refine these values in contextualized and relatable ways that history lessons can provide(Kelsey, 2009).KB presents a model of student-centered collaborative inquiry. KB teachers are encouraged toactively engage students in thinking through the diverse but related ideas that emerge in the class inquiry andsupporting them in ways to revise and improve these ideas into more formalized explanation or proposal(“theory”). This idea-centric approach never fails to surface students’ thoughts and perspectives that surprisedteachers. This is a piece of clear evidence against the misnomer that some teachers have about their students; ttheir students cannot think. In fact, all students, regardless of age and ability, have ideas. KB introduces studentsto a culture in which they see new responsibilities in themselves as learners, contributing and negotiating todevelop new insights about their inquiry (Paavola & Hakkarainen, 2005). More importantly, studentsunderstand that they need to function as a network to discuss and exchange ideas with their peers (Lee, Chan, &van Aalst, 2006; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2003; Bereiter, 2002).Design of study: Knowledge Building in Social Studies classroomsIn a series of studies on KB pedagogy in Social Studies in local schools, it was found that young children wereable to engage in online collaborative sense-making and they were also found to have developed skills in askingdeeper questions and tackling deeper concepts (Tan et al., 2014). However, it was also found that teachersstruggled to cope with KB pedagogy. They found it difficult to respond to students’ ideas and to keep up withCSCL 2017 Proceedings692© ISLSstudents’ development of ideas (Chai et al, 2012). As such, more studies on KB classroom needs to be done toaddress teachers’ anxiety and competencies.Teacher’s lesson designThe study was done over two weeks in a social studies class of 30 primary five students (age eleven). The themethat students were working on was ‘Appreciating the World and Region We Live In.' The teacher contextualizedthe inquiry to a local community, Kampong Buangkok. Students were first taken on a field trip to KampongBuangkok to collect data for their case through observations and interviews.There were four phases (adoptedfrom A-C-T-S, the school’s overarching pedagogical tool) to organize these KB lessons:Phase 1: Asking questions: The lesson began with an overarching question “What is the value of KampongBuangkok to Singaporeans?” (Refer to Figure 1), initiated by the teacher on an online electronic discourseplatform, (KF). KF platform provided an open discourse space for students to explore their interpretation andbiases of the problem. The big idea that the teacher wanted students to focus on was to navigate the tensionbetween progress and heritage. This unit is an enrichment unit to the theme of “whether civilization is a blessingor curse to Mankind”. A set of KB scaffolds (e.g. <I can build on this value by> ; <I need to understand>,<Iwere put in place to guide students through their ideas.Figure 1. Teacher posted the initial question on KFPhase 2: Challenging ideas: Following the first lesson, the teacher highlighted a student’s questions posted onKF: ‘Are the people or the economy more important?’ and facilitated a whole-class discussion to challengestudents’ current thoughts. He led students through a discussion to talk about the two main camps of thoughtsemerging on KF at that moment, i.e. one camp supported the “People” while the other supported “Economy”. Astudent suggested ‘What if we develop kampung Buangkok while preserving it and not destroying it either?’,the class picked up on that and the teacher posted that promising idea onto a new KF view. (Refer to Figure 3).The teacher continued to emphasize on consensus, reminding students to consider multiple perspectives ratherthan winning an argument.Figure 2. Promising idea identified in class to shape the inquiry further.CSCL 2017 Proceedings693© ISLSPhase 3. Think Further. Following the question ‘What if we develop Kampung Buangkok while preserving itand not destroying it either?’, three promising ideas were put up on KF for further pursuit. The class agreed on aset of selection criteria based on the level of amalgamation of promising student-proposed theories for what the“town council” could do instead of a one-sided approach. The selected promising theories includes “developinga museum in Kampong Buangkok to attract tourists”; “turning Kampong Buangkok into a flower gallery likeBotanic Gardens”; “developing half of Kampong Buangkok into a modernized residential area while leaving theother half alone”. Students were to have a final read-through and discussion on KF about what ideas among thethree that they would propose to the “town council”. They would then have a conclusive verbal discussionbefore bringing their ideas up to the “town council”.Phase 4. Reflect Forward:The teacher posed six questions in a new KF view for the students to reflect on their experience. Questionsincluded: ‘In the first place, why is there even a debate as to whether Kampung Buangkok should be preservedor developed?’ and ‘If there are future opportunities for me to participate in projects aimed at protecting placesof heritage, would I be interested, even if it would take up a lot of my time and effort? Why or why not?”.Throughout the lessons, the teacher would talk about KB principles (e.g., improvable ideas, collectivecognitive responsibility). The teacher would say things like “Spend the last 15 minutes of the lesson readingthrough all the notes contributed to KF, and process all that information” thus cultivating the habits ofcollaboration in the class.ResultsThe data collected comprises of students’ notes on KF, classroom observations, students’ and teacher’sreflection notes. We analyzed the data for three components: (i) students’ motivation in solving the problem;and students’ primary considerations in response to the problem and students’ emotional connection to theproblem. 13 out of 15 students responded positively when asked about their interest in the inquiry. Someattributed the source of their interest to their learning experience which influenced their developing interest insocial studies,“If I had the opportunity, I would participate. I believe that I will be able to gain moreknowledge on my surroundings and further understand the value of heritage sites and whatthey provide the society with.”More importantly, the students were seen to grow to really care about the problems and issues that arose in thecourse of the KB discourse.“I realised (or so I though) that REAL town council officers would come and the residents ofKB really depended on this. Nevertheless, even after I knew they were fake I still treasured theexperience and the project.”We also observed students perception of the issue at hand grew from merely tackling the design and utility ofspace in Kampong Buangkok (Spatial) to that of taking the lens of the residents of Kampong Buangkok(Social). This Social dimension included students' attempt to understand the behaviour and activities of peoplein Kampong Buangkok (Social), to considering specific events or organization (Temporal) (Table 1). Though allthree types of considerations increased, the most significant increase was the social perspective (Fig.1, from6.7% to 21.4%).Table 1: Three main categories of considerations revealed in students’ postsCodesDescriptionsExamplesConsidering froma socialperspectiveConsidering human needs,behaviour, and their socialactivities.“Kampung Buangkok is valuable to - the residents there. They mightfeel very akward in another housing estate without the hustle andbustle of the kampong.”Considering froma spatialperspectiveConsidering utility of space,including location and scale.“KB can be made into shopping centres and sports facilities as thereare not many near that area.”Considering froma temporalperspectiveConsidering organization oftime and significant eventWill we still have this Kampong 20 years from now? 50 years? Our"heritage homes" are important, but people whom they benefit are theextreme minority”CSCL 2017 Proceedings694© ISLS25.020.0Percentage notesfrom firstdiscussion on KF15.010.0Percentage notesfrom Seconddiscussion on KF5.00.0SocialSpatialTemporalFigure. 3. Percentage of students’ notes that revealed different sets of consideration.We noted anaffective dimension emerging in students’ notes. The tone and vocabulary used by the studentsshowed their concern about their ideas and proposals. We were detecting notes that revealed analysis of theproblem through description of feeling (e.g. “if they wanted to trespass and direspect the residents, they could,couldn't they?”), notes containing emotional expression (e.g. “don't you think that residents will feel cooped upin KB with buildings around?”) and even notes with moralising tone (e.g.“This value is important, but progress from destroying people's homes?”).The 'aha' moment in these lessons was the teachers' account of his students asking him what wouldhappen after they presented their plans to the “town council”. They wanted to know if it would make anydifference to the real Kampong Buangkok. And if it couldn’t, they asked the teacher if they could speak tosomeone genuine (like a real town council) who would do something about the real problem.Conclusion and DiscussionThe evidently positive results showed in this group of high achievers regarding their motivation in tacklingsocial issues and especially with their increased focus and connection with the social aspects of the problemwithin such a short implementation cycle surprised both the researchers and the teachers. An anecdotal butimportant observation from the teacher was that he noticed his class becoming less competitive in this KBjourney. Competitiveness is a common trait in these high-achievers in previous years. Though we also managedto see a corresponding improvement in the quality of students’ explanation, that was not the most critical to theteachers. Teachers saw that the students were pursuing real-life problem beyond just an academic pursue whenthey fostered KB culture in class. Itwas sufficient to convince them in sustaining such practice in their class.ReferencesChai, C. S., & Tan, S. C. (2003). Constructing knowledge building communities in classrooms.Lee, E. Y., Chan, C. K., & van Aalst, J. (2006). Students assessing their own collaborative knowledgebuilding. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(1), 57-87.Paavola, S., & Hakkarainen, K. (2005). The knowledge creation metaphor–An emergent epistemologicalapproach to learning. Science & Education, 14(6), 535-557.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge building environments: Extending the limits of the possiblein education and knowledge work. Encyclopedia of distributed learning, 269-272.Scardamalia &Bereiter, 2003).Tan, S.C., So, H.J., & Yeo, J. (2014). Knowledge Creation in Education. Singapore: Springer Science+BusinessMedia, pp.292-294.Harkness, D. (1994). History, democratic values and tolerance in Europe: the experience of countries indemocratic transition. Council of Europe Symposium. Sofia.Kelsey, H. (2009). History teaching and the values agenda. In PhD Thesis. James Cook University.Lee, H. L. (2015) Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong’s National Day Rally 2015 Speech (English). Retrieved 1213, 2015, from Prime Minister’s Office Singapore: http://www.pmo.gov.sg/newsroom/prime-ministerlee-hsien-loong-national-day-rally-2015-speech-englishWoodhouse, M. & Fleming, D. B. (1976). Moral education and the teaching of history. The History Teacher, 9(2), 202-209.CSCL 2017 Proceedings695© ISLS