Fabric-based Computing: New Materials for Learning ComputerScienceAnna Keune, Indiana University Bloomington, akeune@indiana.eduAbstract: When embroidering fabric into tessellation structures, crafters sew algorithmicpatterns and program folding mechanics. Fiber crafts could become an alternative context forcomputer science education. This research aims to understand computational concepts andpractices of fiber crafts and the uncharted computational products and learning processes theyfoster.VisionInclusive of weaving and electronic-textiles (Buechley, 2006), fabric manipulation is a compelling yet unchartedcontext for reinvigorating the historical connections of fiber crafts and computing. Fiber crafts that incorporatethe algorithmic patterns into fabric to create three-dimensional textures could become an alternative context forlearners to intimately (and perhaps more profoundly) engage with Computer Science Education (CSEd). Thegoals of my dissertation are to research three aspects of fiber arts: (1) the computational concepts and practices,(2) the emergent computational forms of CSEd, and (3) the range of design process(es).Through design, materials become “objects-to-think-with” for learners to internalize inherent ideas ofphysical objects through understanding their own bodily actions (Papert, 1980). New computational materials,like fiber crafts, therefore have the potential to create new and transform existing learning opportunities. Newmaterialist theories can extend constructionist assumptions beyond material mediated internalization byflattening hierarchies among materials and people and negotiating learning through routines and variations(Barad, 2003). This relates to fiber crafts because artifacts form through human movement, and changes inmovement can produce changes in the performed computation. My dissertation draws on the framework ofGoode and Chapman’s (2016) CS curriculum that includes concepts (e.g., algorithms) and practices (e.g,debugging) that map on to observable aspects of fiber crafts (e.g., defining input/output commands).Pilot studies showed fabric manipulation as a compelling context for computing, including practicingcore computational concepts (e.g., intuiting algorithms, defining conditionals), and demonstrated that in fabric,participants performed pre-computational practices. Crafters became an intimate part of live computationalperformances instead of controlling a computer. This kindled questions about which CS concepts and practicesare inherent to fiber crafts and which computational forms and learning processes they produce.I will investigate these areas in the context of a fiber-crafts public school course for youth (age 11-13)through qualitative and performative analyses (Barad, 2003) of video data, think alouds, and artifacts. Theanalyses will include iterative coding for computational concepts and practices, graphic abstractions of materialcomputational expressions, tracking routines and variations in computational units, aesthetic deliberations (e.g.,integrating patterns), and what facilitates or prohibits them (e.g., fold and movement potential) to demonstratedesign process(es) during computationally relevant moments. This dissertation aims to contribute to scholarlyefforts that investigate fiber crafts for disciplinary learning, extend material-mediated conceptions of learning bytheorizing learners as part of computational products, and expand CS learning processes. This promisesimplications for broadening participation in CS and for integrating low-cost computation into low-resourcedsettings, which could have ramification for gender representations and rupture inequities within CSEd.New materialist theories are new to the Learning Sciences. To help advance my dissertation, I seek tosolicit methodological guidance to better align my analytical techniques and theoretical framework, and toexplore implications of my work for the Learning Sciences.ReferencesBarad, K. (2003). Posthumanist performativity: Toward an understanding of how matter comes to matter. Signs:Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 28(3), 801-831.Buechley, L. (2006, October). A construction kit for electronic textiles. In Wearable Computers, 2006 10thIEEE International Symposium (pp. 83-90). IEEE.Goode, J., & Chapman, G. (2016). Exploring computer science, version 7.0. Computer Science Equity Alliance.Retrieved December 29, 2017 at http://www.exploringcs.org/for-teachers-districts/curriculum.Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York, NY: Basic Books.1879