Examining the Flow of Ideas During Critique Activities in a DesignProjectElizabeth A. McBride, Jonathan M. Vitale, Lauren Applebaum, and Marcia C. Linnbethmcbride@berkeley.edu, jonvitale@berkeley.edu, lauren.applebaum@berkeley.edu, mclinn@berkeley.eduUniversity of California, BerkeleyAbstract: Peer critique activities in design projects give students the opportunity to shareideas, receive feedback, and revise their work. Critique can increase student feelings ofownership of science ideas and help students to distinguish between different ideas they mayhave about how things work. In this paper, we examine how students use their own ideas andideas from a partner group to revise and improve a physical solar oven they have built usingguidance from an online curriculum. We find that students fall into two groups: distinguishingideas and adding new ideas. Within distinguishing ideas, students can further separated bywhether or not they kept only their own ideas or also added the ideas from their partner group.We look at case studies to determine how these groups changed their ideas before, during, andafter the critique activity.Keywords: science, engineering, peer critique, technology, knowledge integrationIntroductionDesign projects allow students to use science concepts to solve meaningful problems in topics such as energyefficiency. In addition to improving understanding of disciplinary concepts, middle school design activitiesengage students in the NGSS practices of engineering design (NGSS Lead States, 2013). We study a designproject on solar ovens supported by an online curriculum. The project includes visualizations and interactivesimulations to help students develop meaningful plans. Students draw on their scientific ideas and interpret thedata collected using their physical artifacts to design and refine their solar ovens. We study how collaborativecritique of student designs contributes to effective science learning.Critique is common as a way to improve engineering designs (Krajcik, Blumenfeld, Marx & Soloway,1994). Critique activities can guide students to justify their designs and identify flaws in their plans (Chang &Linn, 2013). Peer critique often succeeds when students discuss ideas together and justify their claims. This canhelp students clarify their ideas and reveal weaknesses in their understanding (Blumenfeld, Kempler & Krajcik,2006). We examine how middle school students used their own ideas, others’ ideas, and new ideas duringcritique of solar ovens. We then develop categories that are common types of student interactions during thepeer critique activity in our curriculum.By situating thinking in a social context, peer critique may increase student motivation (Wentzel,1997). If students feel responsible for the success of their group, they may be more likely to engage and offerideas. On the other hand, peer critique activities must be structured to ensure that all participants feelcomfortable giving and receiving criticism (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994; Sato, 2015). Research on peercritique has shown the value of having students evaluate written work by their peers as a way to help studentsexamine their own writing with a more critical eye (Black, Harrison, Lee & Marshall, 2003).In addition to improving their designs, peer critique can help students develop a coherent understandingof underlying scientific concepts. According to the knowledge integration framework (Linn & Eylon, 2011),learning is achieved by first eliciting student ideas, then giving students opportunities to add new ideas anddistinguish between these ideas. Peer critique provides an opportunity for students to express their ideas andhear new ideas from their peers. Students bring different prior experiences with them to the project, and canoffer unique ideas (Matuk, Linn & Eylon, 2015). In a successful critique activity students will then distinguishbetween these ideas according to agreed-upon criteria. Students may be called upon to distinguish between theirown ideas when developing explanations, but distinguishing the ideas of a group based on agreed-upon criteriamay require further discussion to develop criteria.Since students often receive feedback only from their teachers or other authority figures they maybenefit from peer feedback that is worded more like their own thinking (Cole, 1991; Linn & Songer, 1991). Inan environment where students feel comfortable sharing ideas and providing reasonable criticism, in addition toreceiving feedback, students can develop general criteria for evaluating designs, which they may then apply tolater activities (Clark et al., 2012). By building an awareness of what makes a good design, students developgreater agency and a sense of ownership over their designs and ideas.CSCL 2017 Proceedings41© ISLSHowever, it is often the case that students have difficulty establishing and applying appropriate, mutualcriteria for evaluating ideas. If students have many ideas to distinguish, developing criteria for distinguishingcould be quite a challenging task. This could be due in part to the fact that students may not practice critiqueoften in the classroom setting. Numerous studies document the challenges faced by students when they are newto peer critique activities (e.g., Tsivitanidou, Zacharia, & Hovardas, 2011; Gan & Hattie, 2014; van Zundert,Könings, Sluijsmans, & van Merriënboer, 2012). In cases where students have not agreed upon criteria basedupon underlying scientific ideas, they may focus on superficial features of designs. Furthermore, without criteriagrounded in scientific concepts, students may feel reluctant to provide criticism, as it could be misinterpreted asa personal offense.In previous work (McBride, Vitale, Applebaum & Linn, 2016), we saw mainly positive critiques (“Addmore tinfoil”) rather than negative (“use black paper instead of tinfoil”). This effect may be exacerbated ifstudents are expected to engage in face-to-face, verbal critique. This could be because of the structure of thecurriculum; students are given a new budget during the revision to add to their oven, so during the critiqueactivity they may be trying to decide how to spend their new budgets. However, students may also find it easierfrom a social standpoint to give positive critiques rather than negative (Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Finkenauer, &Vohs, 2001).In this study, students often seemed to provid feedback without scientific justification, providing a peergroup with a new idea, but no rationale for that new idea. This could be because students were reluctant toprovide explanations, they did not feel they had to provide an explanation, or fi they did provide and explanationduring conversation, they simply did not write it down. In practice, engineers are often called upon to providerationales for design changes. For professional engineers, providing rationales and being reflective is animportant practice in improving design skills (Adams, Turns, & Atman, 2003; Schön, 1983). Rationales may becentered in the artifact and may also provide a way to understand and talk about dependencies in a complexproject (Gruber & Russell, 1996). We introduce students to dependencies and tradeoffs by having them use abudget during the curriculum.Types of student interactions during the peer critique activity could be categorized into groups usingthe knowledge integration framework. Two possible groups are “idea distinguishers”, and “idea adders”. In thiscurriculum, we aim to help students integrate their design choices with science concepts, so we consider the“integration” component of the knowledge integration framework to be specifically science and designintegration. Ideally, peer critique activities will support students across groups in improving their practices ofscientific idea integration, while also giving students the opportunity to add and distinguish ideas.In this study, we examine how students’ original ideas change and grow from their first ideas aboutrevisions they will make to their final ideas. We will evaluate the extent to which groups maintain their originalideas, add new ideas, distinguish between ideas, and integrate ideas with scientific justifications. Based on ourfindings from this analysis, we can also inform future design of critique activities to encourage certain types ofstudent activity, like providing justifications and rationale.MethodsParticipants and proceduresOne 6th grade teacher and her 150 students participated in this study. Following individual pretest, the teacherassigned students to a total of 55 dyad or triad workgroups; students in this class often work together on groupactivities. Following curricular activities, students engaged in an individual posttest.Curricular materialsThis study was implemented in a curriculum module entitled Solar Ovens and Solar Radiation (referred to asSolar Ovens in this paper). The goal of the unit is to familiarize students with the way energy transforms fromsolar radiation to heat through a hands-on project and interactive models, covering the modeling aspect of theScience and Engineering Practices of the NGSS, as well as the standards associated with energy, specificallystandards related to the transformation of thermal energy (NGSS Lead States, 2013). Students engage with thecurriculum online through WISE (Web-based Inquiry Science Environment), utilizing a variety of instructionaland assessment tools (Linn & Eylon, 2011).Students follow a design, build, test approach with two iterations. For added support for distinguishingbetween and reflecting upon ideas, we include explanation and critique activities between iterations. Prior tobuilding, students engage in a series of design activities intended to make science concepts central to students’design plans. In a budgeting activity students are prompted to choose and justify materials they plan to use.Figure 1 shows the material and budget list. For their initial design, students are allowed to spend $20 on theirCSCL 2017 Proceedings42© ISLSmaterials (excluding the box). In later design revisions students receive an additional $13 budget. By limitingtheir access to materials, students are forced to consider the most important elements of their design. Followingbudgeting, students engage with an interactive virtual model to investigate various design options (e.g.,materials), and familiarize themselves with underlying mechanisms (Wilensky, 1999). In addition to selectingmaterials and testing them in the virtual model, students are also prompted to draw pictures of their ovens andexplain how energy transfer will occur in their oven. After building, students test the ovens using digitaltemperature probes that collect data and generate a graph in real-time. The physical ovens are tested underlamps with a common set of requirements so that results are comparable between trials and groups. Afterrevising, building, and testing a second time, students in this class cooked marshmallows in their ovens. Table 1displays the general layout and features of the Solar Ovens curriculum unit.We specifically investigate the use of the critique activity that occurs between iterations of designing,building, and testing. In this activity, students were first asked to describe the changes they would make to theirown ovens during the next iteration. Then, students were instructed to work with the group next to them toexchange ideas about the ovens. This activity required some facilitation from the teacher. Students were askedto give at least one idea to the group they were working with, and to take at least one idea from the other group.Students wrote these ideas in WISE during the activity. In the next activity, redesigning the oven, we askedstudents to describe the changes they would actually make to their ovens.Table 1: Solar Ovens Curriculum OutlineActivityIntroduction to Solar OvensSolar Radiation and theatmosphereSolar Radiation andGreenhouse Gases (GHGs)Model ActivityDesign, Build, Test 1Reflect & CritiqueDesign, Build, Test 2ReflectDescription & Items of InterestElicit initial student ideas about energy transformationEnergy comes as radiation from the sun; energy can be absorbed or reflected.Students use a simulation to investigate energy.Describes how energy interacts with greenhouse gases. Students use a model toinvestigate how addition of GHGs impacts energy.Students use an interactive model to investigate how radiation works in a solarovenDesign oven under budgetary constraints using a draw tool, build, test under aheat lamp using a temperature probe to collect dataStudents think about changes they will make to their oven and engage in critiqueactivity with other student groupStudents reflect on what was learned from the first iteration; use new budgetconstraints to repeat processStudents describe how their solar ovens work using energy from the sun; makeconnections between solar ovens and the atmosphereFigure 1. Materials and cost list for Solar Ovens curriculumAnalysis materialsWe examined four items for each group. These items come from the reflection stage, the critique activity, andthe very first activity during the redesign process. These items are:1. Reflect: Students describe the changes they wish to make during the redesign of their ovenCSCL 2017 Proceedings43© ISLS2. Take: Students write the idea(s) they received from the group they worked with3. Give: Students write the idea(s) they gave to the group they worked with4. Redesign: Students describe the changes they wish to make during the redesign of their ovenAnalysis approachOur analysis approach for these items included developing a list of ideas students mentioned in any of their fourresponses. This list of ideas was then grouped into several categories that encompassed the majority of studentideas. We used the shortened list of ideas to code students’ responses for the presence of ideas in order to trackwhere ideas occurred within these four items. The shortened list is made up of the ten student ideas in Table 2. Itwould be useful to also have student reasoning for their design decisions, but many students did not providereasoning, though the question specifically asked for it. Many students may have provided reasoning during theconversation that took place during the peer critique activity, but that reasoning was not recorded.Table 2: Student idea categories and counts during each activityStudent IdeasAdd aluminum foilAdd tapeAdd more paper (black or white)Add plastic wrapAdd or adjust reflective flapAdd PlexiglasTighten the plastic wrap over the top of the ovenPatch holes anywhere in the ovenAdjust or add a flap to insert food or a temperature probeAdjust box construction (size, shape, structure, etc.)Reflect2251291663432Take120941343452Give83136913670Redesign Total2567101817511029114951631211511626ResultsOverall, we found that students wrote more ideas about their own ovens than peers’ ovens. Across the 55groups, students wrote an average of 1.55 ideas in the reflect item and 1.60 ideas in the redesign item, whileonly writing an average of 1.06 ideas in each of the give and take items. The greater number of ideas written forreflect and redesign are not surprising since students are more familiar with their own designs and ovens thanthe designs of other groups.We next break down the flow of ideas from each item to the next in Table 3. In this table, we look atthe interaction between each possible pair of items.Table 3: Flow of ideas between itemsGroups use ideasfrom their peergroupGroups use theirown ideasItemsReflect to Take (1 to 2)Take to Give (2 to 3)Take to Redesign (2 to 4)Reflect to Redesign (1 to 4)Reflect to Give (1 to 3)Give to Redesign (3 to 4)# Ideas Carried Over24417351323Taking a closer look at whether students took their own ideas (reflect) or the ideas they received fromthe other group (take) with them to the redesign stage, of the 53 groups, 9 groups (16%) kept ideas in theredesign item from both the reflect and take items, 14 groups (25%) only kept ideas from reflect item in theirredesign response (no ideas carried over from take), 2 groups (4%) only took ideas from the take item in theirredesign response (no ideas carried over from reflect), and 22 groups (40%) did not use ideas from their reflectresponse or the take item in their redesign response. There were 8 groups (15%) that did not mention anyspecific ideas in their redesign response (e.g. “Well, we will use materials that will effect the box the most, so weonly use 10 dollars.”).CSCL 2017 Proceedings44© ISLSThis interaction between ideas students generated themselves and those generated by another groupshows that some students seem to keep only their own ideas, while others seem to engage in idea generationduring the critique activity. Generating new ideas during the critique activity may help these students to generatemore new ideas for themselves later in the design process.Examining some of the other interactions between items, we see that students often carried ideas overfrom those that they gave to another group (give) to their own redesign. This happened 24 times (22 groupscarried over one idea, 1 group carried over two ideas). This signals that having students generate ideas foranother group is a useful activity for helping students to add more ideas to their repertoire for their own solaroven. Students generally did not carry over ideas from the take item to the give item. There were 4 ideas carriedover, but in this case 3 of the ideas were carried over by the same group, with only one other group using thesame idea for both give and take items.During the analysis of this data, we also noticed that students did not often give negative critiques toother groups. However, this may be because of the structure of the unit. During the critique activity, students arethinking about what they can now add or change about their oven, so these are the types of critiques they get andgive. This may also reflect a difficulty students have in giving their peers negative feedback, possibly becausethey do not yet consider themselves experts on the topics covered in the unit.Students seem to fall into one of two categories: idea adders or idea distinguishers. Idea distinguisherscan then be further broken down into students take ideas from others or those who keep only their own ideas.Students fall into the group of idea adders if they did not use any of their own previous written ideas or the ideasgiven by their peer group during Redesign. Students fall into the group of idea distinguishers (keep) if they keptonly their own written ideas at Redesign. These students may not have liked the idea given to them by their peergroup, the given idea may have been incorrect, or the budget may have been prohibitive. In any of these cases,however, the students distinguish between ideas and choose to carry forward with their own ideas. Students inthe group of idea distinguishers (take) use ideas given to them by their peer group in Redesign. They can do thisin conjunction with keeping their own written ideas from Revise. We discuss each of these four categoriesfurther through case studies.Table 4 shows the breakdown of how many groups fell into each category from our data. In theknowledge integration framework, students should also integrate their ideas together. In this context, integrationis considered integrating a design idea with reasoning that comes from science concepts. Only 14 groupsintegrated their design ideas with science reasoning in Redesign, even though the question specifically asked forreasoning. These groups were also spread across our three categories.Table 4: Number of groups in each category and groups who integrate design ideas with science conceptsCategoryIdea Distinguishers (Take)Idea Distinguishers (Keep)Idea Adders# Groups / (Total)17 / (55)14 / (55)23 / (55)# With Integration644Case studiesTo further illustrate the results presented above, we use three case studies. Each of these cases offers a differentview of how students use ideas presented during the critique activity. We will compare where ideas present inthe last activity, Redesign, initially emerge. We specifically examine each of the following scenarios: groupswho kept their own ideas and took ideas from their peer group, groups who kept only their own ideas, andgroups who did not use any of their original ideas or the ideas from their peer group. Important parts of theresponses are underlined.Case 1: Idea Distinguisher (Take)In this case, the pair of students both kept their original ideas (reflect) and took the ideas given to them by theirpeer group during the critique activity (take). This type of case happened in 17 out of 55 groups. Each itemanswered by the pair is shown below:•••Reflect: “We could improve our solar oven by making the tin foil flaps bigger.”Take: “One idea that we got was to put black paper all around the inside of the box.”Give: “One idea I gave the group is that they should put a tin foil flap.”CSCL 2017 Proceedings45© ISLSRedesign: “we will buy black paper and more tin foil. The black paper is to absorb the heat inside theoven. The tin foil is to make a larger flap to direct the rays from the sun to the oven.”While students certainly write their own ideas for revising their oven in the reflect item, the nature of the projectis such that students can watch other students in the classroom test their ovens and gain new ideas simply fromlooking around the classroom. Many of the reflect ideas likely come from watching other students, in addition toa group’s own ideas. This group starts out with an idea about improving the reflector flaps on their oven. Thisgroup got the idea of putting black paper on the inside of their box during the critique activity. When the groupwas asked how they would redesign their oven, they said they would use both ideas to improve their oven. Sinceeach group has a limited budget, this was an interesting case in which the group was able to add materials totheir budget to fulfill an idea given to them by another group. Another common occurrence seen in the give itemwas groups giving their own ideas to the other group. This happened in this case as well, with the groupsuggesting to their peer group that they “should put a tin foil flap”. This group also exhibited integration,integrating their design idea in Redesign with science reasoning.•Case 2: Idea Distinguisher (Keep)In this case, the pair of students kept their original ideas (reflect), but did not take any new ideas (take) into theredesign activity. This type of case was fairly common, happening in 14 out of 55 groups. Each item answeredby the pair is shown below:Reflect: “We can add plexiglass and still have $3 dollars left if we get the additional $10 button.”Take: “One idea that they gave us is that they put black paper on every side, including the bottom oftheir flap.”• Give: “They could use plastic wrap or plexiglass on top and ad a hole that can put the smore in iteasier.”• Redesign: “We will add plexiglass and tape to keep more heat in.”In this case, the group began the critique activity with the idea that they would revise their oven by addingPlexiglas (reflect). This also included a discussion of their budget. The Plexiglas cost the students $10, theirwhole budget. However, it seems that the students did not utilize their entire budget during the first round ofbuilding. It was common in this classroom for the teacher to allow the students to carry over any additionalbudget to the second iteration of building. The group mentions that they have $3 left in their budget. During thecritique activity, the students are given the idea of using black construction paper on all surfaces of the oven;construction paper costs $2/sheet, so it is within their remaining budget to add some construction paper.However, the group decides to use their new budget to add Plexiglas and tape, sticking with their original ideafrom the reflect item. Again, this group offers their own idea to their peer group in the give item: to usePlexiglas. While students are giving ideas to other groups that are relevant to improving the function of theoven, we would like to improve students’ critical thinking in order to provide more relevant critiques to othergroups.••Case 3: Idea AddersIn this case, the pair of students did not keep their original ideas (reflect) or take the ideas from their peer groupin the critique activity (take). This type of case was most common in our data, occurring in 23 out of the 55groups. Each item answered by the pair is shown below:• Reflect: “we could have had the alumnin foil flap better postioined. Also Maybe the plastic wrap couldhave been tighter.”• Take: “we got the idea to use plexiglas insted of plastic wrap.”• Give: “was to use tape to cover the holes.”• Redesign: “We will add more black paper and touch up on some things that looked bad.”This type of case was the most common in our data. In the reflect item, the group wrote about changing theposition of their reflector flap and tightening their plastic wrap. Their peer group gave them the idea of usingPlexiglas instead of plastic wrap as a cover on their oven (take). However, in the redesign item, the group wroteabout something completely different, adding black paper. In addition, the group did not give this idea aboutblack paper to their peer group during the critique activity (give). While it is difficult for us to say exactly wherethis idea came from, this example illustrates how the critique activity can help students think about new anddifferent ideas. This group both had and was exposed to many ideas during the course of these four items, andCSCL 2017 Proceedings46© ISLSwas able to then think of even more new ideas for their redesign. While the group may not have providedscientific justification for their ideas yet, this still fits with the underlying knowledge integration framework;students need to add ideas to their repertoire in order to later sort those ideas.Conclusions and implicationsThis work offers a view into how students are using critique activities during their work in hands-on scienceprojects, and offers a way to categorize how students use the peer critique activity to add and distinguishbetween new ideas.We provide support for peer critique activities in our curriculum through face-to-face interaction withpeer groups. During this direct interaction, students were able to engage in further conversation and often had toprovide scientific justifications for their critiques to their peer groups. This resulted in the vast majority of thecritiques during this project being about scientific and design choices, rather than superficial choices (e.g.,decorative features).The results of our data analysis help to show the benefits of using critique activities during designprojects. While some students will still utilize only their own, preexisting ideas, many other students add ideasduring the critique activity. The students who add ideas may combine their ideas with ideas from other groups,come up with completely new ideas after the critique activity, or give up on their ideas in favor of the ideas fromtheir peers. From a creativity perspective, as well as a knowledge integration perspective, it is beneficial forstudents to be exposed to many different types of ideas. Students may learn more about the scientificimplications of their design choices by having to sort through multiple ideas for revising or creating theirdesigns.Understanding how students use ideas from the peer critique activity to help develop new ideas orcriteria for distinguishing between ideas helps to inform how we can design curriculum to encourage betterpractices for students.One shortcoming of this curriculum and study was the lack of scientific reasoning given by students intheir explanations for their design choices. In future uses of the Solar Ovens curriculum, students will beprompted for their design choice and their scientific reasoning separately (instead of in the same questionprompt). This data provided us with useful information showing that students do not often want to providereasoning or what they may see as extraneous explanation, but in the future we would like to also be able tobetter understand students’ reasoning and help them to develop their explanation and argumentation skills.ReferencesAdams, R. S., Turns, J., & Atman, C. J. (2003). Educating effective engineering designers: The role of reflectivepractice. Design studies, 24(3), 275-294.Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The journal of the learning sciences, 12(3), 307-359.Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Finkenauer, C., & Vohs, K. D. (2001). Bad is stronger than good. Review ofgeneral psychology, 5(4), 323.Black, P., Harrison, C., Lee, C., Marshall, B., & Wiliam, D. (2003). The nature of value of formative assessmentfor learning. Improving schools, 6, 7-22.Blumenfeld, P. C., Kempler, T. M., & Krajcik, J. S. (2006). Motivation and cognitive engagement in learningenvironments.Clark, D. B., Sampson, V., Chang, H. Y., Zhang, H., Tate, E. D., & Schwendimann, B. (2012). Research oncritique and argumentation from the technology enhanced learning in science center. In Perspectives onScientific Argumentation (pp. 157-199). Springer Netherlands.Chang, H. Y., & Linn, M. C. (2013). Scaffolding learning from molecular visualizations. Journal of Research inScience Teaching, 50(7), 858-886.Cohen, E. G. (1994). Restructuring the classroom: Conditions for productive small groups. Review ofeducational research, 64(1), 1-35.Cole, D. A. (1991). Change in self-perceived competence as a function of peer and teacherevaluation. Developmental Psychology, 27(4), 682.Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design research: Theoretical and methodological issues. TheJournal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15–42.Gan, M. J., & Hattie, J. (2014). Prompting secondary students’ use of criteria, feedback specificity and feedbacklevels during an investigative task. Instructional Science, 42(6), 861-878.Gruber, T. R., & Russell, D. M. (1996). Generative design rationale: Beyond the record and replayparadigm. Design rationale: concepts, techniques, and use, 323-349.CSCL 2017 Proceedings47© ISLSKrajcik, J. S., & Blumenfeld, P. (2006). Project based learning. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook ofthe learning sciences. New York: Cambridge University Press.Krajcik, J. S., Blumenfeld, P. C., Marx, R. W., & Soloway, E. (1994). A collaborative model for helping middlegrade science teachers learn project-based instruction. The elementary school journal, 483-497.Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B. S. (2011). Science learning and instruction: Taking advantage of technology topromote knowledge integration. Routledge.Linn, M. C., & Songer, N. B. (1991). Teaching thermodynamics to middle school students: What areappropriate cognitive demands?. Journal of research in Science teaching, 28(10), 885-918.Matuk, C. F., Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B. S. (2015). Technology to support teachers using evidence from studentwork to customize technology-enhanced inquiry units. Instructional Science, 43(2), 229-257.McBride, E.A., Vitale, J.M, Applebaum, L.R., Linn, M.C. (2016) Use of Interactive Computer Models toPromote Integration of Science Concepts Through the Engineering Design Process. In Proceedings ofthe 12 th International Conference of the Learning Sciences.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States.Sato, M. E. (2015). Designing Critique for Knowledge Integration (Doctoral Dissertation). Retrieved fromProQuest Database. (Accession No: 3733349)Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.Schön, D. A. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action (Vol. 5126). Basic books.Tsivitanidou, O. E., Zacharia, Z. C., & Hovardas, T. (2011). Investigating secondary school students’unmediated peer assessment skills. Learning and Instruction, 21(4), 506-519.Van Zundert, M. J., Könings, K. D., Sluijsmans, D. M. A., & Van Merriënboer, J. J. G. (2012). Teachingdomain-specific skills before peer assessment skills is superior to teaching themsimultaneously. Educational Studies, 38(5), 541-557.Wentzel, K. R. (1997). Student motivation in middle school: The role of perceived pedagogical caring. Journalof educational psychology, 89(3), 411.Williams, L., Wiebe, E., Yang, K., Ferzli, M., & Miller, C. (2002). In support of pair programming in theintroductory computer science course. Computer Science Education, 12(3), 197-212.Wilensky, U. (1999). {NetLogo}.CSCL 2017 Proceedings48© ISLS