The Impact of Evidence-based Professional Development onClassroom DynamicsGaowei Chen, University of Hong Kong, gwchen@hku.hkCarol K. K. Chan, University of Hong Kong, ckkchan@hku.hkJinjian Yu, University of Hong Kong, albenyu@hku.hkLiru Hu, University of Hong Kong, liruhu@hku.hkSherice N. Clarke, University of California, San Diego, snclarke@ucsd.eduLauren B. Resnick, University of Pittsburgh, resnick@pitt.eduAbstract: Evidence-based data use in teacher professional development (PD) programs hasbeen proposed as an effective way for supporting teacher learning and reflection. However, fewstudies provided empirical evidences on its impact on teachers’ and students’ classroombehaviour across PD sessions. This paper reports the findings of how a video-based mathematicsteacher PD program, in which teachers reflected on self-captured videos supported byClassroom Discourse Analyzer (CDA), influenced the teacher and students’ classroomengagement over time.IntroductionData use to inform educational decision making has been increasingly emphasized in the fields of teaching,learning, and teacher education in recent years (e.g., Gold & Holodynski, 2016; Mandinach & Gummer, 2013;Marsh & Farrell, 2015). Among the data use literacy, the use of classroom videos is increasingly popular as amethod for enhancing teaching and learning in the classroom-based settings (Borko, 2016; Nolan, Paatsch, &Scull, 2017), for measuring teacher knowledge and teaching competence (Kersting et al., 2016; Santagata & Yeh,2016) and for supporting teacher professional development (PD) and ‘noticing’ (Sherin & Dyer, 2017) forexample. However, relative to the large potential of data use in teacher PD, the evidence of systematically usingself-captured classroom videos in teacher PD and its impact on teachers’ and students’ classroom behaviour wasnot sufficient (e.g., Poortman, Schildkamp, & Lai, 2016).The present studyTo address this gap, the study uses an analytics-supported PD model in which mathematics teachers use theClassroom Discourse Analyzer (CDA; Chen, Clarke, & Resnick, 2014, 2015) to analyze and reflect on their selfcaptured classroom videos and discuss about their classroom behaviour with peer teachers. CDA allows teachersand facilitators to use a visual representation of classroom discourse as a lens to identify meaningful discoursepatterns for discussion, learning and reflection in the PD community. The aim of the program was to help enhancethe mathematics teachers’ classroom talk competence in a school district in China. There were 30 mathematicsteachers from 12 schools who received analytics-supported PD to learn about classroom talk (using AcademicallyProductive Talk [APT] as part of the training materials; Michaels, O’Connor, & Resnick, 2008; Resnick,Michaels, & O’Connor, 2010).The preliminary resultsIn this poster presentation, we report the participating teachers’ data regarding the influence of the three PDsessions on their classroom dynamics back to teaching. We report the preliminary findings from four perspectivesof the changes of classroom dynamics: (1) percentages of teachers’ and students’ words; (2) percentages ofstudents who spoke at least once; (3) average words per turn spoken by teachers and students; and (4) percentagesof various teacher talk strategies used in the classroom.Percentages of teacher’s and students’ total wordsWe counted percentages of teachers’ and students’ words by dividing the teacher’s and students’ words by totalwords in each classroom and then averaged the teachers’ data. We found that the percentages of teachers’ wordsseemed to decrease and that of students’ words seemed to increase across the three PD training sessions (thetraining interval was 1-2 months). In another word, after each PD session, the teachers tended to spoke less andallowed their students to speak more.Percentages of students who spoke at least once1769The results showed that the percentages of students who spoke at least once in the classroom increased across thePD sessions, which suggests that the teachers engaged more students into classroom talk.Words per turn spoken by teachers and studentsInterestingly, the words per turn in the student’s data increased across the three PD sessions. It is likely that thestudents had deeper thinking and hence produced more words per turn during the discussion. This hypothesiswould be further cross-validated and investigated in the project.Percentages of various teacher talk strategies used in the classroomWe then draw on theories and examples of teacher APT (adapted from Michaels et al. [2008] and Resnick et al.[2010]) to code the teachers’ classroom discourse into two dimensions: (1) encouraging students to elaborate theirown thinking (e.g., “Revoice”, “Say More”, “Press for Reasoning”, and “Challenge”), and (2) encouragingstudents to think with others (e.g., “Restate”, “Add On”, “Agree/Disagree”, “Explain Other”). We counted thepercentages of various teacher talk strategies by dividing the number of teacher turns with a specific talk strategyby the total number of teacher turns and averaged the teachers’ data. First, we found that in general the teachersused limited “Revoice” and “Challenging” talk moves in the three teaching occasions, but they seemed to befamiliar with “Say more” talk strategies regardless of the PD training. Another large share of talk strategy usedby the teachers, especially after the PD training sessions, is “Press for Reasoning”, which increased graduallyacross the sessions. It suggests that the teachers used the strategy “Press for Reasoning” more in the classroomacross the PD sessions. Second, we found in general the teachers used few talk strategies to encourage studentsto think with others. For example, the percentages of “Restate” and “Explain other” occurrences out of totalteacher turns remained at a low level, so were the percentages of “Add on” and “Agree/Disagree.ReferencesBorko, H. (2016). Methodological contributions to video-based studies of classroom teaching and learning: Acommentary. ZDM, 48(1-2), 213-218.Chen, G., Clarke, S. N., & Resnick, L. B. (2014). An analytic tool for supporting teachers’ reflection on classroomtalk. Paper in Proceedings of the 11th International Conference of the Learning Sciences. Boulder, CO.Chen, G., Clarke, S. N., & Resnick, L. B. (2015). Classroom discourse analyzer (CDA): A discourse analytic toolfor teachers. Technology, Instruction, Cognition and Learning, 10(2), 85-105.Gold, B., & Holodynski, M. (2017). Using digital video to measure the professional vision of elementaryclassroom management. Computers & Education, 107, 13-30.Kersting, N. B., Sutton, T., Kalinec-Craig, C., Stoehr, K. J., Heshmati, S., Lozano, G., & Stigler, J. W. (2016).Further exploration of the classroom video analysis (CVA) instrument as a measure of usable knowledgefor teaching mathematics: taking a knowledge system perspective. ZDM, 48(1-2), 97-109.Mandinach, E. B., & Gummer, E. S. (2013). A systemic view of implementing data literacy in educatorpreparation. Educational Researcher, 42(1), 30-37.Marsh, J. A., & Farrell, C. C. (2015). How leaders can support teachers with data-driven decisionmaking. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 43(2), 269-289.Michaels, S., O’Connor, C., & Resnick, L. B. (2008). Deliberative discourse idealized and realized: Accountabletalk in the classroom and in civic life. Studies in the Philosophy of Education, 27(4), 283-297.Nolan, A., Paatsch, L., & Scull, J. (2017). Video-based methodologies. International Journal of Research &Method in Education, 1-12.Poortman, C. L., Schildkamp, K., & Lai, M. K. (2016). Professional development in data use: An internationalperspective on conditions, models, and effects. Teaching and Teacher Education, (60), 363-365.Resnick, L. B., Michaels, S., & O’Connor, C. (2010). How (well structured) talk builds the mind. In D. Preiss &R. Sternberg (Eds.), Innovations in educational psychology (pp. 163-194). New York, NY: Springer.Santagata, R., & Yeh, C. (2016). The role of perception, interpretation, and decision making in the developmentof beginning teachers’ competence. ZDM, 48(1-2), 153-165.Sherin, M. G., & Dyer, E. B. (2017). Mathematics teachers’ self-captured video and opportunities forlearning. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 20(5), 477-495.AcknowledgmentThis work was partially supported by Hong Kong RGC grant No. 27606915.1770