To What Extent Students’ Epistemic Beliefs Influence TheirEngagement in Argumentative Discourse and Attitudinal ChangeOmid Noroozi, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran, Wageningen University, The Netherlands,omid.noroozi@wur.nlJavad Hatami, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran, j.hatami@modares.ac.irMartin Mulder, Wageningen University, The Netherlands, martin.mulder@wur.nlHarm Biemans, Wageningen University, The Netherlands, harm.biemans@wur.nlAbstract: This study investigates how students with various epistemic beliefs engage inargumentative discourse and shift their attitude within a digital dialogue game. Participantswere randomly assigned to groups of four or five and asked to argue and explore variousperspectives of four controversial issues of environmental education in four consecutiveweeks that each lasted 90 minutes. Epistemic beliefs of students were seen to be an importantfactor for the way they engage in argumentative discourse and also their attitudinal change.Keywords: attitudinal change, epistemic beliefs, learning, argumentationIntroductionArgumentation is a vehicle for collaborative learning process not only for traditional forms of classrooms butalso for blended and online learning settings such as open and distance learning programmes in higher education(see Noroozi et al., 2012). Argumentation is considered to be significant to education due to the importance ofdiscourse in the acquisition of scientific knowledge (see , Noroozi et al., 2013b, 2017; Osborne, 2010).An important factor for the extent to which students engage in, or avoid, critical reasoning andarguments is their epistemic beliefs (see Nussbaum et al. 2008). Epistemic beliefs colour student interactionswithin argumentative discourse, leading some students to hold back from interactions. Epistemic beliefs can bedefined as one’s own opinion on the nature, structure, and certainty of knowledge and justification for knowingwith regard to knowledge acquisition (see Hofer, 2000; King & Kitchener, 1994). From this perspective,students’ epistemic beliefs can be labelled as: (a) absolutism, (b) multiplism, and (c) evaluativism. Absolutistsview knowledge as objective, simple, certain, and fixed that cannot be changed meaning that there is only oneright or wrong answer and only authority figures have those answers. Multiplists perceive knowledge assubjective and contextual where viewpoints are seen as mere opinions. In this case, students are exposed tovarious perspectives of the issue at hand with the aim of concluding that one point of view is as good as another.In the most developed and sophisticated scenario, evaluativists perceive knowledge as verified true beliefmeaning that there are multiple possibilities in which knowledge claims must always be evaluated for theirquality of arguments in different contexts (see Muis, 2007). Scientific empirical evidence has shown thatstudents engage in argumentation differently with respect to their epistemic beliefs. For example, multiplists areless critical regarding inconsistencies and misconceptions and less interactive with their partners than otherbelief groups (Nussbaum et al. 2008). It is also shown that evaluativists are more critical and active in elicitinginformation from their partners (Nussbaum et al. 2008), compared with absolutists who are less inclined toexplore alternative solutions (Oh & Jonassen, 2006).Epistemic beliefs can therefore be seen as a factor that influences the way students engage inargumentative discourse and critical discussion and reasoning (see Noroozi, 2016). Prior research has notinvestigated the effects of epistemic beliefs on student argumentative discourse when student willingness toargue is enhanced by such activity design. The picture is also unclear in terms of whether confrontation ofstudents with various viewpoints during argumentative discourse lead to modification of their attitudes towardsthe topic(s) of discussion. With regard to willingness to argue, since argumentation and debating involve sociallearning processes (O’Keefe, 1982) and guide student attention towards exploring various sides of issue at stake(Noroozi et al., 2011, 2013a, 2013c; Nussbuam et al., 2008), we hypothesise that students’ attitudes towardscontroversial issues would be modified after the discourse. The goal of this study is to explore how studentswith various epistemic beliefs engage in argumentative discourse by exposing them to controversial topics andconflicting views within a dialogue game which is fun to play, but encourages challenges. Furthermore, weexplore the role of students’ epistemic beliefs on their attitudinal change.CSCL 2017 Proceedings533© ISLSMethodsThe study took place at Wageningen University in the Netherlands. The participants were 29 MSc/BSc studentswho enrolled for the 168-h course “Applied Environmental Education and Communication”. The mean age ofthe participants was 23.34 (SD = 2.71). About 59% of participant were female and 41% of participants weremale. Participants were divided into groups of four or five students on a random basis. The topic for discussionwas different for each week. The dialogue game took place in four consecutive weeks providing that each weekone of the main themes of the course is touched through the dialogue game. The students’ task was to readmaterials, discuss, and argue the topic with other members in the group while taking into account the variousperspectives on the need – or lack thereof – of the topic of the discussion for each week.The learning partners in each group were distributed over different locations of a classroom. The digitallearning environment was called “InterLoc” which is a synchronous text-based discussion board. InterLocstimulates dialogue between group members in an active and structured environment by guiding students thinkand reason together. A variety of sentence openers are embedded in the InterLoc for provoking and promotingstudents’ reasoning and the argumentative dialogue processes and practices of the players. For example, 'I agreebecause...' encourages a player to provide fully reasoned agreement. Other types of sentence openers deal withstatements, evidence, support or criticism, and conclusions. Furthermore, a key feature of the game is the list ofsuggested openers for players' reactions to others, dynamically based on what has gone before. The list of repliesis derived from a conception of how a well-reasoned discussion should proceed, e.g. from statements to fullerexplanations, and from evidence to deriving justified conclusions. The epithet of a 'dialogue game' accuratelydescribes the interactions within the discussion, as in a game there are rules about what dialogue moves can bemade at different times, and so it is with InterLoc (see McAlister et al., 2004; Ravenscroft & McAlister, 2006).One week prior to the start of the dialogue game, students were asked to complete severalquestionnaires through the online survey (30 minutes) on demographic variables, preliminary environmentalattitude and their epistemic beliefs. The dialogue game was conducted in four consecutive weeks that eachlasted 90 minutes. The first week of the study lasted almost 140 minutes. This was due to the introductory verbalexplanations on the purpose of the game by the researcher (10 minutes) and students orientation andacquaintance to the InterLoc with its functionalities followed by a short 'hands-on' training exercise (40minutes). Then, the dialogue game began and lasted 90 minutes. The second and the third sessions lasted only90 minutes because there was no need for the introduction, orientation, and acquaintance to the InterLocanymore. The last, forth, session lasted 140 minutes again. The dialogue game (90 minutes) was followed by a10 minutes break. Students were then asked to state their environmental attitude positions on controversialissues that were touched during the four-week dialogue game (10 minutes). Finally, there was a plenary verbalsession in which students expressed and shared their opinions on their experiences using the game with fellowclassmates and also the teacher and the researcher (30 minutes).MeasurementsA pre-test post-test questionnaire was used to measure students’ attitudinal change on the environmental issuesthat were touched during the four-week dialogue game sessions. This questionnaire consisted of two questionsfor each session (in total eight questions) on a five-point Likert scale ranging from “strongly disagree”,“disagree”, “neutral”, “agree” through to “strongly agree”. Specifically, both in the pre-test and post-test, eachstudent was asked to indicate the extent to which s/he agreed with the environmental attitude statements (seeTable 1). The data from post-test was compared with the pre-test data in order to detect any shift of the studentattitude towards environmental issues. For each question, there could be a maximum of four-point shift (forexample from strongly disagree to strongly agree and vice versa) on the environmental attitude on the basis ofthe Likert scale. Taking into account the five-point Likert scale together with the total eight questions on theenvironmental attitude, as a maximum, 32 points could be scored by each student.We measured students’ epistemic beliefs using a 15-item instrument developed by Kuhn et al. (2000)according to the judgement domains. Based on the data from this questionnaire, each student was classified intothree epistemic orientations: Absolutists, Multiplists, and Evaluativists (see Kuhn et al., 2000; Nussbaum et al.,2008). An Absolutist believes that only one answer could be right. A Multiplist believes that all opinions can beequally valid. An Evaluativist believes that criteria exist whereby opinions/judgements can be evaluated and onecan be shown to be better than another.A content analysis coding scheme was adapted to measure quality of argumentative discourseactivities (see Weinberger & Fischer, 2006). Every message posted during the discussion was coded as one ofthe following: externalization, elicitation, agreement, integration, disagreement, off task (Noroozi et el., 2016).CSCL 2017 Proceedings534© ISLSFindings and discussionsThere were a total of 2927 discussion messages generated during the discourse, with an average of 103.76 perstudent (SD = 35.53). 909 messages were categorized as externalization, 455 as elicitation, 900 as agreement,341 as integration, 294 as disagreement, and 28 messages as off task. Each student in average produced 31.34(SD = 9.70) externalization messages, 15.69 (SD = 12.37) elicitation, 31.03 (SD = 14.05) agreement, 11.76 (SD= 6.07) integration, 10.14 (SD = 5.62) disagreement, and only .97 (SD = 1.50) off task messages.The results show that 18 (62%) of the participants were classified as Multiplist, 11 (38%) asEvaluativist and none as Absolutists. MANOVA repeated measurement test showed that Evaluativists engage inargumentative discourse in a different style than Multiplists do, Wilks’ λ = .64, F (1, 25) = 2.02, p < .1, η2 = .35.Specifically, Evaluativists produced higher number of externalization messages (M = 35.82, SD = 8.57)compared with Multiplists (M = 28.61, SD = 9.54); F (1, 25) = 4.20, p < .05, η2 = .14. Evaluativists alsoproduced higher number of integration messages (M = 14.18, SD = 6.82) compared with Multiplists (M = 10.28,SD = 5.21); F (1, 25) = 3.03, p < .1, η2 = .10. There were no differences between Evaluativists and Multiplistsin terms of total number of agreement messages, elicitation, disagreement, number of messages, and producingoff-task messages. The results show an effect of epistemic beliefs on the style and frequency of particular typesof contribution by students. Multiplists were expected to interact less and be less critical than Evaluativists.Therefore, it was assumed that Evaluativists would produce higher number of messages and that they wouldmostly engage in high level of discourse transactions such as disagreement and integration. These expectationswere confirmed in this study. Evaluativists produced higher number of total messages as well as disagreementand integration messages compared with Multiplists. Previous studies had found differences in the style andstrength of interactions within the discussion emerging from the differences in epistemic beliefs (Kuhn et al,2000; Nussbaum et al. 2008). Unlike our expectation and also unlike previous research (Kuhn et al, 2000;Nussbaum et al. 2008), Evaluativists produced higher number of externalization messages compared withMultiplists. One would expect that Multiplists produce more externalization messages than Evaluativists sinceexternalizations are viewed as the least interactive category. This could be explained by the specific context ofthe study. The controversial issues of environmental education caused quite passionate and personal views onboth side of the argument, increasing students willingness to outline and externalize their information for othersregardless of their epistemic orientation.ANOVA test showed that students’ epistemic beliefs play a big role for the extent to which studentschange their attitude. The difference between the total number of shifts of opinions on environmental issues wasstatistically significant between Evaluativists and Multiplists, F (1, 28) = 4.34, p < .05. Evaluativists (M = 7.36,SD = 2.94) shifted their opinions on the environmental issues much more than Multiplists did (M = 5.16, SD =2.64). The argumentative discourse in this study caused most students to change their positions and shift theiropinions, an outward sign that the activity initiated thinking, and rethinking, among the students. This has to dowith the nature of argumentation that involves social process (O’Keefe, 1982) that can facilitate students’consideration of alternative viewpoints (Nussbuam et al., 2008). The results show a strong effect of epistemicbeliefs on the attitudinal change of students. The expectation was that Multiplists would interact less and be lesscritical of their peers than Evaluativists. It was then expected that Multiplists would be less susceptible toattitude shifts than Evaluativists. Due to more openness to persuasion and argumentation of Evaluativistscompared with Multiplists, they took more advantage of the knowledge distributed in the group and integratedthem with their own prior opinions to revise, modify, and adjust their initial contributions. The change betweenbeing neutral to supporting a proposal about environmental issues is a relatively large change for a studentstudying the topic, so none of the attitude shifts recorded were trivial or unconsidered to the students involved.Conclusions and implicationsThis study used a learning activity design to engage higher education students in an intensified debate forexchanging and directing diverse conflicting opinions towards deeper reasoning and engagement using a digitaldialogue game. Students’ epistemic orientation was seen to be a crucial factor on their style of argumentation,engagement in the discourse, and their openness to persuasion and attitudinal change.This study reminds us of the many variables at work within a learning design affecting willingness toargue and engagement in argumentative discourse. They include the ecological validity of the setting,knowledge and pertinence of the issue at hand, students' epistemic beliefs, and, by no means least, the style ofengagement. Outcomes are not determined by one variable alone, so learning designers will need to keep inmind the full range of factors that will facilitate thoughtful and deeper argumentation.CSCL 2017 Proceedings535© ISLSReferencesHofer, B. K. (2000). Dimensionality and disciplinary differences in personal epistemology. ContemporaryEducational Psychology, 25(4), 378–405.King, P., & Kitchener, K. S. (1994). Developing reflective judgment: Understanding and promoting intellectualgrowth and critical thinking in adolescents and adults. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.Kuhn, D., Cheney, R., & Weinstock, M. (2000). The development of epistemological understanding. CognitiveDevelopment, 15(3), 309-328.McAlister, S., Ravenscroft, A., & Scanlon, E. (2004). Combining interaction and context design to supportcollaborative argumentation using a tool for synchronous CMC. Journal of Computer AssistedLearning, 20(3), 194-204.Muis, K. R. (2007). The role of epistemic beliefs in self-regulated learning. Educational Psychologist, 42(3),173–190.Noroozi, O. (2016). Considering students’ epistemic beliefs to facilitate their argumentative discourse andattitudinal change with a digital dialogue game. Innovations in Education and Teaching International.http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14703297.2016.1208112.Noroozi, O., Biemans, H. J. A., Busstra, M. C., Mulder, M., & Chizari, M. (2011). Differences in learningprocesses between successful and less successful students in computer-supported collaborative learningin the field of human nutrition and health. Computers in Human Behaviour, 27(1), 309–318.Noroozi, O., Biemans, H.J.A., & Mulder, M. (2016). Relations between scripted online peer feedback processesand quality of written argumentative essay. Internet and Higher Education, 31(1), 20-31.Noroozi, O., Biemans, H.J.A., Weinberger, A., Mulder, M., & Chizari, M. (2013a). Scripting for construction ofa transactive memory system in multidisciplinary CSCL environments. Learning and Instruction,25(1), 1-12.Noroozi, O., Kirschner, P., Biemans, H.J.A., & Mulder, M. (2017). Promoting argumentation competence:Extending from first- to second-order scaffolding through adaptive fading. Educational PsychologyReview. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10648-017-9400-z.Noroozi, O., Teasley, S.D., Biemans, H.J.A., Weinberger, A., & Mulder, M. (2013b). Facilitating learning inmultidisciplinary groups with transactive CSCL scripts. International Journal of Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning, 8(2), 189-223.Noroozi, O., Weinberger, A., Biemans, H.J.A., Mulder, M., & Chizari, M. (2012). Argumentation-basedcomputer supported collaborative learning (ABCSCL). A systematic review and synthesis of fifteenyears of research. Educational Research Review, 7(2), 79-106.Noroozi, O., Weinberger, A., Biemans, H.J.A., Mulder, M., & Chizari, M. (2013c). Facilitating argumentativeknowledge construction through a transactive discussion script in CSCL. Computers and Education,61(2), 59-76.Nussbaum, E.M., Sinatra, M.G., & Poliquin, A. (2008). Role of epistemic beliefs and scientific argumentation inscience learning. International Journal of Science Education, 30(15), 1977-1999.Oh, S., & Jonassen, D. H. (2006). Scaffolding online argumentation during problem solving. Journal ofComputer Assisted Learning, 23(2), 95–110.O’Keefe, D. J. (1982). The concept of argument and arguing. In J. R. Cox & C. A. Willard (Eds.), Advances inargumentation theory and research (pp. 3–23). Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.Osborne, J. F. (2010). Arguing to learn in science: The role of collaborative, critical discourse. Science,328(5977), 463–466.Ravenscroft, A., & McAlister, S. (2006). Digital games and learning in cyberspace: A dialogical approach. ELearning and Digital Media, 3(1), 37-50.Weinberger, A., & Fischer, F. (2006). A framework to analyze argumentative knowledge construction incomputer-supported collaborative learning. Computers & Education, 46(1), 71-95.CSCL 2017 Proceedings536© ISLS