Learning Nanoscience Concepts Through a Nanoscale ExperiencePolly K. Lai, University of New South Wales, polly.k.lai@gmail.comMichael J. Jacobson, The University of Sydney, michael.jacobson@sydney.edu.auMicah Goldwater, The University of Sydney, micah.goldwater@sydney.edu.auAbstract: Invisible nanoscale phenomena are difficult to learn, as people have no experienceof observing nanoparticles and their behaviors in everyday life. To help address this issue, twodifferent treatment conditions were developed: (a) working with two different Agent-BasedModels (ABMs) and (b) watching two dynamic visualizations. An empirical study wasconducted to compare students in these two groups in terms of reasoning strategies onassessments of declarative and explanatory knowledge as well as solving transfer problems. Thefindings suggest that the ABM students’ reasoning strategies on the explanatory knowledgetasks and problem-solving activities seemed to have been influenced by the previouscomputationally embodied learning experience. Nevertheless, the dynamic visualizationstudents seemed to rely on memory retrieval of information from the videos.Keywords: Agent-Based Model, Dynamic visualization, Nanoscience education, Embodiment ofthoughtIntroductionEarlier research has argued that students contextualize their science experience into three different mental contextsconsisting of imagination, previous experience, and the science investigation itself (Shepardson, Choi, Niyogi, &Charusombat, 2011). In line with this view, it is a big challenge for students to conceptualize and understand thebehavior of individual nanoparticles emerges into the properties of matter. This is because their intuition aboutbehaviors of objects is built upon the experience in their daily lives at the human scale instead of the nanoscale(Jones et al., 2013; Magana, Brophy, & Bryan, 2012; Peng, Isaac, & Wilkins, 2012). Thus, the question is how toprovide students a nanoscale experience in terms of nanoscience phenomena investigations to enhanced learningof nanoscale concepts? To help facilitate the learning of nanoscience concepts, current research has exploredvarious visualization approaches such 2D static images (Landau, Groscurth, Wright, & Condit, 2009), animatedvisualizations (Blonder & Dinur, 2011), and 3D virtual environments (Peng et al., 2012). However, research todate on the use of multimedia visualizations in nanoscience classrooms has mainly reported on students’ interestsand motivation rather than enhanced deep learning of nanoscience phenomena. Further, there are concerns thatmerely having students passively watch a visualization would not provide an interactive and cognitively engagingexperience to gain a deep understanding of challenging concepts (Chi & Wylie, 2014).In our previous work, we conducted an initial investigation of comparing students’ learning outcomes ofnanoscience concepts after learning with Agent-Based Models (ABMs) and dynamic visualizations respectively(Lai, Jacobson, & Markauskaite, 2016). We found that both treatment groups had a higher declarative knowledgegain; however, the students in the ABM group outperformed the students in the dynamic visualization group onthe assessments of explanatory knowledge and transfer problem. To expand our previous work, this study exploresthe premise that whether learning with ABM provided an opportunity for students to experience an embodimentof thought, which leads to a higher learning gain on the assessments of explanatory knowledge and problemsolving. This premise is based on Goldstone and Wilensky’s (2008) argument, which they proposed that the useof “ABMs to teach complex systems topics fits under the wide umbrella of embodied cognition” (p.506).Therefore, according to the wide umbrella of embodied cognition, cognitive processes are influenced and shapedby the body, including the visual perceptual system, body morphology, motor system as well as the body’sinteractions with the surrounding world and manipulations of objects in the environment (Barsalou, 2008; Clark,1998; Gibbs, 2006). This study explores that using ABMs to learn nanoscale phenomena can provide an embodiedexperience through active hypothesis testing, manipulating individual objects (agents) to increasing an ability, forfirst-person perspective taking, and eliciting gestures to reason nanoscience concepts afterwards.Based on the embodied cognition theory, we propose a Framework of Embodiment of Thought tocompare and explore the impact of using ABMs and dynamic visualizations to learn nanoscience knowledge: (a)Perspective Taking (Clark, 1998; Soylu, 2016), (b) Causal Inference Making (Gibbs, 2006), (c) Motor-supportedThinking (Mahon & Caramazza, 2008; Schwartz & Holton, 2000). First, research has suggested that ABMlearning environments present unique perspective taking challenges to learners (Sengupta & Wilensky, 2009). InABM learning environments, for instance, students are able to observe an individual agent’s actions such as howICLS 2018 Proceedings200© ISLSthis agent behaves and interacts with its surroundings (a first-person perspective) and accumulates in an aggregatelevel representation (a third-person perspective). In contrast, dynamic visualization learning environments providea story line animation to represent the scientific concepts only from a third-person perspective. Second, embodiedcognition theorists have argued that manipulating objects and exploratory procedures are useful in identifyingobjects and making goals meaningful (Gibbs, 2006). In other words, when people see a tool, they know what theyare going to do with the tool for causal consequences (Gibson, 1986; Schwartz & Holton, 2000; Soylu, 2016). Inline with this view, an ABM learning environment allows the learner to run hypothesis testing by settingparameters and exploring procedures and consequences. Thus, the learner knows she is the cause of the individualagent’s behavior, and she also understands the causality directly from her perceptual and embodied experience.However, the information and behavior of dynamic visualizations do not change. The learner has no opportunityto test hypotheses and only passively receives information from the videos. Finally, Schwartz and Holton (2000)argued that mental simulations only mediate coupling of action and imagery in the context of manipulation. Givenan ABM environment is allowed learners to manipulate and experience an individual agent behavior andinteractions with its surroundings from the first-person perspective, and she also predicts and makes inferencesabout causality of the agent and the system. After learning with ABMs, she may be influenced by the ABMs anduse spontaneous gestures and imagery to form their mental simulations from her past learning experience with theABMs. Nevertheless, the dynamic visualizations provide a visual representation, learners may form their mentalrepresentations through their multimodal perceptions (de Koning & Tabbers, 2011). In short, we argue that thestrength of learning with ABMs is how the control of simulations give opportunity for perceptually rich mentalmodels of the nanoscale phenomena, and taking advantage of cognitive capacities in visuospatial thinking, motorsimulation, and causal reasoning.In order to understand why the students in the ABM group outperformed than the students in the dynamicvisualization group on the assessments of explanatory knowledge and transfer problems (Lai et al., 2016, April),a study was conducted to compare students’ reasoning strategies on declarative as well as explanatory knowledgeand transfer problems after learning from the ABMs and dynamic visualizations respectively.In line with this, the research questions are:1. Do students change their reasoning strategies in terms of embodiment of thought from the pre-test topost-test on declarative and explanatory knowledge?2. Are students’ reasoning strategies grounded in embodiment of thought on the post transfer problems?This study explored whether students’ reasoning strategies were engaged in the embodiment of thoughtprior to and after the learning activities. Students’ pre-test and post-test think-aloud protocols were analysed indetail by the three indicators of reasoning strategies in terms of an embodiment of thought framework we proposein this paper. According to the Embodiment of Thought Framework, this study hypothesised that the use of ABMshelps students’ conceptualization development grounded in embodiment thought processes and influence theirreasoning strategies afterward, particularly, on the explanatory knowledge and problem solving.MethodsResearch design and procedureThis study had a mixed method design that consisted of a quasi-experimental intervention, and think-aloud tasks,over one three-hour period (see Table 1). The experimental condition investigated the efficacy of the ABMapproach using two Agent-Based Models, which were developed by the first author using NetLogo (Wilensky,1999). The models provided interactive and manipulative simulations for learning two target nanoscience topics:Nano Gold (see Figure 1 (left)) and Nano Magnetics. In contrast, the comparison condition involved two dynamicvisualizations, which were also developed by the first author, for the same topics and activities (see Figure 1(right)). Finally, think-aloud tasks were used in this study to assess participants’ cognitive processes prior to andafter the interventions.Participants were undergraduate students at Australian universities, who were enrolled in nanoscienceprograms. Of the twenty-seven participants (average 20.1 years old), seven were females, and 20 were males.Participants received instruction for the think-aloud task and practiced the think-aloud process before the pre-testthink-aloud tasks. After completing the pre-test think-aloud tasks, participants were introduced to either the ABMor the dynamic visualization learning environments depending on their group assignment. In the experimentalgroup (14 students), the introduction briefly explained how to use Nano Gold and Nano Magnetics models to runthe simulations related to the learning activities. In the comparison group, 13 students were told that they wereable to start, stop and rewind the videos as much as they wanted to during the learning activities. Participants thenwere given two hours to complete learning activities online with the ABMs or the videos individually. Finally,ICLS 2018 Proceedings201© ISLSboth groups were administrated the post-test think-aloud tasks, which included all the items on the pre-test thinkaloud questions and two extra transfer problems.Table 1: Study designActivities123ContentSize-Dependent Propertyin Nano GoldSize-Dependent Propertyin Nano MagneticsComparison and ContrastExperimental ConditionPre-test think-aloud tasksComparison ConditionGold nanoparticles modelGold nanoparticles videoNano magnetics modelNano magnetics videoCompare and contrast two modelsPost-test think-aloud tasksCompare and contrast two videosFigure 1. Nano Gold model (left) and Nano Gold video (right) were used in the study.Table 2: Pre-test and post-test think-aloud questionsAssessment TypeDeclarativenanoscienceknowledge tasksExplanatorynanoscienceknowledge tasksTransfer problems(Post-test only)QuestionsQ1: What is the concept of surface area to volume ratio?Q2: Do the individual atoms or molecules of a substance have the same properties as the bulksubstance or not?Q3: Why does an increase in surface area change the way materials interact with each other on amolecular or atomic level?Q4: Why are properties not the same in all three directions (one-, two- and three-dimensional) in agiven material?P1: Imagine you are on a clear sunny day. The sky above us looks bright blue. A few hours later, inthe evening, the sunset puts on a brilliant show of reds, pinks and oranges. Why is the sky blue?Why twilight and sunset are in red or orange color? Please write a short essay to answer thisquestion.P2: Hard drives and data recording tapes are applications of nanotechnology that depend onmagnetic materials. When a magnet is cut into small enough pieces, its magnetic moment becomesincreasingly sensitive to the random motion of particles. At a certain point, known as thesuperparamagnetic limit. Recently, you got a mission from your supervisor to develop a devicewith maximum storage. Please describe how you will achieve this mission.Data sources and analysisMultiple sources of data were gathered prior to, and at the conclusion of the study, including: (a) video/audiorecordings of pre- and post-test think-aloud protocols; and (b) video data of participants’ bodily movements duringpre- and post-test think-aloud tasks.The transcripts of participants’ think-aloud protocols were integrated with the video recordings of theirbodily movements during the think-aloud tasks, and analyzed in detail by using a coding scheme for reasoningstrategies (see Table 3), which was built on the Framework of Embodiment of Thought proposed in this paper. Itprovided a mechanism to explore whether using ABMs and dynamic visualizations to learn about nanoscienceconcept might influence participants’ reasoning strategies afterwards, precisely in relation to the target concepts.Two coders each coded 60% of the subset with a 20% overlap for the coding reliability. The inter-rater reliabilitywas good with the Kappa (κ) = .86, with a significance of p < .0005. After coding, the percentage of participants,who showed each indicator during the think-aloud tasks, was calculated.ICLS 2018 Proceedings202© ISLSTable 3: Coding scheme for reasoning strategiesIndicatorsPerspectiveTakingA first- to thirdpersonperspectiveA third-personperspectiveCausalInferenceMakingDescriptionA verbal explanation involves:(a) an agent-level view: illustratinghow an individual nanoparticlebehave and interact with itsneighbours, and(b) an aggregate-level view:illustrating how individualnanoparticles emerge to systemproperties.A verbal explanation involves:an aggregate-level view:illustrating a system-levelphenomenon.ExampleYou know like the gold that if the particular issmaller, then more space between each other,and the light with different wavelength hits it,resulting in different colours.Gold nanoparticles at 12 nanometres appearto be red in humane eye.The sky is blue because of the size of particlesin the atmosphere. The particles in theatmosphere are reflecting and refracting theblue light wavelengths that come from the sun.Generating causalinferencesA verbal explanation involves ideagenerating related to causality.InformationretrievalA verbal explanation mentionsprior experience and knowledge.Use of gesturesA verbal explanation supported bygesturing.When the light hitsthe nanoparticle…Use ofhandwriting/drawingA verbal explanation supported byhandwriting/drawing on a blankpaper.This is surface area.Well, from the video tow. I think the answer isnot.MotorsupportedThinkingResultsDeclarative and explanatory knowledge tasksIn the ABM group (see Figure 2 (left)), there was an interesting difference between pre-test and post-test thinkaloud tasks on Perspective Taking. First, prior to the intervention with ABMs, none of students showed a first- tothird-person perspective (an agent- to aggregate-level view). However, after the intervention with ABMs, 71% ofstudents’ verbal responses demonstrated that they presented their scientific understandings from an agent-basedperspective (a first-person perspective) to an aggregate-level perspective (a third-person perspective). Second,64% of students took a third-person perspective (an aggregate-level view) to explain the concept of structurematter at the nanoscale on the pre-test. In contrast, only 18% of students took a third-person perspective on thepost-test. In addition, there was a slight increase in the number of students (64% to 68%) who generated causalinferences from the pre- to post-test think-aloud protocols; on the other hand, the percentage of students onrecalling information from previous knowledge to respond to the tasks decreased (100% to 68%). Although noneof students took notes to structure their ideas prior to and after the interventions, an increased number of studentsused gestures to support their thinking (11% to 43%).Figure 2 (right) shows that most students’ verbal responses reflected a third-person perspective (anaggregate-level view) on both the pre-test and post-test think-aloud tasks (88% and 100%), and none of studentsused a first- to third-person perspective (an agent- to aggregate-level view) on either task. Prior to the intervention,although 19% of students drew causal inferences to construct their ideas, after the intervention, all of studentsICLS 2018 Proceedings203© ISLSchanged to recall previous information for idea generations. Although 8% of students used gestures associatedwith their ideas, prior to the intervention, there were no gestures at all, after the intervention. In addition, therewas a slightly increased number of students taking notes to form their mental representations from the pre- topost-test declarative tasks (12% to 15%).Figure 2. The percentage of students in the ABM group (left) and students in the Dynamic Visualization group(right) showing the reasoning strategies on pre-test and post-test think-aloud tasks on declarative knowledge.Figure 3. The percentage of students in the ABM group (left) and students in the Dynamic Visualization group(right) showing the reasoning strategies on pre-test and post-test think-aloud tasks on explanatory knowledge.For the explanatory knowledge tasks, Figure 3 (left) shows that in the ABM group, prior to theintervention, the verbal responses of most students (82%) showed a third-person perspective (an aggregate-levelview) for idea constructions. However, after the intervention, 64% of students provided their explanations in theway, which switched between a first-person perspective (agent-based view) and a third-person perspective (theaggregate-level view) to link the agent-level interactions with emergent outcomes in the ABMs. In addition, 86%of students constructed their ideas on the pre-test explanatory tasks by recalling their previous knowledge. Incontrast, on the post-test explanatory tasks, all the students (100%) drew causal inferences for idea constructions.Moreover, there was an increased percentage of students spontaneously using gestures to simulate thenanoscientific phenomena from the pre- to post-test explanatory tasks (32% to 68%). None of the studentswrote/drew on the blank paper provided on either task.In the dynamic visualization group (see Figure 3 (right)), there was an increased number of studentsproviding their explanations from a third-person perspective (an aggregate-level view) from the pre- to post-testexplanatory tasks (54% to 88%). None of the students’ verbal responses showed a first- to third-person perspective(an across agent- to aggregate-level view) during their explanations on either task. Additionally, all of the studentsutilized the similar reasoning strategies to respond to the pre- and post-test explanatory tasks by recalling previousknowledge. It is also noteworthy that fewer students drew causal inferences after the intervention with the videosthan prior to the intervention (27% versus 54%). After the intervention with videos, there was a slightly decreasednumber of students using gestures (19% to 12%), as well as writing/drawing on the blank paper provided for ideaconstructions (31% to 8%).ICLS 2018 Proceedings204© ISLSTransfer problemsTransfer problems in both groups were conducted after the interventions only. Figure 4 shows notable differencesbetween groups in terms of showing the reasoning strategies during the transfer problems. A Fisher Exact testindicated that the ABM groups had a significantly higher percentage of students demonstrated the solutionconstructions across an agent-based view to an emergent system view (a first- to third-person perspectives)compared with the dynamic visualization group, x2(1, n = 27) = 23.14, exact p = .000, phi = -1.0. In contrast, thepercentage of students in the dynamic visualization group was significantly higher than the ABM group in regardsto the use of a third-person perspective (an aggregate-level view) on solutions, x2(2, n = 27) = 27, exact p = .000,phi = 1.0. Further, all of the students in the ABM group developed solutions based on generating causal inferences,x2(2, n = 27) = 14.54, exact p = .001, phi = .73 All the students in the dynamic visualization group searched thesolutions from their prior knowledge, x2(2, n = 27) = 12.53, exact p = .002, phi = .68. Finally, it is also noteworthythat there was a significant difference between groups regarding using gestures as a support for their problem,x2(2, n = 27) = 21.66, exact p = .000, phi = .9 In other words, the ABM group had 85% of students spontaneouslyusing gestures for supporting problem-solving, while the dynamic visualization group only had 8% of studentsdid so. Although 35% of students in the dynamic visualization group wrote on the blank paper provided to supporttheir solutions, none of students in the ABM group used note-taking on the post-transfer problems, x2(1, n = 27)= 14.54, exact p = .000, phi = .73.Figure 4. The percentage of students in the ABM group (in blue) and students in the Dynamic Visualizationgroup (in green) showing the reasoning strategies on post-test think-aloud tasks on transfer problems.Discussion and conclusionThe results of this study show that the students in the ABM group during the post-test think-aloud tasks werefound to use significantly more of the proposed reasoning strategies in terms of embodiment of thought—(a)Perspective Taking: a first- to third-person perspective, (b) Causal Inference Making: generating causalinferences, and (c) Motor-supported Thinking: use of gestures—than the dynamic visualization group did. Forexample, the students in the ABM group changed their perspectives from a third-person perspective to a first- tothird-person perspective to describe the nanoscale concepts. They did not seem to change their ideas on the posttest tasks by searching their previous knowledge, but rather they started generating causal inferences toconceptualize the nanoscale knowledge in the post-test. This suggests that regarding declarative knowledge,students’ reasoning strategies were slightly influenced by learning with the ABMs. Moreover, the most studentschanged their reasoning strategies from the pre-test to post-test on explanatory knowledge tasks and transferproblems. For example, during the pre-test, students searched their previous knowledge from a third-personperspective to structure their ideas. However, during the post-test, the ABM students generated causal inferencesfrom a first- to third-person perspective and they were found to spontaneously use gestures as part of theirreasoning strategies.According to recent research in an embodiment framework of cognition, it has been proposed thatinteracting with tools may change ways an individual thinks and perceives (Gibbs, 2006; Soylu, 2016). In otherwords, when one manipulates tools, which is usually related to particular goals, this interaction may change anindividual’s perceptions and conceptualizations of the environment. The results of this study are consistent withthis embodiment view of tools as mediating changes in ways of thinking and perceiving phenomena. For example,the tools used by the ABM group allowed the students to manipulate an individual nanoparticle by setting up theICLS 2018 Proceedings205© ISLSparameters to observe the individual nanoparticle’s behaviors and interactions (a first-person perspective), andthen to explore the consequences of their setting (a third-person perspective). This may have set up opportunitiesfor the students to notice that these parameters settings had a causal impact on the behavior of the nanoparticle(the agent), even though the students did not have direct bodily contact with the nanoparticle. In this way, theABMs functioned as a learning tool that provided a “virtual” nanoscale learning experience whereby the learnerhas experiences via by their bodily movements with the model, and in turn to see in the behavior of the agents inthe model causal consequences of their selections.This paper proposes that the students in the ABM group had computationally mediated embodiedexperiences that helped them construct new schema about the nanoscale experience in terms of the target concepts.This in turn allowed them to “run” mental simulations based on these new schema as part of their reasoningstrategies when working on the post-test explanatory knowledge tasks and problems. Earlier research hasdemonstrated a mental simulation recruits the same neural networks involved in action and perception (Gallese &Lakoff, 2005; Jeannerod, 2007), and thus functions as a form of re-enactment of past sensorimotor experience(Borghi & Cimatti, 2010). From this cognitive perspective, it seems that the use of gestures by the ABM groupindicated the running of mental simulations during post-test explanatory knowledge and problem solving, and itwas the use of the ABMs that provided the “past sensorimotor experience” for students to construct the cognitiverepresentations (i.e., schema) necessary to support these mental simulations.In contrast, the students watching the videos were only permitted a limited set of interactions with thevisualization—albeit with “focus” on selected content information. According to Lai et al. (2016, April), this typeof learning activity has been found to foster the acquisition of declarative knowledge but not to be effective forachieving the higher order learning outcomes of explanatory knowledge and knowledge transfer. Most studentsin the dynamic visualization group had no change from the pre-test to post-test think-aloud tasks in their reasoningstrategies in that they took a third-person perspective and recalled previous information to structure their ideasduring their assessments. Further, students in the dynamic visualization group demonstrated their reasoningstrategies were influenced by the videos in terms of reproductive memory of declarative information and abilityto recall images from the videos to draw figures when answer the post-test questions.In general discussion, this study has found students’ reasoning strategies during the post-test explanatoryknowledge tasks and problem solving activities have been influenced by their previous experience of using ofABMs, which suggests that embodied cognition have been a critical aspect of this type of learning experience.This is because students’ mental imagery activates in the ABM group were integral to simulating and activatinggestures were highly compatible with an embodiment framework of cognition (Gibbs, 2006; Hostetter & Alibali,2008). The mental simulations were based on the previous experience of students’ perceptual and motor processesassociated with the interactions of the ABM learning environment.However, current work on embodied cognition and learning design merely focus on physical activity.The design of this body of research was: (a) using physical motion/gestures as a control mechanism for threedimensional (3D) game-based learning (e.g., virtual environment; Lindgren & Johnson-Glenberg, 2013); or (b)using fingers tracing on paper/iPad as a control mechanism (e.g., Hu, Ginns, & Bobis, 2015); Although the use ofphysical activity might support enhanced learning, not all learning activities that involve physical activity can beregarded as embodied learning experience.Moreover, to determine whether physical activities are actual factors in supporting enhanced learning,most research related to action, movement, and gesture studies tends to manipulate physical activities. However,the manipulation of physical activities might complicate research findings. For example, during learning activities,leaners’ attention might be disturbed by factors such as remembering gesturing, or not gesturing, rather thanlearning contents. Another example is that using fingers to trace on paper/iPad might help learners focus on theinformation they are tracing, and then this concentration leads to learning gains, instead of finger tracing per se.Furthermore, earlier research has claimed that gestures are a natural way of expressing thoughts and spatialinformation (Hegarty et al., 2005). In line with this view, this study had no manipulation of physical activities.The gestures and handwriting/drawing in this study were students’ strategy choices in a way to express theirthoughts spontaneously after learning with the ABMs and dynamic visualizations respectively. In this sense,students moved their hands to simulate the nanoscale phenomena from previous learning experience with theABMs, and thus, embodied their thought in actions.In conclusion, the findings of this study are significant in three ways. First, this study has proposed aFramework of Embodiment of Thought with three indicators of reasoning strategy from which to differentiateembodied versus non-embodied learning experiences associated with learning technologies. Second, the findingsof this study demonstrated that students in the ABM group spontaneously used gestures to reason the targetnanoscale phenomena, which suggests the ABM approach may help students construct new schema and togenerate mental simulations as part of their reasoning strategies when problem solving. As this was a small-scaleICLS 2018 Proceedings206© ISLSstudy, there is limitation to the generalizability of the findings beyond the sample of university students whoparticipated in the study. Overall, it is hoped this study might stimulate further interest in these research areasconcerning the nature of innovative learning experiences for understanding difficult scientific knowledge andtheir underlying theoretical mechanisms.ReferencesBarsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. The Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 617-645.Blonder, R., & Dinur, M. (2011). Teaching nanotechnology using student-centered pedagogy for increasingstudents’ continuing motivation. Journal of Nano Education, 3(1), 51-61.Borghi, A. M., & Cimatti, F. (2010). Embodied cognition and beyond: Acting and sensing the body.Neuropsychologia, 48(3), 763-773.Chi, M. T. H., & Wylie, R. (2014). The ICAP framework: Linking cognitive engagement to active learningoutcomes. Educational Psychologist, 49(4), 219-243.Clark, A. (1998). Embodied, situated, and distributed cognition. In W. Bechtel & G. Graham (Eds.), A companionto cognitive science (pp. 506-517). Oxford: Blackwell.de Koning, B. B., & Tabbers, H. K. (2011). Facilitating understanding of movements in dynamic visualizations:an embodied perspective. Educational Psychology Review, 23(4), 501-521.Gallese, V., & Lakoff, G. (2005). The brain's concepts: The role of the sensory-motor system in conceptualknowledge. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 22(3-4), 455-479.Gibbs, R. W. (2006). Embodiment and cognitive science. New York: Cambridge University Press.Gibson, J. J. (1986). The Theory of Affordances. In J. J. Gibson (Ed.), The Ecological Approachto VisualPerception (pp. 127-136). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Hegarty, M., Mayer, S., Kriz, S., & Keehner, M. (2005). The role of gestures in mental animation. SpatialCognition and Computation, 5(4), 333-356.Hostetter, A. B., & Alibali, M. W. (2008). Visible embodiment: Gestures as simulated action. PsychonomicBulletin & Review, 15(3), 459-514.Hu, F. T., Ginns, P., & Bobis, J. (2015). Getting the point: tracing worked examples enhances learning. Learningand Instruction, 35, 85-93.Jeannerod, M. (2007). Motor cognition: What actions tell the self. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Jones, M. G., Blonder, R., Gardner, G. E., Albe, V., Falvo, M., & Chevrier, J. (2013). Nanotechnology andnanoscale science: Educational challenges. International Journal of Science Education, 35, 1490-1512.Lai, P. K., Jacobson, M. J., & Markauskaite, L. (2016, April). Agent-based models versus video-basedvisualisation to learn nanoscience concepts: An embodied cognition perspective. Paper presented at the2016 annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Washington D.C.Landau, J., Groscurth, C. R., Wright, L., & Condit, C. M. (2009). Visualizing nanotechnology: the impact ofvisual images on lay American audience associations with nanotechnology. Public Understanding ofScience, 18(3), 325-337.Lindgren, R., & Johnson-Glenberg, M. C. (2013). Emboldened by embodiment six precepts for research onembodied learning and mixed reality. Educational Researcher, 42(8), 445-452.Magana, A. J., Brophy, S. P., & Bryan, L. A. (2012). An integrated knowledge framework to characterize andscaffold size and scale cognition (FS2C). International Journal of Science Education, 34(14), 21812203.Mahon, B. Z., & Caramazza, A. (2008). A critical look at the embodied cognition hypothesis and a new proposalfor grounding conceptual content. Journal of physiology-Paris, 102(1), 59-70.Peng, X., Isaac, B., & Wilkins, R. T. (2012). Development of nanoscale virtual reality simulations for the teachingof nanotechnology. Paper presented at the 119th American Society for Engineering Education, SanAntonio.Schwartz, D. L., & Holton, D. L. (2000). Tool use and the effect of action on the imagination. Journal ofExperimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26(6), 1655-1665.Sengupta, P., & Wilensky, U. (2009). Learning electricity with NIELS: Thinking with electrons and thinking inlevels. International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 14(1), 21-50.Shepardson, D. P., Choi, S., Niyogi, D., & Charusombat, U. (2011). Seventh grade students' mental models of thegreenhouse effect. Environmental Education Research, 17(1), 1-17.Soylu, F. (2016). An embodied approach to understanding: Making sense of the world through simulated bodilyactivity. Frontiers in Psychology, 7(1914), 1-10.Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo. Evanston, IL: Center for Connected Learning and Computer-Based Modeling.Northwestern University.ICLS 2018 Proceedings207© ISLS