Children’s Participation in Rulemaking to Mitigate ProcessProblems in CSCLYong Ju Jung, Dhvani Toprani, Shulong Yan, and Marcela Borgeyongju@psu.edu, dqt5207@psu.edu, suy144@psu.edu, mborge@psu.eduThe Pennsylvania State UniversityAbstract: In CSCL studies, children have been largely excluded from decision-makingprocesses around orchestration by being required to follow predetermined scripts forcollaboration. However, opportunities to acknowledge issues surrounding the process ofcollaboration (i.e., shared resources) and resolve related problems are important for thedevelopment of higher-order collective cognitive processes. Thus, considering cognitiveapprenticeship, this case study illustrates a session at an afterschool club where childrenworked on collaborative design projects with Minecraft and were empowered to participate indecision-making processes surrounding classroom rules and orchestration of activities.Keywords: Socio-metacognition, agency, cognitive apprenticeship, sharing, Minecraft, CSCLIntroductionMany CSCL settings favor the creation of predetermined rules that minimize conflict and reduce the necessityfor students to solve social problems such as those surrounding shared resources (e.g., Schwarz, de Groot,Mavrikis, & Dragon, 2015). However, learners in these predetermined settings lose opportunity to understandnon-task related, social problems arising from collaboration processes and practice important decision-makingprocesses. For example, learners need to understand that sharing resources is an integral process for achievingcommon goals because physical and/or virtual resources in CSCL are often shared among individuals. Basedupon the perspective that participation itself is a learning process (Lave & Wenger, 1991), we argue thatchildren need to be active participants in the resolution of issues that emerge during collaboration in order tolearn about and practice evaluation and regulation of collective processes. To support children’s participation insuch issues, it is important to make collaborative aims and underlying thinking processes explicit, modelbehaviors, articulate thinking, and coach children as they work through similar processes (Brown, Collins, &Duguid, 1989). In this way, we can immerse children in these issues and support them as they figure out how toresolve issues related to collaboration through testing, synthesizing, evaluating, and negotiating future activity.Towards this aim, we examined children in an afterschool club as they worked on collective designprojects by using a variety of tools including Minecraft. Using computers often led to conflicts, as a limitedsupply caused students to fight over control of the tools. Having to share a virtual space also caused conflicts.Rather than solving the issues for them in advance, we ran a session designed to help children understand theissues related to limited resources, try out different ways to orchestrate collaboration, and create their own clubrules. Then, we conducted a qualitative case study to answer the research question: how did children participatein the collective sense-making process surrounding shared resources during the CSCL afterschool club? Thestudy also discuss whether taking time to focus on such process provides benefits to students.Conceptual frameworkLearners in collaborative environments need to practice how to collaborate and how to solve problems in groups(Schwarz et al., 2015), because collaboration involves higher-order forms of group cognition rather than asimple sum of individual contribution (Stahl, 2013). Thus, it is critical to support not only learners’ cognitiveactivities about domain knowledge, but also to develop collaborative sense-making processes that surround it.Previous studies in CSCL have adopted tools and scaffolds to enhance the quality of collaboration at the level ofthe small group (e.g., Borge & White, 2016). However, we argue that previous studies overlooked theimportance of empowering learners to adopt the role of main agents for creating rules for the community.Process problems regarding shared resourcesLearners in CSCL settings are often asked to solve domain problems that require higher-order thinking (i.e.,inquiry skills, argumentation); solving the given domain problem becomes the primary goal for the group. Thus,the conflicts that emerge during collaboration (i.e., limited resources, shared environment) are regardedobstacles and are therefore mitigated in advance by teacher rule-making. However, instead of neglecting orCSCL 2017 Proceedings652© ISLSeliminating conflicts among individuals, it is important to consider what conflicts learners may confront andwhat could be learned by solving problems together.In CSCL settings, learners are usually required to collaborate with shared or constrained resources inboth physical and virtual spaces. In terms of sharing physical resources (i.e., laptops), research indicates that iflearners share a computer screen but have an individual mouse, which allows them to make concurrent input, ahigh level of collaboration can be achieved (Gómez et al., 2013). However, such predetermined rules deprivelearners the opportunity to understand the problem associated with limited resources and to determine how toovercome this problem. It also may not always be feasible to provide enough technology due to limited budgetsand technical issues. In terms of a virtual environment, simultaneous access the same virtual space can causeconflict. For example, in Minecraft, an online video game for building virtual artifacts, multiple users can buildat the same time in one world by using different computers. Thus, conflicts might arise if they envision differentcreation in the same location without achieving shared understanding about the project. Given that our previousiteration indicated that children might lose their motivation in collaborative activities when adult facilitatorsminimized conflicts through goal-oriented reasoning (Jung, Yan, & Borge, 2016), we designed a session wherefacilitators would empower learners to collectively manage process problems during collaboration.Fostering children’s agency as part of the club activitiesMany of the scaffolds and tools for CSCL are designed and predetermined by adults such as researchers orteachers (e.g., Borge & White, 2016), but the culture of collaboration should also include children’s autonomouscollective problem solving. In this regard, we follow aspects of cognitive apprenticeship models of instruction toinclude children as the main agents dealing with process problems and to facilitate their attempts to solve theseproblems during collaboration (Brown et al., 1989). Cognitive apprenticeship emphasizes authentic practiceswhere learners are situated in their own problems and generate solutions for themselves within enculturation(Brown et al., 1989). We ran the session to bring these issues to the forefront and help children engage inthinking about the issues of sharing resources, testing different solutions, and collectively discussing relateddecisions for their collaborative projects. During this session, children not only made rules for sharing resourcesbut also modeled the whole process of decision making for collaborative activities in future. We examine howthe session engaged children in such process to mitigate conflicts among themselves.MethodsSetting and participantsThe research was conducted over 16 weeks during Fall 2015, in a weekly afterschool club at an elementarycharter school in the Northern US. Two adult facilitators led four groups of children (16 total) between 8 and 12,who worked collaboratively on design projects (i.e., building a garden) by using diverse media (i.e., drawing,Legos, Minecraft). Six were female, ten were male, and eight were non-Caucasian. For Minecraft (Figure 1, a),as we had a limited number of laptops, each group had to share two laptops. Each laptop could access the sameserver on Minecraft, so children could work on a group project together from different laptops (Figure 1, b).Children also took turns to use the Teacher account (one or two children per session), which has more functions(i.e., freeze other players) but adds more responsibility to the club community.(a)(b)Figure 1. Example of children’s design project with Minecraft (a) and the scene of the setting (b).This study focuses on Session 6 (75 min), which was designed for children to begin using Minecraftand engage in problem solving associated with sharing resources. In this session, the facilitators not onlyprompted children’s discussions but also modeled collective, decision-making processes. The session flowgenerally followed six continuous steps. Step 1: The facilitators announced that a limited number of laptopswere available and presented two options for sharing a laptop. In Option 1, command keys were divided so thateach person could press simultaneously, while in Option 2, one person verbally guided the other who actuallyCSCL 2017 Proceedings653© ISLSpressed the keys. Step 2: Each group worked in Minecraft to build their design experimenting with the twooptions (20 min). Step 3: The facilitators led a whole-class discussion about the pros and cons of each option toidentify its claims and trade-offs. Step 4: Children decided which option they would use by articulating theirrationale. Step 5: Children continued to work on Minecraft (20 min). Step 6: The facilitators led a whole-classdiscussion aimed at getting children to discuss difficulties during building, including any frustrations andproblems they faced. Afterward, children were prompted to think about and propose additional rules needed forbuilding in Minecraft to address the problems they experienced. Steps 1-4 were particularly about sharingphysical resources, and Steps 5-6 were about sharing a virtual space.Data source and analysisWe conducted a case study to explore authentic situations with in-depth analysis (Creswell, 2013). The data wascollected in the form of audio and video recordings (296 minutes total from four groups). We analyzed the databy (1) developing content logs (Jordan & Henderson, 1995) that included a general description of events thatoccurred every 2 minutes, (2) collectively reviewing the recordings and the content logs to identify episodes ofchildren’s rulemaking, transcribe, and code them, (3) conducting microanalyses to deduce patterns of children’sdecision-making processes about evaluation and orchestration of club rules.FindingsUsing one’s own experience as a tool to articulate reasoningDuring the session, children as main agents could establish their own rules for sharing physical and virtualresources, via reflecting on their experiences, sharing ideas, or building upon each other’s ideas. Especiallywhen setting a rule for sharing physical resources (laptops), we identified that children used reasoning based ontheir own experiences and reflections to make decisions. When children had a discussion about the pros andcons of each option for sharing one laptop between two members (Step 3), children reflected back on their ownexperiences from Step 2 and used it as evidence for their reasoning. For instance, the episode of Marcos andPatty from Group 1 shows an alignment throughout their experiences, discussions, and decision-making. DuringStep 2, Marcos voluntarily verbally guided Patty while she built artifacts in Minecraft. Marcos also drew onpapers to specify plans and thoughts, unlike other children who guided only verbally. During the discussion(Step 3), Marcos used this experience as his rationale to support Option 2. He said “This [Option 2] is a sort ofthing for that they can do what they want. Um, so since I like sketching (showing his drawing to others), Iprepared a couple of pieces of papers for what I will [while the partner was working on Minecraft]. … And Ilike planning! If you don’t like to build in Minecraft, you can do this [drawing].” This transcript shows thatMarcos asserted the pros of Option 2 with explanation of what he and his partner did. He even showed hisdrawing as evidence to support his claim that Option 2 could be more beneficial especially for children whomight not like to play Minecraft. Then in Step 4, Marcos and Patty chose Option 2 as the rule for their furtherprojects. This episode shows that children were not only able to understand the pros or cons of each strategy butalso to use their experience to support their arguments for choosing rules.Presenting problems from one’s experience during negotiationThe session also helped children to bring up realistic problems they experienced and then make communityrules that all individuals could agree upon, particularly for sharing a virtual space. Since children used acommon server in Minecraft, many of them experienced conflicts due to territory invasion. During the secondwhole-class discussion (Step 6), children voluntarily brought up problems and frustrations related to the issuesof territory. Harry (Group 1) mentioned that somebody placed water in his group’s space; Bruce (Group 3)complained that somebody broke down his group’s artifacts; Eric and Aaron (Group 2) stated that Group 3 builton their territory. Then, facilitators reminded them that they had to share a common server in Minecraft andasked what rules they wanted to establish to ensure that all students could feel safe to explore while beingconsiderate of other’s creations. The facilitators invited children to share ideas and establish rules collectively.14 Iman:First, no building in others’ territory unless they ask help to build something.15 Facilitator2: What should we do then if somebody doesn’t follow that rule?16 Marcos:Um, ask a teacher [student who uses Teacher account] to freeze them!17 Patty:[Responsible for Teacher account this session] No, I don’t want to do that.18 (Some arguments going on)19 Iman:Each day we should have a chart, and then if you build on other’s territoryCSCL 2017 Proceedings654© ISLS202122 Facilitator2:23 Karen:24 Patty:and check mark. Once you get down to zero check mark, you get frozen forfive minutes.That’s a lot of check marks. …We should get two! To get two chances!How about one. …Based on the rule that Iman suggested (line 14), the facilitator prompted children to create morespecific rules (line 15). Then, other children shared their ideas, agreements or disagreements (line 16-24). Onesuggestion was for the child taking on the responsibility of ‘teacher’ to freeze a player (line 16). However, the‘teacher’ for that session stated that she would not feel comfortable freezing someone (line 17). Finally, childrencame to a consensus for a rule that ‘if a person built in other’s territory, he/she can be given one chance to adjusttheir behavior, otherwise he/she will be frozen in Minecraft for five minutes.’ Throughout this process, childrenacted as the main agents to set their own rules and reconcile solutions via multiple attempts to make agreements.This episode shows that children pursued their autonomy by creating rules that they could manage bythemselves.ImplicationsOur results indicate that young learners can successfully take the role of main agents to understand processproblems they confront, test different strategies, reason about experiences and needed rules, and establish theirown rules about shared resources for better collaborative environments. During the session, children reflectedupon their own experiences and practiced reasoning for choosing/making rules. This process can be seen as theenhancement of socio-metacognition, which is important for high-quality collaboration and socially sharedregulation (Bore & White, 2016; Järvelä et al., 2015). This study also explores the possibility of applyingcognitive apprenticeship models not only to cognitive development of domain knowledge and practice, but alsoto solving socio-emotional problems. However, we also recognized that not all children participated equally inthe rulemaking process, as some of them were not engaged as active agents during the session. Our next studymay focus on how to include all the children in process-related problem solving activities.ReferencesBorge, M., & White, B. (2016). Toward the development of socio-metacognitive expertise : an approach todeveloping collaborative competence. Cognition and Instruction, 34(4), 1–38.Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. EducationalResearcher, 18(1), 32–42.Creswell, J. W. (2013). Qualitative inquiry & research design: choosing among five approaches. CA: Sage.Gómez, F., Nussbaum, M., Weitz, J. F., Lopez, X., Mena, J., & Torres, A. (2013). Co-located single displaycollaborative learning for early childhood education. International Journal of Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning, 8(2), 225–244Järvelä, S., Kirschner, P. A., Panadero, E., Malmberg, J., Phielix, C., Jaspers, J., ..., & Järvenoja, H. (2015).Enhancing socially shared regulation in collaborative learning groups: designing for CSCL regulationtools. Educational Technology Research and Development, 63(1), 125-142.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39–103.Jung, Y. J., Yan, S., & Borge, M. (2016). Problems with different interests of learners in an informal CSCLSetting. In C-K. Looi, J. Polman, U. Cress, & P. Reimann (Eds.), Transforming Learning, EmpoweringLearners: The International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) 2016, Volume 2 (pp. 878881). Singapore: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York, NY: PressSyndicate of the University of Cambridge.Schwarz, B. B., de Groot, R., Mavrikis, M., & Dragon, T. (2015). Learning to learn together with CSCL tools.International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 10(3), 239–271.Stahl, G. (2013). Theories of collaborative cognition: Foundations for CSCL and CSCW together. In S. P.Goggins, I. Jahnke, & V. Wulf (Eds.), Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning at the Workplace(pp. 43–63). Boston, MA: Springer US.AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the Center for Innovations in Online Learning at Pennsylvania State University.CSCL 2017 Proceedings655© ISLS