Learning Design Through Science vs. Science Through DesignElizabeth McBride, Jonathan Vitale, and Marcia C. Linnbethmcbride@berkeley.edu, jonvitale@berkeley.edu, mclinn@berkeley.eduUniversity of California, BerkeleyAbstract: This research investigates two ways of framing design projects and their impacts onlearning. The study explores the benefits of learning science concepts before or during a designproject. Based on the NGSS science and engineering practices, in an engineering condition,students learn the necessary science concepts during a design project. In a science condition,students learn the science concepts first, then apply them during a design project. The studyexplores the benefits of each approach to inform instructional design. We use the knowledgeintegration framework to develop curriculum and assessment items, including an interactivecomputer model of a solar oven. Using three types of pre/posttest assessment items, we foundstudents in both conditions gained insights on science and engineering design items; students inthe engineering condition outperformed the science condition on a science-design integrationitem and conducted more trials during the design process while using an interactive computermodel.IntroductionEngineering projects are becoming more common in K-12 schools, but while it is often claimed that engineeringprojects improve student achievement in mathematics and science, research on this topic has shown that manyprojects do not live up to the claim (Teacher Advisory Council, 2009). While engineering projects may generatemore student interest and engagement (Hmelo et al., 2000; Cantrell et al., 2006) than typical science curricula,they often fall short on developing science concepts. Ideally, undertaking a science project should be motivating,while also helping students to understand the interplay between science concepts (like energy transformation) andengineering design decisions. However, the framing of goals can impact what aspects of the project areemphasized. In projects framed around science goals, students learn the science concepts and then do a designproject to apply those concepts (science condition). In projects framed around engineering goals, students learnthe science concepts during the process of completing a design project (engineering condition). We investigateways these two goal frameworks impacts student learning.Often, in science the goal is to develop knowledge, while in engineering the goal is to develop a solution(Lewis, 2006; Purzer, et al., 2015). In addition, we use the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) focus onscience and engineering practices, specifically the practice of “constructing explanations (for science) anddesigning solutions (for engineering)” (NGSS Lead States, 2013) to inform our conditions. This study comparesversions of a solar ovens unit that loosely use one or the other goal frames and present a focus on eitherconstructing explanations or designing solutions, while keeping the overall content of the curriculum the same.We use the knowledge integration framework (Linn & Eylon, 2011) to guide the development of thecurriculum and this study. This framework focuses on building a coherent understanding of concepts, and hasproven useful for design of instruction featuring dynamic visualizations (Ryoo & Linn, 2012) and engineeringdesign (Chiu et al., 2013; McElhaney & Linn, 2011). The framework emphasizes linking of ideas by eliciting allthe ideas students think are important and engaging them in testing and refining their ideas. When students builda physical artifact, as in many engineering projects, they can only test a few of their ideas due to time and materialconstraints. Features in this curriculum, like using interactive computer models, allow students to explore manymore ideas, thereby facilitating knowledge integration.Though engineering projects are potentially motivating, when students build a physical model they oftenneglect the scientific basis for their decisions (Crismond, 2001), instead focusing on aesthetic and otherwisesuperficial details of construction. Tools like interactive computer models can help students connect scienceprinciples and design decisions by making mechanisms such as energy transformation visible (Snir, Smith, &Grosslight, 1993; Wilensky & Reisman, 2006). The combination of computer models and hands-on activities indesign activities allows students to test many designs while also visualizing how energy transformation takesplace in their designs.In addition to providing science content knowledge, design projects utilizing computer models providestudents with an opportunity to explore authentic practices of scientists and engineers. The NGSS envision thatinstruction would combine practices including modeling, data, analysis, computational thinking, and design toenable students to integrate their scientific and engineering ideas (NGSS Lead States, 2013). The solar ovensICLS 2018 Proceedings17© ISLScurriculum used in this research familiarizes students with the way energy transforms from solar radiation to heat(MS-PS3-3) by using a hands-on project and interactive models, emphasizing the modeling aspect of the scienceand engineering practices of the NGSS as well as the standards associated with energy (NGSS Lead States, 2013).This curriculum draws on all eight of the science and engineering practices in the NGSS, focusing on usingmodels, developing solutions, and engaging in argument from evidence.A project framed as an engineering design project from the beginning may offer students meaningfulopportunities for science learning, especially when they must consider trade-offs in their designs (Purzer et al.,2015). This type of consideration of design trade-offs may be especially useful in helping students to integratetheir science ideas with their design decisions. Design projects have been found, in some cases, to positivelyimpact students’ scientific reasoning (Silk et al., 2009). However, these students may not learn complex scienceconcepts if their focus is on incidental aspects of design. Hands-on projects that directly follow a related scienceunit may allow students more time to focus on understanding the complex scientific phenomena they are beingasked to apply, while still motivating them to learn the concepts in order to apply them to their design. However,the separation of the science content from the design project may seem disjointed to students and lead to lowermotivation in learning the concepts.We use knowledge integration assessment items (Linn & Eylon, 2011; Liu et al., 2008) at pretest andposttest targeted at three specific areas to better understand how each of our conditions impacts learning. Theseitems measure science concept integration, engineering design practices, and the integration of science andengineering design practices. While there has been much work done to advance engineering education at the K12 level (e.g., National Research Council, 2009; Bybee, 2011), there has not been as much work done to developvalid items for assessing engineering practices.The two conditions in this research are meant to understand two common ways hands-on activities areframed in the classroom. By understanding the benefits of each method of framing, we hope to develop acurriculum that helps students to integrate their ideas about science concepts and engineering design better. Whileteachers may have their own preferred way to conduct hands-on projects in their classrooms, this work is meantto help strengthen student learning in both the science and engineering domains no matter the framing of theclassroom project.MethodsParticipants and proceduresOne teacher and her 153 students participated in this study. Out of these students, 139 students completed a pretest,(some part of) the curriculum, and a posttest. The pretest was conducted one day before beginning the unit, andthe posttest was conducted one day after finishing the unit. Both the pretest and posttest were administered tostudents individually. Pairs, or in some cases triads, of students were assigned to collaborative workgroups bytheir teacher to work on curriculum. Workgroups were randomly assigned to a condition (science or engineering)by the software. All students received the same curricular content, but activity focus and order varied by condition.Curricular materialsThis study was implemented in a curriculum module entitled Solar Ovens in the Web-based Inquiry ScienceEnvironment (WISE), which utilizes a variety of instructional and assessment tools (Linn & Eylon, 2011). Thegoal of the unit was to familiarize students with the way energy transforms from solar radiation to heat through ahands-on project and interactive models, covering the modeling aspect of the Science and Engineering Practicesof the NGSS, as well as the standards associated with energy, specifically standards related to the transfer ofthermal energy (NGSS Lead States, 2013).The solar ovens curriculum within WISE has been designed and refined with the collaboration of multipleexpert teachers and researchers to help students test and refine their ideas about energy transformation. Thecurriculum seeks to help students utilize their ideas about how radiation works in various contexts, like in theatmosphere and inside solar ovens.Students in both conditions followed a modified “design, build, test” approach. An important feature ofthis unit is a budget activity in which students make decisions about and justify the materials they choose to usefor building (Figure 1). During the design phases, students also draw pictures of their ovens and explain howenergy transfer will occur. Students also use an interactive model of a solar oven, designed using NetLogo(Wilensky, 1999), to test features in the solar oven and understand how solar radiation transforms into infraredenergy (Figure 2). Students generate trials using the model by allowing the model to run for 5 simulated minuteswithout changing the input variables. When students test their physical prototypes they also test them under alamp for 5 minutes. After each trial is generated, it is automatically added to a table, allowing students to trackICLS 2018 Proceedings18© ISLSthe trials they ran and the results of those trials. The computer model has been previously tested to understandhow students use it at different points during the curriculum and how it impacts learning. Our earlier findingsindicate that the computer model aids students in integrating their science and design ideas, and that studentsinteracting with the model earlier during the curriculum (during the planning phase) benefit more than studentswho interact with the model later in the curriculum (the reflecting phase) (McBride, Vitale, Applebaum & Linn,2016). After designing, students build physical solar ovens, which are tested under lamps with a common set ofrequirements, so results are comparable between trials and groups.Figure 1. Student budget (left) and example of student design (right); students were given $20 for their firstdesign iteration and $13 to add to their oven for the second iteration.Figure 2. The interactive model used by students for design solar ovens and understanding energytransformation, with an automatically generated table below.Condition differencesConditions did not differ in content, only in the order the content was presented and in the framing of questionsor activities. In the engineering condition students were introduced to the design project in the first step, then wereprompted to learn or consider science concepts during the design process. In the science condition, studentslearned all the science concepts at the beginning of the project in a module about the atmosphere and were thenintroduced to the design project as a way to apply what they had just learned. Students in each condition used aconcept-mapping tool to map energy flow. In the engineering condition, students mapped energy flow in theirsolar ovens, while in the science condition students mapped energy flow in the atmosphere. These differences areoutlined in tables 1 & 2.Tables 1 & 2: Table 1 (left) shows the main steps in the curriculum for the engineering condition, including thenumber of steps. Table 2 (right) shows main steps in the curriculum for the science conditionICLS 2018 Proceedings19© ISLSScience Condition (25 steps)ActivityDetails(# Steps)Solar Radiation - Solar radiationand the- Reflectivity (of earth)Atmosphere (7) - Concept map of energytransformationSolar Radiation - Greenhouse gas modeland- Update concept map ofGreenhouseenergy transformation toGases (3)include greenhouse gasesDesign & Build - Introduction to project& Connect (10) - Model a solar oven- Make connections betweensolar oven and greenhousegases- Budget and design- Build physical solar ovenTest (3)- Test physical solar ovenRedesign (2)- Collaborative critiqueactivity- Use solar ovens model toredesign oven, writeupdated descriptionEngineering Condition (26 steps)ActivityDetails(# Steps)Design &- Introduction to projectScience- Solar radiationConcepts- Solar oven model(18)- Concept map of energytransformation (in solar oven)- Reflectivity- Preliminary design- Why do you need a cover?- Greenhouse gas model- Budget and final designBuild (1)- Build physical solar ovenTest (3)- Test physical solar ovenRedesign- Collaborative critique activity(2)- Use solar ovens model to redesignoven, write updated descriptionConnect- Make connections between solar(2)oven and greenhouse gasesTest materialsThe pre- and posttest assessments we used consisted of 9 assessment items. These items fell into three areas:science concepts, engineering practices, and the integration of science and engineering. All items use shortresponse format and are scored using knowledge integration rubrics. Of these 9 items, 5 items measure integrationof science concepts, 3 items measure integration of engineering design ideas and practices, and 1 item measuresthe integration of design practices with science concepts.One of the science concept items, Car prompted students to explain what would happen to a car left inthe sun during a cold day. In an engineering item, Budget, students were asked to describe how two fictionalstudents would build solar ovens using two different lists of materials and then to describe the tradeoffs made ineach design. In the science-engineering integration item, Model, students were asked to use a basic solar ovenmodel (like that shown in Figure 2, but with only a box shape drop-down option) to help a fictional studentdetermine whether a tall, skinny box or a short, wide box would heat up faster. The pretest and posttest werecomposed of the same items.While the science and engineering integration items measure how well students link their ideas aboutdesign or about science concepts, we were particularly interested in the performance of students in each conditionon the integration item, since a goal of this curriculum is to help students use their science ideas to justify theirdesign decisions. This integration item has been tested with over 1000 students in prior work.We also use the automatically generated table from students’ interactions with the interactive computermodel (Figure 2) to analyze how many trials students ran during the design process. In addition, we use threeother measures of students’ interactions with the interactive computer model. We use the amount of time studentsspent on the project step that included the computer model, the number of clicks students made in the computermodel, and the average number of clicks made per hour (time spent divided by number of clicks). All of thesemeasures come from analysis of student log files.Analysis approachTo measure knowledge integration, the items were scored using knowledge integration rubrics to assess linksbetween multiple normative science ideas (Linn & Eylon, 2011; Liu et al, 2008). The knowledge integration rubricfor Model, the science/design integration item, shows how links are scored (Table 3). Multiple researchers developthe rubrics for each item; initial scoring of data is also done by at least two researchers, with high inter-raterreliability (κ > 0.8).Since this research investigates the differences between framing as a whole project (more similar toengineering) or as an application of concepts (more similar to science), our analysis looks at whether there areICLS 2018 Proceedings20© ISLSdifferences between conditions on the science, engineering, or integration items. However, unless otherwisespecified, we examine the corpus of all 9 items.To analyze the differences between conditions based on how students used the interactive computermodel during the design phase of the project, we used a count of the number of trials run by each group. Each trialis added to an automatically generated table after students allow the model to run for 5 simulated minutes (takesabout 30 seconds to 5 minutes in real time). We do not count trials that were not allowed to run for shorter thanthis time period because, since they were not added to the automatically generated table, students did not have arecord of them and were therefore not able to look back at these trials while making their decisions. This analysisis done at the workgroup level.Table 3: Sample knowledge integration scoring rubric for the Model pre/post open response itemScore12LevelOff TaskIrrelevant/Incorrect3PartialNormative isolated ideaswithout a valid linkBasicElaborate a scientificallyvalid link45ComplexElaborate two or morescientifically valid linksExamplesI don’t know.David is correct because I chose the skinny and tall one and the heatwent up really fast.David's claim is not correct because in the model it show solarradiation stayed trapped inside the wide and short one making heateasily trapped inside.David's claim is incorrect because the skinny box got to 33.8 in 2minutes and the wide box got to 44.7 in 2 minutes. The wider box couldkeep a lot of energy because of the space and the skinny box doesn'thave a lot of space. So, this means David was wrong.David's claim is incorrect because the more area for radation to comethe more radation can get trapped and turn into heat.there is less ofthe when you have a skiny box.ResultsA t-test of pooled pre- and posttest data across conditions revealed a significant effect of testing session [t(304) =-6.44, p < 0.0001], demonstrating that across both conditions students made gains from pre- to posttest (Figure3).There were no overall differences between the science and engineering conditions. When consideringthe groups of science and engineering assessment items, there were non-significant differences in conditiondifferences. Students in the science condition made slightly greater gains on the science assessment items betweenpretest and posttest and likewise students in the engineering condition made slightly greater gains on theengineering assessment items between pretest and posttest; neither of these differences were significant.When considering the integration assessment item, there was a significant impact of condition. Using aregression model, students in the engineering condition scored higher on the posttest integration item, whencontrolling for pretest score (β = 0.18, p < 0.01). This is shown in Figure 4.We also analyze the number of trials students run in the interactive computer model during the designphase of the project. Groups in the engineering condition ran significantly more trials than those in the sciencecondition (β = 0.33, p < 0.02). Figure 5 shows data on the variance between the conditions in terms of the numberof trials run. In the engineering condition, more of the groups used the model to run trials, and a larger proportionof groups ran more than one trial. In the science condition, many groups did not even allow the model to run fora full trial, and of groups that did run any trials, a majority of them only ran one trial.ICLS 2018 Proceedings21© ISLSFigure 3. Differences between pretest and posttest scores for Solar Ovens.Figure 4. Differences between conditions (Science and Engineering) on the integration item at pretest andposttest.There was not a significant difference between conditions when examining the amount of time studentsspent using the computer model. On average, students spent about 20 minutes using the computer model, withstudents in the engineering condition spending slightly longer on average than students in the science condition.However, there was a significant difference between conditions when looking at the number of clicks, or actions,students made while using the model (β = 0.34, p < 0.01), with students in the engineering condition making 25more clicks than students in the science condition (mean for engineering condition: 56, mean for sciencecondition: 31). Since students in the engineering condition ran more trials, we would generally expect them toalso have made more clicks. When combining the measures of time and clicks to be the number of clicks per hour(calculated: clicks divided by time), we find no significant difference between conditions. This measure isimportant to check because in some cases, students may make rapid clicks on an interactive model withoutallowing the model to run and reveal the results or patterns to students. We found that there is generally a linearrelationship between the amount of time spent and number of clicks in the model. We also found few outliers,meaning that most students were using the model appropriately.Students used the model to run more trials in the engineering condition, even though students in bothconditions generally spent the same amount of time using the model. This may mean that students in theengineering condition used the model more effectively to test their ideas. This is likely because students areintroduced to the model very early in the project, so they are using the model to add and test new ideas about theirdesign. Students in the science condition may have already been considering their design throughout the project,but before they were able to test their ideas using the model. This may have caused students to become attachedto certain choices they made before they had a chance to use the model to test design options.ICLS 2018 Proceedings22© ISLSFigure 5. left: Histograms showing the number of trials done using the interactive computer model in eachcondition; right: scatterplot showing the number of clicks and the time spent using the model for each group ofstudents.Conclusions and implicationsStudents in the engineering condition were more successful in integrating their science ideas with their ovendesign than were students in the science condition. Students in the engineering condition may have used the designof their oven as an artifact for testing their science ideas. The students in the engineering condition conductedmore trials than students in the science condition giving them more opportunities to test their science ideas. In thescience condition the students may have seen designing the solar oven as separate from learning the scienceconcepts.Students in the science condition spent more of the curriculum solely focused on learning scienceconcepts, therefore it makes sense that students in this condition would do slightly better at integrating theirscience ideas on the science integration items. Similarly, students in the engineering condition spent a longer timeconsidering the trade-offs of their designs, and also performed better on items that measured engineering practices,like analyzing designs for trade-offs. In addition, students in the engineering condition may have seen the ideasthey tested in the interactive computer model as more open to questioning, which may have encouraged studentsto test more ideas (Sandoval & Morrison, 2003). Students in the science condition seemed to be more attached totheir original ideas, testing fewer ideas in the computer model. The engineering condition seemed to open studentsup to more possibilities in their design, while the science condition in some ways gave students a more limitedidea of the possibilities for their designs. Since adding and testing new ideas is a proven feature or curricula thatimproves student learning (Linn & Eylon, 2011), it is important to emphasize this in all design projects, includingthose following a format more similar to the science condition.These results indicate that there are benefits for each type of framing. This is important to recognize inaligning the design of the curriculum with teachers’ learning goals for their students. In this work we recognizethat there may be outside factors that impact teachers’ choices in how to frame a hands-on project. However, theresults show that there are impacts in what students take away from different framings of the same hands-onproject. To improve the science condition, curriculum designers or teachers may have to work to integrate theaddition and testing of ideas earlier during the curriculum to overcome students’ fixation on certain ideas duringthe design process. To improve the engineering condition, science concepts must be emphasized.This work included only minimal differences between conditions; ordering and question framing on onlysome curricular activities. While it still generated a useful and statistically significant finding, it would be morehelpful for understanding how to frame design projects if the conditions were separated even further. However,separating the conditions further may be very challenging for one teacher to orchestrate (since students arerandomly assigned within class periods). In addition, understanding how the framing of hands-on projects impactslearning outcomes also relies on valid and reliable measures for learning. While this has been studied and manypsychometrically valid items have been developed in science contexts, this is not yet the case for engineeringdesign in K-12 settings. This work would benefit from further research into measuring engineering and designpractices in K-12 settings and the development of useful items that are not reliant on specific scientific content.ReferencesBybee, R. W. (2011). Scientific and engineering practices in K-12 classrooms. Science Teacher, 78(9), 34-40.ICLS 2018 Proceedings23© ISLSCantrell, P., Pekcan, G., Itani, A., & Velasquez-Bryant, N. (2006). The effects of engineering modules on studentlearning in middle school science classrooms. Journal of Engineering Education, 95(4), 301.Chiu, J. L., Malcolm, P. T., Hecht, D., DeJaegher, C. J., Pan, E. A., Bradley, M., & Burghardt, M. D. (2013).WISEngineering:Supportingprecollegeengineeringdesignandmathematicalunderstanding. Computers & Education, 67, 142-155.Crismond, D. (2001). Learning and using science ideas when doing investigate‐and‐redesign tasks: A study ofnaive, novice, and expert designers doing constrained and scaffolded design work. Journal of Researchin Science Teaching, 38(7), 791-820.Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2004). Problem-based learning: What and how do students learn?. Educational psychologyreview, 16(3), 235-266.Lewis, T. (2006). Design and inquiry: Bases for an accommodation between science and technology education inthe curriculum?. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 43(3), 255-281.Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B. S. (2011). Science learning and instruction: Taking advantage of technology to promoteknowledge integration. Routledge.Liu, O. L., Lee, H. S., Hofstetter, C., & Linn, M. C. (2008). Assessing knowledge integration in science: Construct,measures, and evidence. Educational Assessment, 13(1), 33-55.McBride, E. A., Vitale, J. M., Applebaum, L., & C Linn, M. (2016). Use of interactive computer models topromote integration of science concepts through the engineering design process. Singapore:International Society of the Learning Sciences.McElhaney, K. W., & Linn, M. C. (2011). Investigations of a complex, realistic task: Intentional, unsystematic,and exhaustive experimenters. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 48(7), 745-770.National Research Council. (2009). Engineering in K-12 education: Understanding the status and improving theprospects. National Academies Press.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States.Purzer, Ş., Goldstein, M. H., Adams, R. S., Xie, C., & Nourian, S. (2015). An exploratory study of informedengineering design behaviors associated with scientific explanations. International Journal of STEMEducation, 2(1), 9.Ryoo, K., & Linn, M. C. (2012). Can dynamic visualizations improve middle school students' understanding ofenergy in photosynthesis?. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 49(2), 218-243.Sandoval, W. A., & Morrison, K. (2003). High school students' ideas about theories and theory change after abiological inquiry unit. Journal of research in science teaching, 40(4), 369-392.Silk, E. M., Schunn, C. D., & Cary, M. S. (2009). The impact of an engineering design curriculum on sciencereasoning in an urban setting. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 18(3), 209-223.Snir, J., Smith, C., & Grosslight, L. (1993). Conceptually enhanced simulations: A computer tool for scienceteaching. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 2(2), 373–388.Teacher Advisory Council. (2009). Engineering in K-12 Education: Understanding the Status and Improving theProspects. National Academies Press.Wilensky, U. (1999). {NetLogo}.Wilensky, U., & Reisman, K. (2006). Thinking like a wolf, a sheep, or a firefly: Learning biology throughconstructing and testing computational theories—an embodied modeling approach. Cognition andinstruction, 24(2), 171-209.ICLS 2018 Proceedings24© ISLS