Teachers and Professional Development:New Contexts, Modes, and Concerns in the Age of Social MediaChristine Greenhow (co-chair), Michigan State University, greenhow@msu.eduArnon Hershkovitz (co-chair), Tel-Aviv University, arnonhe@tauex.tau.ac.ilAlona Forkosh Baruch (co-chair), Levinsky College of Education, alonabar@levinsky.ac.ilEmilia Askari, Michigan State University, easkari@umich.eduDimitra Tsovaltzi, Saarland University, dimitra.tsovaltzi@mx.uni-saarland.deThomas Puhl, Saarland University, t.puhl@mx.uni-saarland.deArmin Weinberger, Saarland University, a.weinberger@mx.uni-saarland.deChrista Asterhan, Hebrew University Jerusalem, asterhan@mail.huji.ac.ilEdith Bouton, Hebrew University Jerusalem, edith.bouton@mail.huji.ac.ilJoseph Polman (discussant), University of Colorado Boulder, joseph.polman@colorado.eduAbstract: The papers in this symposium together address new contexts, modes and concernsrelated to teaching and teacher professional development in the age of social media, with aparticular focus on the socio-technical affordances and challenges of social network sites andteachers’ perceptions and experiences. The presentations included in this symposium offer amulti-faceted and international view on the topic, highlighting both opportunities and challenges.Expected outcomes are a critical evaluation of the value, implications, and generality of the workpresented to the field as well as an outlined agenda for future research on teaching with these newmedia and design work related to teachers’ professional development.Keywords: teachers, social networking sites (SNS), professional development, learningIntroductionSymposium focus and issues addressedEducational researchers and professionals have recognized the potential of social media, such as social networksites (SNS), to transform learning in and out of classrooms (Manca & Ranieri, 2012). Educational designinitiatives have shown that engineered Facebook applications support discussion and knowledge building ininformal (Greenhow et al, 2015) and formal learning settings through introducing informal elements (Tsovaltziet al, 2014). However, we know less about teachers’ perceptions, practices, and concerns related to teachingwith these technologies or related professional development (Forkosh-Baruch & Hershkovitz, 2014). Indeed, thefield has struggled to both understand the new cultures of learning arising in these "open environments" andconnect them with educational practices that typically emphasize closed learning environments and teachercentered pedagogies. We seek to make these connections visible through this synthesized set of papers.Symposium outcomes will be a better understanding of professional development in social networking sites aslearner-empowering environments.Online networking in social network sites (SNSs) like Facebook (FB), is the dominant technologymediated, leisure-time activity among teenagers worldwide (Rideout, Foehr & Roberts, 2010). Most SNSs sharecommon characteristics, including: 1) uniquely identifiable profiles that consist of user-supplied content and/orsystem-provided data; 2) (semi-) public display of connections that can traversed by others; and 3) features thatallow users to consume, produce, and/or interact with user-generated content provided by their connections onthe site (Ellison & Boyd, 2013, p. 7). Unlike studies in the learning sciences that have focused on isolatedtechnology-based learning environments, open SNSs, generally not designed for instructional purposes, offerexpanded vistas from which to study cultures of learning and teaching, mechanisms for teacher knowledgedevelopment and sharing, and ultimately, new modes for teacher learning and research opportunities.In spite of their merits, SNSs are largely perceived in the public discourse as platforms for socialinteraction devoid of learning (Whiting & Williams, 2013). Educational policies restrict the use of SNSs, someeven ban them, while others are vague and unhelpful. We propose a different approach – evidence based –focusing on the interaction between teachers and students as key for the effective usage of SNSs for learning; asa result, we will highlight in the symposium the need for incorporating SNS in teacher professional developmentand their exposure to the different aspects of SNSs in education, e.g. cognitive, emotional, social and ethical.Significance to Learning Sciences and relevance to conference themeICLS 2016 Proceedings1136© ISLSThis set of papers aims to provoke conversation on how learning scientists can advance timely, usable researchthat informs policy debates surrounding social media in education, as well as the design of teacher professionaldevelopment (TPD). The papers explore a prototypical case of a social medium – Facebook. They employobservations of spontaneous Facebook use and controlled studies with engineered Facebook applications thatblur formal and informal learning. They thus strive to understand with bottom-up and top-down approaches howsocial media influence the dynamic interaction between and role of the different stakeholders of schooling.Range and coherence of papersThe papers in this symposium together scrutinize the use of social media in teaching and TPD. They addressnew contexts, modes and concerns of learning and teacher-student interaction in the age of social media, with aparticular focus on the socio-technical affordances and challenges of social network sites and teachers’perceptions and experiences with them. Contribution 1, a review of a decade of empirical work, provides a‘state-of-the-field’ viewpoint on learning and (preservice and inservice) teaching with SNSs. Building on thisoverview, the second contribution extends collaborative learning and argumentation theory to examine teachers’argumentative knowledge construction and development of communication skills in a field study of closedFacebook groups affiliated with a TPD seminar. The paper critically considers the best design for SNSenvironments that advance professional communication as a compliment to traditional face-to-face TPD. Thethird paper compares teachers’ perceptions of teacher-student SNS-mediated communication to that of students;it highlights their differences and raises critical issues that must be addressed in leveraging new media culturesfor formal teaching objectives and in designing relevant TPD. Extending this work, the fourth paper examineswhether and how secondary school teachers and students use SNS technology for learning and other schoolrelated purposes spontaneously; it further illuminates the differences and potentially problematic contradictionsin teachers’ and students’ practices and values that must be factored into TPD designs.Symposium formatThe symposium will commence by introducing the importance and potential of the topic. Next each contributionwill be presented, emphasizing its key points and controversies. A central aim will be to evaluate and synthesizethe different and overlapping perspectives represented in the papers. The discussant, Joseph Polman, a leadinglearning sciences researcher, has examined professional identity and the design of new media environments; hemaintains a critical view of current assumptions regarding learning and teaching with social media and is,therefore, aptly suited to help us assess the value, implications, and generality of the work presented to the fieldand sketch an agenda for future related research on learning and teaching and design work related to TPD.Learning and teaching with social network sites: A decade of research ineducationChristine Greenhow and Emilia AskariThe increasingly widespread use of social network sites to expand and deepen one’s social connections is arelatively new but potentially important phenomenon that has implications for teaching, learning and TPD in the21st century. This paper reviews the educational research, including a scan of over 1600 identified articles topresent the state-of-the-field and provide a launching off point for the symposium’s additional three papers. Thispaper reviews empirical work on learners and teachers’ perceptions and processes of using social network sitesin K-12 settings and beyond with what impacts on pedagogy, students’ learning, or TPD.MethodTo illuminate the potential benefits and dilemmas of designing educational practices with new media, such associal network sites, a select review of research articles published in refereed journals between 2004 and 2014was undertaken. Boote and Beile (2005) outline several categories to which the reviewer must attend inconducting a quality literature review, such as: coverage (having criteria for inclusion and exclusion); synthesis(summary, analysis, and synthesis of selected literature); and significance (discussion of the implications of theexisting research). A first criterion was that the article had been published in the last 10 years (2004-2014). Asecond criterion for inclusion was that the article had been published in peer-reviewed journals dedicated mostlyor entirely to the topic (i.e., technology integration/Internet in education) or in high quality general educationjournals (e.g., Review of Education Research, Journal of Learning Sciences, etc.). Because a scan of thesejournals yielded few results, the scan was expanded, using Scopus, ERIC, Education Full Text and Web ofScience databases to identify additional peer-reviewed articles published from 2004 through 2014.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1137© ISLSFrom the range of potential articles, an initial content analysis was conducted to separate them into thefollowing categories: description, literature review, empirical research, and editorial/commentary, whileexcluding specific article types like book reviews and research abstracts (Klein 1997). Because this review wasprimarily concerned with the state of empirical research, studies that were more conceptual in nature or thosewith little evidentiary support were excluded. In addition, articles that focused on social media generally, but didnot address social network sites specifically, were eliminated. To establish the quality of selected articles,empirical articles needed to demonstrate: (1) clear statement of research questions; (2) claims and interpretationsgrounded in evidence and theory; and (3) systematic documentation of procedures (Freeman, deMarrais,Preissle, Roulston & St Pierre, 2007). Our scan of selected journals and database queries yielded a total of 24empirical peer-reviewed journal articles deemed appropriate for review.Results and discussionFive themes were evident in the reviewed studies (N = 24); the studies focused on: students’ informal learningoutside of school; students’ formal learning in schools and classrooms; connections between in- and out-ofschool learning; and preservice and inservice teachers’ perceptions and practices. Furthermore, selected studieswere summarized and categorized according to the four types introduced by Roblyer (2005) as studies mostneeded to advance the technology in education sub-field. These include studies that establish the technology’seffectiveness at improving student learning; investigate implementation strategies; monitor social impact; andreport on common uses to shape the direction of the field. The most prevalent type of study conducted wasresearch on common uses and studies that investigated implementation strategies in formal learning settings.The least common type of study was research that established the technology’s effectiveness at improvingstudent learning and several studies did not fall within the framework. Implications for the design of futureresearch and teacher education initiatives are discussed (See Greenhow & Askari, 2015 for the full review).Using social networking sites to support teacher-trainees professionaldevelopment: The role of socio-cognitive conflict and argumentationDimitra Tsovaltzi, Thomas Puhl, and Armin WeinbergerSocial media like SNS can empower lifelong professional development. They are often spontaneously used byteachers as platforms for professional discussion as they seek professional development that goes beyondapplying appropriate subject-matter teaching methodologies. Study programs also offer seminars to this end, e.g.to improve teachers’ communication skills. They commonly teach communication theories in order to influenceteachers’ communication attitudes and communication skills. However, attitudes tend to be stable (Erber,Hodges, & Wilson, 1995) and teacher trainees have pronounced negative attitudes towards the need for goodcommunication skills (Ihmeideh & Al-omari, 2010). Attitude change presupposes long-term deep learning andconflict awareness (Erber, Hodges, & Wilson, 1995). Deep learning can be obtained through ArgumentativeKnowledge Construction (AKC), which is the deliberate practice of elaborating learning material byconstructing formally and semantically sound arguments with the goal of gaining argumentative and domainspecific knowledge (Weinberger & Fischer, 2006). SNSs may offer a platform for socially embeddedargumentation processes that can lead to socio-cognitive conflict and seize benefits for the teacher-studentinteraction in social media and beyond. However, the argumentation quality in SNSs can be poor and alternativeperspectives are regularly disregarded. Can incorporating SNS in TPD help teachers improve their knowledgeabout and attitude towards communication skills?Scripts are socio-cognitive structures that specify, sequence, and distribute learners’ roles and activitiesin collaborative learning scenarios, e.g., by prompting learners to warrant their claims. Scripts can improveprocesses and outcomes of argumentative knowledge co-construction (Weinberger, Stegmann & Fischer, 2010).Group Awareness Tools (GATs) aim to foster domain-specific knowledge by visualizing covert informationabout the group — e.g., highlighting conflicting opinions in discussions — and can enhance the collaborationprocess, like socio-emotional and motivational processes (Buder & Bodemer, 2008). While GATs can makelearners aware of their own and their partners’ attitudes, thus making differences salient, scripts can helpanalyze lines of ongoing argumentation and model adequate argumentative processes. GATs rely on high selfregulation skills that empower teacher-learners but may be too subtle, whereas scripts externally regulateargumentative practices but may be too directive. Their interaction over time may help teacher trainees deeplyanalyze the domain, elaborate alternative perspectives, scrutinize and maybe adjust them.MethodICLS 2016 Proceedings1138© ISLSIn a long-term 2×2 field-study, with factors GAT and argumentation script, we used Facebook, a prominentSNS, to complement face-to-face teacher training seminars on communication theory with online argumentativediscussions over 9 weeks. 105 German teacher trainees filled out a weekly case-based questionnaire, to capturetheir communication attitudes based on cases from social interactions in the school. Each seminar wasaccompanied by one Facebook group, where students had to discuss problem cases based on the theories theylearned. The seminar’s leaning goals were that teacher trainees gain deep knowledge on communication theoryand in turn, become more multi-perspective and less goal-oriented, but keep a balanced attitude based on thesituation. Students in the GAT conditions saw a graphical visualization of the result of the communicationquestionnaire presented in a Facebook application. It depicted their communication attitude in relation to others’reported attitudes in order to make conflicts salient. Students in the argumentation script conditions received aweekly argumentation script in the form of feedback to arguments posted in the Facebook group. They had topick and “like” the best argument. The feedback evaluated the epistemic (theoretical concepts and relations) andthe formal (reasoning and evidence) argumentation quality for two selected arguments. Participants in thecontrol condition merely discussed in their Facebook group. Domain-specific knowledge was assessed by thecourse exam containing definitions, facts, and higher order discursive processes like theory-based interpretationsand arguments. Process analysis was based on epistemic and formal quality of arguments using an adaptedversion of Weinberger & Fischer's framework (2006). Attitudes were measured with the communication attitudequestionnaire along two dimensions, as revealed through factor analysis (Puhl, Tsovaltzi, & Weinberger, 2015):multiperspective vs. goal-oriented.Results and discussion6655GATGAT4ARG3Script2GAT +ARG1Script0ARG ScriptMean (formal quality)Mean (epistemic quality)A repeated measures ANOVA showed a significant effect for the interactions between time with epistemicquality, F(6;606)=3.81; p<.001; ηp2=.10, and with formal quality, F(6;606)=1.88; p=.015; ηp2=.053 Descriptivestatistics show that the epistemic quality did not change for the control group but increased for theargumentation script. Formal quality also increased only for argumentation script and decreased for the controlgroup (Figure 1). An ANOVA for domain-specific knowledge showed significant main effects for the factorsGAT, F(1;98)=11.24; p=.001; ηp2= .10, and argumentation script, F(1;98)=23.44; p=.001; ηp2= .19, and aninteraction between them, F(3;102)=4.89; p=.029; ηp2= .05. The control learned less, M=34.08, SD=6.53,followed by the GAT, M=39.81, SD= 5.42, the argumentation script M=41.34, SD= 4.38, and the combinationcondition, M=42.52, SD= 4.33. The domain-specific knowledge correlates with mean of epistemic quality ofarguments over the eight times r(102)=.29, p= .03, and the mean of formal quality of arguments r(102)=.36,p<.001. When we take the influence of these process variables on domain-specific knowledge into account in anANCOVA, there is a significant effect of condition, F(1;3)= 7.07; p<.001; ηp2=.18.43210t1t3t4t5t6t7t8GAT +ARG ScriptControlt1t3t4t5t6t7t8Figure 1: Epistemic and formal quality of argumentation (weekly measurments)Using a repeated measures ANOVA, we found a significant main effect on communication attitudechange over the seminar period for the goal-oriented dimension, F(8;800)=14.2; p<.001; ηp2=.12, which showeddecreasing attitudes, but no significant effect for the multi-perspective dimension, F(8;800)=2. 87; p=.003;ηp2= .02, or for the interaction between time and group. Descriptively, attitudes increased on the multiperspective dimension for the combination condition, and post-hoc contrast showed a significant difference tothe argumentation script only condition t(100)=2.35; p=.023; d=.64. There was a negative correlation betweenattitude change in the two dimensions r(104)=-.28, p= .003, and between the significant change in the goaloriented dimension and the knowledge outcome r(101)=-.24, p=.016.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1139© ISLSThe GAT and the argumentation script, implemented in Facebook, influenced teacher-trainees’knowledge outcomes and increased the argumentation quality. The argumentation script had a larger influence,but its combination with the GAT showed the best results. Scripts seem to be more promising regarding formalquality of argumentation, although both formal and epistemic quality influences knowledge outcomes. Thenegative correlations of attitude change with knowledge outcomes are in line with the learning goals of theseminar. The results reveal benefits of combining cognitive instructions, in the form of scripts inside a Facebookgroup, with making learners aware of socio-cognitive conflict in order to self-regulate their argumentation, gaindeep knowledge and re-evaluate their attitudes given a longer time period. However, contrary to the positiveinfluence on knowledge outcomes, the combination of salient socio-cognitive conflict and cognitive directionsfor argumentation in SNSs seems less beneficial for assuming a more multi-perspective attitude. Thus, thedesired effects of empowering teacher-learners’ meaningful professional discussion in social networkingenvironments might be dependent on the learning goal and learning context.Teachers' and students' perceptions of positive and negative aspects ofSNS-mediated communication: Implications for professional developmentArnon Hershkovitz and Alona Forkosh BaruchToday’s young people have outpaced educational policies and institutionalized practices, creating digitalepistemologies and out-of-school learning opportunities for themselves with social media while educators andpolicymakers struggle to catch up. Teacher-student relationships are generally believed to be vital for the wellbeing and academic development of students within schools (Sabol & Pianta, 2012); however, many educationalstakeholders express ambivalence regarding the value and implications of teacher-student communication onsocial networking platforms, which typically extend beyond school boundaries. On the one hand, teachers areencouraged to recognize students as whole entities, addressing not only their academic achievements but alsotheir emotional lives, social needs and general well-being (Moll, Amanti, Neff, & Gonzalez, 1992). On the otherhand, teacher-student communication on SNSs—(where students display social, emotional, academic and otheraspects of themselves) (Greenhow & Robelia, 2009)—has been prohibited in many countries and schooldistricts. Research that advances understanding of the positive and negative aspects of teacher-student, SNSmediated communication may yield insights that assist educators and teacher educators in designing TPDopportunities that promote the critical evaluation of practice and policy necessary to address this gap.MethodIn two quantitative studies, launched in 2013-2014 with teachers (N=180) and students (N=667) from secondaryschools in Israel, we examined teachers' and students' perceptions of the positive and negative aspects ofteacher-student interactions via Facebook, collected via open-ended response questions. Responses to questionsabout positive aspects were coded based on Ang's TSRI axes (2005), specifically: Satisfaction and InstrumentalHelp (a single statement could have been coded by more than one axis). Responses to questions about negativeaspects of teacher-student, Facebook-mediated communication were analyzed following a bottom-up approach,identifying categories of reference. This iterative process was done jointly by the two authors and resulted withseven categories, as described in the next section.Results and discussionExamples below refer to teachers' responses to the following question: "In your opinion, what are the downsidesof teacher-student connections on Facebook?"1. Technology and Socio-Technology. "A teacher will never be able to know what stands behind thekid's words on Facebook, because what the kid says is, in most cases, false, and you can only know itby the kid's body language." (T267)2. Violation of Equal of Opportunities. "Breaking anonymity. [Also,] not all the teachers are connected[to Facebook]." (T144)3. Lack of Borders. "The option of getting into each other's personal aspects. Crossing borders " (T156)4. Identity and Anonymity, or Inappropriate Behavior. "Endangering the teacher by blaming her orhim in an instance in which a student posts negative information—such as violent content,drugs/alcohol, depression and suicidal tendency—on knowing about it and not intervening" (T34)5. Teacher-Student Relationship. "Facebook ruins the morality and the purity of the teacher-studentrelationship" (T95)ICLS 2016 Proceedings1140© ISLS6.Exposure to Information and Privacy. "The teacher will be radically exposed to his students,especially with regard to his personal and family matters." (T99)7. There Are No Negative Aspects.Quantitative analysis of the responses to the aforementioned question is demonstrated here. This question wasanswered by 507 students and 170 teachers. Note that a single student's response could have been coded undermultiple categories. Results are summarized in Table 1.Table 1. Comparison of frequencies of categories for teachers' and students' responses regarding negativeaspects of teacher-student, Facebook-mediated communicationTechnology and Socio-TechnologyViolation of Equal of OpportunitiesLack of BordersIdentity and Anonymity, or Inappropriate BehaviorTeacher-Student RelationshipExposure to Information and PrivacyThere Are No Negative Aspects* p<0.05, ** p<0.01Teachers(N=107)2 (1.2%)3 (1.8%)69 (40.6%)22 (12.9%)46 (27.1%)86 (50.6%)12 (7.1%)Students(N=507)24 (4.7%)33 (6.5%)82 (16.2%)89 (17.6%)90 (17.8%)227 (44.8%)57 (11.2%)Z, Effect Size2.09*, r=0.082.38*, r=0.106.61**, r=0.271.412.62**, r=0.111.321.56Results show significant differences between teachers' and students' perceptions regarding four categories.Students mentioned more equal oppportunity aspects than teachers (6.5% compared to 1.8%, Z= 2.38, atp<0.05); also, students mentioned more technological/socio-technological aspects than teachers (4.7% comparedto 1.2%, Z=2.09, at p<0.05). On the other hand, teachers mentioned the lack of borders more than students did(40.6% compared to 16.2%, Z=6.61, at p<0.01); also, teachers mentioned relationship issues more than studentsdid (27.1% compared to 17.8%, Z=2.62, at p<0.05).Studies of SNS-mediated communication out-of-school have established Facebook’s affordances forenhancing students’ sense of social belonging, well-being and life satisfaction (Ellison et al., 2007; Greenhow,Burton & Robelia, 2011), all of which could be beneficial to their academic persistence, achievement andgraduation. However, differences in teachers’ and students’ perceptions of teacher-student, Facebook-mediatedcommunication help surface disruptive (or transformative) issues that must be considered when leveraging newmedia cultures for formal learning aims (e.g., lack of boundaries and inability to verify information posechallenges to the teacher’s role as source of authority in the classroom) (Maranto & Barton, 2010). SNS-basedcommunication pose ethical dilemmas (Chen & Bryer, 2012); hence, related teachers' professional developmentshould include exposure to actual ethical dilemmas and debate on resolution. Finally, these results suggest thatpolicymakers should consider diversity within the teacher community, as well as among students, in theirperceptions of teachers' role (e.g. academic roles, social roles, roles related to emotional support).Teenage knowledge sharing in WhatsApp and Facebook groupsChrista Asterhan and Edith BoutonEducational researchers and professionals have recognized the potential of SNSs to transform learning andteaching practices, inside and outside classrooms. Educational design initiatives have shown that specificallydeveloped Facebook add-ons can support knowledge building and discussion in informal (Greenhow et al, 2015)and formal learning settings (Tsovaltzi et al, 2014). However, we know little about whether and how secondaryschool teachers and students use SNS technology for learning and other school-related purposes spontaneously.Research shows that teenagers and secondary school teachers interact in SNSs. Some of these teacher-pupilinteractions serve social-relational purposes (Asterhan & Rosenberg, 2015; Hershkovitz & Forkosh-Baruch,2013). Others serve psycho-pedagogical purposes, such as adult patrolling and monitoring of the virtual socialsphere or detecting and providing emotional support for individual emotional distress (Asterhan & Rosenberg,2015; Ophir et al, submitted). Some teachers also report that they use SNSs for instructional purposes (Asterhan& Rosenberg, 2015). There is then reason to believe that teenage students also use ubiquitous SNSs foracademic and school-related purposes, yet little is known about these practices. This paper presents findingsfrom a multi-method line of studies that highlight different aspects of teenagers’ WhatsApp and Facebookgroups for learning, study, and other school-related purposes, and the role of teachers in these groups, if any.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1141© ISLSFirst, we conducted an exploratory pilot study, which included in-depth interviews with teenagestudents from different high schools in Israel (Bouton & Asterhan, 2013) and about 50 logged transcripts ofSNS study group interaction. Based on these two data sources, we concluded that online peer-to-peer dialogueon academic content and other forms of “collaborative learning” was extremely rare. In fact, teenagers’spontaneous use of SNSs for academic purposes was primarily characterized by peer-to-peer sharing of learningmaterials. Sharing of knowledge is a very broad term, especially in the digital age, when documenting, copyingand distributing knowledge and knowledge sources is easily done (John, 2012). Knowledge sharing has beenstudied extensively in fields such as business management (Acquisti & Gross, 2006), organizational counseling(Tsai, 2014) and economics (Taylor, 2002). However, peer sharing of schoolwork and learning materials has notreceived much attention in educational research. While sharing and discussing ideas is viewed as a cornerstoneof learning (e.g., Resnick, Asterhan & Clarke, 2015), sharing learning materials is often viewed as an inferiorform of cooperation, promoting superficial learning strategies.In the next two studies, we then set out to further explore the different ways in which teenagers shareknowledge for school-related purposes in SNS study groups. The overall aim was to answer six “W” questions:the whether, where, when, what, why and who of peer knowledge sharing in SNS study groups. To this end twosurvey studies were conducted in the Fall of 2014 (N = 205; 41 items, 11 open items) and Spring of 2015 (N =517; 91 items, 7 open items) on two different representative samples of Israeli, Hebrew-speaking teenagers aged15-18 yrs old. We summarize the main findings of the two studies combined:•The scope of sharing, or whether? Most teenage students (86%) reported being members of SNS studygroups in either Facebook or Whatsapp or both (88% in > 1 group). Almost all teenagers admitted tohaving shared at least “some learning materials” during the school year and believed that it helpsimprove grades. Four-fifth of respondents regarded the use of SNSs for schoolwork purposesfavorably.•Where do they share? Most respondents (86%) chose WhatsApp as the most convenient SNS platformfor study groups, while 6% preferred Facebook . Three quarters of teenagers who are members in SNSstudy groups reported that their teachers are members of at least one of these groups.•When do they share? Interestingly, most teenagers indicate that they do not share without being askedfirst by one of the group members (64% for own sharing, 81% for sharing by others).•What do they share? Based on the pilot study findings, we distinguished between five different types ofknowledge sharing for school-related purposes: (1) administrative messages, (2) snapshots ofwhiteboards and other teacher-created materials, (3) student-created summaries (of lessons or reading),(4) copying of homework and other assignments (i.e., cheating); and (5) online peer tutoring andlearning. Teenagers reported that they frequently encounter administrative messages, snapshots andpeer learning in SNS study groups, and significantly more so than copying or student-createdsummaries (p <..001). We also asked them what type of shared materials they themselves use most.Responses showed that they use administrative messages more than any other type (p <.003), exceptfor peer learning.•Why do they share? Based on student responses to open items in the first survey study, six differentmotives for sharing were identified: helping others to succeed, improve positive self-concept, quid proquo (secure receiving help in future), gaining social stature, and lack of effort. In study 2, selfidentified knowledge brokers (central sharing figures in their own SNS groups) indicated that the mostfrequent motive for sharing was to help classmates to succeed, and least frequent motive, to gain socialstature.Who are the sharers? Regression models showed that cooperative-collectivistic views, self-efficacyand mastery learning goals predicted teenagers’ knowledge sharing in SNS study groups. Nocorrelation was found between competitive-individualistic views and sharing. Amongst students whodo not endorse a quid pro quo motive, competitiveness was negatively correlated with sharingbehavior, whereas a positive correlation was found for those who believe in future pay-offs of sharing.In the fourth we conducted interviews and focus groups with 86 teenage students from a range ofbackgrounds to better understand the workings of WhatsApp SNS groups in classrooms. We highlight one mainfinding relevant to this symposium topic: many teachers initiate official “classroom Whatsapp groups” whichthey believe encourage civil communication (because of adult presence) and improve group cohesiveness(Bouhnik & Deshen, 2014). However, our findings reveal that in addition to these formal groups, which aremainly used for teacher-led communications, students open “shadow” groups, excluding the teacher and without•ICLS 2016 Proceedings1142© ISLShis/her knowledge. Often, these include a subset of students, usually excluding less popular kids, are consideredmore important and active, and provide a podium for critiquing what happens in the “official” groups.Based on the four studies presented here, we reach several conclusions. First, teenage knowledgesharing in SNS study groups is a widespread phenomenon, primarily through WhatsApp. Second, sharingadministrative messages and snapshots are the most common types of knowledge sharing, but online peer helpgiving and help-seeking is also present. While the first two types of learning materials are mundane, the thirdtype holds the most promise, may be “upgraded” by giving students better tools and guidance on how toimprove peer learning interactions. The findings also indicate that existing concerns about SNS study groups ashotbeds of cheating (i.e., share homework solution, exams) and study shortcuts (i.e., relying on others’summaries) proved to be only partly founded. Finally, teachers should be aware of the existence of studentinitiated, self-organized SNS shadow groups in their classrooms, which have quite different sets of norms andgoals. Future research should compare our findings to additional student and teacher populations, track studentand teacher behavior in real-time and focus on what individuals do with all these shared learning materials.Selected referencesAng, R.P. (2005) Development and validation of the teacher–student relationship inventory using exploratoryand confirmatory factor analysis. The Journal of Experimental Education, 74, 55–73.Asterhan, C. S. C. & Rosenberg, H. (2015). The promise, reality and dilemmas of secondary school teacherstudent interactions in Facebook: The teacher perspective. Computers & Education, 85, 134–148.Bouhnik, D., & Deshen, M. (2014). WhatsApp goes to school: Mobile instant messaging between teachers andstudents. Journal of Information Technology Education: Research, 13, 217-231.Buder, J., & Bodemer, D. (2008). Supporting controversial CSCL discussions with augmented group awarenesstools. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3(2), 123–139.Chen, B., & Bryer, T. (2012). Investigating instructional strategies for using social media in formal and informallearning. The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 13(1), 87-104.Erber, M. W., Hodges, S. D., & Wilson, T. D. (1995). Attitude strength, attitude stability, and the effects ofanalyzing reasons. In R. Petty and J. Kosnik (Eds.), Attitude Strength. (pp. 433–454). Mahwah, NJ:Erlbaum.Forkosh-Baruch, A. & Hershkovitz, A. (2014). Teacher-student relationship in the Facebook-era. In P. Isaías, P.Kommers, T. Issa (Eds.), The Evolution of the Internet in the Business Sector: Web 1.0 to Web 3.0.Hershey, PA: IGI Global.Greenhow, C. & Askari, E. (2015). Learning and teaching with social network sites: A decade of research ineducation, Education and Information Technologies, 1-23.Greenhow, C., Gibbins, T., & Menzer, M. M. (2015). Re-thinking scientific literacy out-of-school: Arguingscience issues in a niche Facebook application. Computers in Human Behavior, 53, 593-604.Hershkovitz, A. & Forkosh-Baruch, A. (2013). Student-teacher relationship in the Facebook-era: The studentperspective. International Journal of Continuing Engineering Education and Life-Long Learning,23(1), 33-52.Ihmeideh, F. M., & Al-omari, A. A. (2010). Attitudes toward communication skills among students’ -teachers’in jordanian public universities. Australasian Journal of Teacher Education, 35(4).Maranto, G. & Barton, M. (2010). Paradox and Promise: MySpace, Facebook, and the Sociopolitics of SocialNetworking in the Writing Classroom. Computers and Composition, 27, 36–47.Moll, L.C., Amanti, C., Negg, D., & Gonzalez, N. (1992). Funds of knowledge for teaching: Using a qualitativeapproach to connect homes and classrooms. Theory into Practice, 31(2), 132-141.Ophir, Y., Rosenberg, H. , Asterhan, C. S. C. , & Schwarz, B.B. (in press). In times of war, teachers do not fallsilent: Teacher-student social network communication in wartimes.Puhl, T., Tsovaltzi, D., and Weinberger, A. (2015). Blending Facebook into seminars for practicingargumentation. Computers in Human Behavior 53, 605-616. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2015.04.006Resnick, L. B., Asterhan, C. S. C., & Clarke, S. N. (Eds.) (2015), Socializing Intelligence through academic talkand dialogue. Washington, DC: AERA.Tsovaltzi, D., Puhl, T., Judele, R. & Weinberger, A. (2014). Group awareness support and argumentation scriptsfor individual preparation of arguments in Facebook. Computers & Education, 76, 108-118.Weinberger, A. & Fischer, F. (2006). A framework to analyse argumentative knowledge construction incomputer-supported collaborative learning. Computers & Education, 46, 71-95.Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K., Fischer, F. (2010). Learning to argue online: Scripted groups surpass individuals(unscripted groups do not). Computers in Human Behavior, 26(4), 506–515.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1143© ISLS