Towards a Cognitive Ecological Framework in CSCLMarcela Borge, The Pennsylvania State University, mbs15@psu.eduEmma Mercier, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, mercier@illinois.eduAbstract: The field of computer-supported collaborative learning uses a range of theories,grounded in different epistemic frameworks, to conduct research and design learningopportunities. While some studies use multiple theories, and attempt to bridge the frameworks,most use a single theory, considering learning from just one perspective. We argue that this canlead to a reduction in what we can understand about learning from each study, and hasimplications for the quality of designs and limits the possibility of uptake of CSCL tools beyondthe specific research context. Drawing on other fields, we identify the potential and need for anecological framework to inform research and design work, and argue for its importance in thedevelopment of the CSCL field (1).Introduction“Another success of the past two decades of theory-based research can be seen in the evolutionof theories and models themselves—a move away from a major focus only on individualbehavior change and toward broader multi-level behavior and social change models. By the late1980s, the limited reach and staying power of even our most effective individual health behaviorinterventions, based on theories emphasizing intrapersonal and interpersonal determinants ofhealth behaviors, made it clear that an exclusive reliance on individually oriented interventionswould be inadequate to achieve our pressing population health and health care goals. Thesefailures led to a fundamental “paradigm shift” in our understanding of what the targets ofeffective interventions needed to be, not just individuals but the broader contexts in which theylive and work. This shift fueled the rise of ecological models of health promotion that haveguided the development of powerful interventions in public health and health care arenas." Orleans, 2008Many fields have made paradigmatic shifts in how they design and evaluate interventions, which have resulted inchanges in the theoretical frameworks they use to guide and interpret research. In fields that emphasize the designof tools and interventions, theoretical frameworks have evolved from linear to more systemic conceptual modelsto guide their understanding of complex social phenomenon (Carroll, 2009; Engeström, 2000; Sallis, Owen, &Fischer, 2015). This shift is particularly necessary for unpacking problems that include social factors. Unpackingproblems associated with decreasing bee populations is one example. Bees are social animals, so to understandwhy their populations are dwindling, it is necessary to identify possible environmental causes of bee death, theways that individual bees deal with such environmental stressors, and how these changes affect the socialdynamics and long-term outcomes of a colony (Perry, Søvik, Myerscough, & Barron, 2015). In other words, it isan ecological problem that has to be examined within an ecological framework.In Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL), we aim to understand learning as it occurs in asocio-technical context. There are different theoretical frameworks that guide our research. Influenced by differenthistorical perspectives on cognition and learning, each framework focuses on a small aspect of the learning systemand have different views on where cognition occurs and how learning happens (Greeno, Collins, & Resnick,1996). Differences between these perspectives have fueled debates between researchers on where cognition occursand what counts as learning. However, there is ample evidence to support the claim that cognition is a multilevel,systemic phenomenon. As such, selecting only one framework to guide research limits our ability to understandlearning on a broader scale and introduces bias into our research, as we commit sampling errors and ignore otherpossible explanations for research outcomes. Given the complex nature of computer-supported collaborativelearning, we argue that it is necessary for CSCL to begin moving towards a cognitive ecological framework inorder to better inform how we examine learning, trade-offs associated with different technologies andinterventions, and our evolving understanding of how learning happens in social contexts.Different theoretical frameworks to examine learning processesThe Learning Sciences, and CSCL as a part of the Learning Sciences, emerged from multiple disciplines andepistemic traditions, integrating a range of theoretical frameworks from which to study learning (see Table 1).ICLS 2018 Proceedings336© ISLSTable 1: A Summary of learning theories in CSCL that focus on cognition at different levels of scaleMost CommonAssessmentTheoryTheoretical AssumptionsUnit of AnalysisInformationProcessingLearning occurs as a functionof psychological and biologicalmechanisms within the brain.Individual processesoccurring within thebrain.Individual measurementof acquired knowledgeand skills: multiple choicetests, essay, and shortanswer; standardizedtests.ConstructivismLearning occurs as a functionof individual construction ofknowledge based on previousexperiences and existingknowledgeIndividual processesoccurring betweenindividuals or betweenindividuals and objects.Individual measurementof cognitive growth:assessments of conceptualchange, performance testsin authentic contexts.SocialConstructivism/SocioculturalLearning occurs as function ofthe gradual internalization andappropriation of culturalnorms, expectations, practices,and value systems.Collective processesoccurring betweenindividuals, betweenindividuals and objects,within groups, or withincommunities.Individual measurementof changes in discoursepatterns, identity, socialpractices or artifact use.GroupCognitionLearning occurs at the level ofthe group as individualsexternalize individual thoughtthrough language and createnew shared understanding;group cognitionGroup processesoccurring throughlanguage or through thecreation of sharedknowledge artifacts.Collective changes indiscourse patterns, socialpractices, or artifact use.These frameworks range from those that take the individual learner as the unit of analysis to those that focus onthe group. The richness that these different perspectives bring allow us to develop a nuanced and complexunderstanding of learning at multiple levels of analysis. However, concerns have been raised about the constraintsof these theoretical stances, and how research and development of innovative learning environments may bestalled or stymied by these constraints (Akkerman et al., 2007; Jarvela, et al., 2010). The epistemologicalfoundations of different theories are at odds, and therefore, for researchers who are attentive to such features,place roadblocks when trying to address learning at multiple levels in a single design research project or study.Webb (2013) describes an information processing approach to understanding the outcomes ofcollaborative learning. This approach focuses on individual learning, suggesting that students learn throughactively processing information while engaging in collaborative activities. From this perspective, individualcognition is what leads to the formulation and presentation of ideas; individual cognition is necessary forexplaining, actively listening, and responding to a collaborator and can be positively impacted by collaborativelearning. This approach, which focuses on knowledge in the individual’s mind, closely relates to constructivisttheories of learning (e.g. Piaget, 1965). These theories pose that learning happens as a result of experiencingdisequilibrium, the constructivist, cognitive processes of assimilation and accommodation, which may be causedby peer interaction. Studies that take this approach tend to focus on the individual learner, comparing pre- andpost-test scores given to each participant (e.g. Meier, Spada, & Rummel, 2007; Webb, Nemer, & Zuniga, 2002).A socio-constructivist theory of collaborative learning, places increased emphasis on the role ofinteraction with more-expert peers and the societal use of tools and language to pass down knowledge throughgenerations (Golbeck & El-Moslimany, 2013). While Vygotsky maintained a focus on the individual learner, theemphasis differs from Piaget in that Vygotsky takes into account the need for a learner to “master the items ofcultural experience” and “the habits and forms of cultural behavior” (Vygotsky, 1929, p 415). Interpretations ofVygotsky’s theory range from those that emphasize the role of the expert in learning and the zone of proximaldevelopment (e.g. Wood, Bruner, & Ross, 1976) and others that emphasize that learning is an act of increasingparticipation in the cultural norms and tool use of a community (e.g. Hakkarainen, et al., 2013). Studies thatICLS 2018 Proceedings337© ISLSremain close to a Vygotskian perspective often examine how learners at different stages of development orexperience perform during interactions (e.g. Azmitia, 1988; Schmitz & Winskel, 2008). Studies that take a broadersocio-cultural approach also examine how students co-construct knowledge, regardless of their prior experienceor development level, and consider the use of tools in knowledge building. These studies may use individuallearner outcome measures, but often make attempts to consider the non-independence of the data; these studieslook at the quality of interaction, often attempting to tie it to learner outcomes (e.g. Barron, 2003; Mercier, 2017).Group cognition theory alters the focus from the individual learner to the group interaction. Describedby Stahl (2013) as a post-cognitive approach, where the nature of interaction among group members producesknowledge that cannot be attributed to any individual contribution nor understood as a sequence of contributionsfrom the individuals in the group. In this way, group cognition shares similarities with psychological theories ofmacrocognition, which is defined as "the process of transforming internalized knowledge into externalized teamknowledge through individual and team knowledge-building processes (Fiore, et al., 2010). These theories ofgroup cognition are rooted in theoretical perspectives that perceive cognition as contextually situated anddistributed among individuals, tools, and artifacts that are part of the sense-making processes (Fiore & Schooler,2004; Stahl, 2006). Thus, from this perspective, collaborative learning can be seen as an emergent property of thegroup, not as something that can be attributed to an individual. Assessment of learning from a group cognitionperspective is often ethnographic in nature, focusing on analyzing the processes of learning that occurred duringthe interaction, rather than relying on post-test learning measures of individuals (e.g. Mercier, et al., 2013).How different frameworks create tensions in the fieldThese different frameworks work well as a means to deeply understand learning at specific levels of interest.Information processing and constructivist theories have greatly added to our understanding of individual sensemaking and knowledge building. Socio-cultural and socio-constructivist theories have helped us to recognize theimportance of dialogic forms of learning, how cultural values and expectations impact sense-making activity andlearning outcomes, and the importance of situated practice. Group cognition has helped us to develop a betterunderstanding of how groups learn as it pushed us to examine verbal interaction as a form of shared thought andshow how learning and cognition can occur at the level of the group. Each theoretical perspective has implicationsfor how we measure learning outcomes and design learning contexts for individuals, groups, or communities oflearners (Greeno, Collins & Resnick, 1996). However, prioritizing one of these frameworks over another andfocusing solely on a singular level of learning activity is problematic.While using research designs grounded in a single theoretical perspective is relatively unproblematic,difficulties arise when we begin to ask questions such as why collaborations are successful or consider designingCSCL activities that we wish to implement in classroom contexts. Multiple studies (e.g. Barron, 2000; Kapur &Kinzer, 2007; Webb & Mastergeorge, 2003) report that their findings explains some of the variance that emergesbetween groups, but few studies account for all of the variance. This limitation results in a patchwork of findingsthat provide some insight into the nature of successful collaboration, but does not give a full picture of what isoccurring at the multiple levels of learning and interaction that occur during collaborations.One particular example is the classic study by Roschelle (1992) in which he explored the central role ofknowledge convergence to collaboration. He argued that the co-construction of knowledge is a process throughwhich individuals converge on a shared meaning, making sense together, and as such, co-create knowledge at thegroup level, while developing an individual understanding of a phenomena. He found that neither the Piagetianconcept of the individual’s cognitive development, nor the Vygotskian emphasis on the need for a moreknowledgeable peer can account for the type of learning that went on between students during the collaborationthat he observed, and that a more nuanced understanding of learning and knowledge across levels is necessary toaccount for this type of collaborative learning. He argues that there is little doubt that each student was engagedin individual sense-making or cognitive processes, but that there was also evidence for joint cognition, and thatsome of the learning occurs during the interactive processes of the dyad. The group was neither merely providingincentive for accommodation and assimilation at the individual level, as Piaget would suggest, nor was there amore knowledgeable peer supporting the learning, as both students were making sense of the information for thefirst time. Thus, he argues for a more complex theory of collaboration to account for the observed processes.Group cognition as a theoretical framework, addresses some of Roschelle’s concerns, but does not allowfor the central nature of individual sense-making during the co-construction of knowledge that Roschelle reported.Group cognition alleviates the reliance on a more knowledgeable peer, as is central to Vygotskian theory, andprovides a framework to account for the knowledge creation that happens between people, when all are novicesor when they encounter a new problem. However, there is no place in this theory for individual cognition, and noway to consider what the individual may learn from participating in such an activity.ICLS 2018 Proceedings338© ISLSSalomon & Perkins (1998) argue for the importance of recognizing the synergistic interaction betweenthe individual and social aspects of learning. Reviewing the literature that situates the individual mind and socialinteraction within different conceptions of where information processing lies, they suggest that it is necessaryfrom a design standpoint to understand how these two processes may interact and, rather than foreground one orthe other, account for how they play equal parts in learning as we design instruction. Similarly, Jarvela, Volet, &Jarvenoja, (2010) also note a need to move beyond the situative and cognitive divide when we consider the roleof motivation on collaboration. They argue that social and individual processes occur simultaneously and ininteraction with each other, and that by limiting our focus to one level of analysis, we cannot fully understand thenature of the phenomena we are studying.Akkerman and colleagues (2007), argue for a need to bridge the divide between sociocultural andcognitive approaches to collaboration, but note that few studies successfully manage this. The studies thatsuccessfully cross the boundaries between both individual cognition and group cognition in their analysis, pointtowards the need for the field to develop theories that allow for such analyses without the epistemic divide centralto these two approaches. However, basic differences in what counts as knowledge, hinder our ability to do thissuccessfully. This suggests the need for a more coherent framework – not just merely the juxtaposition of multipleframeworks in our analysis, but a new framework that allows for a broader conception of knowledge andcollaborative learning.In support of a multi-level, systemic model of cognition and learningRegardless of our particular theoretical stances most can agree that there are many different types of knowledgethat can be tacitly or explicitly held. There are also many types of learning: cognitive, metacognitive,sociocognitive, and socio-metacognitive learning. For example, let us examine what students could learn whenthey play an online, collaborative science game. Students could develop their knowledge about the features andfunctions of the game, they could develop knowledge about the scientific content contained within the game, orthey could develop knowledge about different strategies that can be used to overcome obstacles in the game.However, students could also be learning other things as well. Metacognitively, they could be learning how tomonitor and regulate their playing processes to achieve desired gaming outcomes. Sociocognitively, they couldlearn how to problem solve with other students in order to figure out how to overcome difficult aspects of thegame. They could also learn that their peers react negatively to teasing during gameplay. From a metasociocognitive perspective, they could also learn about desired social and emotional practices and how to monitorand regulate their own and others’ social interactions to promote a more positive learning environment.There are also many variables that can influence all these forms of learning and interfere with knowledgedevelopment. These variables include identity formation, beliefs, values, interests, proclivities, skills, and theongoing outcomes of interactions between our unit of analysis (the individual, the group, or the community) andother environmental factors such as access to food, educational resources, mentors, social acceptance, access toongoing positive educational experiences, stable homelife, fear of violence, etc.It is also possible that one form of learning could interfere with another. A computer game may helpstudents develop specific in-game skills and knowledge, but over long periods of use could interfere with socialforms of learning as the individual becomes immersed in gameplay thereby reducing social discourse andinteractions with others. Sherry Turkle’s work points to growing evidence that supports this relationship. Forexample, Turkle (2016) discusses how social media and cell phones may increase our factual knowledge aboutwhere people are, what is going on in the world, and what people like, but diminish our ability to develop thesocial skills to connect with people who are different than us or engage in meaningful conversations.Another possibility is that learning at one level of analysis (the individual, the small group, or thecommunity) can help or hinder learning at another level. For example, if an individual develops knowledge thatothers lack, a small group may ignore that person’s contributions and fail to build on this unique knowledge. Thisis because groups have tendencies to build on shared knowledge over unique knowledge (Stasser & Titus, 2003).Individuals who have not learned how to share authority may also dominate group conversation and interfere withthe entire group’s learning and performance (Barron, 2003; Borge & Carroll, 2014; Woolley et al., 2010). Groupscan also develop knowledge in a situated context, but fail to undersdtand the series of individual contributionsand decision-making processes that led to that knowledge development. As a result, individuals would not learnthe whole of the knowledge and the community may be unable to reproduce it. Organizational learning, learningat the level of the larger community, is also subject to many problems. Individual and small group levelcharacteristics can prevent learning from occurring across the community. For example, toxic individuals or smallgroups that make others feel devalued can create an environment that feels psychologically unsafe. Suchenvironments prevent individuals or small groups from or sharing errors, admitting when they do not understand,ICLS 2018 Proceedings339© ISLSor contributing viewpoints, thus interfering with organizational learning that occurs across individuals and smallgroups in the community (Edmondson, 1999).What these collective studies imply is that learning and behavior is not linear, or even nested. It isecological, meaning it is a multilevel, multisystemic model. Learning occurs as part of interrelated, social systems(Cole & Engestrom, 1993; Jonassen & Rohrer-Murphey, 1999). Learning occurs in different ways at differentlevels and can be affected by different factors within levels and interactions between factors across levels. If weaccept that learning is an ecological phenomenon, one that is dependent on a relationship between different people,groups, communities, and their physical surrounding, then we can come to understand that an instance of learningwithin such complex systems cannot be fully understood by examining that instance in isolation from itsinterconnected parts. Many other fields have come to recognize this problem and have moved to more ecologicalmodels to guide their developing understanding. For the field of CSCL to continue moving forwards, it isnecessary that we consider moving to an ecological model of learning.The effects of ignoring multi-level, systemic modelsMany fields have recognized that ignoring the multilevel systemic nature of human activity is problematic for thedesign of tools to help people improve their activities. The fields of Computer Science and Public Health are twoexamples. Both of these fields began making sense of human learning and behavior from an individualisticinformation-processing perspective. They designed tools and interventions that were uninformed by the activitysystems that their subjects belonged to, but came to recognize that this approach was largely ineffectual and costly.When computer science was emerging in the 1970s most computational technologies were developed bycomputer scientists for computer scientists and enthusiasts. When personal computing became more prominent inthe 1980’s the need to create technologies for computer novices became necessary. As a means to address thisneed, many universities and research institutions began examining how everyday people completed tasks, howcomputers could help to simplify these tasks, and how computers could be built to be fairly usable by theseworkers. This is how Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) emerged as a field: strongly tied to cognitive scienceand human factors research and mainly confined to the study of individual computing activity (Grudin, 2008).HCI changed over time as human activity and technology creation co-evolved. As technologies becamemore prevalent and intertwined within different aspects of human activity, the ways that people worked, played,and communicated also changed. Overtime, the field of HCI began to recognize the systemic and ecological natureof human behavior, learning, and artifact use. As a result, the theories that HCI used to inform design graduallyshifted from theories that explain the individual to theories that explain activity systems and the interplay betweenlearning, behavior, and emotion (Carroll, 2009). This shift has helped HCI to grow and for various fields outsideof Computer science to recognize the importance of Human-Centered Design.Similar methodological progressions can be found in health medicine. In their book on health and humanbehavior, Glanz, Rimer, and Viswanath (2008) capture the increasing complexity of health intervention research.The history of the field shows striking similarities to the growing complexity and theory application described inHCI. Unlike HCI, the emphasis is not on the development of products, but the creation of interventions to changeexisting health practices. In the 1980s, most educational health interventions were informed by individual theoriesof learning and behavior, but no matter how theoretically informed these interventions were, they remained largelyineffective. These failures led the field to conceptualize human behavior and interventions as existing within anecological system. Glanz et al. (2008) discuss how this shift resulted in the design of educational interventionsthat targeted and evaluated change at multiple levels of analysis: the individual level, interpersonal level, and thecommunity and organizational level. This approach, they say, helped the field to better identify where problemsoccurred and how interventions could be improved, which resulted in more effective interventions.These examples highlight that theoretically informed interventions are not enough in and of themselvesto produce effective tools. Ignoring the systems to which human activities belong can lead to the development ofcostly and ineffective interventions. These examples also illustrate how our theoretical leanings can prevent usfrom paying attention to important and potentially confounding factors, leading to a biased understanding of thephenomenon under study and the needs of those we are designing for. For example, for many years, HCI believedthat all users needed was basic usability, systems that simplified tasks, so most of their studies paid attention todesigning intuitive systems and largely ignored how those systems made users feel and interact with others. Theyalso did not carefully consider the impacts of these systems on organizations and society in the long-term.Our field shares many similarities with HCI and health medicine in that we are designing tools, cognitiveand technological, with the goal of improving how students accomplish tasks and learn about complexphenomenon. For this reason, we should consider the potential problems that may result from our own theoreticalleanings. One of the biggest practical issues that can result from ignoring multilevel systemic models is lackingprofessional development and biased measurements of learning outcomes.ICLS 2018 Proceedings340© ISLSA key concern that should be central to our field, is the relative lack of impact we have had on classroomsand schools. The work on Design Based Implementation Research (DBIR) seeks to address some of the issuesthat emerge from traditional research paradigms that have been central to our field. While there is great challengein creating a CSCL activity to engage learners in lab settings, and great value in understanding the nuances of thedifferent features that we can design, approaching design from an implementation standpoint requires a differentstance. The learning opportunities we have created and tested in controlled settings, are rarely suitable for use inmore typical learning contexts (Penuel, Fishman, Cheng, & Sabelli, 2011). Taking into account the multiple levelsof the learning ecology within which they could be used during design is necessary if the tools and activities areto be useful in contexts outside the immediate research venue.When conducting CSCL research in classrooms, it is hard to ignore the ecological nature of learning.Students are individuals, who make sense of information in individual activities and when interacting with others,and their learning can be assessed in individual post-tests after a collaboration. However, knowledge buildingdoes happen within groups, and groups of students talk to other students within the classroom during collaborativeactivities. The teacher intervenes in groups, working with individual students, groups of students, or deciding todiscuss an issue with the whole class (e.g. Mercier, 2016; Webb, 2009). Teachers also use consolidation activitiesduring or at the end of tasks, asking group members to share their progress or final answers, which can serve asboth an assessment exercise and a learning opportunity for other students (Joyce-Gibbons, 2017; Kaendler, et al.,2015). Finally, students learn through participation with the wider community, bringing their prior knowledge andexperiences to the classroom (Moll et al., 2009), and with and through the tools and technologies of the culturewithin which they are situated (Barron, Walter, Martin, & Schatz, 2010). If we focus our design activities on oneof these levels, and only look for learning at that level, we are likely to provide important insight into the natureof collaborative learning at that level on analysis, but be unable to determine how these changes impact the largersystem. Without this understanding, we may be unable to generalize positive effects or prevent the developmentof unintended negative consequences. In no way do we argue that the field should abandon the careful analysis ofcollaborative learning, but, alone, it is not sufficient for the field to have a significant impact on practice.Moving forward: Adopting a cognitive ecological framework in CSCLThe idea that learning is a multi-level systemic phenomenon is not new. Many scholars before us have made thisclaim (Barron et al., 2009; Cole & Engestrom, 1993; Jonassen & Rohrer-Murphy, 1999). Prior to the informationage, Greeno, Collins, and Resnick (1996) discussed the relationship between underlying theories of cognition andlearning and called for the need to rethink how we use them to inform educational research. They argued thatquestions about theoretical frameworks should not be limited to whether or not use of theory is coherent and leadsto predictions; we need to start asking whether how we are using these theories is working. Current trends witheducational design and technology use necessitate that we take up this call and start asking whether our existingtheoretical frameworks are sufficient to inform practice, design, and the identification of tradeoffs associated withdifferent instructional practices.Our understanding of the different frameworks and the growing complexity of computer supportedcollaborative contexts suggests it is necessary for CSCL to begin moving towards an ecological framework ofcognition. Doing so would help to relieve tensions in our field and better inform how we examine and design forcollaborative learning. We could more fully investigate the trade-offs associated with different technologies andinterventions and enhance our evolving understanding of how learning happens in social contexts. For example,studies that measure the impacts of technology on individual learning outcomes could also examine the impactsof the technology on social discourse. Studies that examine group learning could also examine impacts onindividual learning processes and changes in the community. No one researcher would have to investigate theentire system, but they could partner with those that specialize in a complementary form of cognition, learning,or social interaction or identity development.Adopting an ecological framework does not mean that we need to abandon previous theories of learning,but rather that we synthesize and extend them. It means we must bridge our epistemic silos, and treat knowledgeand cognition as occurring at multiple levels simultaneously. If we begin to account for the notion that knowledgeand cognition exist at multiple levels and are affected by multiple interconnected factors, we can move towards adeeper understanding of learning.The implications of taking an ecological approach are not trivial. We may have to revisit how we designand report research studies. When designing studies, we need to ask questions that explore learning at multiplelevels of scale and distribute strands of analysis among experts with different theoretical underpinnings in orderto examine the impacts of technological interventions on a wider aspect of the ecological system. It would requireus to modify how we report studies so that we acknowledge the limitations and possible unintended consequenceswhen not accounting for learning and interaction multiple levels of scale. It would also require that we describeICLS 2018 Proceedings341© ISLSand consider the learning context in detail, considering the implications of the particular context and how thatinfluences the generalizability of claims. The evolution of our theoretical frameworks may facilitate thedevelopment of deeper understanding of learning, the creation of more generalizable interventions, and growingimpact on policy and practice.Endnotes(1) We note the relevance of this argument to the wider field of the Learning Sciences; due to our focus on design-basedimplementation research, social processes, and the limitations of the format, we have limited our paper to focus on CSCL.ReferencesAkkerman, S., Vandenbossche, P., Admiraal, W., Gijselaers, W., Segers, M., Simons, R., & Kirschner, P. (2007).Reconsidering group cognition: From conceptual confusion to a boundary area between cognitive andsocio-cultural perspectives? Educational Research Review, 2(1), 39–63.Azmitia, M. (1988). Peer Interaction and Problem Solving: When Are Two Heads Better Than One? ChildDevelopment, 59(1), 87. http://doi.org/10.2307/1130391Barron, B. (2000). Achieving Coordination in Collaborative Problem-Solving Groups. Journal of the LearningSciences, 9(4), 403–436. http://doi.org/10.1207/S15327809JLS0904_2Barron, B. (2003). When Smart Groups Fail. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307–359.Barron, B., Martin, C. K., Mercier, E., Pea, R., Steinbock, D., Walter, S., … Tyson, K. (2009). Repertoires ofcollaborative practice. Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Computer SupportedCollaborative Learning - CSCL’09, 25–27. http://doi.org/10.3115/1599503.1599513Barron, B., Walter, S. E., Martin, C. K., & Schatz, C. (2010). Predictors of creative computing participation andprofiles of experience in two Silicon Valley middle schools. Computers and Education, 54(1), 178–189.http://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2009.07.017Borge, M., & Carroll, J. M. (2014). Verbal Equity, Cognitive Specialization, and Performance. In Proceedings ofthe 18th International Conference on Supporting Group Work (pp. 215-225). New York, NY: ACM.Carroll, J.M. (2009). Human computer interaction- a brief intro. In M. Soegaard & R.F. Dam, (Eds.),Encyclopedia of Human-Computer Interaction. Aarhus, Denmark, 2009: The Interaction DesignFoundation.Cole, M. & Engestrom, Y. (1993). A cultural-historical approach to distributed cognition. In G. Salomon, ed.Distributed cognitions. New York: Cambridge University Press.Edmondson, A. (1999). Psychological safety and learning behavior in work teams. Administrative ScienceQuarterly, 44(2), 350–383. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/2666999Fiore, S. M., & Schooler, J. W. (2004). Team Cognition: Understanding the Factors that Drive Process andPerformance.Washington,D.C.:AmericanPsychological.Retrievedfromhttps://labs.psych.ucsb.edu/schooler/jonathan/publications/317Fiore, S. M., Smith-Jentsch, K. A., Salas, E., Warner, N., & Letsky, M. (2010). Towards an understanding ofmacrocognition in teams: developing and defining complex collaborative processes and products.Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science, 11(4), 250–271. http://doi.org/10.1080/14639221003729128Glanz, K., Rimer, B. K., & Viswanath, K. (2008). Health behavior and health education: theory, research, andpractice. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Golbeck, S. L., & El-Moslimany, H. (2013). Developmental Approaches to Collaborative Learning. In C. E.Hmelo-Silver, C. A. Chinn, K. K. Chan, Carol, & A. M. O’Donnell (Eds.), The International Handbookof Collaborative Learning (pp. 41–56). New York, NY: Routledge.Greeno, J. G., Collins, A. M., & Resnick, L. B. (1996). Cognition and learning. Handbook of educationalpsychology, 77, 15-46.Grudin, J. (2008) A moving target: The Evolution of HCI. In A. Sears & J. A. Jacko (Eds.), The human computerinteraction handbook: Fundamentals, evolving technologies, and emerging applications (pp. 1-24). NewYork: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Hakkarainen, K., Paavola, S., Kangas, K., & Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P. (2013). Sociocultural perspectives oncollaborative learning. In C. E. Hmelo-Silver, C. A. Chinn, K. K. Chan, Carol, & A. M. O’Donnell (Eds.),Sociocultural Perspectives on Collaborative Learning (pp. 57–73). New York, NY, USA: Routledge.Jarvela, S., Volet, S., & Jarvenoja, H. (2010). Research on Motivation in Collaborative Learning: Moving Beyondthe Cognitive-Situative Divide and Combining Individual and Social Processes. EducationalPsychologist, 45(1), 15–27. http://doi.org/10.1080/00461520903433539Jonassen, D. H., & Rohrer-Murphy, L. (1999). Activity theory as a framework for designing constructivistlearning environments. Educational Technology Research and Development, 47(1), 61–79.ICLS 2018 Proceedings342© ISLSJoyce-Gibbons, A. (2017). Observe, interact and act: teachers’ initiation of mini-plenaries to scaffold small-groupcollaboration. Technology, Pedagogy and Education 26(1): 51-68.Kaendler, C., Wiedmann, M., Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2015). Teacher Competencies for the Implementationof Collaborative Learning in the Classroom: a Framework and Research Review. EducationalPsychology Review, 27(3), 505–536. http://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-014-9288-9Meier, A., Spada, H., & Rummel, N. (2007). A rating scheme for assessing the quality of computer-supportedcollaboration processes. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2(1),63–86. http://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-006-9005-xMercier, E. (2016). Teacher orchestration and student learning during mathematics activities in a smart classroom.International Journal of Smart Technology and Learning, 1(1), 33–52.Mercier, E. M. (2017). The influence of achievement goals on collaborative interactions and knowledgeconvergence. Learning and Instruction, 50, 31–43. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2016.11.006Mercier, E., Vourloumi, G., & Higgins, S. (2013). Idea development in multi-touch and paper-based collaborativeproblem solving. In Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning Conference, CSCL (Vol. 2, pp. 313–314).Moll, L. C., Amanti, C., Neff, D., & Gonzalez, N. (1992). Funds of knowledge for teaching: Using a qualitativeapproach to connect homes and classrooms. Theory into practice, 31(2), 132-141.Orleans, T. (2008). Forward. In K. Glanz, B. Rimer, & K. Viswanath (Eds.), Health behavior: theory, research,and practice (pp. Xiii - XV). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Haugan Cheng, B., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing Research and Developmentat the Intersection of Learning, Implementation, and Design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331–337.Perry, C. J., Søvik, E., Myerscough, M. R., & Barron, A. B. (2015). Rapid behavioral maturation acceleratesfailure of stressed honey bee colonies. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(11), 34273432.Piaget, J. (1965). The stages of the intellectual development of the child. Educational psychology in context:Readings for future teachers, 98-106.Sallis, J. F., Owen, N., & Fisher, E. (2008). Ecological models of health behavior. In K. Glanz, B. Rimer, & K.Viswanath (Eds.), Health behavior: theory, research, and practice (pp. 465-485). San Francisco: JosseyBass.Salomon, G., & Perkins, D. N. (1998). Chapter 1: Individual and Social Aspects of Learning. Review of Researchin Education, 23(1), 1–24. http://doi.org/10.3102/0091732X023001001Schmitz, M. J., & Winskel, H. (2008). Towards effective partnerships in a collaborative problem-solving task.The British Journal of Educational Psychology, 78(Pt 4), 581–96.Stasser, G., & Titus, W. (2003). Hidden profiles: A brief history. Psychological Inquiry, 14(3-4), 304-313.Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge: MITPress.Stahl, G. (2013). Theories of cognition in collaborative learning. The international handbook of collaborativelearning, 74-90.Turkle, S. (2016). Reclaiming conversation: The power of talk in a digital age. New York, New York: Penguin.Vygotsky, L. S. (1929). The Problem of the Cultural Development of the Child. Journal of Genetic Psychology,36, 415-434.Webb, N. M. (2009). The teacher’s role in promoting collaborative dialogue in the classroom. The British Journalof Educational Psychology, 79(Pt 1), 1–28. http://doi.org/10.1348/000709908X380772Webb, N. M. (2013). Information processing approaches to collabroative learning. In C. E. Hmelo-Silver, C. A.Chinn, K. K. Chan, Carol, & A. M. O’Donnell (Eds.), The International Handbook of CollaborativeLearning (pp. 19–40). New York, NY: Routledge.Webb, N. M., Nemer, K. M., & Zuniga, S. (2002). Short Circuits or Superconductors? Effects of GroupComposition on High-Achieving Students’ Science Assessment Performance. American EducationalResearch Journal, 39(4), 943–989. http://doi.org/10.3102/00028312039004943Webb, N., & Mastergeorge, A. M. (2003). Promoting effective helping behavior in peer-directed groups.International Journal of Educational Research, 39(1–2), 73–97.Wood, D., Bruner, J. S., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child PsychologyandPsychiatry,andAlliedDisciplines,17(2),89–100.Retrievedfromhttp://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/932126Woolley, A. W., Chabris, C. F., Pentland, A., Hashmi, N., & Malone, T. W. (2010). Evidence for a collectiveintelligence factor in the performance of human groups. Science, 330(6004), 686-688.ICLS 2018 Proceedings343© ISLS