Making a Difference: Analytics for Quality Knowledge-BuildingConversationsFrank de Jong (chair organizer), Aeres University of Applied Sciences, f.de.jong@aeres.nlJoan van den Ende, Aeres University of Applied Sciences, j.van.den.ende@aeres.nlHennie van Heijst, Aeres University of Applied Sciences, h.van.Heijst@aeres.nlYoshiaki Matsuzawa, Aoyama Gakuin University, Japan, matsuzawa@si.aoyama.ac.jpPaul Kirschner, Open University, Paul.Kirschner@ou.nlJianwei Zhang, University at Albany, jzhang1@albany.eduMei-Hwa Chen, University at Albany, mchen@albany.eduFeng Chen, University at Albany, fchen5@albany.eduCarolyn Rosé, Carnegie Mellon University, cprose@cs.cmu.eduErick Velazquez Godinez, LiNCS Lab, Ecole de Technologie Superieure, erick.velazquezgodinez.1@ens.etsmtl.caSylvie Ratté, LiNCS Lab, Ecole de Technologie Superieure, sylvie.ratte@etsmtl.caBodong Chen, University of Minnesota, chenbd@umn.eduCarol Chan, University of Hong Kong, ckkchan@hku.hkJan van Aalst, University of Hong Kong, vanaalst@hku.hkChristine Yang, University of Hong Kong, China, cyang@hku.hkJun Oshima (reflection panelist), Shizuoka University, joshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jpCindy Hmelo-Silver (reflection panelist), Indiana University, chmelosi@gmail.comAlyssa Wise (reflection panelist), New York University, alyssa.wise@nyu.eduAbstract: The symposium focuses on the analysis of the knowledge building process e.g. ideaimprovement conversations by which students get to a high quality of knowledge andunderstanding. Learning Analytics (LA) focuses on the collection, measure and analysis of dataabout learners and their contexts (Long & Siemens, 2011). LA tools are normally rooted inprobabilistic/frequency-based approaches. These are themselves incapable of capturing themeaning of texts at any level, because probabilities do not constitute natural language semantics.Therefore, semantic related analytics seems to be a promising approach. Not only to get insightin the process of knowledge building as a support for students and teachers in this collectiveprocess but also as a possibility for assessment. Not to control but to mirror and feed forwardthe semiotic collaborative process of building an understanding that makes a difference for howstudents look at and act in our world.The overall focus of the symposiumThe aim of the symposium is to explore how recent development in learning analytics (LA), especially semanticand network analytics, could afford new understandings of knowledge-building discourse, so as to broaden itsaccess to more classrooms with less tradition of or less support for the Knowledge Building pedagogy(Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014). Underlying this aim is another effort to turn decades of research on knowledgebuilding dialogues into actionable analytics, to form a solid basis for further development of analytics for insteadof of knowledge building.Knowledge building (Bereiter, 2002; Bereiter & Scardamalia, 2006a) or knowledge creation (Nonaka,2006; Nonaka & Toyama, 2003; Nonaka, 1994) consists of the social and group dynamic processes as is the casein collaborative learning. However, the latter does not always include the systematic, methodological, hermeneuticprocess of knowledge creation as an enculturation in Popper’s world 3 (Magee, 1974). Despite the affordances ofcollaborative learning formulations such as scripts (Dillenbourg & Hong, 2008), roles (Strijbos, 2004), ororchestrating graphs and workflows (Dillenbourg, 2015), they do not support such an enculturation as requiredfor knowledge building. While tools in knowledge-building environments have been developed and continuallyrefined to support such enculturation into World 3 (Scardamalia, 2004), LA introduces new opportunities tocatalyze this same kind of development.According to van Aalst, (2009, p. 260) knowledge creation involves more than the creation of new ideas;rather, it requires discourse (talk, writing, and other actions) to determine the limits of knowledge in thecommunity, set goals, investigate problems, promote the impact of new ideas, and evaluate whether the state ofknowledge in the community is advancing. It goes beyond the knowledge sharing among students, as well as“knowledge construction [that] refers to the processes by which students solve problems and constructCSCL 2017 Proceedings711© ISLSunderstanding of concepts, phenomena, and situations” (p. 261). Knowledge creation, in contrast, involves theproduction and continual improvement of conceptual artifacts to solve authentic problems for community advance(Bereiter, 2002; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2003). Knowledge building as a pedagogy engages students directly inthe process of knowledge creation and help them “acquiring competence in knowledge creation by actually doingit” (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014, p. 399). Knowledge building derives from a Popperian epistemology andontology (Bereiter, 2002; Scardamlia & Bereiter, 2014), with the Popperian ontological World 3 underlies thesemiotic process in knowledge building. The World 3 enables knowledge production and sharing because we cangrasp the knowledge in its form as a conceptual artefact, build on it, modify it, and develop it further. It concernsan objective knowledge world, created by the human mind. Students’ thinking is related to their being-in-theworld and their mental mind(s) are embedded in their out-in-the-world artefacts.Knowledge building as going into the artefact and the artefact getting into our minds is a process oftransformation of our frame of reference. This process is a starting point for opening up our mind to perceivesigns, codes and information as they manifest themselves in our problem, question, complexity. It is this semioticprocess of noticing difference and potentials that we never perceived and understood before. It is these kinds ofknowledge building conversations with the others in the artefact, and with others about the artefact in whichrelations, e.g. differences come into language in the conversation (de Jong, 2015). Not as an individual propertyof the interlocutors. ‘What is’, is ‘laid down in the middle’ as a ‘rising above’ in collective, in community, as acommon language of collective understanding (a hermeneutic ‘collective Verstehen’). The knowledge buildingconversation is not an adjusting to each other as partners in the conversation. Partners become engaged in theartefact, coming under the truth of the matter or praxis, under the resonation of understanding reality. A resonanceof organic connectedness and dependency of our being as part of others and nature. Resonations that partners inthe knowledge building conversation combine in a new common ground. In the ‘knowledge-buildingconversation’ it is not merely against each other and putting your own positions forward, but a transformation intothe common, into the collective. A transformation in which one does not remain who one was. (Gadamer, 1975,p. 360).It is this semiotic process in which semantic learning analytics try to provide more empirically basedinsights. An approach that might be a basis for a direction of assessment. Instead of only assessing the grasp offacts it could move towards assessing the process of meaning making, thinking, and knowledge creation. Such an(formative) assessment by LA mirroring data and illuminating knowledge creation dynamics might help studentsin their process of thinking and becoming knowledge workers, and helps teachers to become knowledge buildingteachers.This symposium addresses the question of how to develop these kinds of LA’s to foster the support ofassessment for students’ understanding instead of assessing of students’ learning and to support the students andteachers in the Knowledge Building process.How contributions to the symposium are contributing to the aims?The contribution from Zhang et al. shows how ‘Idea Thread Mapper’ explicate the idea threads as an inquiry of ashared epistemic object and the ‘journey of thinking’ mirrors the syntheses of the epistemic endeavor, the absencesof knowledge to be addressed by the community, the interrelated strands of inquiry and student’s participatoryroles. The contribution of Velazquez et al. applies Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques to analyzingthe coverage of syllabus’ vocabulary in students’ conversations is evaluated using a method based on linguisticand cognitive knowledge. The analysis uses an asymmetric coverage hybrid measure, which combines semanticand lexical information with cognitive principles to determine how syllabus’ concepts are covered in students’conversations. VandenEnde et al. study used the same students as Velazquez and integrates students’ sociocognitive openness, their use of curriculum keywords in the knowledge building and the alignment of keywordsin students’ term paper. The contribution of Chen attempts to integrate the activity theory with recent innovationsin dynamic network analysis (DNA) to derive new indicators of knowledge-building discourse. The contributionfrom Chan et al. presents the Knowledge Connections Analyzer, a software designed to support students’ selfassessment of asynchronous online discourse that emphasizes the collective aspects of knowledge building.Idea Thread Mapper and its analytics tools: Tracing and connecting unfoldingstrands of inquiry across knowledge building communitiesJianwei Zhang, Mei-Hwa Chen, Feng Chen, and Carolyn RoséIn a knowledge building community, students need to take on high-level collective responsibility for monitoringand continually advancing the “state of the art” of their collective knowledge (Scardamalia, 2002). Instead ofCSCL 2017 Proceedings712© ISLSsimply dealing with teacher-assigned topics and tasks, students identify deepening goals as their knowledgeadvances through knowledge building discourse, and co-construct unfolding strands of inquiry to address sharedgoals. They co-engage in “dual construction” to both construct knowledge and the socio-epistemic structures ofknowledge practices to guide and sustain their ongoing interactions (Hakkarainen, 2009; Zhang & Messina, 2010;Tao & Zhang, 2016). Current analytics and assessment tools mostly focus on features of specific idea entries inknowledge building discourse (e.g. words, problems, claims, evidence) (Mu et al., 2012). This paper presents ourdesign and research of Idea Thread Mapper (ITM) (Zhang et al., 2012; Chen M.-H., Zhang, & Lee, 2013) thatcaptures collective structures and unfolding strands of knowledge practices reflected in long-term online discoursein order to inform students’ purposeful contributions and connected efforts.On top of micro-level representations of ideas using online postings and build-on’s (physicalconversation threads), ITM incorporates “idea threads” as an emergent structure in online discourse. Each ideathread includes a sequence of discourse entries (possibly several build-on trees) that investigates a sharedepistemic object of inquiry (e.g. conductors), as an unfolding strand of inquiry work (Zhang et al., 2007). Featuresof ITM signify collective structures of knowledge building including (a) using the thread topics and “Journey ofThinking” syntheses to highlight the shared epistemic objects being investigated and absences of knowledge tobe addressed by the community; (b) using timeline-based discourse mapping to visualize the unfolding,interrelated strands of inquiry practices focusing on the epistemic objects; and (c) retrieving members’participatory roles in the different strands of inquiry. The collective landscape of a whole knowledge buildinginitiative is mapped out as clusters of idea threads that investigate a set of interrelated problems through thecontributions of all members. Visualization tools further show the intensity of contributions in each thread andcross-thread connections, including cross-thread build-on links and connective contributions that simultaneouslyaddress two or more objects of investigation.Figure 1. A map of idea threads created by a Grade 5/6 classroom studying electricity. Each colored striperepresents an idea thread extending from the first until the last note contributed. Each square represents a note; ablue line between two notes represents a build-on link. The example analyses (bottom) show the distribution ofnotes in the different idea threads and conceptual connections between the threads.ITM integrates a set of automated analyses to support students’ construction and review of idea threadsin online discourse. Text analysis models set up using LightSIDE (formerly known as TagHelper — see Rosé etal., 2008) based on human-coded data can identify online discourse moves (contributions types) such asquestioning (Kappa = .80), referencing sources (Kappa = .72), theorizing (Kappa = .68), and using evidence(Kappa = .52). An augmented Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) tool retrieves topics from student onlinediscourse in relation to topical structures of relevant expert texts (i.e. Wikipedia) and recommends online postsmost relevant to each topic, as a potential idea thread. A cross-community space is further provided for studentsto share (publish) productive idea threads and “Journey of Thinking” syntheses across classrooms, with analyticsof semantic similarity facilitating potential cross-community connection and complementarity.ITM-supported classroom designs engage students in reflexive monitoring and structuring of knowledgebuilding and formative assessment for collective and individual progress. A set of studies was conducted in thirdthrough sixth-grade classrooms. The ITM-aided reflective monitoring and structuring of online discourse playedCSCL 2017 Proceedings713© ISLSa positive role in increasing student awareness of their community’s evolving focus and collective progress,leading to more connected deepening moves to generate deep and coherent understandings (Chen, J. & Zhang,2016; Tao et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015). Reviewing Journey of Thinking syntheses from other classroomshelped students to reflect on their own idea progress and gaps and further integrate insights from differentcommunities for deeper research.Analyzing students’ knowledge-building conversations by comparing tosyllabus and their collective writingErick Velazquez Godinez, Sylvie Ratté, Frank de Jong, Joan van den Ende, and Hennie van HeijstLearning analytics (LA) has emerged during the past five years as a means to analyze mainly quantitatively the‘Learning’ process. Mostly, LA focuses on frequencies of participations, contributions, amount of references, etc.(De Jong, 2015). Considering recent advances in Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Text-Mining (TM)techniques, it is now possible to incorporate new models within LA, to study the students’ development of newconcepts within knowledge-building dialogues. This, hence, provides an insight to both, teachers and students.Recent works on the analysis of learners’ dialogues in CSCL platforms have shown that various linguistic andcognitive phenomena are involved in the learning processes (Dascalu et. all, 2015; Scheihing,et. all., 2016).A lot of the works in computer science have been focused on similarity as a symmetric relation(Landauer, McNamara, Dennis, & Kintsch, 2007). These similarity measures were conceived in a symmetric waybecause of the use of geometric spaces, like Vector Space Model (VSM), and the bag of words model for cosinesimilarity in the context of NLP. When comparing two objects, A and B, in a coordinated space, this kind ofsimilarity is symmetric because the distance is always the same from object A to object B and vice versa.However, Tversky and Itamar (1978) standpoint is that similarity is an asymmetric relation, betterdescribed as a comparison of features (matching process) rather than a computation of metric distances betweentwo points (Pinker, 2013). Tversky et. all. also, mentions that the concept of symmetric similarity should not berejected altogether; it holds in many contexts, while in many others it is a useful approximation. He highlightedthat symmetric similarity cannot be accepted as a universal principle of psychological similarity. Moreover, heshows that the concept of asymmetric similarity was observed in production tasks where we generate a similarresponse against single stimulus. Examples of these tasks are pattern recognition, stimulus identification, andword association.An experiment was conducted, where conversations of four students in the Knowledge Forum werecompared to the syllabus and a theme product. The syllabus is composed by 9 documents. These are all conferenceor journal articles. The theme product document is a collective document that the same group of studentselaborated. The group consisted of 4 Med ‘learning and innovating’ students following the 3 month them ‘visonson learning’ as part of the 2 years’ part time MEd ‘learning and innovating’ program. Students’ years of age was26, 24, 43. The two women students are teachers with many years of work experience the male student is directorof an advisory enterprise in the field of ‘ecology and landscaping’.The conversations concern contributions of students in the Knowledge Forum environment. The number isdifferent per student. The length of the contribution differs per contribution. The analysis concerns the use ofconcepts from the syllabus reflected in the students’ conversations and their collective term paper, e.g. theirconceptual artefact of their vison of learning conceptualized in a textual augmented visual model. The Dutchconversation data where translated with Google translate and corrected for spelling, typing errors etc. Stop-wordswere extracted. Finally, we face the problem of concept coverage by using a similarity text computation. For thiswe use the ACHM (Velasquez, Ratté, and de Jong, 2016). When comparing a syllabus text and a student’s text,the ACHM allows selecting the word of the syllabus that contributes the most to the computation of the similarityprocess with the student text. This word is assumed to be the concept that ensures the connection between bothsegments of texts.In analyzing the conversations versus the syllabus, a scatterplot is used to show the coverage value onthe Y-axe. The X-axe represents the index of the student collaboration. The points that we can see for each studentcontributions in Fig. 2 (left) represent a different book from the syllabus. For example, the contribution one of thestudent 3 is almost aligned with almost all the syllabus document with a high degree of coverage. In more personalgraphs like in Fig. 2 (right) the related articles of the syllabus of the concepts that are coming into the conversationof a student is presented. On the Y-axes, the index coverage is presented.CSCL 2017 Proceedings714© ISLSFigure 2. (left) Concentrated graph of student contributions and alignment with the syllabus; (Right) Dotsexpress concepts from a particle syllabus article. On the Y-axes the similarity index and on the X-axes thecontributions in time order.The analysis shows the difference between students’ contribution in the amount of similarity e.g. thecovering of the syllabus’ concepts by the conversations and the coverage of the term paper concepts by theconversations. This study gives insight in on the one hand in what way ‘authoritative sources’ contributes to thebuilding understanding in the conversation and on the other hand how the conversations contribute to the termpapers, e.g. the students’ conceptual artefact concern their collective vison on learning.Key concepts and socio-cognitive openness: Exploring the potential ofknowledge building from the two perspectivesJoan van den Enden, Hennie van Heijst, Frank de Jong, Yoshiaki Matsuzawa, and Paul KirschnerAs teacher-researchers in an MEd program ‘learning and innovating’ we build our pedagogy on the principles ofknowledge building and responsive learning (de Jong 2015). To improve our educational practices, we areconstantly looking for more insight into how the knowledge building discourse in student communities fosters thedevelopment of a collective product (e.g., conceptual artifact; Bereiter 2002). To this end we conducted an indepth case study on the knowledge building process of four students within a community of 28. These studentsare the same as in the Velazquez et al. study. We addressed the following questions: How do key concepts in theliterature and in the collective term paper about a model of learning, enter and evolve in the knowledge buildingdiscourse. In this case study (N=4 students, 79 contributions in 19 conversation initiatives of which 12 developed;3 rise aboves) we analyzed the: (1) emergence of key concepts in the online discourse itself, (2) use of keyconcepts in the final conceptual artifact, and (3) degree of socio-cognitive openness of the online discourse. Forthe key concepts we used KBDeX (Knowledge Building Discourse eXplorer), a tool to explore network structuresof collaborative learning discourses in Knowledge Forum from the perspective of social as well as semanticanalysis (Matsuzawa, Oshima, Oshima, Niihara, & Sakai, 2011). To analyze the degree of openness, we used acoding scheme based on CSCL-literature.Figure 4. Alignment of key concepts in discourse and in collective term paper.Conclusions: At the beginning stage at group level all key concepts appear and are loosely connected.There seems to be a fair amount of openness, although individual students show a diverse appearance of keyconcepts. During the process of knowledge building at group level, a selection of key concepts is firmly connectedand a larger amount of openness is realized. More openness based on expression is showed at the individualstudent level; Students also show varying levels of uncertainty expressions. We determined an interaction withCSCL 2017 Proceedings715© ISLSthe degree of participation in the conversation. In the final stage, the selection of key words is slightly expandedat group level and can be easily recognized in the collective product, though the phrasings are different (see Fig.4). The openness slightly diminishes except for orientation towards the other members. At the individual studentlevel, student B develops the most strongly connected key words network, participates most and shows bestbalanced emergence of openness. Student C, who participated least, developed a scattered key words network butexpressed greater openness. Student A participates at a ‘medium’ level and expresses least openness of all.Deriving knowledge-building analytics through activity theory and dynamicnetwork analysisBodong Chen, & Yoshiaki MatsuzawaKnowledge Building (KB) is conceptualized as an interactive system involving epistemic agents (e.g., students,teachers), knowledge objects, and sociocultural practices (Chen & Hong, 2016), with KB principles (Scardamalia,2002) explicating the relations among them to distinguish KB from other pedagogical approaches. For example,the principle of Improvable Ideas stresses the ontological substance of ideas, the commitment of epistemic agentsto improve them, and the sociocultural norms of tolerating tentative ideas and continually improving them. Toderive analytics for KB, therefore, efforts need to be geared towards understanding and interpreting the intricaterelationships among agents, knowledge objects, and practices.So far, much work has committed to the extraction of various measures from KB discourse (Burtis, 1998;Oshima, Oshima, & Matsuzawa, 2012; Zhang & Sun, 2011). While these techniques have shown promise inunderstanding KB discourse from unique angles, a more holistic approach that addresses the interactive KBsystem could contribute to the ongoing effort of developing KB analytics.Among existent efforts to analyze KB discourse, the use of activity theory (Cole & Engeström, 1993) asan analytic framework represents a promising approach that “simultaneously” lights on multiple factors in KBdiscourse (Hewitt, 2004; van Aalst & Hill, 2006). Originating from Vygotsgy’s work, activity theory attempts tobridge the space between subjects (e.g., students) and objects (e.g., tasks, problems of understanding) byrecognizing various mediational means in between, i.e., tools, rules, community, and division of labor (Cole &Engeström, 1993). Compared to quantified content analysis widely applied to the analysis of KB discourse, theactivity theory framework could afford a richer description of KB discourse, “because it accounts for bothindividual and communal activity, as well as multi-directional movement of individuals within the community”(van Aalst & Hill, 2016, p. 25).During this session, we will present an emerging approach of operationalizing such activity-theoryanalysis through dynamic network analysis (DNA) and rapid ethnographic assessment (Carley, Bigrigg, & Diallo,2012). Compared to a typical one-mode social network, a dynamic network is multi-mode (involving differenttypes of nodes such as students and concepts) and multi-plex (comprising different kinds of links) network tocapture different aspects of a KB activity system. Specifically, we first seek to construct a network representationof subjects, objects, artifacts, and division of labor (instructive to not cover rules and community for now) fromtrace data in Knowledge Forum; the resulting dynamic network is a holistic, theoretically-informed representationof KB discourse ready to be interpreted from different angles. Then, we can derive measures for different factorsin the activity system, as well as the interactions among them. Using a simple example, we can derive a measurefor subjects in a KB dialogue based on the count of Knowledge Forum activities from all students and the sum ofconnections they form with domain-specific concepts. This approach is distinctive from earlier work in CSCLthat embraces a reductionist approach (Xing, Wadholm, Petakovic, & Goggins, 2015) or focuses on two-modenetworks (Andrade, 2015).A case study based on a secondary dataset (see Zhang, Scardamalia, Lamon, Messina, & Reeve, 2007)will be presented, to afford opportunities for triangulation and validation. Analytic decisions will be criticallyexamined, together with future development of this approach in machine learning, pedagogically responsiveanalytics, and information visualization for sense-making.Using knowledge connection analyzer to scaffold reflective assessment inknowledge buildingCarol Chan, Jan van Aalst, and Christine YangKnowledge building is a pioneer model in CSCL and an educational approach to initiate students into a knowledgecreation culture (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014); a key idea is the contribution to the community for sustainedidea improvement. At the heart of knowledge building is the online progressive discourse, supported byCSCL 2017 Proceedings716© ISLSKnowledge Forum® that help students maintain focus on idea improvement during their note-reading and notewriting as they work with ideas. Increased attention has been given to analysis of collective progress in knowledgeforum discourse (Hong et al., 2015). Our goal is to employ the use of assessment and learning-analytics data inknowledge building for formative assessment; data extracted are to help students to self-assess and reflect on theirdiscourse for progress. We present research using the Knowledge Connections Analyzer (KCA, Van Aalst et al.2012), a software designed to support students’ self-assessment of asynchronous online discourse that emphasizesthe collective aspects of knowledge building (see Fig. 5).A key goal of the KCA is to enable students to develop an understanding of knowledge building asinvolving effort and achievements at different levels—from the individual level to the community (or wholeclass). As pointed out by Stahl (2010), learning in a community produces group cognition, which is not reducibleto the efforts of individual students. KCA attempts to help students understand and bring the collective aspects ofknowledge building into focus. It is designed around four intuitive questions; students can run KCA and reflecton these questions: 1) Are we a community that collaborates (extent to which students are collaborating withothers); 2) Are we putting our knowledge together? (use of reference notes in meta-discourse); 3) How does thecommunity knowledge develop? (using keywords to identify key themes of community interests) and 4) What ishappening to my own contributions? (tracking how own ideas develop over time) (Van Aalst et al., 2012)We conducted initial research on KCA analyzing several Knowledge Forum databases drawn from theknowledge-building teacher network in Hong Kong (Chan, 2011), classified into two groups (Group 1: DB1,DB7, DB8, and DB9) and Group 2 (DB2, DB3, DB4, DB5, DB6); analysis shows that databases with strongerdesign work (i.e., principle-based portfolio) showed stronger KCA data on collaboration and rise-above comparedto more novice teachers; the comparison data help validate KCA data and identify patterns where deeperknowledge work and conceptual synthesis are needed.Figure 5. (Left and Middle) Features of Knowledge Connection Analyzer; (Right) KCA indices of communityconnectedness for nine databases with different intensity of pedagogical designs.This study includes 32 grade-10 visual arts students working on knowledge building in a Hong Kongclassroom. After the initial weeks on writing on Knowledge Forum, they were scaffold with the use of KCA toreflect on their KF discourse; it includes both teacher-researcher running KCA and students running KCA ingroups to obtain data to track their own knowledge building work. Quantitative analysis shows how the use ofKCA helped students to improve on Knowledge Forum discourse including the use of build-on and referencenotes as well as qualitative coding of ideas showing more sophistication. Qualitative analysis of classroomdiscourse suggests how teacher scaffold students and how students engage in reflective assessment examining thegaps in current work, and in particular the collective aspects of knowledge building and how they could moveforward (e.g., discussion on patterns of reference notes generated from KCA and need for more rise-above ideas).Knowledge-building talk and forum discourse have been the key areas of attention in knowledge buildingclassrooms; the use of KCA additionally help students focus on data-driven improvement of discourse andtransformative assessment as a collective cognitive responsibility.Selected referencesAndrade, A. (2015). Using Situated-Action Networks to visualize complex learning. In O. Lindwall, P. Häkkinen,T. Koschmann, P. Tchounikine, & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.), Exploring the Material Conditions of Learning:The Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) Conference 2015, Volume 1 (pp. 372–379).Gothenburg, Sweden: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Mahaw, NJ & London: Lawrence, ErlbaumAssociates.Carley, K. M., Bigrigg, M. W., & Diallo, B. (2012). Data-to-model: a mixed initiative approach for rapidethnographic assessment. Computational & Mathematical Organization Theory, 18(3), 300–327.Chan, C.K.K. (2011). Bridging research and practice: Implementing and sustaining knowledge building in HongCSCL 2017 Proceedings717© ISLSKong classrooms. 6, 147-186.Chen, B., & Hong, H.-Y. (2016). Schools as knowledge-building organizations: Thirty years of design research.Educational Psychologist, 51(2), 266–288.Chen, J., & Zhang. J. (2016). Design Collaborative Formative Assessment for Sustained Knowledge Building. InC.-K. Looi, J. Polman, U. Cress, & P. Reimann (Eds.), Transforming Learning, Empowering Learners:Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (Vol. 1) (pp.647-654).International Society of the Learning Sciences.Chen, M.-H., Zhang, J. & Lee, J. (2013). Making collective progress visible for sustained knowledge building. InN. Rummel, M., Kapur, M. Nathan, & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), To see the world and a grain of sand:Learning across levels of space, time, and scale: CSCL 2013 Conference Proceedings Volume 1 (pp.8188). International Society of the Learning Sciences.Dascalu, M., Trausan-Matu, S., McNamara, D. S., & Dessus, P. (2015). ReaderBench: Automated evaluation ofcollaboration based on cohesion and dialogism. International Journal of Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning, 10(4), 395–423.De Jong, F. (2015). Understanding the difference (het veschil doorgronden). Responsive education: A search for“a difference which makes a difference” for transition, learning and education. Wageningen: StoasWageningen|Vilentum University of Applied Sciences and Teacher Education.Hong, H.Y., & Scardamalia, M. (2014). Community knowledge assessment in a knowledge building environment.Computers & Education, 71, 279-288.Landauer, T. K., McNamara, D. S., Dennis, S., & Kintsch, W. (2007). Handbook of Latent Semantic Analysis.Psychological Review. Retrieved from http://books.google.com/books?id=jgVWCuFXePEC&pgis=1Long, P., & Siemens, G. (2011). Penetrating the Fog: Analytics in Learning and Education. Educause Review,46(5), 30–32.Matsuzawa, Y., Oshima, J., Oshima, R., Niihara, Y., & Sakai, S. (2011). KBDeX: A Platform for ExploringDiscourse in Collaborative Learning. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 26, 198–207.Mu, J., Stegmann, K., Mayfield, E., Rose, C., & Fischer, F. (2012). The ACODEA framework: Developingsegmentation and classification schemes for fully automated analysis of online discussions. InternationalJournal of Computer- Supported Collaborative Learning, 7(2), 285-305.Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Matsuzawa, Y. (2012). Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer: A social networkanalysis application for knowledge building discourse. Educational Technology Research andDevelopment: ETR & D, 60(5), 903–921Pinker, S. (1989). Learnability and Cognition: The Acquisition of Argument Structure. Language (Vol. 68).Scardamlia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: theory, pedagogy, andtechnology. (R. K. Swayer, Ed.) (second edi). New York.Tversky, A., & Itamar, G. (1978). Studies of Similarity. Cognition and Categorization, 79–98.Van Aalst, J., Chan, C., Tian, S. W., Teplovs, C., Chan, Y. Y., & Wan, W.-S. (2012). The knowledge connectionsanalyzer. In J. van Aalst, K. Thompson, M. J. Jacobson, & P. Reimann (Eds.), The future of learning:Proceedings of the 10th international conference of the learning sciences (ICLS 2012) – Volume 2, shortpapers, symposia, and abstracts (pp. 361-365). Sydney, Australia: ISLSVan Aalst, J., & Hill, C. M. (2006). Activity theory as a framework for analysing knowledge building. LearningEnvironments Research, 9(1), 23–44.Van Aalst, J. (2009). Distinguishing knowledge-sharing, knowledge-construction, and knowledge-creationdiscourses. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(3), 259–287.Velasquez, E., Ratté, S., & de Jong, F. (2016). Analyzing Student’s Knowlege Building Skills by Comparing theirWritten Production to Syllabus. Interactive Collaborative Learning (ICL), (1).Zhang, J., Chen, M.-H., Tao, D., Lee, J. Sun, Y., & Judson, D. (2015). Fostering sustained knowledge buildingthrough metadiscourse aided by the Idea Thread Mapper. In O. Lindwall & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.),Exploring the material conditions of learning: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference onComputer Supported Collaborative Learning (Vol. 1, pp. 166-173). Gothenburg, Sweden: InternationalSociety of the Learning Sciences.Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Lamon, M., Messina, R., & Reeve, R. (2007). Socio-cognitive dynamics of knowledgebuilding in the work of nine- and ten-year-olds. Educational Technology Research and Development,55(2), 117-145.Zhang, J., & Sun, Y. (2011). Quantified measures of online discourse as knowledge building indicators. In H.Spada, S. G., N. Miyake, & N. Law (Eds.), Connecting computer-supported collaborative learning topolicy and practice: CSCL2011 conference proceedings (Vol. 1, pp. 72–79). Hong Kong SAR, China:ISLS.CSCL 2017 Proceedings718© ISLS