Activity Systems Analysis of the Social Practices by Low-achievingStudents in a Knowledge-Building Environment Augmented byReflective AssessmentYuqin Yang, Central China Normal University, yuqinyang0904@gmail.comJan van Aalst, The University of Hong Kong, vanaalst@hku.hkCarol K. K. Chan, The University of Hong Kong, ckkchan@hku.hkAbstract: This study aimed to understand the dynamics that characterized the social practicesdeveloped by low-achieving students in a knowledge-building (KB) environment augmentedby reflective assessment (RA), using activity systems analysis (ASA). The participants were aclass of 20 Grade 11 low-achieving students working with an experienced teacher. Variousclassroom data was collected and analyzed. Findings indicated that, the students’ activitieswere mediated by: opportunities for collective reflection, the framing of data-driven collectivediscourse improvement and the development of new skills and interests. Pedagogicalimplications for future implications were also discussed.IntroductionThis study aimed to use ASA (Yamagata-Lynch, 2010) to analyze the social practices developed by lowachieving students, and to understand the dynamics and tensions that characterized the social practices. Thestudy was part of a larger study that investigated the design, process and effects of KB environments augmentedby RA on low-achieving students. The following research questions were investigated:1) What was the nature of social practices from a cultural historical activity theory (CHAT) perspective?2) What were the characteristics of the social practices from a CHAT perspective, and how did thesecharacteristics develop?MethodsThe study was conducted at a Band-3 school in Hong Kong. The participants taking a visual-arts courseinquired the topic of “design” with one-hour lesson each week in five months. The teacher used a three-phasepedagogical process to familiarize the students with knowledge building, as described in detail by Yang, vanAalst, Chan, & Tian (2016). We analyzed the following five interrelated sets of qualitative data: classroomobservations, artifacts of students’ work, interviews and questionnaire by using ASA.ResultsWe constructed two activity systems to describe and explain the development of the reflective-assessmentactivities and the interaction of these activities (a) before the KCA student activity, and (B) during the KCAstudent activity. The activity systems are shown in Figures 1-2.In Activity System A, the use of these tools motivated some of the students to contribute more notes,and helped them to understand that knowledge building is a collective effort to improve ideas. However, theseexperiences of reflection directed the students’ attention to their own performance. This activity system had twotensions: (a) attaining the objective while completing SBA projects; and (b) attaining the objective with limitedresources. After the introduction of the KCA, the dynamics of the student activity systems changed, as theparticipating students attempted to advance their KB discourse by carrying out RA afforded by the KCA.Tension (b) in Activity System A (created by the need to attain the objective in the absence of a communityoriented framework for data-driven idea improvement) was also substantially alleviated by the students’engagement in productive reflective assessment scaffolded by the KCA prompt sheets. However, priorexperience of reflection around the ATK and Applets data in Activity System A and the limited framing of datadriven (the KCA data) discourse improvement as a collective responsibility exerted some negative effects onActivity System B that was some students’ attention mostly on individual performance rather than community’sdiscourse as a whole. These resources mediated against the students’ productive use of the KCA data and madetension (b) in Activity System A persisted to some degree in Activity System B.The ASA yielded three main findings that explained the nature, dynamics and tensions of the socialpractices that arose from the students’ KCA-afforded self-directed reflective assessment. These findings offeredinsights into the elements that became influential cultural tools, and the ongoing activities that supported thetransformation of these newly introduced artifacts into cultural tools: (1) the new tools that mediated studentICLS 2018 Proceedings1717© ISLSactivities developed from reflection opportunities afforded by data; (2) framing discourse improvement as acollective responsibility acted as new tools that mediated new activities; and (3)new skills and increasedinterest were transformed into new tools that mediated the students’ new activities.Figure 1. Activity System A: Before the KCA student activity.Figure 2. Activity System B: After the KCA student activity.Discussion and conclusionsWe found that the KCA and its accompanying prompt sheets can help students to engage in productivereflective assessment—focusing on the key learning goals of knowledge building. Our findings on theinteractions between the conditions of and tensions within an activity system, and the processes by which suchfactors become either affordances or constraints to students’ collaborative use of data, suggest ways ofstructuring change in classrooms and even schools, particularly to meet the needs of educationallydisadvantaged students. The findings also lay the groundwork for future research on students’ collaborativework and metacognitive activities in relation to data use.ReferencesYamagata-Lynch, L. C. (2010). Activity systems analysis methods: Understanding complex learningenvironments. New York, New York, N.Y. : Springer.Yang, Y., van Aalst, J., Chan, C. K. K., & Tian, W. (2016). Reflective assessment in knowledge building bystudents with low academic achievement. International Journal of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning,11, 281-311. (SSCI)ICLS 2018 Proceedings1718© ISLS