Influence of Affective Factors on Practices in Simulated AuthenticScience InquiryMelanie E. Peffer, Emily Royse, and Hannah Abeleinmelanie.peffer@unco.edu, emily.royse@unco.edu, abel0781@bears.unco.eduUniversity of Northern ColoradoAbstract: Science literacy is critically important but some aspects, such as epistemologicalbeliefs about science, are difficult to define and assess. New technologies, such as simulatedauthentic science inquiry, may allow for better assessment of epistemology. Science ClassroomInquiry (SCI) simulations offer real-time, scalable assessment of student practices in authenticscience inquiry and by extension their epistemological beliefs about science. Our previous workdemonstrated that undergraduate student practices exist on a continuum of sophistication, whichmay be explained by differences in epistemological beliefs or affective factors like self-efficacy,metacognition, or identity. Our current study examines the relationship between affectivefactors and inquiry practices. Preliminary analysis suggests that students with expert-likeinvestigations are more likely to identify as a science person. This study raises provocativequestions about the intersection between inquiry practices, epistemological beliefs, andaffective factors and highlights the potential of simulation-based assessment to examine abstractconstructs such as epistemology.Keywords: authentic science inquiry, epistemology, simulations, science educationIntroductionAchieving science literacy is an essential part of science education, and involves not only gains in disciplinaryknowledge, but also an understanding of the practices of scientists and how those practices are used to generatescience knowledge. The beliefs an individual possesses about the nature of science and how science knowledgeis generated are known as epistemological beliefs. Epistemological beliefs about science influence how a studentperceives, understands, and engages with scientific knowledge and are therefore critical for achieving scienceliteracy (Peffer & Ramezani, Under Review). Although epistemological beliefs about science are recognized asimportant for attaining science literacy, they are difficult to define and consequently assess. For example, whatmakes an epistemological belief sophisticated? Existing metrics of epistemology are criticized for their staticexamination of what an individual knows or believes only at one point in time, design flaws that falsely assumethat the participant is interpreting the assessment in the same manner as the survey author, and the lack ofreliability and validity (Sandoval, Greene, & Bråten, 2016; Sandoval & Redman, 2015; Sandoval, 2005).An emerging solution is to examine epistemology via student science practices, such as in the context ofargumentation (Deng, Chen, Tsai, & Chai, 2011) or inquiry (Sandoval, 2005). Our previous work (Peffer &Ramezani, Under Review) examined the practices of experts and novices (where expertise was defined asprofessional experience with authentic science inquiry) in the simulated authentic science inquiry environmentprovided by Science Classroom Inquiry (SCI) simulations (Peffer, Beckler, Schunn, Renken, & Revak, 2015).Practices served as a proxy for examining the participants’ epistemological beliefs situated in authentic scienceinquiry, or their Epistemology in Authentic Science Inquiry (EASI). We found that experts scored higher thannovices on a pre-test assessment on their understanding of science practices, and that these scores predictedpractices in authentic science inquiry. Expert-like practices included performing complex investigations aimed atuncovering an underlying mechanism of action, pursuing outside information, spending significant time inpreparation before engaging in inquiry, and using tentative language when explaining research results (Peffer andRamezani, Under Review; Peffer & Kyle, 2017). We also observed that novice practices existed on a continuumof more-or-less expert-like. Do the differences between novice participants reflect variability in their EASI, or dothose differences reflect a combination of factors, such as how they identify as a science person or their selfefficacy? For example, self-efficacy has previously been shown to be related to students’ epistemic beliefs aboutscience and their motivation to learn science (Tsai, Ho, Liang, & Lin, 2011). However, we do not know howaffective factors influence science practices or EASI. Here, we present our preliminary analysis of the relationshipof motivation, metacognition, self-efficacy, and science identity to expert-like practices in authentic scienceinquiry and potentially EASI.ICLS 2018 Proceedings997© ISLSMethods17 undergraduate students pursuing degrees outside the “hard” sciences (e.g. biology, chemistry, physics)participated in this study. We decided to use non-science majors because little is known about theirepistemological beliefs about science and their university science courses are, for many, their last formal scienceexperience and consequently the final opportunity to foster sophisticated epistemological beliefs. Participantsincluded 12 females (70%) and 5 males, of all stages of degree programs (eight freshmen, three sophomores, onejunior, and five senior students). All data was collected during a single two-hour session. First, students completeda pre-test. The pre-test included two Likert-style metrics, a measure of science identity (Godwin, Potvin, Hazari,& Lock, 2016) and the motivated strategies for learning questionnaire (MSLQ) (Pintrich, Smith, Garcia, &McKeachie, 1993), with motivation and self-regulated learning being the constructs this metric most effectivelycaptures (Credé & Phillips, 2011). Our current analysis of MSLQ items focuses on the subscales in thosecategories that are most relevant to our research questions: intrinsic goal orientation, self-efficacy, andmetacognitive self-regulation. The twelve identity items do not give a composite score, but each measure differentconstructs within disciplinary identity: recognition, competency, and interest (Godwin, Potvin, Hazari, & Lock,2016). Out of the twelve identity items on the pre-test, our discussion will focus on the Overall Identity Item, “Isee myself as a science person,” which captures self-recognition with a science identity. Pre-test items werecounter-balanced.After completing the pre-test, students logged into a SCI simulation module that presents a currentbiological phenomenon relevant to the western United States: the avian range expansion of a nuisance bird, theGreat-tailed Grackle. In the simulation, students were situated as scientists attempting to determine why the Greattailed Grackle has moved north from its ancestral home in Mexico. Students can pursue any investigative approachthat they choose, generate any number of hypotheses, examine any tests available within the simulation, and canuse the in-simulation library or Internet searches to seek additional information. Actions, including the students’rationale for each decision, were saved by the SCI simulation engine. On average, the simulation took 25.23minutes (SD = 10.99) to complete. The simulation logs created for each user were reviewed and coded blind bytwo members of the research team to determine if the investigation was complex or simple in nature. Complexinvestigations tend to explore multiple cause and effect relationships, often pursuing several tests and seekinginformation outside the simulation in a logical, systematic manner that describes a putative mechanism. Sincecomplex investigations use a variety of sources of information and various knowledge streams, these simulationactivities may indicate epistemological beliefs that science knowledge is tenuous and derived through a variety ofexperiments. Simple investigations are limited to pursuing a single cause and effect relationship, usually with veryfew tests performed or information sought outside the simulation. These investigations are also characteristic ofsimple inquiry as described by Chinn and Malhotra (2002), and may reflect beliefs that science knowledge iscertain. Overall agreement was 82%, and differences were resolved through discussion. All statistical analysiswas performed using SPSS 23.ResultsWe first examined the differences in pre-test scores between students who pursued complex or expert-likeinvestigations and those with less expert-like investigations. The MSLQ subscale categories have a mean responsecalculated from the relevant survey questions, and the identity metric is scored independently on a scale of 0 to 4.A total of 8 students performed investigations that were coded as complex, and 9 students performed investigationsthat were coded as simple. We found that students with complex investigations scored on average slightly higheron several of the MSLQ and identity items (Figure 1). Using a t-test to compare the means between theseclassifications, the Overall Identity Item (“I see myself as a science person”) was found to be significantly differentbetween those whose investigation style was coded as simple (M = 1.33, SD = 1.22) or complex (M = 2.50, SD =0.76) (t(15) = 2.32, p = .0345). Although the MSLQ items did not yield a statistically significant result, studentswith complex investigations tended to have greater intrinsic goal orientation, self-efficacy, metacognition, criticalthinking and help seeking.ICLS 2018 Proceedings998© ISLSFigure 1. Differences in affective factors between students with complex or simple investigations.We next examined differences in pre-test scores and expert-like simulation behaviors using Pearson’s correlationcoefficient; while our sample size was too small to do multiple regression analysis, correlations demonstrate thatlinear relationships may exist between these variables. We first compared students who pursued informationoutside their investigation and those who did not. Information seeking is known as an expert practice in both SCIsimulations (Peffer & Ramezani, Under Review) and in authentic engineering tasks (Atman et al., 2007). Nineparticipants chose to seek outside information, while eight did not explore information beyond what the simulationprovided. When compared with pre-test metrics, there were no significant differences between those who soughtout information versus those who did not. However, when looking at the spectrum of actions, the number ofinformation-seeking actions are correlated with the pre-test metrics of self-efficacy (r = .514, p = .035). Anotherexpert-like practice, the amount of time spent preparing for investigation, which included time spent reviewingintroductory material in the simulation, exploring information outside the simulation, and devising a hypothesisand testing strategy, was found to be correlated with self-efficacy (r = .514, p = .035), metacognition (r = .487, p= .047), and overall science identity (r = .512, p = .036) (Figure 2).Figure 2. Correlation between Preparation Time (Minutes) and Pre-Test Metric ScoresConclusions and discussionWhile data collection is still in progress, we observed that students who view themselves as competent at science,as seen in both their MSLQ scores and their views of being a “science person,” tend to demonstrate more expertlike investigations and consequently may have a more sophisticated EASI. Although the MSLQ data is notstatistically significant with our current sample size, it suggests that students with more complex investigationsare scoring higher across learning behavior categories. This is consistent with our identity metric, which wasstatistically significant. This suggests that students who identify as science people, in spite of not pursuing degreesin the sciences, have more sophisticated or expert-like investigations and potentially more sophisticated EASI.For this study, we only examined three specific practices that may indicate a more sophisticated EASI:pursuing a complex investigative strategy, seeking outside information, and spending time preparing a hypothesisbefore moving on to the investigation stage of the simulation. Ongoing work will investigate the relationship ofaffective factors to other measures of expertise in SCI, such as the use of tentative language (Peffer & Kyle, 2017).Future work will expand existing statistical models of EASI (Peffer & Ramezani, Under Review) to include theseaffective factors. One limitation of this study is that participation was voluntary and students who are alreadyconfident in their science ability or who identify as science people may have been more likely to sign up toICLS 2018 Proceedings999© ISLSparticipate. Repeating this study with a different method of recruitment, such as by using SCI simulations asassignments in non-majors’ science classrooms, may increase participation and reduce possible selection bias.Additionally, both identity formation and epistemological beliefs about science are dynamic processes. Since datawas collected in one meeting only, we have a static view of their identity and EASI. If a student completes multipleSCI simulations, it may be that their identity, science practices, and EASI may morph over time.This work describes our preliminary attempt to connect expert-like practices as a proxy for sophisticatedEASI with affective factors such as self-efficacy and science identity. Assessing epistemological beliefs aboutscience via practices in authentic inquiry, and the relationship of both to affective factors may provide novelinsight into how students understand science, and consequently improve overall science teaching. If students viewthemselves as science people, or are motivated to learn science, are they more expert-like in their practices becausethey seek out more science opportunities and may therefore have been exposed to more science experiences? Ifso, perhaps encouraging a science identity may be a pedagogical focus to encourage the development ofsophisticated epistemological beliefs about science. It may be that adoption of a science identity and gaining selfefficacy and motivation towards science is necessary to attain sophisticated epistemological beliefs andconsequently science literacy. Since this work was done with non-science majors, perhaps these affective factorsare critical for the formation of overall science literacy for all students, not just science majors who seem naturallyinclined to their respective disciplines.In conclusion, this manuscript builds on our previous work that positions SCI simulations as a methodfor assessing epistemological beliefs as seen via practices in authentic science inquiry. We extend our previouswork to include affective measures which could influence practices in the simulation, epistemological beliefs, orboth. Although additional work is needed, this work highlights a novel method for how technology can beleveraged and used in combination with existing metrics to better understand difficult to measure constructs andconsequently improve educational practice.ReferencesAtman, C. J., Adams, R. S., Cardella, M. E., Turns, J., Mosborg, S., & Saleem, J. (2007). Engineering designprocesses: A comparison of students and expert practitioners. Journal of Engineering Education, 96(4),359-379. doi:10.1002/j.2168-9830.2007.tb00945.xChinn, C. A., & Malhotra, B. A. (2002). Epistemologically authentic inquiry in schools: A theoretical frameworkfor evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86(2), 175-218.Credé, M., & Phillips, L. A. (2011). A meta-analytic review of the motivated strategies for learning questionnaire.Learning and Individual Differences, 21(4), 337-346. doi:10.1016/j.lindif.2011.03.002Deng, F., Chen, D., Tsai, C., & Chai, C. S. (2011). Students' views of the nature of science: A critical review ofresearch. Science Education, 95(6), 961-999.Godwin, A., Potvin, G., Hazari, Z., & Lock, R. (2016). Identity, Critical Agency, and Engineering: An AffectiveModel for Predicting Engineering as a Career Choice. Journal of Engineering Education, 105(2), 312–340.Pintrich, P. R., Smith, D. A., Garcia, T., & McKeachie, W. J. (1993). Reliability and predictive validity of theMotivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ). Educational and psychologicalmeasurement, 53(3), 801-813.Peffer, M.E., Ramezani, N. (Under Review). Journal of Research in Science Teaching.Peffer, M. E., & Kyle, K. (2017). Assessment of language in authentic science inquiry reveals putative differencesin epistemology. In Proceedings of the Seventh International Learning Analytics & KnowledgeConference (pp. 138-142). ACM.Peffer, M. E., Beckler, M. L., Schunn, C., Renken, M., & Revak, A. (2015). Science classroom inquiry (SCI)simulations: a novel method to scaffold science learning. PloS one, 10(3), e0120638.Sandoval, W. A., Greene, J. A., & Bråten, I. (2016). Understanding and promoting thinking about knowledge:Origins, issues, and future directions of research on epistemic cognition. Review of Research inEducation, 40(1), 457-496.Sandoval, W. A., & Redman, E. H. (2015). The contextual nature of scientists’ views of theories, experimentation,and their coordination. Science & Education, 24(9), 1079-1102.Sandoval, W. A. (2005). Understanding students' practical epistemologies and their influence on learning throughinquiry. Science Education, 89(4), 634-656.Tsai, C. C., Ho, H. N. J., Liang, J. C., & Lin, H. M. (2011). Scientific epistemic beliefs, conceptions of learningscience and self-efficacy of learning science among high school students. Learning andInstruction, 6(21), 757-769.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1000© ISLS