Uncovering Students’ Ecological Knowledge ResourcesLana M. Minshew, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, minshew@live.unc.eduKelly J. Barber-Lester, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, kelba@live.unc.eduSharon Derry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, derry@email.unc.eduJanice L. Anderson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, anderjl@email.unc.eduAbstract: This paper reports a cognitive resource analysis of middle school students’understanding of energy flow and matter cycling in ecosystems. We discuss students’resources that we uncovered through our analyses, highlighting how those that emergedthrough analysis of the second cohort of students extend our previous work. Five major topicareas of cognitive resources were identified in one cohort and confirmed in a second.Keywords: knowledge in pieces, design-based research, science, misconceptions, resourcesIntroductionThis project focused on the scientific domain of ecosystems, with a special interest in how students understandand think about the flow of energy and cycling of matter. We emphasized the role of prior knowledge inlearning and accepted scientific inaccuracies as characteristic of students’ initial phases of learning (Smith et al.,1994). Our Knowledge in Pieces (KiP) framework, representing a class of learning theories (Hammer, Elby,Scherr & Redish, 2005; diSessa, 1988; Clark & Linn, 2003), takes a fragmented approach to describing studentknowledge. Students’ possess knowledge fragments that some call phenomenological primitives (diSessa,1988), resources (Hammer et al., 2005) or simply ideas (Clark & Linn, 2003).In previous work, we explored how a KiP framework can be used to examine students’ understandingsin this domain (Minshew, Barber-Lester, Derry, & Anderson, 2017). In contrast to misconceptions literature,which suggests that learning is a process of replacing misconceptions with expert knowledge (Smith et al.,1994), a KiP perspective allows for the reorganization of resources. In other words, resources are not necessarilyextinguished but reorganized when students learn scientific concepts. In this study, we extended a previousanalysis (Minshew et al., 2017) to a second cohort of students. The research question was: 1) What resourcesrelated to flow of energy and cycling of matter in ecosystems do students in Cohort Two bring with them to theclassroom and how do those resources compare to those exhibited by the students in Cohort One?Research designParticipants were sixth graders (n = 208) at a rural STEM-focused middle school in the southeastern UnitedStates. Data was collected over two academic years, 2015-2016 (Cohort One) and 2016-2017 (Cohort Two).Our initial analysis (Minshew et al., 2017) based on data from Cohort One was extended by this analysis of datafrom Cohort Two. Each year a representative sample of 12 students were interviewed before engaging in theCompost Unit. In interviews students explained models they constructed representing their understandings aboutenergy and matter in ecosystems. Interviews were analyzed qualitatively through successive steps of coding,creation of data matrices and summaries.ResultsOur analysis of Cohort Two students’ interview data revealed that they had resources in the same major topicareas (food chains, decomposers, waste, energy, and matter) initially found in Cohort One, providingconfirmatory evidence for resources identified in our initial analysis. Analysis of data from Cohort Two alsorevealed five specific resources that were not initially noted in our analysis of Cohort One. Table 1 provides anoverview of both discovered and confirmed resources. Resources in Table 1 are organized by major topic area;columns on the right side indicate in which cohorts a resource was discovered (), confirmed () or absent(blank).Conclusions and implicationsOur study focused on the knowledge that students brought with them concerning energy flow and matter cyclingin ecosystems. Analysis of students’ interviews from a model-based assessment task uncovered resources in fivemajor topic areas. These had been previously identified in Cohort One and confirmed by this analysis in CohortTwo. Students in Cohort Two expressed additional specific resources in the topic areas of energy and matterICLS 2018 Proceedings1703© ISLSwhich were not initially identified in Cohort One. However, a post-hoc analysis revealed that some of thesewere present in Cohort One.The use of a KiP framework to examine student understanding is novel in the science domain of energyand matter in ecosystem. This resource-oriented view of student understanding pushes both researchers andeducators to focus on the wealth of experiences that students bring with them to the science classroom. Theseresources are potentially powerful and important assets to be engaged in the pursuit of advancing scientificunderstanding.Table 1: Identified resources related to flow of energy and cycling of matter for both Cohorts One & TwoTopic AreaFood ChainsDecomposersWasteEnergyMatterResourceThere is a relationship between sun/sunlight and producersAnimals eat other animalsAnimals eat plantsDecomposers are a part of the food chainBacteria, worms, and mushrooms are decomposersDecomposers break things downAnimals and humans generate wasteSome waste can be broken down and is connected to soilThe sun is central to energyRain and clouds are connected to energyOrganisms need energyPlants need energy to make their own food/perform photosynthesisAnimals eat to get energyElectricity is connected to energyDecomposers get energy from breaking down dead organisms ororganic wasteEnergy flows through an ecosystemEverything is matter/matter takes up spaceMatter exists in different statesThere is organic and inorganic matterCohort1Cohort2ReferencesClark, D., and Linn, M. (2003). Designing for Knowledge Integration: The Impact of Instructional Time. TheJournal of the Learning Sciences. 12(4), 451-493.diSessa, A. A. (1988). Knowledge in pieces. In G. Forman & P. B. Pufall (Eds.) Constructivism in the ComputerAge (pp. 49-70). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Hammer, D., Elby, A., Scherr, R. E., & Redish, E. F. (2005). Resources, framing, and transfer. In J. P. Mestre(Ed.) Transfer of Learning from a Modern Multidisciplinary Perspective (89-119). Greenwich, CT:Information Age Publishing.Minshew, L. M., Barber-Lester, K. J., Derry, S. J., & Anderson, J. L. (2017). Leveraging students’ knowledge toadapt science curricular to local context. Educational Technology & Society, 20(4), 205-218.Smith, J. P., diSessa, A. A. & Roschelle, J. (1994). Misconceptions reconceived: A constructivist analysis ofknowledge in transition. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(2), 115-163. Doi:10.1207/s15327809jls0302_1AcknowledgementsThis is based upon work supported by the National Science foundation under Grant No. DRL1418044. Anyopinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors anddo not necessarily reflect the views of National Science Foundation.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1704© ISLS