The Santa Trap: When Scaffolding is Not Enough to ChallengeTeachers’ Pervasive BeliefsChandra Hawley Orrill, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, corrill@umassd.eduRachael Eriksen Brown, Pennsylvania State University-Abington, reb37@psu.eduAbstract: In this poster, we examine how middle school teachers performed on a task adaptedfrom a study with high school students. We asked 32 middle grades teachers to complete athink-aloud protocol that included the task with three scaffolds to determine whether teachersperformed differently than students.Keywords: Proportional Reasoning, Teacher Knowledge, MathematicsMajor issue addressed and potential significanceResearch has shown that students often use linear reasoning in nonlinear situations. In one such study, De Bock,et al. (2002) examined students’ reasoning about the Santa Task, which provides two images of Santa: one issmall and the other is similar but dilated to be three times taller. The task asks how much paint will be needed topaint the taller Santa, which is 168 cm tall, if 6 ml was needed to paint the smaller Santa, which is 56 cm tall. Intheir study, De Bock et al. posed the Santa Task with scaffolds to help students (ages 12-13 and 15-16) attend tothe area relationship. The researchers found that two students were initially able to answer the Santa taskcorrectly. Even with the five scaffolds, only 32 of the 40 participants were able to determine a correct answer.Because we are interested in teachers’ knowledge of the mathematics they teach, we wondered howteachers would respond to a version of this task. We modified the task scaffolds to be teacher appropriate.Scaffold 1 presented teachers with two different answers from the students in the class: 18 ml and 54 ml andasked the teacher how the students with the wrong answer might be reasoning about the task. In Scaffold 2, weprovided the Santa images with rectangular boxes drawn around each. We asked teachers whether this would bea productive approach. In Scaffold 3, the hypothetical student simplified the task by treating the originalquantity of paint used as 1 tube and used that to find the new quantity. Again, we asked whether this would beuseful for students. In this poster, we examine the teachers’ engagement with this set of tasks and itsimplications for teachers.Despite the importance of proportional reasoning in the curriculum, little is known about how teachersreason about proportions (Lamon, 2007). There is a growing body of research focused on teachers’understanding of proportions, covariation (e.g., Thompson et al., 2017), and the relationship between teachers’understanding of proportions as it relates to their teaching (Copur-Gencturk, 2015). We add to this literature byexamining how teachers understand one relationship with a goal of improving teacher development.Theoretical and methodological approachesWe work from the knowledge in pieces perspective (diSessa 2006), which posits that understandings develop asfine-grained knowledge resources that are refined and connected through our experiences. From this view,developing expertise requires creating connections between knowledge resources as well as creating moreknowledge resources. Thus, learning needs to be comprised of both knowledge resource development andknowledge resource linking opportunities.To study teachers’ understanding of whether proportional reasoning was appropriate for this task, weincluded the task in a think-aloud protocol sent to 32 teachers from four states. Their responses were capturedusing Livescribe pens that allowed us to capture both their voices and their written inscriptions. Data weretranscribed verbatim. For this paper, we considered whether a participant’s response was correct, after whichscaffold each participant’s reasoning became correct, and what resources were used in solving the task.Major findingsSimilar to the original study of high school students, teachers in this study were misled by the task. Of the 32participants, nine (28%) (correctly) used an area-interpretation from the outset. Three teachers found their errorin scaffold 1 and corrected their responses, none corrected their responses in scaffold 2, and one corrected theirresponses in scaffold 3. By the end of the task, only 13 (40%) of the 32 teachers solved the task using areainterpretation rather than a height-only interpretation.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1481© ISLSTeachers’ abilities to correctly reason about the Santa situation was critical to their ability to makesense of the student work presented. Teachers who were reasoning mathematically correctly had a much higherlikelihood of making sense of the students’ responses than those who were not using correct reasoning. Forexample, in Scaffold 1, all 13 teachers who used area reasoning were able to identify the mistake the studentshad made. In contrast, none of the teachers using height-only reasoning did this. In Scaffold 2, 12 of the 13 areareasoning teachers believed that drawing the frame around the Santa would be useful. Many noted that it wouldhelp students see both height and width. Of the height-only reasoners, six (32%) recognized that the frameshelped to show area, but this did not change their thinking. Four of the 19 height-only teachers (21%) saw theframe as highlighting one dimension (e.g., height), and six rejected (32%) the frames saying the framesinappropriately focused students on area, which they perceived to be incorrect. Scaffold 3 was harder overall.Among teachers (correctly) attending to area, nine (69%) believed that using easier numbers was appropriateand usable for their students. Two were okay with the hypothetical student using the approach, but would notwant their own students to use it and three teachers (23%) were unable to make sense of the situation. Incontrast, none of the height-only reasoners believed this was a useful approach. Eight of the 19 (42%) pointedout that it yielded incorrect answers and six (32%) could not make sense of what was happening or wereunclear. Interestingly, four (21%) of the teachers rejected this approach because they believed that one cannotreason about tubes as the unit in this way.Conclusions and implicationsConsistent with DeBock et al. (2002), participants in this study were lured to interpret the Santa Task as beingabout one dimension. As mentioned above, four of the 19 height-only reasoners rejected using a simpler task(Scaffold 3). Data suggests that the teachers did not recognize that this was an appropriate approach because 9 :1 is the same relationship whether it is describing 9 tubes to 1 tube or 9 ml to 1 ml. The teachers’ approach tothe task itself suggests that teachers are not making appropriate sense of the task. This adds to literaturesuggesting that teachers need additional opportunities in determining the nature of tasks (e.g., Izsák & Jacobson,2017). Finally, teachers who approached the task incorrectly were unable to follow student reasoning in thethree scaffolds. The main implication of this is that it suggests teachers’ abilities to make sense of studentthinking is tied to students’ abilities to produce expected answers.ReferencesCopur-Gencturk, Y. (2015). The effects of change in mathematical knowledge on teaching: A longitudinal studyof teachers’ knowledge and instruction. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 46, 280-330.De Bock, K., Van Dooren, W., Janssens, D., & Verschaffel, L. (2002). Improper use of linear reasoning: An indepth study of the nature and irresistibility of secondary school students’ errors. Educational Studies inMathematics, 503, 311-334.diSessa, A. A. (2006). A history of conceptual change research: Threads and fault lines. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.),The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 265-282). New York: Cambridge UniversityPress.Izsák, A., & Jacobson, E. (2017). Preservice teachers’ reasoning about relationships that are and are notproportional: A knowledge-in-pieces account. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 48(3),300-339.Lamon, S. (2007). Rational numbers and proportional reasoning: Toward a theoretical framework for research.In F. K. Lester (Ed.), Second handbook of research on mathematics teaching and learning (pp.629667). Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.Thompson, P. W., Hatfield, N. J., Yoon, H., Joshua, S., & Byerly, C. (2017). Covariational reasoning amongU.S. and South Korean secondary mathematics teachers. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 48, 95111. doi: 10.1016/j.mathb.2017.08.001AcknowledgmentsThe work reported here was funded by the National Science Foundation under grants DRL-1621290 and DRL1054170. The opinions expressed here are those of the researchers and do not necessarily reflect those of theNSF.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1482© ISLS