“We Were on the Same Level”: Young Engineering ResearchersTaking Up Agentive Positions in a Diverse Learning CommunityWendy Wakefield, Arizona State University, wendy.wakefield@asueduMichelle E. Jordan, Arizona State University, michelle.e.jordan@asu.eduMia DeLaRosa, Alhambra Elementary School District, mdelarosa222@gmail.comAbstract: This study reports on the design and enactment of a summer engineering researchexperience for high school students focused on increasing interest and knowledge and removingbarriers to participation and preparedness for underrepresented students through expansiveframing of program experiences and opportunities for consequential engagement. A cadre oftwelve outgoing eighth-grade students drawn from one Title 1 district learning to participate inphotovoltaics engineering research and collaboratively designing a community solarengineering project over a period of six full-days. These Youth Scholars were intentionallyembedded within a larger cohort of summer research participants including undergraduates,teachers, and international graduate students. Though all participants were novice in solarenergy engineering, all were positioned as both learner and contributor. This design-basedresearch study addressed the question: What were the affordances and constraints of beingpositioned as a learner and a contributor in a diverse cohort of novice engineering researchers?IntroductionThis study reports on the design and enactment of a model of a summer engineering research experience for highschool students focused on increasing interest and knowledge and removing barriers to participation andpreparedness for underrepresented students in engineering. Specifically, the project aimed to support a cohort ofoutgoing eighth-grade students drawn from a Title 1 district with high proportions of Hispanic students, apopulation historically marginalized in engineering (Gibbons, 2009). Twelve students participated in the programtwo days a week over three weeks (six full-day sessions), learning to participate in PV engineering andcollaboratively designing a community solar engineering project that was the core activity of the program.By design, and taking a situative approach to fostering learning (Greeno & Engestrom, 2014), theseYouth Scholars (YS) were embedded within a larger cohort of summer research participants that includedundergraduate students trying to become engineers, local teachers developing learning to do research and createcurriculum for their classrooms, older high school students exploring engineering as a possible major, andinternational graduate students taking on responsibilities in new labs, along with the YS working on theircommunity solar project. Though all these sub-groups had different goals for their program participation, they allshared an interest in solar energy engineering as well as the experience of working on solar energy projects whilebeing mentored by established graduate student-mentors from photovoltaic engineering research labs. Thesummer research experience participants represent differing levels of professional competence, but eachparticipant must navigate as a learner and a contributor to the cohort and to the field, negotiating meaningfulinvolvement in the PV engineering community while being supported by like and diverse peers and mentors.For each of these sub-groups, three focal activities organized their program experience: working on theirown meaningful projects, receiving feedback from other cohort members, and giving feedback to others. Throughthese activities, all cohort members, including the YS, were positioned as both learners and contributors, not onlyas consumers of knowledge, but also as producers of knowledge (Ito et al., 2014) with the moral position, rightsand responsibilities, to discursively produce their engineering selves (Davies & Harre, 1990). The purpose of thisintentional positioning was to facilitate a support system where participants could draw on the affordances of theirown and others’ diverse perspectives and backgrounds in order to help one another move forward theconsequential work with which they were engaged (Page, 2010). Although many learning scientists investigatethe affordances for learning of fostering communities of learners in relatively homogenous groups (e.g., Engle &Conant, 2002), there is little research exploring the possible benefits of fostering learning relationships in suchdiverse cohorts.The current study was part of a larger research project investigating the designed-for and emergentpatterns of relationships among participants and their influence on trajectories on engineering pathways. Here wefocus specifically on the YS sub-cadre of this diverse cohort. Taking a design-based research approach, weexamine the meaning the YS made of their participation in the program, particularly of their interactions withtheir older cohort members, and of their consequential engagement (Gresalfi, Barab, Siyahhan, & Christensen,2009) in a variety of PV engineering activities. In particular, we were interested in the following research question:ICLS 2018 Proceedings887© ISLSWhat were the affordances and constraints of being positioned as a learner and a contributor in a diverse cohortof novice engineering researchers?Membership in a diverse cohort as an innovation to address barriers to engineeringThrough a consideration of the complex interaction of factors that often inhibit STEM trajectories, the projectcomponents provide a sustained cohort-based network that we anticipate is needed to broaden the participation ofunderrepresented students in engineering. Despite increasing emphasis on the importance of STEM-related fieldsby the National Science Foundation and other national organizations, the number of U.S. students pursuing STEMcollege degrees and careers has declined in recent decades (National Center for Education Statistics, 2015),especially for underrepresented demographic groups who have historically been excluded within STEM, namely,women and minorities (Joyce & Farenga, 2000). These disparities carry over to post-secondary education, whereHispanic students’ college entrance SAT math scores and their persistence rates in STEM fall well below that oftheir White counterparts (Landivar, 2013). Multiple barriers contribute to Hispanic students’ underperformanceand underrepresentation in STEM domains. Inadequate K-12 academic preparation is a major factor (Museus,Palmer, Davis, & Maramba, 2011). A large proportion of K-12 ethnic minority students are raised in low incomeareas and do not get exposure in underserved schools to rigorous educational experiences or adequate math andscience courses that comprise preparation needed for college STEM degree paths (e.g., Adelman, 2006).Broadening underrepresented students’ participation in engineering requires effective K-12 innovationsbecause many such students self-select out of engineering-related learning opportunities and career trajectoriesbefore entering college (Museus et al., 2011). More broadly, the majority of college students who major in STEMfields make that choice during high school. That choice is related to a growing interest in mathematics and sciencethat develops as early as middle school (Maltese & Tai, 2011). Thus, K-12 formal and informal educationexperiences need to provide equitable opportunities and outcomes in three key ways: increase interest inengineering, promote knowledge in STEM content areas and opportunities for participation in engineeringpractices, and develop awareness of career pathways to engineering fields (Svihla & Petrosino, 2008). It is criticalthat learning-teaching designs aimed at broadening participation begin in high school in order to nurture learners’initial interest and support their commitment to pursuing STEM learning and STEM careers.We argue that current educational approaches to developing historically underrepresented students’interest and preparation in engineering through informal learning experiences are limited in at least three ways.First, most programs consist of one-day workshops (e.g., Molina-Gaudo, Baldassarri, Villarroya, & Cerezo, 2010)or short-term afterschool club experiences (e.g., Nugent, Barker, Grandgenett, & Adamchuk, 2010). Second,current diffuse approaches introduce multiple engineering fields in surface fashion with few opportunities forrigorous preparation or deep, sustained connection to a single field. Finally, programs targeted at demographicsthat relate to risk or underrepresentation frequently fail to recognize that engineering cultures are characterized byparticular ways of doing and “being an engineer” (Godfrey & Parker, 2010, p. 9) that may be at odds with thecultural practices and identities of historically underrepresented learners (Wilson-Lopez, Mejia, Hasbun,& Kasun, 2016). Thus, they fail to consider cultural connections that facilitate meaningful bridge-building. Forexample, many Hispanic groups are characterized by collectivistic orientation, familism, and an emphasis oncommunity (vs. individual) outcomes (Knight et al., 2009). Accordingly, “helping” professions may provide moresalient career pathways for many Hispanic students compared to science and technology. Yet, engineeringprograms for youth rarely offer experiences that highlight these aspects of students’ identities and experiences.Given the above, there is a need for studies that test sustained educational models aimed at fosteringadolescents’ interest in engineering and other STEM disciplines, participation in STEM opportunities, andpreparedness to pursue engineering career trajectories. Moreover, there is a need to understand the impacts oflonger-term, after school education experiences that take a focused approach, promoting deep knowledge throughconsequential engagement in meaningful projects, and rich social relationships within a single field (e.g., PV),while also creating a culture of support among familiar and like peers. Finally, there is a need to examine theimpacts of extending this culture of support and build a community of learners that includes those with a diverserange of backgrounds, experiences, interests, and ages. This type of cohort not only approximates the collective,familial orientation of many of these students, but also positions everyone as a learner, everyone as a contributor.Designing for consequential engagement in a diverse cohortHere we explore the affordances and constraints of a summer youth program that attempted to systematicallyaddress the aforementioned barriers and limitations by situating incoming high school students in a diverse cohortof summer research participants, widely varying in their age, education level, and goals for the program, yet allwith limited prior knowledge of PV, all interested in solar energy engineering, and all consequentially engaged(Gresalfi, Barab, Siyahhan, & Christensen, 2009) with authentic engineering research. Our designed innovationICLS 2018 Proceedings888© ISLSof consequential engagement in PV engineering differs greatly from the broad, exploratory overviews of theengineering field common in other engineering education models, and is designed to foster deeper knowledge ofdisciplinary core ideas, crosscutting concepts, and engineering practices, skills, and habits of mind as well as toposition students to learn and contribute in meaningful ways within a diverse cohort (National Academies Press,2009). Further, through expansive framing (Engle, 2006), we sought to help students see themselves as connectedto the past, present, and future of PV and its impact on broader social and environmental issues. We also framedthe students’ project and their participation in the summer program in terms of potentially contributing to the field,providing opportunities to engage with their local communities and other engineers, and as products they couldshare digitally with a much wider audience. It was our belief that integrating this team of young scholars into adiverse cohort of summer engineering researchers would further forward the same goals we were aiming forthrough consequential engagement and expansive framing, to support engineering identities, which we believeare a discursive production (Davies & Harre, 1990), a joint accomplishment between individuals and their socialenvironments (Hand & Gresalfi, 2015).MethodDesign research begins with the belief that research must attend carefully to the context of learning in order toproduce knowledge that can have a positive, and potentially transformative impact (Barab, Dodge, Thomas,Jackson, & Tuzun, 2007). Thus, design researchers attempt to “engineer” learning and teaching processes andsystematically studies these processes to iteratively illuminate and refine how a designed educational innovationinfluences learning and teaching systems (Brown, 1992). Rather than “fixed packages of strategies with readilymeasurable outcomes,” design research tends towards “open-ended social or socially embedded experiments thatinvolve ongoing mutual engagement” (Gutiérrez & Penuel, 2014, p. 20). Such was the stance we took in trying toascertain the meaning these youth scholars made of their participation in a diverse cohort and the affordances andconstraints of being positioned as both learners and contributors. Design-based studies take a variety ofmethodological turns. Here, we took an ethnographic approach much in the style of learning scientists concernedwith fostering STEM pathways for youth (e.g. Calabrese Barton et al., 2013, Rahm & Moore, 2016).Context and participantsThe context of this study was a summer research experience program at an engineering research center embeddedin a university in the southwestern US. Within this context, twelve outgoing eighth-grade students (6 boys and 6girls) participated as Youth Scholars, traveling to the university twice a week for three weeks. These youthscholars had recently completed eighth-grade in one of two middle schools in a large urban district serving amajority Hispanic student population (94% non-Caucasian; 93% low SES, 17% English language learners). Themajority of YS participants were Hispanic; half the cadre reported their primary home language as other-thanEnglish. Attendance at the six full-day sessions was high (89%). YS participants were recruited based on theirdemonstrated academic proficiency and interest in STEM. All three authors, one research faculty member, onemiddle school teacher, and one graduate student, participated as facilitators in the program and also contributedto the program’s design.The central activity of the YS program was designing a community solar energy engineering project.Facilitated by a local middle school science teacher, the YS participants scoped and framed a problem of interestto them: promoting solar energy in their community through a co-op membership model, with energy drawn froma field of solar panels that would simultaneously provide shade structures in five local parks. Participants collectedsurvey data from members of their local community and the PV engineering community, and conducted interviewswith PV experts. Their project culminated in a video project sharable with wider audiences. Through theseactivities, we intentionally sought to recognize and honor strengths these Hispanic adolescents brought to thesummer program, including, family, community, peer, and popular culture funds of knowledge (Wilson-Lopez etal., 2016).The YS program was embedded in a larger summer research cohort that included 11 undergraduatestudents, 2 older high school students, 3 international graduate students, and 7 local K-12 teachers. These oldercohort members worked on 9 different photovoltaics research projects, guided by graduate student mentors for 5to 9 weeks. Working with engineering program facilitators, we purposefully designed the summer researchprogram to take advantage of the diversity in this larger cohort (Page, 2010), foster a sense of belonging anddevelop interest and identify that sustain engineering pathways for underrepresented students (Packard, 2015).Thus, we intentionally created participation structures aimed at decreasing potential social hierarchies (e.g., thosedue to age, experience, SES status) and level the playing field among members. In so doing, we hoped to fosterreciprocal relationships among diverse cohort members, thus positioning YS participants as contributingmembers, consequentially engaged in meaningful work in order to foster these engineering identities. For instance,ICLS 2018 Proceedings889© ISLSeach project group presented their work in a weekly cohort lab meeting; all participants presented their work-inprogram and all were taught to take up audience roles (Herrenkohl & Guerra, 1998) in order to offer helpful peercritique (Dannels, 2005). Other activities that were intentionally designed to jointly position the YS as learnersand contributors, and to scaffold their consequential engagement as members of their larger heterogeneous cohortare listed in Table 1.Table 1: How youth scholars were positioned as learners and contributors across the six-day program*Day 1Day 2Day 3Day 4Day 5Day 6Positioned as Learners-Lunch with undergraduates-began scoping their community solarproject, facilitated by teacher-Lunch talk by PV graduate studenton applications of solar-Lunch talk by PV grad on options ofsolar panels for YS project- Kinesthetic astronomy led byteacher participant-Lunch talk by older high schoolstudent on how to find STEMopportunities beyond the program-Lunch talk by PV grad student on hisproject similar to YS project-Lunch talk by older high schoolstudents about how to succeed asentering freshmenPositioned as Contributors-Audience for teacher lesson ideas-Learned how to collect & record data for teacher research projectto prepare for substituting when teachers on a field trip-Lab meeting: presenter & audience roles-Learned how to collect data for teachers’ research project-Learned how to collect & record data for teacher research project-Friday Lab meeting: presenter and audience roles-Gave feedback on teachers’ lesson pilot test, short feedbacktraining, critique form, paired with teachers 2 to 1 for increasedconfidence and peer support-Learned how to collect & record data for teacher project-Collected and recorded data for teacher research project whileteachers were on a field trip-Lab meeting: presenter and audience roles-Feedback to undergraduates on writing project, scaffolded byclose reading, critique form, and paired 2 to 1 paired withundergrads 2 to 1 for increased confidence and peer support*At the end of summer, the YS presented their research to PV engineering scholars and solar energy industryleaders, alongside the older cohort members.Data collection and analysisThis study was part of a larger program of research aimed at interrogating and informing further iterations of thedesign of the summer research program. Data collection took place throughout implementation of the summerprogram and across all cohort members who consented to the study. Data sources included daily survey responses,audio-video recordings and ethnographic field notes of cohort members’ participation in core activities, semistructured interviews to elicit participants’ perspectives (Bogdan & Biklen, 2007; 20-30 minutes), and participantgenerated artifacts (e.g., written feedback, project videos/posters, Google Classroom posts). Initial data analysisprogressed along with data collection, as study team members wrote extended memos and met regularly in orderto capture independent insights about participants and program activities, and to analyze broad patterns acrosspersons, types of cohort members, and events.As the current study focused on the meaning YS participants made of their positioning as learners andcontributors in the larger cohort, closer analysis focused on YSs’ survey responses and transcribed interviews,and data logs of video recordings related to networking activities with the larger cohort. Data from other cohortmembers were used as secondary sources. All three members of the research team iteratively examined dataindividually and met for collective work sessions to interpret the meaning these youth scholars made of theirexperience in this diverse cohort. The team met frequently (and as soon as possible after core events) to comparefield notes and negotiate interpretations of observational and interview data, to analyze and interpret survey data,and to synthesize our understandings relative to project goals. Using constant comparative methods, we sought todetermine patterns across data sources through multiple iterations of examination (Corbin & Strauss,2014). Using interactional analysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995), we identified participation structures andpatterns of activity among diverse participants, paying particular attention to how activities for expansively framed(or not) and to how YS participants were positioned relative to their older cohort members and to PV engineering.We tried to follow the means and consequences (affordances and constraints) of social actions through multiplerounds of listening and viewing audio-video recordings in which YS were engaged with their older cohortmembers, coupled with examination of relevant artifacts. Our interpretations of the meanings that youthparticipants made of these social actions were informed largely through content analyses of their pre and postprogram interviews.ICLS 2018 Proceedings890© ISLSFindingsThrough our analytic process, we surmised that the young engineering researchers in this study made muchmeaning of their experience in this diverse cohort in which they, along with all members, were positioned aslearners and contributors, all consequentially engaging in important engineering work. Specifically, we surmisedthat these scholars came to understand that there is important work to be done in PV engineering, I am capable ofcontributing to that work, and we are all in this together. Furthermore, due to the expansive framing of time andparticipation (Engle, 2006) intentionally designed into this program, the youth participants came to see theprogram simply as a vehicle for the diverse members of the summer cohort to do their work, work that willcontinue past the program. These insights were generated through the confluence of three themes that emergedthrough analysis: authentic membership, difficulty in giving feedback, and developing engineering identities byconsequentially engaging in real, high stakes work, using PV engineering processes and concepts to achievemeaningful goals.On the same level: Authentic membershipThe YS in this study revealed through their participation, interviews, and reflections, that they saw themselves aslegitimate members of this diverse cohort where all participants were explicitly positioned by the program aslearners and contributors. This was especially apparent in an interview segment in which Ryan shared herexperience giving feedback to a teacher, demonstrating how it had given her a new positionality relative toteachers:It was like, they weren’t doing the whole superiority complex. I know - it’s not exactly that, you needcontrol in a classroom. But it was like we were on the same level – because we were! We were learningabout the same thing. So, it was pretty cool.Another YS, Mikki, related her first experience with one of the teachers in the program, saying, “He helpedme…At first, he introduced himself to me…when we did the research or data collection… he made me feel moreconfident about being here…he was one of my favorite people here.”Analysis also indicated that being positioned as sources of critique and feedback, thereby contributing tothe adult cohort members’ learning, was particularly meaningful to these young scholars. Many responded insurveys that providing feedback to the teachers’ instructional plans and the undergraduates’ writing projects wastheir favorite activity on the days that these activities occurred. Audio-video analysis indicated that the studentswere meaningfully engaged in these activities. Not only did video show students participating in the teachers’lessons and attending to instruction, positioned in the traditional learner role, but also giving suggestions,positioning themselves in the contributor role as well. For example, a teacher demonstrated his model for a solarpowered drone, and then asked what the students thought. One student responded that it would be even better ifthe drone could be steered in some way, and then posited a possible design for a steering mechanism. The teacher,intrigued by the idea, positioned himself as a learner to discover more about the student’s ideas. Throughout theremainder of the interaction, the student and teacher flexibly moved between learner and contributor roles,focusing on the goal of improving the lesson in general and design of the drone specifically.Further, through analysis of interviews, we garnered deeper insights about how these young learners sawthemselves as potentially re-positioned relative to their prior positioning to teachers. Ryan connected herexperience to one she might have with a peer her own age:They did a lot of stuff that was easy to understand because they’re used to talking to less [knowledgeable]kids…. But at the same time, it was like talking to a peer about wearing the wrong clothes or something.So it was pretty awesome.In this example, Ryan felt that, while the teachers did well presenting their lessons and making themcomprehensible, as they were used to talking to students, there were things about the lessons that did need to becritiqued. This had the potential to be awkward, and generally would not be something she mentioned to a teacher.However, because of her positioning and being “on the same level” as the teachers, she felt it her duty to point itout, as she would for a peer she felt was in need of her help. It was this re-positioning that she found “prettyawesome.” This was even more evident in another part of her interview. She talked about how she wanted to helpthe teachers improve their lessons, as she recognized that they actually would be implemented with the studentsin these teachers’ classes. Ryan’s view extended past this task as just an assignment for the program, to theexpansive and consequential implications of her work. Mikki shared a similar perspective, “It felt cool. I likedICLS 2018 Proceedings891© ISLSbeing heard... I liked how they asked my opinion in it. I liked how they were like, ‘Okay let’s ask for a student'sperspective, not just our own.’” Through being positioned as a contributor and her growing engineering identity,as well as her established identity as a student, Mikki felt confident that she had something important to say andto contribute to the teachers’ work that would be of worth. She noted the difference in this program, where theteachers did not just rely on their own opinion or the opinion of the other teachers, from other learningenvironments in which she more frequently participated. Being “on the same level” as the other cohort membersallowed her to actually “[be] heard.”Level with me: Difficulty in giving feedbackThe youth scholars’ positioning as contributors of feedback in this diverse cohort was not without its challenges,however. As Linehan and McCarthy (2000) explained, in relation to the positioning of students and teachers,“both students and teachers have a degree of agency in how they position themselves in interactions, but thisagency is interlaced with the expectations and history of the community, the sense of ‘oughtness’” (p. 442).Anticipating students’ possible difficulties with going against this sense of “oughtness” when giving feedback tothose who, in situations outside the program, were generally positioned authority figures, we paired up the youthscholars for these feedback activities. Still, in addition to sharing their positive experiences as peer critiquers forthe teachers and undergraduates in their cohort, many YS also reported the difficulties. Mikki described it as“hard” and Ryan noted, as mentioned previously, that it could be awkward, “like talking to a peer about wearingthe wrong clothes or something.” This seemed to be especially true of the process of reviewing the undergraduates’writing project, and then meeting with them to give feedback. In the audio recording of the Ryan, Mikki, andJaxon’s meeting to give feedback to an undergraduate on her online article, Ryan began with saying that the articlewas engaging, but complicated and that the “big words were threatening.” Ryan further suggested that theabundance of these words could discourage the readers who might “scroll down instead of getting into it.” Jaxonagreed, suggesting adding a glossary to explain the words. However, when the undergraduate then explained thather article was not really targeting a younger audience, Ryan responded with “It seems very professional. It’sperfect.” Similarly, other youth scholars, who made many annotations of possible improvements or changes onthe written copies, did not share their written comments in their discussion with the undergraduate to whom theywere offering feedback. Further investigation is needed to determine the specific factors involved in this reluctanceto give feedback face to face with the undergraduates, and whether, as “older college students” they eitherpositioned themselves or were positioned in a way that discouraged feedback from “young high school students.”Leveling up: Consequentially engaging in real, high stakes workIn addition to the youth scholars’ feelings of being authentic cohort members, we found much evidence that theysaw their involvement as real, high stakes work, and that they saw themselves as consequential contributors tothat work. Returning to Ryan’s comment that the youth and teachers in the program were “on the same level”, weassert that this did not indicate that the teachers in the program talked down to the youth's level. Rather, Ryanindicated in her comment that they were all scholars together, and “all learning the same things”. Therefore, whenembedded in this summer program environment in which everyone was positioned as a learner and a contributorto the important work of engineering research and its consequential implications, the level and rigor of engagementramped up and many of these youth scholars responded by also “leveling up.”As further evidence of this, in their final interviews, all youth scholars identified specific, criticalcontributions they had personally made to their collective project of creating a viable design for using solar energyin their community and developing a short video to explain it. For instance, Mikki discussed her work on thePowerPoint, and noted that it “took me hours. I was up at 2 in the morning.” Similarly, Jaxon shared that he haddone all the math - for the financial and energy information in their video - at home, “so it took until one o’clock[in the morning].” There was no programmatic expectation that the YS work outside the hours they participatedin the program. Many of the students simply undertook intentional action, interrogating the usefulness ofengineering concepts and processes to move forward a project they believed in. As Jaxon reasoned,“I just persevered...because I knew that if I kept doing it, eventually I would get it right. Like if I gaveup on the math, we wouldn't have the statistics and our presentation wouldn't be as strong. Now we knowhow much it is going to cost and how much energy it is going to save…[and] it makes our presentationmuch more powerful.”Each time Jaxon discussed the group’s video presentation during the interview, he did so in the context of what itwould be used for after the program. In this case, he was referring to the importance of making it “much moreICLS 2018 Proceedings892© ISLSpowerful” for the people they would be sharing it with in the future: families, community members and leaders,other students and school leaders, and an online audience.By the end of the program, Ryan demonstrated “leveling up” and owning the responsibility of workingwith others to develop solutions to consequential problems. She also demonstrated growing acceptance of herengineering identity. During her interview, she explained:My definition of an engineering is someone who improves a solution or creates a solution - working withothers to create a solution that benefits a large number of others, or even a small number of others, soyeah. So yeah, I guess I do [think of myself as an engineer].In their interviews at the beginning of the program, most students identified engineering as something that youdid after going to school to become an engineer and choosing that as your career. However, Ryan is an exampleof how that perception changed for many of the YS in the time they were in the summer program. Her focus onimproving or creating solutions to benefit either large or small groups of people demonstrates her acceptance ofour expansive framing of photovoltaics. Further, she felt that the activities she and the other YS were engaged inwere consequential and allowed them the chance to participate in a way that would benefit others.SignificanceThis study sought to interpret what meaning the members of a YS cadre made of their experiences in a summerPV engineering research experience designed to support underrepresented youths’ trajectories on engineeringpathways through expansive framing of program experiences and opportunities for consequential engagementconsequential engagement in a diverse cohort. Of the emergent themes, two of them are positive, while one hasroom for growth. The authors found this innovation to be powerful in the way of developing engineering identity;the YS participants felt a strong sense of belonging to their cohort as learners and contributors. The examplespresented are just a small representation of the many participants who demonstrated their ability to expansivelyframe their contributions. Several YS recognized that their engagement was consequential not only for their oldercohort members, but potentially for a wider audience in the world, the students who would encounter the teachers’lessons, the public audience who would read the undergraduate’s projects, members of their own community whomight benefit from their community solar engineering research project. Another significant finding was the YSparticipants’ decision to level up, and accept their roles as both learners and contributors, rather than shrinkingaway or freezing in the face of uncertainty elicited from being positioned by program participation structures asnot only students and learners, but also as key contributors through their own work and feedback on others’ work.Coupled with their explicit expressions of feeling like engineers or future engineers, we take this leveling up asevidence of these young scholars’ developing sense of belonging to the field of PV engineering as contributingmembers.However, our findings also reveal the need to provide more scaffolding when asking the YS to givefeedback to adults. This task turned out to be more intimidating than the authors expected, even though the YSparticipants gave feedback in assigned pairs or groups in our attempt to provide added support and bolsterconfidence in this activity. These findings provide us with a both a foundation to build on for future iterations ofthis designed summer research experience in our efforts to further engage learners from populations historicallyunderrepresented in the consequential work of engineering. They further contribute to theoretical understandingsof consequential engagement and expansive framing by showing how these principles are applicable to examiningthe affordances and constraints of positioning underrepresented youth in a diverse cohort of novice engineeringlearners.ReferencesAdelman, C. (2006). The toolbox revisited: Paths to degree completion from high school through college.Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.Barab, S. A., Dodge, T., Thomas, M. K., Jackson, C., & Tuzun, H. (2007). Our designs and the social agendasthey carry. JLS, 16, 263–305.Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. JLS, 2, 141-178.Bogdan, R., & Biklen, S. (2007). Qualitative research for education: An introduction to theory and practice.Boston: Allyn and Bacon.Calabrese Barton, A., Kang, H., Tan, E., O’Neill, T. B., Bautista-Guerra, J., & Brecklin, C. (2013). Crafting afuture in science: Tracing middle school girls’ identity work over time and space. AERJ, 50, 37–75.Corbin, J. & Strauss, A. L. (2014). Basics of qualitative research. Sage.ICLS 2018 Proceedings893© ISLSDannels, D. P. (2005). Performing tribal rituals: A genre analysis of “crits” in design studios. Comm. Ed., 54, 136160.Davies, B., & Harré, R. (1990). Positioning: The discursive production of selves. J. for theory of soc. behav. 20, 4363.Engle, R. A. (2006). Framing interactions to foster generative learning: A situative explanation of transfer in acommunity of learners classroom. JLS, 15, 451–498.Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cog. & Instr. 20(4). 399-483.Gibbons,M.T.(2009).Engineeringbythenumbers.ASEE,http://www.Asee.org/publications/profiles/upload/2008ProfileEng. Pdf. Washington DC.Godfrey, E., & Parker, L. (2010). Mapping the cultural landscape in engineering education. JEE, 99, 5–22.Greeno, J. G., & Engestrom, Y. (2014). Learning in activity. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook ofthe learning sciences (pp. 128-148). New York: Cambridge University Press.Gresalfi, M., Barab, S., Siyahhan, S., & Christensen, T. (2009). Virtual worlds, conceptual understanding, andme: Designing for consequential engagement. On the Horizon, 17, 21-34.Gutierrez, K. & Penuel, W. (2014), Relevance to practice as a criterion for rigor, Ed. Researcher, 43(1), 19-23.Hand, V. & Gresalfi, M. (2015). The joint accomplishment of identity. Educational Psychologist, 50(3), 190-203.Herrenkohl, L. R., & Guerra, M. R. (1998). Participant structures, scientific Discourse, and student engagementin fourth grade. Cognition and Instruction, 16, 431-473.Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., Schor, J., Sefton-Green, J., & Watkins,K. (2013). Connected Learning: An agenda for research and design. Irvine, CA: Digital Media andLearningResearchHub.Availableat:http://dmlhub.net/wpcontent/uploads/files/Connected_Learning_report.pdfJordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction Analysis: Foundations and Practice. JLS, 4, 39–103.Joyce, B. A., & Farenga, S. J. (2000). Young girls in science: Academic ability, perceptions and futureparticipation in science. Roeper Review, 22(4), 261-262.Knight, G. P., Gonzales, N. A., Saenz, D. S., Bonds, D. D., Germán, M., Deardorff, J., & Updegraff, K. A. (2009).The Mexican American cultural values scale for adolescents and adults. J. of Early Adolesc., 3, 444-481.Landivar, L. C. (2013). Disparities in STEM employment by sex, race, and Hispanic origin. Ed. Review, 29, 911922.Linehan, C., & McCarthy, J. (2000). Positioning in Practice: Understanding Participation in the Social World.Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 30(4), 435–453.Maltese, A. V., & Tai, R. H. (2011). Pipeline persistence: Examining the association of educational experienceswith earned degrees in STEM among US students. Science Education, 95, 877–907.Molina-Gaudo, P. Baldassarri, S., Villarroya, M. & Cerezo, E. (2010). Perception and intention in relation toengineering: A gendered study based on a one-day outreach activity. IEEE Transactions in Ed., 52, 6170.Museus, S. D., Palmer, R. T., Davis, R. J., & Maramba, D. (2011). Racial and ethnic minority student success inSTEM education: ASHE Higher Education Report, 36(6), John Wiley & Sons.National Academy of Engineering and National Research Council. 2009. Engineering in K-12 education:Understanding the status and improving the prospects. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.National Center for Education Statistics (2015). Fast facts. Retrieved on February 4, 2017,https://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=171Nugent, G., Barker, B., Grandgenett, N., & Adamchuk, V. I. (2010). Impact of robotics and geospatial technologyinterventions on youth STEM learning and attitudes. J. of Research on Technology in Ed., 42, 391–408.Packard, B. W.-L. (2015). Successful STEM mentoring initiatives for underrepresented students: A researchbased guide for faculty and administrators. Stylus Publishing, LLC.Page, S. E. (2010). Diversity and complexity. Princeton University Press.Rahm, J., & Moore, C. J. (2016). A case study of long-term engagement and identity-in-practice: Insights into theSTEM pathways of four underrepresented youths. JARST, 53, 768–801.Svihla, V., & Petrosino, A. J. (2008). Improving our understanding of K-12 engineering education. In TheInternationalConferenceonEngineeringEducation.Retrievedfromhttp://www.academia.edu/download/3242952/full_paper61.pdfWilson-Lopez, A., Mejia, J. A., Hasbun, I. M., & Kasun, G. S. (2016). Latina/o adolescents’ funds of knowledgerelated to engineering. JEE, 105, 278-311.ICLS 2018 Proceedings894© ISLS