“Ohhh, Now I Can Do It!”:School-age Children’s Spontaneous Mathematical Sensemaking inConstruction PlayLara Jasien, Vanderbilt University, lara.jasien@vanderbilt.eduIlana Seidel Horn, Vanderbilt University, ilana.horn@vanderbilt.eduAbstract: This analysis joins together two lines of work: mathematical problem solving andchildren’s construction play as a resource for mathematics learning. Our study is motivated bytwo observations. First, play has characteristics reminiscent of professional mathematicians’practice. Second, the child-centeredness of play points to possibilities for equitablemathematics instruction. We conceptualize problem solving in construction play as theprocess children engage in when they experience trouble accomplishing a goal and work torepair it. To examine this phenomenon, we used head-mounted GoPros to collect 348 pointof-view videos of children as they played in a mathematical playground, where “messingaround” with designed objects provided them with opportunities to encounter mathematicalconcepts. Through a close examination of one case, we illustrate the mathematicalgenerativity of play with the designed objects and argue that children’s construction play cansupport rich opportunities for children’s mathematical sensemaking.Keywords: mathematics learning, out-of-school learning, play-based learning; mathematicalsensemaking; interaction analysisThe heart of children’s play involves asking what if questions about the world. Similarly, the heart ofmathematical activity involves asking what if questions about patterns in number, shape, and space. Thus, weposit that children’s play in mathematically rich contexts provides a productive avenue for them to conjectureand explore in disciplinarily authentic ways. Yet little is known about how school-age children might makesense of ideas in mathematically-rich play settings.In the U.S., children’s opportunities to encounter mathematics are largely limited to classrooms. This isa significant shortcoming, since many children’s school mathematics experiences emphasize ritualized activityand pre-determined solutions (Stigler & Hiebert, 2009), often resulting in them disliking the discipline (Boaler& Greeno, 2000). This type of instruction is at odds with authentic disciplinary engagement (Engle & Conant,2002) and mathematical practices like exploration, defining, and conjecture-testing (Lakatos, 1978).This is a missed opportunity, since research has shown that self-selected and self-directed out-of-schoollearning helps students develop positive disciplinary identities and builds foundations for formal knowledge,even in technical fields like science, technology, and engineering (Quinn & Bell, 2013). Out-of-school settingsfacilitate children’s focus, persistence, joy, and pride in work (Petrich, Wilkinson, & Bevan, 2013). While outof-school studies in museums and makerspaces have investigated students’ scientific, technological, andengineering activities, informal mathematics remains underexamined, offering little guidance for designingspaces that might support mathematical exploration.We study out-of-school mathematics learning by investigating mathematically generative play in amathematical playground called Math On-A-Stick (MOAS). To identify mathematically generative play, welook for moments when what if questions of play intersect with what if questions about disciplinary concepts.Specifically, we examine children’s construction play –– play with materials that require building or designing.In construction play, children explore objects’ properties and see what they can do with them. In the process,they experiment and make tacit conjectures around patterns in number, shape, and space, which we callmathematical generativity. In addition to opportunities to do mathematics, mathematically generative play opensup possibilities for students to experience disciplinary enjoyment (Sengupta-Irving & Enyedy, 2015) ofmathematics, potentially supporting their long-term identification with and persistence in mathematics.Our work builds on previous studies of mathematical play, noting that they are primarily focused onyoung children whereas we focus on upper elementary and middle school age children. That research has shownthat construction play is rich with opportunities for informal mathematics learning (Seo & Ginsburg, 2004), yetplay of any kind is increasingly being pushed out of U.S. preschool, elementary, and middle schools due toincreased emphasis on standardized tests and standardized curricula (Bodrova & Leong, 2003; Jerret, 2015).This situation poses a dilemma for teachers who wish to incorporate mathematical play into their classrooms,with thin empirical basis for its value. Eventually, we hope our research will influence classroom instruction, butICLS 2018 Proceedings624© ISLSour first step is to examine how meaningful mathematics is joyfully engaged in school-age children’sconstruction play.Prior work: Construction play and children’s mathematical learningPrior research on how mathematics is engaged through play highlights construction play as mathematicallygenerative (Sarama & Clements, 2009; Seo & Ginsburg, 2004). In construction play, children design withobjects and engage in higher-level thinking as they solve problems that emerge from the constraints ofconstruction materials (Bergen, 2009; Forman, 2006). There is evidence that preschool children who engage inconstruction play might do better in math later on (Stannard, Wolfgang, Jones, & Phelps, 2001). Additionally,older children who do well on construction tasks also tend to perform well in mathematics (Casey, Pezaris, &Bassi, 2012). While most of these studies were conducted in laboratories without intentionally designedmaterials, pedagogical theorists such as Maria Montessori have made much work of these ideas. In fact,Montessori schools in the U.S. leverage exploration in construction play as a primary aspect of their preschoolcurriculum. These pedagogies specifically leverage design of materials to promote scripted mathematicalexploration.However, we break from Montessori both in the age of children studied, and in what we count as play.First, the mathematical sensemaking of young children likely looks very different than the mathematicalsensemaking of older children (Clements & Battista, 1992). Second, the nature of scaffolding in Montessori—where teachers model how to engage with materials (Lillard, 2013)—runs counter to our notions of play. Ourconceptualizations of play feature children’s agency in exploration, self-selection of goals, and self-direction inhow to accomplish them (Wing, 1995). Just as mathematics education research highlights how agency benefitslearning, we hypothesize that children’s agency in play will lead to rich exploration of construction playmaterials. We argue that examining children’s self-directed construction activity with mathematically structuredobjects is likely to provide rich examples of children’s emerging mathematical sensemaking.Surprisingly, there are few studies of upper-elementary and middle school aged children’s constructionplay with materials explicitly designed to direct children’s attention to mathematical concepts –– perhapsbecause foundational scholars like Piaget (1946/1962) and Vygotsky (1978) focus on sociodramatic play as theleading activity of this age group. This has created a missed opportunity, as engagement with sophisticatedmaterials can lead to productive mathematical exploration for older children (Papert, 1980). In fact, themathematical generativity of construction play emerges from the material constraints that lead children toexperience trouble as they work to achieve their goals (Bergen, 2009; Papert, 1980). Our research thus asks:How do school-age children engage in mathematically generative play in a designed out-of-schoolmathematical playground?Conceptual framework: Mathematically generative play as problem-solvingthrough trouble and repairTheoretical frameworkTo understand how upper elementary and middle school children engage in mathematically generative play, wefollow Vygotsky’s (1978) theory of mediated action. This theory holds that all knowing and doing is mediatedby cultural tools, including language and physical objects. The objects at MOAS were intentionally designed tofacilitate encounters with mathematical concepts (Wertsch, 1998). When the what if aspect of play intersectswith the mathematical practice of conjecturing, we posit that children are working just beyond what they alreadyknow and understand. Questions like, what if I move this tile here? what if I rotate it this way? supportexplorations and encounters with mathematical concepts. When this happens, we see this as evidence of childrenoperating in their zones of proximal development (ZPDs; Vygotksy, 1978), making these moments of potentiallearning. Of particular interest are moments where children (a) encounter trouble in meeting their self-generatedconstruction play goals and then (b) make multiple attempts to repair that trouble, whether independently as thematerials themselves act as scaffolds or with a more expert other who poses questions or models solutions. Weconsider these episodes of trouble-and-repair to be examples of problem-solving, as children’s work in theirZPD inherently involves problematic experiences for children relative their current understandings.Mathematical learning in playFoundational to this study is a view of math embedded in play (Ginsburg, 2006). Notably, Seo and Ginsburg(2004) looked at young children (<5 years) playing with mathematically rich objects and inductively developedICLS 2018 Proceedings625© ISLSexplanatory categories for their activity. In doing so, they identified mathematical ideas children could notice,even when children did not frame their activity as math.To understand children’s sensemaking in play, we attend to children’s problem-solving during goalbased play. This is both a theoretical and a methodological choice. Theoretically, problem-solving requires anend goal, so identifiable goals help us analyze it. Methodologically, we count construction play to begin whenchildren set goals (Hutt, 1979; Vandenberg, 1980), and these are often most visible when they are not met. Weacknowledge that (a) children engage in exploratory play without construction goals, (b) children have goals wecannot identify, and (c) children may achieve their goals without experiencing trouble and may be engagingimportant mathematical ideas. Pragmatically, we analyze the cases where the problem solving is most visibleand omit these cases where it is less so. As a result, we focus only on episodes in which children set visiblegoals, experience trouble, and make multiple attempts at repair, as these are low-inference cases for thephenomenon of interest.Research design: Understanding problem solving and mathematicalgenerativity in playTo explain our logic of inquiry, we describe our data collection procedures and identify our units of analysis.We then outline our data sampling and analysis methods for our research question, how do school-age childrenengage in mathematically generative play in an out-of-school mathematical playground?Site selectionResearch took place at a mathematical playground called Math On-A-Stick (MOAS) at the Minnesota StateFair. Data were collected over the full ten-days of the fair in 2016. MOAS was open to any fairgoer. It was apleasant, shady space in a relatively quiet corner, containing nine tables, each of which had uniquemathematically structured objects that children could use as they pleased along with volunteers who couldfacilitate play. These objects included pattern machines, various tiling pentagons, tessellating turtles, and 6x5egg crates with colorful plastic eggs. Children’s voluntary participation, their freedom in how (and how long) toengage with the exhibits, and the mathematical richness of their design support a study of children’ssensemaking as they encounter mathematical ideas in unexpected ways.Data collectionTo understand the mathematical generativity of children’s play, data collection aimed to capture children’sperspectives of their activity in MOAS exhibits. We recruited 348 children to participate. They answered briefintake surveys and then went about the playground with Go-Pro video recorders mounted on their heads, aimeddownwards and slightly forward to capture the children’s and adults’ talk, gestures, and object manipulation.This view captures the locus of the children’s attention when they are playing with objects: When the childlooks up, the camera shows what they are looking at. Even slight glances at other children playing are captured.This video record supports inferences about children’s attention and interest. As participants exited MOAS, weconducted brief interviews about their experiences. The video data serve as the primary data for the study, withthe survey and interview data used primarily to select participants based on different reported characteristics andexperiences.Data corpusThe 348 participants ranged in age from 4 to 16 years old. The average MOAS visit lasted 26 minutes (sd =0.007), with median visit per exhibit at approximately four minutes. Out of the 348 participants, this studyfocuses on upper elementary and lower secondary aged children’s play (7 – 12 years old, n = 277, visit length: m= 28 minutes , sd = 0.01). This limits the variation in children’s development and addresses a gap in theliterature, as this age group’s out-of-school mathematical learning is understudied.Case selectionTo illustrate how our methodology supports an analysis of mathematically generative play, we present the caseof one child at the egg exhibit at MOAS. Olivia (a pseudonym) was an eight year old girl who played at the eggexhibit for over 12 minutes, much longer than the average stay time. We conjectured that sustained engagementat one exhibit might support increasingly complex design goals. We focus on Olivia’s last construction at theegg table, where she had a goal of making a heart design using pink plastic eggs in a 6x5 egg crate. This episodeof goal-based activity lasted approximately seven minutes, meaning that this single design took her longer thanICLS 2018 Proceedings626© ISLSmost children remained at this exhibit. Because Olivia’s mother was attentive while she engaged in constructionplay, their interaction was analytically useful, because it gave us access to Olivia’s thinking.Unit of analysis: Episodes of goal-based activityBecause we seek to identify mathematically generative play, we distinguish between (a) play that producesmathematical ideas that the children might have noticed and (b) play that produces mathematical ideas that wecan empirically argue that they noticed. In other words, while we can certainly infer mathematical ideas fromchildren’s play activities, we seek to identify the mathematics that children attend to in play, even if it is notformally named.As a preliminary data reduction strategy, we focused on episodes of goal based activity, parsing oursubset of videos into these episodes. To allow enough time for exploratory play and to seek examples ofsustained engagement, we sampled video from children who stayed at an exhibit at least five consecutiveminutes. Out of the 277 school-aged children in our sample visiting the many exhibits at MOAS, this datareduction yielded 395 episodes of exhibit level activity (~50 hours of video data). We reasoned that longerepisodes were more likely involve multiple attempts at reaching the goal. To determine the start of goal-basedactivity, we attended to both explicit goals (e.g., the statement “I’m going to make a dog!”) and implicit goals(e.g., making a “blank slate” by ruining what was previously made). To determine the end of goal-basedactivity, we attended to when children: (a) discard (e.g., child destroys what made); (b) abandon (e.g., walksaway without finishing); (c) preserve (e.g., having parents take photographs), or (d) share (e.g., soliciting adultpraise). If, after preserving or sharing, the child continued to work on the same object to refine (but notdramatically alter) their work, we considered this part of the same goal-based activity, reapplying the criteria forthe end of goal-based activity to determine when the activity truly ended for the child.Second, we further reduced our data by identifying episodes of trouble-and-repair. Because we areinterested in the mathematical learning supported by play, these moments made visible times when children hadtrouble reaching a goal, along with their strategies and resources for repairing the trouble. Trouble was locatedthrough children’s: (a) repeated attempts; (b) use of multiple strategies; and (c) expressions of frustration orconfusion. While some exhibits afforded longer play than others, analyses show that two minutes of goal-basedactivity often captures multiple attempts at repairing a problem. We selected Olivia’s case by examining theduration of episodes of trouble in our data set, with hers being and outlier in sustained engagement in repairwork.Analytic methodsTo examine how school age children—and Olivia in particular—engaged in mathematically generative play, weuse methods of interaction analysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995) to identify when children experienced troubleand worked to repair it. Trouble occurred when participants’ expectations were broken (p. 69), such as whenchildren’s patterns and designs did not emerge as they intended. This approach allowed us to attend to bothverbal and nonverbal features of interaction. Indicators of trouble include when children explicitly asked forhelp (e.g., “How do you make a circle?”), asked for formative feedback (e.g., “Does this look like a heart?”),expressed frustration (e.g., “Ughhhh”), gestured inquisitively, or made trial-and-error revisions (e.g., movingpieces to make a pattern “look right”). When children persisted and made multiple repair attempts using themathematical features of the objects, we view this as mathematically generative play, even if the trouble neverwas fully repaired.FindingsChildren engage in complex problem-solving during play at MOAS, and this often takes the shape of repairwork. To illustrate how repair work supports children’s grappling with mathematical concepts and approximatesdisciplinary practices, we share a brief episode in which trouble occasioned mathematically generativeconstruction play. Olivia worked with her mother for seven minutes to achieve Olivia’s play goal of making aheart in a 6x5 egg crate. Over the course of their activity within the play goal, Olivia articulated aspects of theheart that were important to her, which manifested as emergent problems in play. She refined her account of theemergent problem three times, with each articulation of the problem indicating an element of Olivia’smathematics sensemaking: (1) “Does this look like a heart?” (notices shape without midline symmetry), (2)“Ohhh, it’s crooked” (focuses on asymmetry), (3) “Where’s the middle?” (focuses on egg crate as a 6x5 gridwith a midline). The remainder of this section analyzes how Olivia’s question of “Where’s the middle?”launches Olivia into her ZPD as she persists in her play goal. Due to the density of gesture, which is pivotal forunderstanding sensemaking in constructive play, the transcript below explores 30 seconds of interaction fromthis last phase, beginning when she refined her problem to “Where’s the middle?” and then began to structure aICLS 2018 Proceedings627© ISLSsolution to the problem. Given limited space, we use only one still image from the recording for each turn,though the multimodal analysis we conducted is considerably more complex. The extra punctuation denotesspeech characteristics like breaks -, elo::::ngation, ((notes about gesture)), volume, and intensity.Transcript ExcerptTalk and ((activity))ScreenshotAnalytic Interpretation(38)Olivia: Whe::re's the((moves egg to slots oneither side of the actualmiddle in the egg crate,then rests egg on actualmiddle)) middle?[00:28:59.20] Olivia and Mom are in a facing-formationwith joint attention on the egg crate. Olivia asks forassistance to find the practical middle in an egg crate thatoffers a 6x5 grid. By moving the egg, Olivia draws Mom’sattention to the absence of a midline in her current use of thecrate.(39)Mom: Well that's theproblem, there's- there'sreally no middle becausethis is the middle((finger runs alongmiddle line her daughterhad just touched thenturns away to talk withanother adult))[00:28:59.28] Mom scaffolds attention to missing mid-linesymmetry for the entire carton, then turns away, breaking thefacing formation and ending joint attention to the carton as agrid.(40)Olivia: ((moves body toalign with side havingfive slots, grabs crate,then rotates body backand held crate to heroriginal position))[00:29:08.16] Olivia uses her whole body to investigate thepractical middle of the other side of the crate.(41)Olivia: Oh maybe if weMommy:: ((grabsMom’s arm to get herattention, then rotatescrate back to originalposition))[00:29:10.14] Olivia bids urgently for Mom’s attention, pullsher body back, and restores their former facing-formation.(42)Mom: ((turns backtowards Olivia))Mom leaves adult conversation and turns her body to restoreformer facing-formation with her daughter.(43)Olivia: Maybe if wetu:::rn it ((rotates crateagain so Mom can seethe contrast))[00:29:13.14] Olivia demonstrates her discovery to Mom byre-enacting the rotation of the crate while her mother is intheir facing formationICLS 2018 Proceedings628© ISLS(44)Mom: Oh yeah, goodidea. Good thinkinghoney!(45)Olivia: Oh::::, no::w Ican do:: it! ((takes all ofthe eggs out of thecarton))Mom recognizes Olivia’s solution to the problem of amissing mid-line (Turn 39) and praises her ingenuity with aterm of endearment.[00:29:27.24] Olivia clears the crate/grid and starts again tomake a symmetric heart with a point/egg that falls on a truemidline. Rotating the crate makes this solution possible.Over the course of this episode of goal-based construction play, Olivia structured a new problem withnew affordances for symmetry through her visible attention to aligning actual middles (i.e., midline symmetry isat the middle of six, Figure 1) with practical middles (i.e., midline symmetry is at the middle of five, Figure 2).(a)(b)(a)(b)Figure 2. Practical midline symmetry (a)with heart centered on practical middle (b).Figure 1. No practical midline symmetry (a)with heart centered on practical middle (b).When asking “Where’s the middle?” Olivia placed her egg on the crate’s midline of symmetry (Line38, Figure 1a), although it was not a practical middle because she had the crate rotated such that the side withsix slots was parallel to her body and the egg could not rest in the center. After asking this question, Momscaffolded Olivia’s understanding saying, “There is no middle,” while tracing the mid-line of symmetry with herhand (Line 39, Figure 1a). Importantly, Mom did not tell Olivia how to resolve the problem of no middle butrather temporarily disengaged by breaking the facing-formation (Line 39). Olivia then moved her body aroundthe crate, making herself to parallel to the side with five egg slots. She then jointly rotated both herself and thecrate back to her original position (Line 40), resulting in the crate being oriented so that its mid-line ofsymmetry and the practical middle for making a heart with a point became aligned (Figure 2a). Olivia then madea bid for Mom’s attention (Line 41) and, re-establishing the facing formation (Line 42), Olivia re-rotated thecrate so that Mom could see the change (Line 43). Here, both Olivia and Mom demonstrated (Lines 44 and 45)that they now knew they had re-structured the problem space to align the practical and actual middles of the eggcrate grid. Once Olivia removed the eggs from the crate grid, she exclaimed, “Ohhhhh, now I can do it!” Oliviathen created her heart-with-a-point unproblematically (Figure 2b).This episode gives a glimpse into the child’s perspective of trouble experienced in play and shows thepotential for mathematical generativity in goal-based activity. First, Olivia iteratively refined her definition ofthe problem from not looking like a heart to eventually a problem that suggested a solution path: find or make amiddle. Second, Olivia used important disciplinary practices (National Governors Association, 2010), such as(a) attending to precision as she refined her goal to be a heart with a point, (b) looking for and making use ofstructure as she transformed the problem space to have matching practical and actual middles, and (c) usingappropriate tools strategically as she began to treat the egg crate as a grid. Third, as Olivia played, sheattended to mathematical properties of the egg crate –– the evenness and oddness of the two sides, the presenceor absence of a true middle –– and relations between them. We posit that this linking of mathematical propertiesfacilitates deeper understanding of symmetry. Although it is not the focus of this analysis, we note that Momeffectively scaffolded Olivia, taking up her questions while also allowing her to maintain control of thedecision-making process and deciding when the heart was “Done, Mommy!” (Line 63, not shown).ICLS 2018 Proceedings629© ISLSConclusion and implicationsThis study uncovers the potential for mathematically generative play, finding that construction play withmathematically structured objects can facilitate children’s attention to mathematical properties of objects as theyovercome trouble to meet practical goals. This study underscores the generativity of seemingly simple ideas(such as middles and symmetry). Future research should continue to explore this generativity, as well asexamine how adults can better scaffold children’s sensemaking of key mathematical ideas. Our aim for thisresearch program is to develop empirically-informed design principles that bring joyful disciplinary engagementinto classrooms through investigating how school-age children’s play can be mathematically generative. Bybuilding an empirical basis for disciplinary enjoyment and engagement through play, this work will enable abroadening of mathematical participation in two ways. First, the mathematical ideas that children findchallenging in contexts other than paper-and-pencil activities might surprise the adults who guide their thinking(Ginsburg, 2006). In other words, mathematics does not seamlessly transfer between scales and modalities(Hall, Ma, & Nemirovsky, 2015), so intentional scaffolds must be designed as we create wider and deeperecosystems for mathematics education. Second, children’s competent informal mathematical thinking is oftennot recognized by adults (Ginsburg, 2006). By capturing examples of children’s productive, informalmathematical thinking, this research can facilitate mathematics educators’ recognition of swaths of competence.By underscoring the inherent challenge of seemingly simple ideas such as middles and symmetry, adults can bebetter attuned to helping children make meaning of key mathematical ideas.ReferencesBergen, D. (2009). Play as the Learning Medium for Future Scientists, Mathematicians, and Engineers.American Journal of Play, 1(4), 413-428.Boaler, J., & Greeno, J. G. (2000). Identity, agency, and knowing in mathematics worlds. Multiple perspectiveson mathematics teaching and learning, Vol. 1 (171-200). Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group.Bodrova, E., & Leong, D. (2003). The importance of being playful. Educational Leadership, 60(7), 50-53.Casey, B. M., Pezaris, E. E., & Bassi, J. (2012). Adolescent boys’ and girls’ block constructions differ instructural balance: a block-building characteristic related to math achievement. Learning and IndividualDifferences, 22(1), 25-36.Clements, D. H., & Battista, M. T. (1992). Geometry and spatial reasoning. In D. A. Grouws (Ed.), Thehandbook of research on mathematics teaching and learning. New York: MacMillan.Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction, 20,399–483.Ginsburg, H. P. (2006). Mathematical play and playful mathematics: A guide for early education. In D. G.Singer, R. M. Golinkoff, & K. Hirsh-Pasek (Ed.s), Play = Learning: How play motivates and enhanceschildren’s cognitive and social-emotional growth (145-165). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.Hall, R., Ma, J. Y., & Nemirovsky, R. (2015). Re-scaling bodies in/as representational instruments in GPSdrawing. Learning technologies and the body: Integration and implementation in formal and informallearning environments, Vol 135 (112-131). New York, NY: Routledge.Hutt, C. (1979). Exploration and play. In B. Sutton-Smith (Ed.), Play and Learning. New York: Gardner Press.Jerret, O. S. (2015). Recess and Learning: Research on the Effects of Recess on Children and Teachers. In J. E.Johnson, S. G. Eberle, T. S. Henricks, &D. Kuschner (Eds.), The handbook of the study of play, (Vol 1,299-318). New York: Rowman & Littlefield.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995) Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39-103.Lillard, A. S. (2013). Playful Learning and Montessori Education. American journal of play, 5(2), 157-186.National Governors Association Center for Best Practices and the Council of Chief State School (2010).Common Core State Standards Initiative (CCSSI), Common Core State Standards for Mathematics.Washington, DC: Officers.Petrich, M., Wilkinson, K., & Bevan, B. (2013). It looks like fun, but are they learning? In M. Honey & D. E.Kanter (Eds.), Growing the next generation of STEM innovators (50-70). New York, NY: Routledge.Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York, NY: Basic Books, Inc.Piaget, J. (1946/1962). Play, dreams and imitation in childhood. New York: Norton.Quinn, H., & Bell, P. (2013). How designing, making, and playing relate to the learning goals of K-12 scienceeducation. In M. Honey & D. E. Kanter (Eds.), Growing the next generation of STEM innovators (17-35).New York, NY: Routledge.ICLS 2018 Proceedings630© ISLSSarama, J., & Clements, D. H. (2009). Building Blocks and Cognitive Building Blocks: Playing to Know theWorld Mathematically. American Journal of Play, 1(3), 313-337.Sengupta-Irving, T., & Enyedy, N. (2015). Why engaging in mathematical practices may explain strongeroutcomes in affect and engagement: Comparing student-driven with highly guided inquiry. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 24(4), 550-592.Seo, K. H., & Ginsburg, H. P. (2004). What is developmentally appropriate in early childhood mathematicseducation? Lessons from new research. Engaging young children in mathematics: Standards for earlychildhood mathematics education, 91-104.Stannard, L.,Wolfgang, C. H., Jones, I., & Phelps, P. (2001). A longitudinal study of the predictive relationsamong construction play and mathematical achievement. Early Child Development and Care, 167(1),115-125.Stigler, J. W., & Hiebert, J. (2009). The teaching gap: Best ideas from the world’s teachers for improvingeducation in the classroom. New York: Simon and Schuster.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge,MA: Harvard University Press.Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.Wing, L. A. (1995). Play is not the work of the child: Young children's perceptions of work and play. EarlyChildhood Research Quarterly, 10(2), 223-247.ICLS 2018 Proceedings631© ISLS