How Middle School Students Construct and Critique Graphs toExplain Cancer TreatmentCamillia Matuk, New York University, cmatuk@nyu.eduJiayuan Zhang, New York University, anna.j.zhang@nyu.eduMarcia C. Linn, University of California, Berkeley, mclinn@berkeley.eduAbstract: Using graphs in science is challenging as it requires both scientific andrepresentational fluency. We examined how different graphing activities during scienceinquiry helped to develop these interrelated abilities in students. Grade 7 students (N=117)worked in pairs on a web-based cell biology unit to either generate or critique graphs of theeffects of proposed cancer treatments on cell numbers. All students gained in their graph andscience explanation abilities. While students who critiqued graphs gave better overallexplanations within the unit, students who constructed graphs better applied their conceptualunderstanding of science to explain their graphs, both within the unit and later on the post test.We interpret these findings in terms of the relative affordances and constraints of critique andconstruction activities, and observe students’ common misunderstandings of graphs. Thisstudy has implications for designing instruction that supports students’ uses of graphs withinscience contexts.Finding the synergy between graph and science understandingThe role of graphs in scientific practice is not often captured in typical K-12 curricula. Within scientificcommunities, graphs are used to predict, explain, and communicate complex concepts. In mainstream media,graphs persuade and inform citizens of important societal and environmental trends. The prevalence of graphs inboth professional and everyday settings is such that people require a degree of graph literacy to make andcritique arguments, and to interpret information for making decisions about personal and policy issues (e.g.,Wiley et al. 2009).For these reasons, there have been calls for curricula that develop students’ abilities to use graphs tomodel, reason about, and communicate science ideas (e.g., Association for the Advancement of Science, 1993;National Research Council, 1996; Next Generation Science Standards, 2013). However, research continues tofind that students struggle to understand and effectively use graphs in science contexts. This study explores theeffects of different graphing activities incorporated into a collaborative web-based science inquiry unit oncancer and cell division.Constructing and critiquing graphs as components of science literacyUsing graphs effectively involves coordinating an understanding of the relevant domain with an understandingof the representational language of graphs. That is, students must be able to encode and relate a graph’s visualfeatures to the concepts these represent (e.g., Friel et al., 2001; Shah & Hoeffner, 2002). As graphs are toolsused to devise and evaluate solutions to complex science problems, the ability to both construct and critiquethem are critical components of scientific literacy. diSessa & Sherin (2000) refer to the abilities to critique andconstruct representations as components of meta-representational competence (MRC). To critique a graph is todetermine the accuracy and effectiveness with which it conveys a message. To construct a graph, meanwhile, isa generative activity that is distinct from, yet just as important as critique (Leinhardt et al., 1990). Byconstructing graphs, students can visually demonstrate how they make sense of scientific information.Reading and constructing graphs are challenging for students who are still developing theirunderstanding of both science and of graphs. Indeed, prior research documents the many ways that student falterin their uses of graphs: They struggle to use graphs as evidence to support arguments (Lovett & Chang, 2007);they read graphs as literal pictures rather than acknowledge its axes (Clement 1985); they focus on individualpoints rather than on bigger trends; they fail to use content to explain axes and slope (Beichner, 1994); and theyread graphs in terms of irrelevant other representational forms (see review by Leinhardt et al., 1990). Consistentwith prior research, Lai et al. (2016) found that middle school students struggled to interpret graph features interms of their related science concepts; and to recognize and interpret relationships depicted in visual features,such as trends, shapes, and noise. They moreover struggled to translate narratives of scientific phenomena intographs, and instead provided superficial visual descriptions of graphs rather than descriptions grounded inscience; and faltered in their efforts to interpret common graphical patterns, such as curve shapes and noisewhen making sense of global climate change and growth curves.CSCL 2017 Proceedings375© ISLSConstructing graphs is likewise difficult for students who are prone to create one-point graphs,generate a series of graphs to represent a single factor, and graph an increasing linear function regardless of theactual trend (Mevarech & Kramarsky, 1997). Moreover, graph construction activities can become easily miredin mundane tasks, such as plotting data points, which students are unlikely to connect to relevant scientificideas. On the other hand, depicting relationships qualitatively may permit students to go beyond the data tomake inferences based in their conceptual understanding, and to use graphs to engage in such scientific practicesas predicting, arguing, and explaining. Interpreting qualitative features of graphs, however, has proven moredifficult for middle school students than interpreting quantitative features of graphs (Hattikudur et al., 2012).The need to emphasize graphs in science instructionStudies find that students’ understanding of graphs can be enriched through activities that involve explainingtheir reasoning and challenging the views of their peers (Kramarski, 2004). As well, curriculum designs thateffectively integrate graphs into science contexts can enable students to successfully communicate scientificphenomena through graphs (e.g., Vitale et al., 2015). These findings suggest that instruction might go beyondguiding students in the technical tasks of constructing graphs and recognizing its features, to also supportingstudents in developing the metacognitive skill of critiquing graphs. The importance of graphs, along withstudents’ struggles to use graphs, suggest a need for instruction that effectively incorporates graphs into realisticscience inquiry activities (Lai et al., 2016).In response, we integrated two graphing activities into a collaborative inquiry unit on cancer and celldivision. We investigate the relative value added of students’ qualitative construction and critique of graphs forsupporting and revealing their abilities to explain and evaluate proposed cancer treatments.MethodsThe WISE Mitosis unitWe integrated a graphing activity into an existing middle school science unit on cancer and cell division. Theunit, called What makes a good cancer medicine?: Observing mitosis and cell processes (aka, Mitosis) wasauthored in the Web-based Inquiry Science Environment (WISE, wise.berkeley.edu, Slotta & Linn, 2009).WISE is a free, open source learning environment with tools for authoring media-rich content, and formonitoring and guiding students’ work. Units are designed according to Knowledge Integration (KI, Linn &Eylon, 2011), a framework that recognizes students’ diverse ideas about science, and guides them indistinguishing, organizing, and integrating these into normative scientific understandings.Mitosis introduces students to the process of cell division and the effects of cancer on the body. Centralto the unit is an investigation of potential cancer treatments, in which students observe and compare animationsof cells dividing normally, and when treated with different medicine options. Students work in pairs on sharedcomputers, and use tools within the environment to develop, share, and refine their explanations forrecommending one medicine over the others.Next, the unit introduces surgery and chemotherapy as typical cancer treatments that each come withtrade-offs: Surgery can quickly remove cancerous cells, but risks damaging healthy organs. As well, anyremaining cancerous cells will continue to divide, which may lead to tumors to return. Meanwhile,chemotherapy avoids the risks of surgery, but because it targets all fast dividing cells—not just cancerouscells—it introduces side effects such as hair loss and nausea. Students analyze graphs of each treatment on apatient’s number of cells over time. They read that because neither treatment is perfect, a goal in designingcancer treatment is to maximize the effects on cancerous cells while minimizing damage to healthy cells. Aculminating graphing activity (further described below) has students use a graph to explain the effects of apossible cancer treatment on the number of cells in the body.Participants and study designParticipants were 117 grade 7 students of a middle school in the west coast of the United States. They weretaught by the same teacher, who had used previous versions of the same unit in the past several years. Studentsworked in pairs on a shared computer for approximately 10 consecutive days to complete the unit, including apre and posttest that assessed their application of the science content. The teacher began each day with a wholeclass opener, in which she highlighted difficulties she noted in students’ work from the previous day, andprepared students for the upcoming activities. Otherwise, the teacher circulated the classroom to assist groups asthey worked through the unit at their own pace.The teacher formed student pairs and randomly assigned half within each of her 4 class periods tocomplete one of two versions of the unit: Construct and Critique. These differed in the following activityCSCL 2017 Proceedings376© ISLS(Figure 1). Construct students were prompted to prescribe and explain a treatment plan for a cancer patient, andto complete a graph of the effects of their treatment on the numbers of cancerous cells over time. Meanwhile,Critique students were given a graph of the effects of a doctor's prescribed treatment on the numbers ofcancerous cells over time, and prompted to annotate and explain how and why that treatment would or wouldnot be effective. Afterward, students shared their graphs and explanations, and commented on the work ofothers in their class through an online discussion forum. They were then instructed to use their peers’ ideas torevise their work.Figure 1. Screenshots of the Construct (left) and Critique (right) versions of the Mitosis unit.Data and analysisThe data considered in this study include students’ responses to the graphing activity embedded within the unit,which consisted of their graph artifacts (student-generated graphs from the Construct group and annotatedgraphs from the Critique group), and their accompanying written explanations of the cancer treatments. (Dataon the ways that students shared and revised their ideas are reserved for future analyses.) We developed a rubricto rate students’ abilities to integrate science content understanding with graphing abilities. This rubricidentified the presence of several key concepts (Table 1), including: (1) an explanation based in science contentlearned in the unit (e.g., what cancer is, how cells divide, how chemotherapy works) as opposed to a literaldescription of the graph; (2) a sense of the imperfections or trade-offs of cancer treatment, as opposed to thebelief that treatment is a straightforward and uncomplicated solution; (3) a recognition that to mitigate sideeffects, the treatment must be given in multiple brief cycles rather than in a single dose; (4) a description of thegraph that conveys the process of treatment by identifying sequences of events, as opposed to overlooking thenuanced changes in cell numbers over time.The rubric also rated responses for their accuracy. One 4-point scale (0-3) rated the normativeness ofstudents’ written explanations, while another captured the accuracy of their graph artifacts (e.g., whether or notstudents indicated a decreasing number of cells, and whether the graph cohered with the written explanations).We summed the ratings on each aspect to obtain a single score with a possible total of 10 points. This scorecaptures the overall quality of responses in terms of students’ abilities to accurately apply relevant sciencecontent and graph features in their critiques or constructions of graphs.The pre and post test consisted of five items that assessed students’ abilities to apply concepts learnedin the unit (e.g., explaining the importance of the phases of cell division, and describing the mechanism ofcancer in terms of its effect on cell division.) For this study, we focused our analysis on one of these items,which had students generate and explain a graph of the number of cancer cells before, during, and after aproposed treatment. We used the rubric described above to code these responses. We also conducted a 30minute long recorded phone interview with the teacher shortly after she had enacted the unit, and draw on this tohelp explain our findings.Table 1: Rubric for scoring students’ responses, with examples (comparison groups indicated in italics).Category1. ContentbasedexplanationPresentExplanation: Uses relevant science content to interpret the graph.ExampleCSCL 2017 Proceedings377© ISLS2. Sense oftrade-offCritique: The chemotherapy keeps the cells from doing mitosis. When you have cancer yourcells divide out of control you can get tumors from too many cells (...) The doctor'streatment plan worked by keeping her cell count near the normal amount but not harming thehealthy cells but at the same time stop the cancer cells from dividing.Explanation: Understands that cancer treatment involves a trade-off that can lead toside-effects.3. TreatmentscyclesExampleConstruct: If you do chemotherapy for the just the right amount of time, you will get rid ofthe cancer cells and lose few normal cells.Explanation: Uses/recognizes an approach to treatment that mitigates risks and sideeffects.ExamplesCritique: The doctors gave it to hermultipul times to kill off the cancercells...Construct: When the number of cellsreach the climax she takes not that muchmedicine. It'll go down but star risingagain so she would take the medicinewhen it starts rising again.4. NarrativedescriptionExplanation: Conveys the process of treatment by identifying sequences of events, andrecognizing the change in cell numbers over time.CSCL 2017 Proceedings378© ISLSExamplesCritiqueConstruct: How the treatment wouldwork is that we would apply it until it gotback to normal, and then apply it againwhen the cells went above average. Wethink this will be effective because it willstop the cancer cells when they comeback, but it won't go below normal.Findings and discussionGroup differences on the embedded graphing activityStudents who critiqued the graph had significantly higher overall scores on the embedded graphing activity(N=29; M=9.59; SD=1.05) than students who constructed graphs of the effects of their own treatments (N = 32;M=8.63, SD=1.39), t(59) = 3.03, p<.005. A 2x4 chi-square test showed significant differences between groupsin the occurrences of the specific aspects we coded, x2(2)=21.31, p<.0001 (Figure 2).Figure 2. Construct and Critique students differed significantly in the frequencies of Narrative description,Treatment cycles, and Content-based explanations on the graphing item embedded in the unit.Specifically, Critique students (N=29 M=.97, SD=0.19) were more likely than Construct students(N=32 M=.19, SD=0.40) to identify the importance of repeated doses of medicine, t(59)=9.64, p<.0001. Thisresult might be explained by the fact that Critique students had only to identify these features from the givengraph, while Construct students, who had to generate their own graphs, were left to discover this strategy ontheir own, which they did not always do successfully. Critique students (N=29 M=1.00, SD=0.00) were alsomore likely than Construct students (N=32 M=.44, SD=0.50) to describe the narrative process represented bythe graph, t(59)=6.01, p<.0001. Being given an already constructed graph may have allowed Critique studentsto focus on developing narratives descriptions of it. Meanwhile, the extra effort of constructing a consensusgraph may have led Construct students to put less effort into their written explanations. Notably, however,CSCL 2017 Proceedings379© ISLSConstruct students were more likely to use science content ideas to explain their graphs (N= 32, M= 0.53,SD=0.51) compared to Critique students (N=29, M=0.28, SD=0.45), t(59)=2.06, p<.05. It is possible thatconstructing a graph encouraged deeper thought into the graph’s conceptual meaning.Gains from pre to postAll students made significant gains on the graphing item from the pre (N= 117, M= 1.99, SD= 2.79) to theposttest (N= 117, M= 7.42, SD= 2.59), t(232)=15.41, p<.0001. Construct students gained slightly, but notsignificantly more (N=62, M=5.48, SD=3.43) than Critique students (N=55, M=5.36, SD=4.02). These findingssuggest that in spite of differences in performance within the unit, both versions helped students improve theirabilities to articulate key ideas, as well as to express these ideas normatively in both written and graphic forms.Some of the group differences that were apparent within the unit persisted to the post test. Specifically,Critique students (M=0.24, SD=0.47) were more able than Construct students (M=0.08, SD=0.27) to identifythe importance of cycling treatment, as shown by their greater pre to posttest gains on the graphing item,t(115)=2.22, p<0.05. It is likely that these students could easily reproduce features of the graph to which theywere exposed during the unit. Likewise, the Construct students made significantly greater gains (N=62, M=0.45,SD=0.50) in applying content to their explanations compared to Critique students (N=55, M=0.22, SD=0.50),t(115)=2.52, p<.05. This finding suggests that Construct students were able to translate the abilities gainedduring the unit to their work beyond the unit.Examples of students’ challenges with using graphs to explain cancer treatmentIn the better cases, students displayed a more nuanced understanding of the cancer treatment process by the endof the unit in both their written and graphed responses (e.g., Figure 3).Figure 3. Left: One student’s pretest response, which conveys a simplistic understanding of the effect of themedicine, along with the explanation: “The drug will stop the cells from multiplying…” Right: The samestudents’ posttest response with the accompanying explanation: “My graph… is supposed to show that the cellcount was rising before treatment, and after the start of treatment is went down, even past the normal cell count.In the middle of it, the cell count goes back up because there is a break in treatment to make sure there is nooverdosage, but once the cell count starts to go back up, the treatment is restarted.” (92037)For the most part, however, we observed problematic features of students’ responses that are consistentwith other research (e.g., Lai et al., 2016). For example, with the exception of two student pairs, one in eachcomparison group, students failed to connect their ideas about science to their graphs, and instead restrictedtheir explanations to describing their graph’s visual features (e.g., “The treatment started, stopped, startedagain... This made the number of cells go up and down...”). In another example, one student pair in the Critiquegroup mistook the y-axis to represent both the amount of medicine and the number of cells. As they wrote: “Thedoctor is giving Chemotherapy in smaller and smaller doses until the number of cells is at a normal amount.”(218836)While most students left their pretests blank or else scribbled nonsense and typed “I don’t know,” a fewstudents created pictorial representations of the effects of cancer treatment (Figure 4); or graphed an increasinglinear function (Figure 5). In each of these cases, the students improved their responses by the posttest. In somecases, however, students who displayed one misunderstanding of graphs at the pretest (using it as a pictorialrepresentation of the phenomenon) ended with different misunderstandings by the posttest (drawing a series ofgraphs as opposed to a single one, and depicting rising linear functions in spite of the actual trend) (Figure 6).CSCL 2017 Proceedings380© ISLSFigure 4. Left: One Critique student’s pretest response showing a pictorial representation of the cancertreatment process. The graph is accompanied by the explanation: “The red circles are cancer cells. My drug isrepresented by the green lines crossing them out, then them turning them into regular cells.” Right: The samestudent’s posttest response is accompanied by the explanation: “The blue line represents when the person hascancer, and the number of there cells is growing rapidly. The green line represents when the drug is first taken.The red line, represents after the drug has been taken. The number of cells is going down, because the person islosing cells at a normal rate, but their body can't replace the cells.” (89152)Figure 5. Left: One Critique student’s pretest response, showing a rising linear function, and the same students’posttest response (right), demonstrating a more accurate narrative of the treatment process and the cycling ofdoses of medicine. (92399)Figure 6. Left: One Construct students pretest response, showing a pictorial representation of cancer cells beforeand after treatment, and the same student’s posttest response, which incorrectly uses a series of rising linearfunctions to represent the numbers of cancer cells before, during, and after treatment. (91962)Conclusions and implicationsWe compared how students explained cancer treatment when constructing or critiquing qualitative graphs. Ourfindings suggest that critiquing graphs enabled students to generate better overall explanations, but that theseexplanations differed in particular ways. Specifically, the explanations of students who critiqued a given graphwere more likely to convey a narrative of the underlying process, and to recognize the importance of cyclingdoses of medicine for mitigating side effects. Meanwhile, students who constructed graphs of their owntreatment plans were more likely to use science concepts to explain their graph’s meaning. These distinctionsmight be accounted for by differences in the practices that critique and construction either emphasize orminimize. That is, critique offers students with material upfront (a finished graph and a worked solution), whichaccomplishes some of the analytic work for students, and allows them to focus on elaborating other aspects oftheir explanations (e.g., coherent narrative descriptions). Meanwhile, construction requires students to generatematerial that is not provided. While doing so may prevent students from realizing nuanced solutions (e.g.,cycling treatment as a way to mitigate side effects) and from spending as much effort in developing narrativesof their explanations, the act of discussing and coming to consensus on a graph to generate may motivateCSCL 2017 Proceedings381© ISLSstudents to think more deeply about the underlying conceptual meaning, and offer them a context in which toexpress that understanding.This study offers an example and classroom trial of a graphing activity embedded within scienceinquiry instruction. Our interview with the teacher suggests that her opener activities, which modeled responsesto other graphing items in the unit, may have prepared students to perform the graph critique and constructionactivity examined in this study. In spite of overall gains in their science and graphing abilities, the fact thatcertain students continued to display misunderstandings that are consistent with prior literature reveals anopportunity to investigate how students’ graph construction reflects their scientific misunderstandings (cf. Vitaleet al., 2015). It also suggests the need to further refine instructional materials that emphasize the synergybetween graphing and scientific practices. In continuing our analysis of these data, we will investigate the waysthat sharing and discussing graph artifacts with their peers impacted students’ revisions, and the ways thattechnology can partner with teachers to support students’ graphing practices in science contexts.ReferencesBeichner R. J. (1994). Testing student interpretation of kinematics graphs. American Journal of Physics, 62,750–762Clement, J. (1985). Misconceptions in graphing. In: Proceedings of the ninth international group for thepsychology of mathematics education. NoordwijkerhoutDiSessa, A., Sherin, B. L. (2000). Meta-representation: An introduction. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 19,385–398.Friel, S. N., Curcio, F. R., & Bright, G. W. (2001). Making sense of graphs: Critical factors influencingcomprehension and instructional implications. Journal for Research in mathematics Education, 124158.Hattikudur, S., Prather, R. W., Asquith, P., Alibali, M. W., Knuth, E. J., & Nathan, M. (2012). Constructinggraphical representations: Middle schoolers' intuitions and developing knowledge about slope and y‐intercept. School Science and Mathematics, 112(4), 230-240.Kramarski, B. (2004). Making sense of graphs: does metacognitive instruction make a difference on students'mathematical conceptions and alternative conceptions?. Learning and Instruction, 14(6), 593-619.Lai, K., Cabrera, J., Vitale, J. M., Madhok, J., Tinker, R., & Linn, M. C. (2016). Measuring graphcomprehension, critique, and construction in science. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 117.Leinhardt, G., Zaslavsky, O., & Stein, M. K. (1990). Functions, graphs, and graphing: Tasks, learning, andteaching. Review of Educational Research, 60(1), 1-64.Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B. S. (2011). Science learning and instruction: Taking advantage of technology topromote knowledge integration. Routledge.Mevarech, Z. R., & Kramarsky, B. (1997). From verbal descriptions to graphic representations: Stability andchange in students' alternative conceptions. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 32(3), 229-263.Shah, P., & Hoeffner, J. (2002). Review of graph comprehension research: Implications for instruction.Educational Psychology Review, 14(1), 47-69.Slotta, J. D., & Linn, M. C. (2009). WISE science: Web-based inquiry in the classroom. Teachers College Press.Vitale, J. M., Lai, K., & Linn, M. C. (2015). Taking advantage of automated assessment of student‐constructedgraphs in science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 52(10), 1426-1450.AcknowledgementsFunding for this research was provided by the National Science Foundation: a DR K-12 under award #1119670.CSCL 2017 Proceedings382© ISLS