Why Can’t We All Just Get Along?: Focusing on SocioemotionalClimates to Understand Emotions in Collaborative LearningNikki G. Lobczowski, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, ngl@unc.eduAbstract: This study aims at identifying and understanding the socioemotional processes thatgroups of students use while engaging in collaborative learning. I will also compare theprocesses of two extreme groups (one with high and one with low meta-emotional judgments).VisionIn this study, I aim to address gaps in the social regulation of learning literature and improve collaborative learningpractice by better understanding the phenomena of socioemotional climates. These are a group’s collectiveemotional state, defined by the overwhelming presence of either positive or negative emotions (Bakhtiar, Webster,& Hadwin, 2017). Currently, most of the literature focuses on socioemotional interactions and tensions; researchis still lacking regarding the emotion regulation strategies students use and the types of talk they engage in whileworking together. The goal of this research is to determine what regulation strategies and talk types groups useand how each of these differ between groups that rated their socioemotional climate as more positive and lesspositive.Measuring socioemotional climates remains a challenge in the current literature. Meta-emotions arefeelings, or perceptions, about feelings and are primarily studied at the individual level (Pekrun, Goetz, Titz, &Perry, 2002). Therefore, a group’s collective meta-emotional judgments about their emotions can be used torepresent their socioemotional climate (Bakhtiar et al., 2017). Importantly, socioemotional climates evolve overtime; the group members become more interdependent, with individuals’ states influencing others in a reciprocalmanner. For this reason, short-term studies on socioemotional climates may not accurately depict development ofthe social processes.The purpose of this study is to understand the different social processes of socioemotional climates.Specifically, I intend to investigate two research questions: RQ1) What socioemotional regulation processes andtalk types did groups use in a project-based learning environment? RQ2) How do these strategies and talk typesdiffer between groups who rated their meta-emotional judgments as low and high?Participants are second-year graduate pharmacy students (n = 150) completing a required project-basedlearning course on problem solving and innovative solutions in pharmacy at a university in the southeastern UnitedStates. During this course, we piloted an app that another student and I created, Collabucate, with six groups ofstudent volunteers (n = 29), recording their two-hour weekly meetings (i.e., two per week for seven weeks). Usinglog data from the app (i.e., weekly ratings of their feelings about collaboration), I calculated the groups’ averagemeta-emotional judgments to serve as their ranking for their socioemotional climate. After identifying the groupswith the overall highest and lowest ratings for comparison purposes, I will code both verbal and non-verbal dataduring each of the group meetings for socioemotional regulation strategies, interactions, and talk types. I willprimarily use deductive coding, but for those topics less prevalent in the research, I will use inductive coding.To answer RQ1, I will conduct a code mapping analysis (Saldaña, 2016) for socioemotional regulationand talk types. For each social process, I will map codes using a three-step iterative process in which I will placecodes into categories, categories into themes, and finally themes into theory. In the last step, I will look for patternsin the strategies and talk types used by students. To better understand the data and answer RQ2, I will conduct athematic analysis using the analytic memos (Saldaña, 2016) from our coding to compare the qualitative differencesbetween the types of codes used in these two groups.Preliminary findings have shown that the group with the lowest meta-emotional judgments began thecourse with average ratings, decreasing to the lowest overall scores. Conversely, the group with the highest metaemotional judgments maintained a high rating over time. Notably, these groups differed in the strategies and typesof talk they used (e.g., the high self-rated group engaged in talk types that resulted in more positive responses).Although the high self-rated group identified slightly fewer tensions, both groups identified progressing despitedifferent personalities and working styles as a tension most frequently.ReferencesBakhtiar, A., Webster, E. A., & Hadwin, A. F. (2017). Regulation and socio-emotional inter-actions in a positiveand a negative group climate. Metacognition and Learning, 1-34.Pekrun, R., Goetz, T., Titz, W., & Perry, R. (2002). Academic emotions in students’ self-regulated learning andachievement: a program of qualitative and quantitative research. Educational Psychologist, 37, 91-105.Saldaña, J. (2016). The coding manual for qualitative researchers (3rd ed). Sage. Los Angeles.1884