Politicization as Learning:Centring Racialization, Colonialism, and Gender in LearningSciences AnalysisJoe Curnow, University of Toronto, joe.curnow@utoronto.caCurrent researchI am a scholar of learning, identity development, and student-led social change. In order to theorize politicizationwithin sociocultural learning frameworks, I focus on how student activists learn new practices and develop newworldviews in movement contexts. My research shows that learning is fundamental to social change, so I tracehow student leaders in movements learn systemic critiques and prefigurative practices, and I show how peoplelearn to become justice-oriented leaders. Within the Learning Sciences, my work has been part of a significantrecent shift to address politics and power within studies of learning. My work is important for shaping what weknow about learning and equity in social movements. Theorizing how student activists learn to understand,critique, and re-make social relations in their movements is fundamental to building a more equitable society anda generation of justice-oriented leaders.My current research project examines the development of political consciousness within the climatechange movement. A new generation of young people have seized on longstanding critiques of mainstreamenvironmentalism as a white, colonial, and masculine movement, and they are working to shift its politics. Myproject explores how student fossil fuel divestment activists develop political critiques, alternative practices, nondominant ways of knowing, and radicalized identities through their activism. Through a multi-year, participatoryaction research project that collected video of meetings, rallies, direct actions, caucus spaces, reflections,interviews, and stimulated recalls, this study examines the struggles over the legitimacy of different ways ofknowing and being within multi-racial, multi- gendered, and settler colonial movements. We collected over10,000 minutes of multi-camera video data, which we content-logged and coded collaboratively. Several differentanalyses have emerged, which draw on sociocultural views of learning, as well as different constellations offeminist, anti-racist, and Indigenous thought.Several articles have emerged from this project. The first, accepted at the American EducationalResearch Journal, traces the politicization of students in the group. This paper uses the case of radicalized studentactivists within the fossil fuel divestment campaign to theorize politicization as a process of conceptualdevelopment, shifting practices and modes of participation, becoming cognizant of and challenging dominantepistemologies, and developing a shared identity as radical activists (Curnow, Davis & Asher, forthcoming). Thiswork extends traditional work on learning in social movements, centring sociohistoric critiques and bringingrobust theories of learning as a central analytic for theorizing changes in movement frames. Another article,building from the 2016 paper presented at ICLS (Curnow & Chan, 2016), analyzes gendered and racializedparticipation dynamics within the fossil fuel divestment campaign. It argues that expertise and leadership wereconflated with white, masculine modes of practice, undermining women and people of colour’s participation andleadership. This paper contributes to theorizations of “doing gender” by analyzing performances of racializedmasculinity, arguing that disproportionate recognition of white men as leaders and experts was an ongoinginteractional accomplishment by people of all genders. I also have an article building from ICLS 2016 (Curnow,2016), which argues that situated learning theory must account for power dynamics and social relations incommunities of practice. This contributes to the Learning Sciences by bringing an equity critique to situatedlearning and communities of practice theories, arguing that racialization, gender, and colonialism must be includedin analyses of learning, identity development, and participation.The publications from my dissertation build on my earlier articles on learning and leadership in the fairtrade movement. In Gender & Education, I traced women’s conscientization processes, demonstrating howconsciousness-raising among a sub-community of practice forced shifts within the broader community. Thischallenged situated learning theory to account for power relations and theorize resistance to masculine leadershipwithin a community of practice framework (Curnow, 2013). Another article argues that consensus-based decisionmaking and equity-oriented facilitation enabled participants to transform their self-identification to becomeactivists through legitimate peripheral participation (Curnow, 2014b). In Interface, I used legitimate peripheralparticipation to theorize leadership development across the student fair trade network (Curnow, 2014a). I arguethat leaders should construct opportunities for joint work with and between grassroots groups to develop sharedpolitical vision and build the ladder of engagement for rising leaders.Contributions to the field1849Often, scholars in the Learning Sciences conduct research, design interventions, and present findings withoutaddressing the power dimensions of their work. My research begins from a different set of assumptions,acknowledging the positional ways we produce knowledge and organize systems of learning. The decolonizing,participatory, feminist, and sociocultural learning theories that my work brings to bear are central to my analysisof learning in social movements. A growing number of Learning Scientists are calling for exactly the kind ofanalysis that my work provides—deep analysis of the interrelations between power, politics, and learning.Theorizing racialization, gender, and colonialism and learningLast year, Cognition & Instruction published a call for a greater focus on power and equity in our discipline,arguing that learning is shaped by racialized, colonial, and gendered dynamics (The Politics of Learning WritingCollective, 2017). My work addressing these issues has been at the forefront of anticipating and responding tothis call. My research turns the field away from the ubiquity of Eurowestern ways of knowing, bringing attentionto the racialized, gendered, and colonial aspects of learning theory.Analyzing and making space for reconciliation and anti-colonial pedagogiesI have invited papers in two forthcoming special issues, one on racialization and settler colonialism in theenvironmental movement for Environment & Society (Curnow & Helferty, forthcoming), and another on thepedagogical significance of territorial acknowledgments for Curriculum Inquiry (Asher, Curnow & Davis,forthcoming). These papers contribute to emergent discussions around Indigenous-settler reconciliation anddecolonization by examining how settlers learn about settler colonialism and racism, and how that learninginforms their participation in multiracial environmental campaigns. This research centres Indigenousmethodologies in fields where these are not widely acknowledged, and plays an important role in making spacefor other ways of knowing and being that emphasize decolonial practice as a step toward reconciliation. Inresponse to the Canadian Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s calls to action, my research provides data onhow social movements and educational institutions can create opportunities to learn that serve anticolonial andantiracist goals, enabling settlers to meet our obligations and better educate students around settler colonialism.Social action as a learning processMy academic publications have been part of the shift in the Learning Sciences toward theorizing learning in thecontext of social movements. My publications in Gender & Education and Interface both brought socioculturaltheories of learning into the analysis of student activism and gendered leadership development (Curnow, 2013;2014a). Additionally, I have published papers theorizing learning in the context of social movements (Curnow &Gross, 2016; Curnow & Wilson, 2013), offering the strength of Learning Sciences tools to social movementscholars and activists in order to shift how scholars conceptualize learning and participation. These publicationsalso add to the growing understanding of the nature of learning in social movements for scholars of learning, whotend to work within school settings rather than in social action contexts.For the Learning Sciences, my work offers groundwork to theorize learning and citizenship practices andto integrate learning about racialization and settler colonialism as central learning accomplishments which can bemeasured, evaluated, and theorized.ReferencesAsher, L., Curnow, J., & Davis, A. (Forthcoming). The Limits of Settlers’ Territorial Acknowledgments.Curriculum Inquiry.Curnow, J. (2013). Fight the Power: Situated Learning and Conscientisation in a Gendered Community ofPractice. Gender & Education. 25(7), 834-850. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09540253.2013.845649Curnow, J. (2014a). Climbing the Leadership Ladder: Legitimate Peripheral Participation in Social Movements.Interface. 6(1), 130-155.Curnow, J. (2014b). Becoming an Activist: Learning the Politics and Performances of Youth Activism throughLegitimate Peripheral Participation. In Polman, J. L., Kyza, E. A., O'Neill, D. K., Tabak, I., Penuel, W.R., Jurow, A. S., O'Connor, K., Lee, T., & D'Amico, L. (Eds.). Learning and Becoming in Practice: TheInternational Conference of the Learning Sciences 2014, Volume 1 (pp. 206-213). Boulder, CO:International Society of the Learning Sciences.Curnow, J. (2016). Situated Learning, Situated Knowledge: Situating Race, Colonialism, andPatriarchy Within Communities of Practice. In Looi, C. K., Polman, J. L., Cress, U., & Reimann, P.(Eds.). (2016). Transforming Learning, Empowering Learners: The International Conference of theLearning Sciences 2016, Volume 1 (pp. 218-225). Singapore: International Society of the LearningSciences.1850Curnow, J. & Chan, J.R. (2016). Becoming an “Expert”: Gendered Positioning, Praise, and Participation in anActivist Community. In Looi, C. K., Polman, J. L., Cress, U., & Reimann, P. (Eds.). (2016).Transforming Learning, Empowering Learners: The International Conference of the Learning Sciences2016, Volume 1 (pp. 146-153). Singapore: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Curnow, J., Davis, A., & Asher, L. (Forthcoming). Politicization in Process. American Educational ResearchJournal.Curnow, J. & Gross, A. (2016). Injustice is Not an Investment: Student Activism, Climate Justice, and the FossilFuel Divestment Campaign. In Rosen, S. & Connor, J. (Eds). Contemporary Youth Activism: AdvancingSocial Justice in the United States (pp. 367-386). Santa Barbara, California: Praeger.Curnow, J. & Helferty, A. (Forthcoming). Contradictions of Solidarity: Whiteness, Settler Coloniality, and theMainstream Environmental Movement. Environment & Society.The Politics of Learning Writing Collective (Philip, T. M., Jurow, A. S., Vossoughi, S., Bang, M., & Zavala, M).(2017). The Learning Sciences in a new era of US nationalism. Cognition & Instruction, 35(2), 91-102.Wilson, B.R. & Curnow, J. (2013). Solidarity TM: Student Activism, Affective Labor, and the Fair TradeCampaign in the United States. Antipode. 45(3), 565-583.http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.14678330.2012.01051.x1851