Dealing With Changes and Challenges:Grade 5 Students’ Experience With Knowledge Building Pedagogyin a Yearlong Science InquiryHe Zhou, University at Albany, SUNY, USA, hzhou@albany.eduJianwei Zhang, University at Albany, SUNY, USA, jzhang1@albany.eduAbstract: The goal of this study is to understand how grade 5 students as new knowledgebuilders adapt to the changes and address the challenges associated with Knowledge Buildingpedagogy to sustain their science inquiry over a school year. We observed the knowledgebuilding process of a Grade 5 classroom that studied ecology, conducted in-depth semistructured interview with nine students to gather detailed accounts of their personalexperiences with science inquiry organized based on Knowledge Building pedagogy.Qualitative analysis of the interviews in relation to the classroom observations elaborates howthe students experienced changes in their learning and their socio-emotional and cognitiveresponses to these changes. The findings show that the students addressed the challengesbrought by the changes by exerting a series of cognitive efforts themselves and by gainingsupport from their knowledge building community.IntroductionEducation in the 21st century needs to prepare students for creative knowledge-intensive careers andcollaborative practices. Various collaborative, inquiry-based learning programs have been developed tocultivate productive knowledge practices among students. Among the inquiry-based programs is the KnowledgeBuilding pedagogy, which is aimed at restructuring classrooms as knowledge building communities in line withhow creative knowledge practices operate in the real world (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014). Despite theadvances made in understanding the socio-cultural and cognitive processes of collaborative inquiry andknowledge building (Bell & Linn, 2000; Hakkarainen, 2003; Hmelo-Silver, 2004; Roschelle, 1992; van Aalst,2009), we, as a field, still have not found out how to bring sustained collaborative inquiry and knowledgebuilding into broad classrooms to transform educational practices. The implementation of authentic inquiry andknowledge building requires teachers as well as their students to adapt to a new paradigm of learning thatinvolves new learning goals, processes, social roles and norms, and environments. For example, students needto learn how to enact high-level agency and collective responsibility for co-managing the processes of inquiry(Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014; Zhang et al., 2011). While existing research has investigated the progress madeby various classrooms toward productive knowledge building practices (van Aalst & Truong, 2011; Zhang etal., 2007), it is unclear how students as new knowledge builders experience and respond to the dramatic changesto strive for effective knowledge building. The purpose of this study is to understand how students in a grade 5classroom adapted to the changes and addressed the challenges associated with knowledge building to sustaintheir science inquiry over a school year.Conducting science inquiry using Knowledge Building pedagogy represents a demanding challenge toteachers and students who are new to the pedagogy. Students are expected to take on new roles and handlelearning differently to become effective knowledge builders who work together to develop collectiveunderstandings through sustained inquiry processes at both the individual and community level. Suchtransformation takes a gradual process through which students become more comfortable embracing changesand addressing challenges associated with Knowledge Building pedagogy. To better support the process ofclassroom change, we need to investigate the motivational and socioemotional aspects related to the waysstudents deal with the challenges and difficulties of knowledge building (cf. Miyake & Kirschner, 2014). Whenexperiencing challenges, students have various emotions, which are associated with the ways they viewthemselves in relation to the nature and context of learning (Dweck, 2006). More positive responses tochallenges involve seeing challenges as opportunities to learn and dealing with challenges through persistentefforts (Duckworth, Peterson, Matthews, & Kelly, 2007). Students need to make decisions at an individual levelto adapt themselves to the new pedagogy that requires them to actively seek support and build knowledge asopposed to passively waiting to be guided and taught by their teacher.What specific changes students experience, what these changes mean to students, and what efforts theypay to respond to the challenges when doing inquiry with Knowledge Building pedagogy are worthinvestigating. This study investigates the experience of a group of fifth-graders in their first year of knowledgebuilding. We ask the following research questions: (a) How do students conceive of the new way of learningICLS 2018 Proceedings1133© ISLSthrough knowledge building? (b) What characterizes student experience as new knowledge builders? And (c)How do students deal with challenges to sustain and deepen their science inquiry over a school year?MethodologyClassroom contextsThis study was conducted in a grade 5 classroom at a public school in Northeast US. This classroom had 24students who were taught by a veteran teacher. The students studied ecology over a whole school year, with twoscience lessons each week. The ecology study was implemented based on Knowledge Building pedagogysupported by Knowledge Forum: an online collaborative environment (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014). Thescience inquiry began with focused research on crayfish and was then expanded to study different ecosystems.Students generated various interests and questions and formulated shared wondering areas as the focus of theirinquiry. They generated ideas, conducted research using online and printed materials, and engaged inknowledge building conversations to share and build on one another’s ideas for deeper understanding. On anongoing basis, students contributed ideas to Knowledge Forum for continual discussion online.Data sources and analysesThe data sources included classroom observations and interviews. The first author observed each science lessonand took detailed notes. At the end of the inquiry, we conducted a semi-structured interview with nine studentsrandomly selected from those who had consented to be interviewed. The interview included nine questionsfocusing on the processes and experiences of inquiry. Follow-up questions were asked in each interview to havestudents explain their response in detail. The interviews lasted between 10 and 19 minutes each. All theinterviews were video-recorded and transcribed verbatim.We used qualitative inductive data analysis (Hatch, 2002; Strauss & Corbin, 1998) to analyze theinterview data supported by our classroom observations. The first author read and re-read the interviewtranscriptions. Focusing on each of the research questions, a set of raw codes was developed and applied to theinterview data. The raw codes were further reviewed and linked to develop salient themes. The themes andcodes were described in Findings.FindingsTo understand how the students experienced and conceived of the changes in their classroom caused by theadoption of Knowledge Building pedagogy, we asked students to reflect on their journey of inquiry and theirexperience with this new way of learning in the interview. Qualitative coding of the students’ responses resultedin five major codes that gave rise to two themes (Table 1). Students recognized that they were expected to takeownership over their science inquiry to generate inquiry directions and questions and plan and structure theirinquiry processes. With this expectation, students noticed that they needed to take on new roles to find theinformation through research, to go beyond the information for deep understanding, and to build connectionsacross the various ideas to understand how ecosystems work.Table 1: New changes students experienced with Knowledge Building pedagogyThemesLearning as student-drivenLearning through deepinquiryCodesDefining inquirytopics and questionsExamples“choose what you wanted to learn about, instead ofteacher saying, this is what you gonna learn about”Structuring inquiryprocessesConducting research“there is a lot of resources I can work by”Going deep“had to figure out why this was the answer and how itworked”“make… connections to many other things”Building connections“having to find out all the answers for ourselves”In the interview, the students were further asked to reflect on any exciting things or difficult momentsthey had experienced in the knowledge building process. Coding of their responses helped us to identify boththeir feelings/emotions as well as cognitive challenges (Table 2). As new knowledge builders, studentsICLS 2018 Proceedings1134© ISLSexperienced different emotional reactions along their journey of science inquiry. On one hand, they showedenjoyment and excitement. On the other hand, they also experienced struggles to adapt to their new role asknowledge builders who needed to manage their inquiry interests and directions. Associated with the strugglesare the specific cognitive challenges they encountered at different stages of their inquiry: to go deeper, to findhelpful sources of information, and to deal with setbacks in thinking.Table 2: Socio-emotional responses and cognitive challenges students experienced with Knowledge BuildingThemesFeelings about inquiryCodesEnjoymentStruggle“couldn’t go anyfurther”Examples“It’s actually very fun!”“It would’ve helped if some of the questions I couldhave gotten answers to like easier, like if the teacherknew the answer to a question, she could tell us.”“I couldn’t find anything else about tundra and so Idecided that I switched topic because I was stuck inthe tundra.”“Sometimes I felt like everything I read was kind ofjust over and over again, the same exact thing.”“hard to findinformation”Setbacks in thinking“can’t find the information that we were trying tofind.”“my train of thought stopped”Finding and changinginterestCognitive challengesIn the interview, students further commented on what they did when they faced difficulties andchallenges. Analysis of their comments revealed their active efforts and strategies along three themes: deepthinking, reflective monitoring and strategic focusing, and seeking collaborative support in their community toconnect ideas and deepen inquiry. These comments aligned with our classroom observations, showing that thestudents exerted continual efforts both individually and as a community to solve problems, stretch theirthinking, and achieve deeper understanding.Table 3: Cognitive efforts students made to deepen inquiry with Knowledge BuildingThemesDeep thinkingReflective monitoring andstrategic focusingCodesKeep thinking andresearching“got moreinformation”Seeing the wholepictureExamples“to think in a different way, at a different angle”Tracking thinking“Think about what you know, and think about whatyou don’t know”“After I switch topics, I found a lot about coral reefs,so I did not get stuck during the coral reefs”“get ideas from my friends and Mrs. O”RefocusingCollaborating to connectand deepen inquiryReaching out to otherpeople“connecting ideas”Contributing to thecommunity“look at the websites, the extra information, thebooks, the videos”“learn about other things about it to figure out howthat affecting what you think is important”“connect your knowledge with other people and yourthinking.”“to take the most important things you kinda want totalk about what’s happening more than the facts aboutit.”DiscussionEfforts to transform classroom practices using Knowledge Building pedagogy and other inquiry-based learningprograms require deeper understandings of how students as new knowledge builders experience and respond tothe dramatic changes. In this study, the participants understood that their learning was expected to be “studentdriven” for “deep inquiry,” which were two major changes they faced in their science learning. The participantsICLS 2018 Proceedings1135© ISLSreported enjoyment of their yearlong science learning experience. Meanwhile, they reported struggles to playtheir new roles and manage their inquiry interests and directions when they reflected on the beginning phase oftheir inquiry. The contrast of students’ emotional responses between “struggle” and “enjoyment” indicates asense of accomplishment after they adapted to the changes by dealing with the “cognitive challenges”, byengaging in “deep thinking” and “reflective monitoring and strategic focusing,” and by “collaborating” andreaching out to their KBC for inquiry support. To students, “reaching out to other people” and “connectingideas” through face-to-face or online interactions were not the only ways they practiced to deepen inquiry.“Contributing to community” by generating and improving ideas in Knowledge Forum also fostered theircognitive effort and stretched their thinking. The community served as a supportive context to sustain thescience inquiry of both individuals and the community as a whole.Implications and next stepsThe findings contribute to understanding how students experience and respond to the changes and challengesassociated with Knowledge Building pedagogy. Transforming classroom practices using inquiry-based learningand knowledge building not only requires the efforts of researchers and teachers but also the persistent efforts ofstudents to make sense of the changes, embrace challenges, and deploy proactive strategies to seek ideaimprovement despite difficulties. We are expanding this analysis to a larger group of students from severalclassrooms to understand the full range of changes and challenges students encounter. We will also do deeperanalysis of students’ specific actions to address the challenges in relation to knowledge advances achieved.ReferencesBell, P., & Linn, M. C. (2000). Scientific arguments as learning artifacts: Designing for learning from the webwith KIE. International Journal of Science Education, 22(8), 797–817.Dweck, C. S. (2006). Mindset: The new psychology of success. Random House Incorporated.Duckworth, A. L., Peterson, C., Matthews, M. D., & Kelly, D. R. (2007). Grit: perseverance and passion forlong-term goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92(6), 1087.Hakkarainen, K. (2003). Progressive inquiry in a computer-supported biology class. Journal of Research inScience Teaching, 40(10), 1072-1088.Hatch, J. A. (2002). Doing Qualitative Research in Education Settings. Albany: State University of New YorkPress.Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2004). Problem-based learning: what and how do students learn? Educational PsychologyReview, 16(3), 235-266.Miyaki, N., Kirschner, P. A. (2014), A. (1992). The social and interactive dimensions of collaborative learning.In. R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning science, Second Edition (pp. 418438), New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. Journal of the LearningSciences, 2, 235–276.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, andtechnology. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences, Second Edition(pp. 397-417). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. M. (2008). Basics of qualitative research: techniques and procedures for developinggrounded theory. Los Angeles: SAGE Publications.van Aalst, J. (2009). Distinguishing knowledge-sharing, knowledge-construction, and knowledge-creationdiscourses. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(3), 259-287.van Aalst, J., & Truong, M. S. (2011). Promoting knowledge creation discourse in an Asian primary fiveclassroom: Results from an inquiry into life cycles. International Journal of Science Education. 33(4),487-515.Zhang, J., Hong, H. -Y., Scardamalia, M., Toe, C., & Morley, E. (2011). Sustaining knowledge building as aprinciple-based innovation at an elementary school. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20(2), 262-307.Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Lamon, M., Messina, R., & Reeve, R. (2007). Social-cognitive dynamics ofknowledge building in the work of nine- and ten-year-olds. Educational Technology Research andDevelopment, 55(2), 117-145.AcknowledgmentsThis research was sponsored by National Science Foundation (IIS#1441479). We thank the teacher and studentsfor their creative work enabling this research.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1136© ISLS