Toward an Integrated Framework of Scientific ReasoningShiyu Liu, The Pennsylvania State University, liux0631@gmail.comAbstract: This paper proposes an integrated framework, PREP, to capture the dynamicrelationship among key influential factors of scientific reasoning, including prior knowledge(P), reading capacity (R), epistemic beliefs (E), and personal attributes (P). Empirical evidencefrom a qualitative study is presented as we elaborate and further develop this framework. In thisstudy, twenty-six undergraduate students were interviewed to reason about competingarguments on global climate change. In-depth analysis of participants’ interview responsesdemonstrated important characteristics of the cognitive processes and underpinningmechanisms of scientific reasoning. This work adds to ongoing discussion about the nature ofscientific reasoning and provides a holistic approach to characterizing and evaluating scientificreasoning. Furthermore, by capturing important features of individuals’ reasoning when facedwith climate issues, this work has significant implications for classroom science teaching andlearning.Keywords: scientific reasoning, epistemic beliefs, prior knowledge, reading capacity, personal attributesIntroductionScientific reasoning is at the core of scientific inquiry, but is not just a vehicle that scientists are entitled to (Giere,Bickle, & Mauldin, 2006; Sinatra & Chinn, 2011). The ability to reason scientifically greatly affects how peopleunderstand and evaluate information from professional publications and public media (Sinatra, Kienhues, & Hofer,2014). Hence, science educators have long been emphasizing the importance of teaching scientific reasoning inthe classrooms so that students grow to be scientifically informed citizens (National Research Council, 2001, 2012;NGSS Lead States, 2013). However, obstacles abound in such efforts, one of which lies in the lack of theoreticalconsensus on what constitutes and affects scientific reasoning (Zeineddin & Abd- El-Khalick, 2010). To betterinform teachers as they support students’ development of reasoning skills, there is a call for more integratedframeworks to conceptualize the essence of scientific reasoning (Kind, 2013).In this paper, we propose a framework to characterize the processes and mechanisms of scientificreasoning. Based on our work through two large projects that aimed to promote classroom instruction andassessment of scientific reasoning, we identified four key factors and investigate their dynamic interactions duringreasoning processes. In the following, we first review relevant literature that informed our perspective. We thenpresent our theoretical framework with findings from an empirical study and conclude with future directions ofthis work.Theoretical backgroundsExisting literature provides numerous perspectives toward what constitutes scientific reasoning and how tomeasure it. Here, we highlight previous research that has influenced our framework.Reasoning is a process of drawing conclusions from principles and evidence so as to infer newconclusions based on what is already known (Wason & Johnson-Laird, 1972). As an important type of formalreasoning, scientific reasoning has drawn attention from scholars in different fields that hold distinctiveperspectives (see Zimmerman (2005) for review), among which the main discrepancy falls in whether to focus onthe cognitive processes during reasoning or the underpinning mechanisms that guide such processes. Chinn andMalhotra (2002) pointed out that more work is needed to unpack the complex mechanisms which underlieindividuals’ reasoning processes. They held that as the majority of previous studies tended to focus on exploringsimplified aspects of scientific reasoning, such as the control-of-variable strategy, the epistemic nature ofreasoning has been missing in not only scholarly research but also classroom teaching. Here, the epistemic naturemainly refers to how one evaluates evidence in authentic inquiry and coordinates theory and evidence when facedwith complex science problems.In the past decades, with growing concerns on teaching socioscientific issues-such as global climatechange and genetic engineering-in science classrooms, the scope of research on scientific reasoning has beengreatly extended (e.g., Mason & Scirica, 2006; Yang, Chang, & Hsu, 2008). For instance, Sadler and colleaguesused the concept of socioscientific reasoning to explain how individuals process information about socioscientificissues to which there are no absolute solutions (Sadler, Barab, & Scott, 2007). In particular, they stressed thatsocioscientific reasoning, as a major type of informal reasoning, requires one to recognize the inherent complexityICLS 2016 Proceedings490© ISLSof ill-defined issues, examine them from multiple perspectives, appreciate that they are subject to ongoing inquiry,and exhibit them from multiple perspectives. Yet, while studies of socioscientific reasoning have greatly enrichedour understanding of how people reason, it remains unclear whether individuals are able to reason formallythrough scientific means about competing arguments on socioscientific issues.More recently, the growing body of studies on epistemic beliefs has imposed significant influence oninvestigation of scientific reasoning (Sinatra & Lombardi, 2013). Current research on epistemic beliefs has movedfrom mainly focusing on individuals’ beliefs toward knowledge and the process of knowing (e.g., Hofer & Pintrich,1997) to investigating how such beliefs guide individuals’ cognitive and metacognitive processes (e.g., Muis &Franco, 2009). As a result, many scholars start to incorporate discussion on epistemic beliefs into studies ofreasoning processes (e.g., Barzilai & Eshet-Alkalai, 2015; Chinn, Rinehart, & Buckland, 2014). Such researchmovement corresponds to educational reforms which suggest further development of students’ skills of engagingin authentic inquiry and participating in scientific argumentation (NGSS Lead States, 2013). In all, the convergingresearch interests from various lines of work have brought in a refreshing look on what affects scientific reasoningand calls for a revisit of existing approaches to investigating scientific reasoning. Further work is needed to movetoward an integrated framework of scientific reasoning.The PREP FrameworkBuilding upon related literature, we identify four interconnected factors that critically contribute to individuals’scientific reasoning processes: prior knowledge, reading capacity, epistemic beliefs, and personal attributes(henceforth, PREP) (Liu, 2014).Prior knowledgePrior knowledge is a double-edged sword in one’s scientific reasoning process. On one hand, appropriateknowledge supports the selection of appropriate reasoning strategies (Schauble, 1996). The more contentknowledge one has, the more likely they are to perform well in scientific reasoning about related issues (Mason& Scirica, 2006; Osborne, 2010). On the other hand, the prominent domain-specific approach to investigatingscientific reasoning left it vague as to whether prior knowledge can place significant impacts on reasoning (e.g.,Klahr & Dunbar, 1988). Thus, to maximize the positive effects of prior knowledge, more and more studies startto investigate the dynamic interactions between prior knowledge and other learner characteristics such as readingcapacity and epistemic beliefs (e.g., Kendeou & van den Broek, 2007).Reading capacityCompared to prior knowledge, the effect of reading capacity on scientific reasoning is much less discussed. Asresearch on scientific reasoning has been more and more embedded in contexts of argumentation, reasoning ofteninvolves comprehension and evaluation of written texts that include two-sided scientific arguments or multiplesolutions in relation to controversial or ambiguous issues (Chan, Ho, & Ku, 2011). Hence, to reason about variousarguments, it is critical that individuals have adequate reading capacity to coordinate the multiple sources ofinformation presented. Bräten and colleagues held that individuals who could integrate information are more likelyto process information in a way consistent with their epistemic beliefs (Bräten, Britt, Strømsø, & Rouet, 2011).At the same time, they also called for further research to specify the relationship between reading capacity andepistemic beliefs.Epistemic beliefsEpistemic beliefs entail “individuals’ beliefs about the nature of knowledge and the processes of knowing” (Hofer& Pintrich, 1997, p. 117). People with limited reasoning abilities tend to find it difficult to process informationfrom multiple perspectives, which in turn discourages them from endorsing sophisticated epistemic beliefs thatacknowledge the tentative and complex nature of knowledge (Zeidler, Walker, Ackett, & Simmons, 2002).Conversely, naïve epistemic beliefs were found to be associated with withdrawal from in-depth reasoning (Sinatra,Southerland, McConaughy, & Demastes, 2003). Those who hold such beliefs tend to overlook the need to engagein scientific reasoning and are more likely to treat information that does not support their existing beliefs in abiased manner (Chan, Ho, & Ku, 2011; Kuhn, 2001; Weinstock & Cronin, 2003).Discussion on the interaction of the above three factors adds an important lens to the study of scientificreasoning. It not only relates to constant debates on the domain-general and domain-specific nature of scientificreasoning, but also proposes alternative explanations of challenges one may encounter during reasoning.The fourth factor: Personal attributesICLS 2016 Proceedings491© ISLSWith increasing emphasis on epistemic beliefs and other learner characteristics, research on scientific reasoningis demonstrating growing orientation toward capturing “warm cognition” (Dole & Sinatra, 1998). In particular,affective factors like motivations and beliefs are being paid increasing attention to in the investigation of reasoningprocesses. For instance, Lombardi, Seyranian and Sinatra (2014) have explored how emotions may relate to thelevel of scientific understanding students hold and their perception of plausibility of evidence regarding criticalissues such as climate change. As early research on scientific reasoning mostly features the cognitive andmetacognitive processes, the role affective factors play is a relatively under-studied area. Based on existing workon affective components of scientific learning, here we use “personal attributes” to refer to important aspectsincluding one’s belief system, attitudinal orientation toward certain topics, as well as personal interests andmotivation.The studyWhile existing research has taken various paths to reveal the relationships among some of the four factors above,to our knowledge, there is little work that devotes to capture in depth how they interact with each other. Therefore,in the present study, we employed a qualitative approach, grounded theory (Glaser & Strauss, 1967; Strauss &Corbin, 1990) to answer a critical question: How the four factors proposed in the PREP Framework interact witheach other to guide people’s scientific reasoning processes? Grounded theory research allows an exploratorydevelopment of theory grounded in data from the field (Glaser, 1978). Researchers conduct iterative datacollection and analysis to allow an analytic, substantive theory to emerge from the phenomenon. Thus, followingthe principles of grounded theory, this work enables a more “naturalistic” insight into the nature of scientificreasoning.ParticipantsTwenty-six undergraduate students (20 females and 6 males, Mage = 19.65 years, SDage = 1.06) at a major universityin the Midwestern U. S. were recruited through theoretical sampling (Glaser & Strauss, 1967). Theoreticalsampling is a key feature of grounded theory: it requires the sampling process to be guided by the need forunderstanding the phenomenon of interest (Glaser, 1978). Following this principle, participants were purposefullyrecruited from a wide range of majors to increase the diversity of the sample in terms of their content knowledgeand personal beliefs about climate change. Data collection was complete after 26 participants were interviewedwhen saturation of theoretical categories was reached and no new categories emerged.Study designAn interview protocol was developed, including a 606-word reading document and 13 open-ended questions. Thetopic of interest is global climate change. Despite the ongoing educational efforts, students at all levels stillexperience difficulties in processing the multitude of perspectives and evidence regarding climate change (e.g.,Braasch et al., 2013; Gil, Bräten, Vidal-Abarca, & Strømsø, 2010). Analyzing individuals’ reasoning processeson this topic can help reveal a more well-rounded view of the nature of reasoning and its influential factors. Thereading document consisted of two opposing perspectives: climate change is human caused versus climate changeis due to natural changes. This reading document involved three most commonly discussed topics regardingclimate change: Earth’s temperature change, rising sea level, and extreme weather events. The three topics werepresented on separate pages with arguments from both sides. The interview questions were designed to assessthree aspects: 1) prior knowledge about climate change, 2) evaluation of evidence and arguments, and 3)perspectives toward climate science. As they read the documents, participants were asked to read aloud and thinkaloud to help us probe into their thinking processes. They then evaluated the evidence used in the reading, critiquedon the arguments, and discussed their viewpoints about climate science.Data analysisThe interviews were audio-recorded and later transcribed verbatim. Transcripts were entered into NVivo 10 forfurther analysis. Constant comparative analysis (Glaser & Strauss, 1967) was employed for data analysis and itinvolved three stages of coding (open coding, selective coding and axial coding) to allow theoretical categories toemerge. Data analysis was conducted in two layers. The first layer featured identification of the four influentialfactors during reasoning. The second layer analyzed participants’ reasoning processes based on the complexity oftheir cognitive processes when thinking aloud and responding to the interview questions. The combination of thetwo layers thus generated fine-grained analysis of the dynamics among the proposed four factors.To establish the trustworthiness of data analysis, techniques such as memoing and diagramming wereemployed throughout the coding processes. In addition, during data analysis, categories that were similar in theirICLS 2016 Proceedings492© ISLSdefinitions were further compared and contrasted to decide their final categorization. These efforts all helped toachieve the goal of establishing credibility, transferability, dependability and confirmability in the data analysis(Lincoln & Guba, 1985).ResultsTable 1 lists the outline of our coding system for this data set. We also identified sub-factors under reading capacity,epistemic beliefs, and personal attributes. In particular, reading capacity was analyzed based on participants’ability to use reading strategies such as monitoring their reading progress, epistemic beliefs captured participants’views about the nature of knowledge and expertise in climate science, whereas personal attributes involved theirattitudes, as well as related belief systems, toward climate issues. Broadly, three patterns were identified tocategorize reasoning processes-withdrawal from reasoning, limited reasoning, and complex reasoning-where therelationships of the proposed four factors were further investigated. Given the limited space, here we present threebrief examples to demonstrate key findings at each reasoning pattern. Quotes from participants are specified withtheir assigned participant number (such as P1, P2, and so on).Table 1: Outline of the core coding systemFactorsSub-FactorsPrior KnowledgeExisting understandings participants hold about climate changeMonitoring ComprehensionReading CapacityMaking AssociationsMaking InferencesOthersTimely reflection of reading progress and problems encounteredRelating texts to existing beliefs or knowledgeGenerating explanations or comments based on textsRelativityResponses such as “I don’t like the wording here”Perception of the nature of scientific knowledge in general, suchas whether knowledge is fixed or fluidRelative correctness of multiple perspectivesPerception aboutCredibilityThe trustworthiness of the source of evidence, the reliability ofthe source, the scientific foundations of measurement, etc.Nature of ScienceEpistemic BeliefsScientist’s ExpertiseFlexibility of BeliefsComplexity andUncertainty of ClimateSciencePersonal BeliefsPersonalAttributesDefinitionsAttitudinal OrientationPersonal InterestsMotivationScientists’ certainty about the causes and consequences ofclimate change, consensus in the science community on theanthropogenic nature of climate change, etc.Reflection on one’s own and others’ stance and likelihood tochange such stancePerception of the nature of climate scienceThe role of political and religious beliefsPreferences for and support of certain stance and argumentsPersonal relevance of the topic of interest, curiosity toward thetopic, etc.Reasons to/not to actively seek relevant information on the topicof interestWithdrawal from reasoningThis pattern consisted of responses from participants that were mainly repeating the information presented.Sometimes they may request specification or clarification after reading information that they were not familiarwith or uncertain about. While they might recognize and briefly identify the consistency or conflict of informationin the reading with what they already knew, they would not resort to their epistemic beliefs when evaluatingevidence and making conclusions. For example, after reading about the composition of the atmosphere and thepercentage of CO2 in it, P14 responded “OK, I guess I didn’t know that CO2 only constitutes less than 1% of thetrace gases.” While she acknowledged that “scientists might realize ten years later that they’re missing someinformation”, P14 often simply conformed to or refuted a given argument without further reasoning about theevidence provided.ICLS 2016 Proceedings493© ISLSLimited reasoningReasoning processes identified into this pattern involved more cognitive efforts and included more details abouthow participants processed any given information. However, this reasoning pattern was limited as participantsmostly emphasized the surface features of evidence as well as the arguments it supported. Their overwhelmingfocus on writing features, such as tone of writing, sometimes may override their attitudes and beliefs about thetopic when they attempted to evaluate evidence and make conclusions. For instance, after reading the sentence“Changes in the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events are due to human-caused Earth’s temperatureincrease”, P22 commented that “even though I believe this, this sentence came off a little biased. Even though Ido believe that it is human caused, it came off a little strong, so I don’t know (whether I agree with it).”Complex reasoningThis reasoning pattern represented participants’ advanced skills in drawing upon their cognitive and affectiveresources. P25, for example, demonstrated her abilities to reason about statistical meanings of numerical values.When presented with numbers such as the percentage of CO2 in the Earth’s atmosphere, P25 raised concerns thatthese numerical values alone might not be telling the whole story and requested clarification for the scientificmeanings of these numbers. P25 explained her concerns about the need for more information regarding thestatistical significance of evidence as follows:Like if the increase of CO2 went from like 0.5 to 1%, I mean I don’t know how significant thatwould be. Um, they’re also showing that the increase in the Earth’s average surface temperature,but it looks like a very small amount too. I don’t know how big an impact that would have.Furthermore, P25 also actively related information to her religious beliefs and reflected on how herbeliefs may have affected her thinking process. When evaluating the evidence that was used to support “Risingsea level is not human-caused”, P25 stated that “I would have tried to find sources that were like based on theCreation (God’s creation of the world) rather than the Theory of Evolution”. Similarly, after reading “In particular,the number of hurricanes and tropical storms during 1995 and 2004 doubled that during 1970 and 1994 in NorthAtlantic”, P25 reported the following as she was thinking aloud:The Bible warns in the book of revelation when Christ returns his coming, that there will bemore like catastrophic events like that, like as his return years. So, like, as a Christian, as afollower of Jesus, it’s kind of exciting, because you will wait for him to come back a secondtime, so I mean because God’s words warn about that, that makes me think of (this argument)just from that perspective.The PREP Framework: A step furtherThe two-layered analysis in this study provided rich information on the complex dynamics among the four factorsproposed. Based on the current findings, the nature of the relationships among these factors makes it difficult tocome to a conclusive model. Nonetheless, some main themes emerged in this work presented opportunities tofurther develop the PREP Framework and inform future efforts in capturing scientific reasoning.First, the potential role each factor may play is relatively consistent and predictable. Figure 1 presents asimplified process model based on the current findings to help illustrate the functional characteristics of thesefactors during reasoning. In particular, when individuals are exposed to multiple arguments in writing, informationencoding takes place and their capacity in reading comprehension acts as the first filter for what they may chooseto focus on as they continue to further interpret the information. During their reasoning processes, intentionallynot unintentionally, individuals relate to prior knowledge to construct mental models of the information. As theyalign such models with their epistemic beliefs about climate change, individuals choose to engage in reasoning orwithdraw from it. Individuals’ personal attributes play a critical role in how they reason. Those who show lack ofinterests in issues related to climate change are more likely to avoid reasoning about the different arguments. Atthe same time, when individuals integrate their personal values such as religious beliefs into their perspectivesabout climate change, they approach reasoning much more differently. It should be noted that the relationshipbetween personal beliefs and the chosen paths of reasoning can be reciprocal: while the former affects howindividuals evaluate different aspects of the arguments, their focus on arguments that support their ownperspectives can further strengthen their beliefs and even biases. This process model can serve as a preliminaryapplication of the PREP Framework to help us understand the proposed factors and their interactions.ICLS 2016 Proceedings494© ISLSFigure 1. A process model of scientific reasoning on global climate change.Second, interactions among the four factors fluctuate not only between individuals but also withinindividuals. For instance, based on the present results, whether more prior knowledge and advanced epistemicbeliefs may result in more complex reasoning depends on the level of reading comprehension one achieves at themoment. Therefore, rather than pushing for a uniformed characterization of scientific reasoning, PREP leavessufficient flexibility for future research to probe into the dynamics among these factors across contexts.It should be noted that while findings from this qualitative work can serve as a foundation for furtherdevelopment of the proposed PREP Framework, cautions should be taken when employing this framework. First,this study adopted a qualitative research approach to investigate scientific reasoning processes. While integratingthe grounded theory approach has yielded in-depth discussions on how undergraduate students reason aboutclimate issues, like all qualitative studies, concerns may arise regarding the trustworthiness and credibility of thiswork. While great efforts were made throughout data collection and analysis to avoid biases and minimizepreconceptions for grounded theory, given the nature of qualitative studies, it is open for further investigationwhether the PREP framework can be generalized across subject domains for different populations. Moreover, thetopic of interest here was global climate change, whereas scientific reasoning processes may differ as the topicvaries. Follow-up studies will continue to explore how this theoretical framework may apply to reasoning withother socioscientific issues, such as genetic engineering and water pollution. To obtain a more comprehensiveunderstanding about the contributing factors of scientific reasoning, later researchers may find it helpful to expandthe scope of investigation and consider aspects that have not been discussed very much in scientific reasoningresearch such as social and religious factors.Research on scientific reasoning has been of great interests to the learning sciences community. ThePREP Framework proposed in this paper aimed to pursue a more integrated view of scientific reasoning andinvestigate its influential factors. Through capturing the dynamic interactions among four factors, including priorknowledge, reading capacity, epistemic beliefs, and personal attributes, this framework demonstrates a holisticview toward scientific reasoning and reveals the complexity of its underpinning mechanisms. PREP adds to thecurrent efforts in facilitating the theoretical construct development for scientific reasoning. The uniqueness of thegrounded theory methodology makes the exploration of individuals’ reasoning processes more naturalistic andbrought a new lens to research on scientific reasoning.Educational implicationsThis work has important implications for classroom science teaching and learning. Despite the numerous studiesin the field of scientific reasoning, no consensus is reached on what instructional support should be provided tofacilitate student reasoning (Osborne, 2010). A central goal of science education is to enhance students’ skills ineffective communication of scientific issues. National science education standards in the U.S. have emphasizedthat students should be able to reason scientifically in order to engage in scientific argumentation and thuscommunicate about issues that impact their daily lives (NGSS Lead States, 2013). Osborne (2010) suggested thatthere are several aspects of scientific reasoning skills that science education might seek to develop such asidentifying patterns in data and resolve uncertainty of scientific inquiry. However, there have not been manyempirical studies that provide empirical support for this proposal. Rooted in empirical data, the PREP Frameworkis consistent with the proposal Osborne made, but extended its scope in the context of a socioscientific issue. Byrevealing participants’ perspectives and thinking processes about climate issues, this study provided criticalinformation for teachers to consider as they develop their curricula.ICLS 2016 Proceedings495© ISLSFurthermore, findings from this work add to the ongoing debates in climate change education about howto enhance climate literacy. One of the most critical educational objectives is for students to learn about howsocioscientific issues are handled and evaluated within society so that they are able to act as responsible citizensin the future (e.g., Höttecke, Henke, & Riess, 2012). Educational and policy documents have suggested thatstudents should develop reasoning skills that can help them evaluate the causes and effects of global climatechange (NRC, 2001, 2012). Students should be more actively engaged in evidence-based reasoning about humanimpacts on the Earth’s climate system to propose, test and modify possible solutions to current climate issues.Incorporating scientific reasoning into climate change education will help fulfill this goal. It is essential that thegeneral public come to appreciate the relevance of scientific reasoning and its impact on climate literacy. However,although the importance of scientific reasoning in climate change education has been established, there have notbeen many detailed discussions on effective approaches to promote scientific reasoning and climate literacy. Asthis grounded theory study looked into the complex relationship between scientific reasoning and prior knowledgeas well as identifying multiple factors that may have affected students reasoning about climate issues, it may serveto initiate conversations between scientists and educators for potential collaborations in their efforts of enhancingthe public’s climate literacy.ReferencesBarzilai, S., & Eshet-Alkalai, Y. (2015). The role of epistemic perspectives in comprehension of multiple authorviewpoints. Learning and Instruction, 36, 86-103.Braasch, J. L., Bråten, I., Strømsø, H. I., Anmarkrud, Ø., & Ferguson, L. E. (2013). Promoting secondary schoolstudents’ evaluation of source features of multiple documents. Contemporary EducationalPsychology, 38(3), 180-195.Bräten, I., Britt, M. A., Strømsø, H. I., & Rouet, J. F. (2011). The role of epistemic beliefs in the comprehensionof multiple expository texts: Toward an integrated model. Educational Psychologist, 46(1), 48-70.Chan, N., Ho, I., & Ku, K. (2011). Epistemic beliefs and critical thinking of Chinese students. Learning andIndividual Differences, 21, 67-77.Chinn, C., & Malhotra, B. (2002). Epistemologically authentic inquiry in schools: A theoretical framework forevaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86 (2), 175-218.Chinn, C., Rinehart, R., & Buckland, L. (2014). Epistemic cognition and evaluating information: Applying theAIR Model of epistemic cognition. In D.N. Rapp & J.L.G. Braasch (Eds.), Processing inaccurateinformation: Theoretical and applied perspectives from cognitive science and the educational sciences.Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Dole, J., & Sinatra, G. (1998). Reconceptualizing change in the cognitive construction of knowledge. EducationalPsychologist, 33(2/3), 109-128.Giere, R., Bickle, J., Mauldin, R. (2006). Understanding scientific reasoning. Belmont, CA: Thomson Wadsworth.Gil, L., Bråten, I., Vidal-Abarca, E., & Strømsø, H. I. (2010). Summary versus argument tasks when working withmultiple documents: Which is better for whom?. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 35(3), 157-173.Glaser, B.G., & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research. Chicago:Aldine.Glaser, G. (1978). Theoretical Sensitivity. Mill Valley, CA: The Sociology Press.Hofer, B. K., & Pintrich, P. R. (1997). The development of epistemological theories: Beliefs about knowledgeand knowing and their relation to learning. Review of Educational Research, 67(1), 88-140.Höttecke, D., Henke, A., & Riess, F. (2012). Implementing history and philosophy in science teaching: Strategies,methods, results and experiences from the European HIPST Project. Science & Education, 21 (9), 12331261.Kendeou, P., & van den Broek, P. (2007). Interactions between prior knowledge and text structure duringcomprehension of scientific texts. Memory & Cognition, 35, 1567-1577.Kind, P. (2013). Establishing assessment scales using a novel disciplinary rationale for scientific reasoning.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 50 (5), 530-560.Klahr, D., & Dunbar, K. (1988). Dual space search during scientific reasoning. Cognitive Science, 12, 1-48.Kuhn, D. (2001). How do people know? Psychological Science, 12 (1), 1-8.Liu, S. (2014). How people reason: A grounded theory study of scientific reasoning about global climate change.Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Minnesota.Lincoln, Y.S., & Guba, E.G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Beverly Hills, CA: SAGE.Lombardi, D., Seyranian, V., & Sinatra, G. (2014). Source effects and plausibility judgments when reading aboutclimate change. Discourse Processes, 51(1-2), 75-92.ICLS 2016 Proceedings496© ISLSMason, L., & Scirica, F. (2006). Prediction of students’ argumentation skills about controversial topics byepistemological understanding. Learning and Instruction, 16, 492-509.Muis, K., & Franco, G. (2009). Epistemic beliefs: Setting the standards in self-regulated learning. ContemporaryEducational Psychology, 34, 306-318.National Research Council. (2001). Educating teachers of science, mathematics, and technology. Washington,DC: National Academies Press.National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. Committee on a conceptual framework for new K-12 science education standards. Boardon Science Education, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, Washington, DC: TheNational Academics Press.NGSS Lead States (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Osborne, J. (2010). Arguing to learn in science: The role of collaborative, critical discourse. Science, 328(23),463-466.Sadler, T., Barab, S., & Scott, B. (2007). What do students gain by engaging in socioscientific inquiry. Researchin Science Education, 37, 371-391.Schauble, L. (1996). The development of scientific reasoning in knowledge-rich contexts. DevelopmentalPsychology, 32(1), 102-119.Sinatra, G., & Chinn, C. (2011). Thinking and reasoning in science: Promoting epistemic conceptual change. InK. Harris, C. McCormick, G. Sinatra, & J. Sweller (Eds.), Educational Psychology: Contributions toeducation (Vol. 1, pp. 257-282). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.Sinatra, G., Kienhues, D., & Hofer, B. (2014). Addressing challenges to public understanding of science:Epistemic cognition, motivated reasoning, and conceptual change. Educational Psychologist, 49(2), 123138.Sinatra, G.M., Southerland, S.A., McConaughy, F., & Demastes, J.W. (2003). Intentions and beliefs in students’understanding and acceptance of biological evolution. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 40(5),510-528.Strauss, A.L., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory Procedures and Techniques.Newbury Park, CA: Sage.Wason, P., & Johnson-Laird, P. (1972). Psychology of Reasoning: Structure and Content. Harvard UniversityPress, Cambridge, MA.Weinstock, M., & Cronin, M.A. (2003). The everyday production of knowledge: Individual differences inepistemological understanding and juror-reasoning skill. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 17, 161-181.Yang, F.Y., Chang, C.Y., & Hsu, Y.S. (2008). Teacher views about the constructivist instruction and personalepistemology-A national study in Taiwan. Educational Studies, 34, 527-542.Sadler, D., & Zeidler, D. (2005). Patterns of informal reasoning in the context of socioscientific decisionmaking. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42(1), 112-138.Zeidler, D., Walker, M., Ackett, W., & Simmons, M. (2002). Tangled up in views: Beliefs in the nature of scienceand responses to socioscientific dilemmas. Science Education, 86(3), 343-367.Zeineddin, A., & Abd-El-Khalick, F. (2010). Scientific reasoning and epistemological commitments:Coordination of theory and evidence among college science standards. Journal of Research in ScienceTeaching, 47(9), 1064-1093.Zimmerman, C. (2005). The development of scientific reasoning skills: What psychologists contribute to anunderstanding of elementary science learning. Final draft of a report to the National Research CouncilCommittee on Student Learning Kindergarten through Eighth Grade. Washington, DC: NationalResearch Council.AcknowledgmentsThe author thanks Dr. Frances Lawrenz for her helpful suggestions on earlier manuscripts of this work.ICLS 2016 Proceedings497© ISLS