Pathways to Literary Reasoning: Bridging Text and WorldAllison H. Hall, University of Illinois at Chicago, ahall33@uic.eduSusan R. Goldman, University of Illinois at Chicago, sgoldman@uic.eduAbstract: This is an embedded case study of an 11th grade English literature class with aninstructional approach based on goals of apprenticing students into disciplinary literacies ofliterary reading and reasoning. This work examines how three students approached makingsense of literary texts in the context of year-long instruction designed to support students inbuilding knowledge, skills, and practices around literary reasoning. Findings illustrate thecomplexities of teaching and learning literary reasoning by describing multiple pathways inhow students’ own knowledge and experience was used to bridge the text and the world. Thiswork has implications for designing spaces that value a variety of approaches towards literaryreading while supporting interpretation of increasingly complex texts.IntroductionReading literature can be the impetus for reasoning and understanding that make us more thoughtful about theworld and our experience of it (Langer, 2011). Scholes (1985) sees texts as imbued with power and seeslearning how to critically interpret texts in the world as a form of empowerment. This approach to literaryinquiry involves readers as active participants in interpreting and constructing meaning around what those textsmight suggest about the world we inhabit and the way people exist in that world. Reading bridges the worldcreated by the words of the author and the world of the reader, what Rosenblatt (1994) referred to as meaning inthe transaction of the text with the reader. A reader’s response to a text is to create a new text (Scholes, 1985),“poem” (Rosenblatt,1994), or “experience” (Dewey, 1934). This new text is never fixed, as our understandingsand responses are continuously being revised as we read, think about, or discuss a text. No two experiences ofreading are the same, as each individual brings their own knowledge, experiences, and emotions to theirreading. The idea that there is no one single correct interpretation underlies both the complexity of readingliterature and the complexity of teaching and learning how to read literature. This stance toward reading may beparticularly important during adolescence, a developmental period during which youth wrestle with questions ofidentity, self, self in relation to others and the world, and their experiences in the world. The overarching issueaddressed in this paper concerns variations in approaches adolescent readers adopt as they are introduced to andbegin to take up a critical and interpretive orientation toward reading literature. The context of the work was aclassroom in which the instructional design intentionally sought to engage students in the practices of literaryinquiry. The present paper discusses three students as cases embedded in the same classroom context.Instructional design for literary inquiryThe design of the learning environment in this case was based on research around what it means to reason aboutliterature and how that might be supported through instructional design. In arguing the specific nature ofepistemic cognition in literature, Lee, Goldman, Levine, and Magliano (2016) point out that reasoning aboutliterary texts involves both the aesthetic elements of a text as well as messages about the human conditionconveyed by the text, i.e., what the text says as well as how those ideas are conveyed. This corresponds withideas put forward by Hillocks and Ludlow (1984) in their hierarchical taxonomy of skills for reading literarytexts, which has two levels: literal and inferential. The present work is concerned with the inferential level,beginning with simple implied relationships. These are inferred based on the language in the text and readers’personal knowledge and experiences. Complex implied relationships are more difficult because they aredependent on the coordination of many different details from both the text and background knowledge. Thesefirst two levels of inference remain inside the world of the text unlike the two highest levels, author’sgeneralizations and structural generalizations. These both require the reader to step outside the text. Author’sgeneralizations ask the reader to think of the literary piece as a whole and make a claim about what the author istrying to say about human nature and the world outside the text. Structural generalizations require the reader toexplain how the pieces and parts of the text work together to create certain effects. The reader has to both noticethe structure and explain how that structure functions to create meaning and message. These high-level skillsrequire readers to approach texts looking for deeper meanings by attending to the language and structure(Graves & Fredrickson, 1991; Rabinowitz, 1987). In the work discussed here, the central goal of instruction wasto support students in developing the range of inferential competencies, but especially author and structuralgeneralizations.ICLS 2018 Proceedings440© ISLSIn the 11th grade classroom that is the focus of this study, the teacher designed the curriculum aroundthe themes of gender and power, both highly relevant and important for these 16/17-year-old students. She usedtwo focal novels, A Thousand Splendid Suns (ATSS) by Khaled Hosseini and The Handmaid’s Tale (HT) byMargaret Atwood, both of which afford analyses of power and control in relations among characters andbetween people and greater institutional and social forces. Power dynamics in both novels are explicitlygoverned by gender roles in the respective social and cultural contexts: the first, Afghanistan in the past 40 yearsand the second, a future dystopian society.The teacher developed the curriculum for this class by analyzing sources of difficulty in each focalnovel and, consistent with backward design (Wiggins & McTighe, 1998), developed an intentional sequencingand coordination of learning objectives, scaffolds, and texts that would support students in building theknowledge, interpretive skills, and confidence needed for literal and inferential reading of the novels (Figure 1).The sequencing provided students with multiple opportunities to learn explicit strategies related to literaryinterpretation and writing with shorter more familiar types of texts and with a gradual decrease in scaffoldingover time (Lee, 2007; Sosa, Hall, Goldman, & Lee, 2016).Increasing ComplexityLearningObjectivesMake everydayinterpretivestrategies explicitBuild thematiccriteria andbackgroundknowledgeUse knowledgeand strategies tomake interpretiveargumentsScaffoldsDetailed scaffoldsModeratescaffoldsMinimum to noscaffoldsTextsShort, culturallyfamiliar textsShort literarytextsLonger literarytextsFigure 1. Sequence of instruction from less to more complex.The combination of objectives, scaffolds, and texts is depicted in Figure 2. Introductory activities at thebeginning of the year and before each focal novel were designed to prepare students to make sense of the focalnovels by providing background knowledge and criteria to develop interpretive claims and support them withevidence from the text. Smith and Hillocks (1988) point out that when students discuss concepts present in aliterary work before they read it, they develop a deeper understanding of the text. Starting with shorter moreaccessible texts can allow students to practice examining the concept in familiar contexts and generate criteriafor understanding and discussing abstract concepts, such as gender and power. In addition, students needrelevant background knowledge about the cultural and historical context of the text in order to make sense ofcharacters and events, especially when that context may be distant from their own. These considerations werefundamental to the design of instruction.Figure 2. Overview of year-long curriculum.The first four weeks of the year began with reading and discussing several short articles about genderrelations in Afghanistan to build relevant background knowledge around the theme and context of the first focalICLS 2018 Proceedings441© ISLSnovel. In addition, they analyzed several images and short literary texts to build criteria for gender and powerand to practice applying those criteria for building arguments around those claims. The rest of the semester wasspent reading the first novel, exploring gender and power in the relationships among the characters and theirsociopolitical, cultural context. At the beginning of the second semester, activities and texts were designed tobuild background knowledge around the specific genre of dystopian fiction, the genre of the second focal novel.There were several reasons to expect HT to pose greater challenges for the students. First, unlike ATSS, HT isnot set in a real place with actual events and situations as its backdrop. Like most dystopian stories, it is based ina future, imaginary world in which the government or other institutional entity has control over the people. Inaddition, the HT narrative jumps back and forth in time without warning and the “truth” of the story being toldby the narrator is never made clear. Dystopian stories often employ a dystopian protagonist who questions theexisting system and engages in actions that attempt to change or destroy the system. Finally, dystopian literaturealso serves as a vehicle for authors to criticize aspects of the current society in which they live. With thesecharacteristics and sources of interpretive complexity in mind, the teacher designed a series of texts and tasks tofamiliarize students with the genre of dystopian fiction in preparation for reading HT. During the reading of HT,tasks involved questions around gender, various types of power and control, dystopian fiction as a genre, thedangers of indifference, and why the author used so many “grey area” characters (neither good nor bad). Muchof the work of the second semester focused students on articulating how the author used language choice andstructural elements to convey the messages that students were identifying in the text, i.e., on author andstructural generalizations (Hillocks& Ludlow, 1984).A critical dynamic of the teaching and learning process in this classroom were class discussionsinterleaved with reading and writing activities. Research on instructional supports for literary reasoningindicates the importance of using class discussions to build understanding (Applebee, Langer, Nystrand, &Gamoran, 2003; Langer, 2011) and explore multiple perspectives on text (Earthman, 1992). The teacher ledsome of the whole class discussions but sometimes they took the form of student-led Socratic seminars. DuringSocratic seminars, the teacher sat at her desk in the back of the class as students discussed their own questionswith a large circle of other students. Activities involving discussing and writing were repeated throughout theyear in various combinations and with each of the texts. They included various types of discussions withpartners, small groups, and whole class as well as various forms of writing, most of which was individual, withoccasional small group projects.The case descriptions reported in this paper rely on data from whole class discussions and individualwriting. They illustrate three variations in approach toward literary interpretation, reflecting different emphasesand different dimensions of reading and responding to literature. In other words, they reflect the epistemologyof literature and literary inquiry that places importance on the reasoning that supports claims about the literaryworks (Lee at al., 2016b).MethodsThis classroom-based case study was situated in the context of a multi-institution collaboration betweenresearchers and practitioners investigating evidence-based argumentation with multiple texts in middle and highschool history, science, and literature classrooms. In collaboration with teachers, the project designedinstructional modules for building adolescents’ disciplinary reading and reasoning skills through inquirypractices appropriate to and reflective of the specific subject matter discipline. Module designs were based on aset of core constructs and learning goals for each discipline, developed through the collaborative work of theproject design teams in literature, science, and history (Goldman, Britt, et al. 2016). This study is situated in an11th grade class (16/17-year-old students) whose teacher was a participant in the project’s literature design teamand was implementing instructional modules for literary reading and reasoning.The class was located in a high school that is part of a large urban district. The school served a diversestudent population (47.9% black, 43.1% Hispanic, 3.8% white, 1.9% Asian, and 3.3% mixed race; 87% free andreduced lunch). The composition of the focal class reflected the general population of the school. The teacher ofthe focal class for this study, Ms. Edwards, is White and was in her fourth year teaching at that school and herthird year of involvement on the project when the data were collected.Data sources for this study are lesson artifacts, field notes, and video and audio recordings of classroomobservations from the second week of class through the end of the academic year. Audio of meetings anddebriefings with the teacher, written lesson plans, student written work, and audio of interviews with individualstudents were used in addition to data from classroom observations. Data analyses took place in three phases:1. Coding of fieldnotes for learning opportunities presented by instructional design (e.g. participationstructure, text used, focus of instruction)ICLS 2018 Proceedings442© ISLS2.Coding of video of whole class discussions and student written work for literary reasoning practices(i.e., type of claim or support)3. Close examination of learning pathways in literary reasoning for three individual student cases throughthe construction of case files.The findings presented here are of three case studies drawing largely on phase three and interviews. In phasethree, discussion contributions and written work compiled chronologically into single documents called casefiles. Interviews with case study students were transcribed and added to their case files. Then each case file wasexamined closely to see in what ways student reasoning practices (i.e., types of claims and support) changedover time and in relation to the instructional sequence (Figures 1, 2). The interview data served to corroboratefindings emerging from the discussions and student writing. Finally, the cases were compared to determinedistinctive characteristics in each students’ approach towards literary reasoning and pathway across the year.FindingsThe three cases discussed here illustrate variations in their approaches towards literary interpretation. It shouldbe noted that in the class as a whole the first two analytic phases revealed that the learning evident in the workstudents were producing in their reading journals, class discussion contributions, and other written productsreflected the correlated focus of the teaching. That is, student practices in general aligned with the requirementsof tasks across the year. Thus, general progress of individual students was consistent with the increasingdemands of the curriculum. Table 1 provides an overview of the variations among the three cases in theirparticipation and approaches towards literary reading and reasoning across the year as well as how theirstrategies changed as they moved from the first to the second focal novel.Table 1: Case study studentsCaseFreddieBriannaVincentParticipation indiscussionshighlowmidApproach towardliterary textsAnalyticalEmpathicLiteraryChange in strategies from ATSS to HTRelated text more to real word and real world more to textIncreased personal and emotional reactions to textIncreased use of analogies and attention to author intentionalityAn analytical approachFreddie, an African American male, was one of the most actively engaged students during whole classdiscussions, often volunteering to lead Socratic seminars and sometimes getting into heated arguments overinterpretations of the texts. During the interviews, Freddie shared that he had always felt English classes wereeasy for him, that his ability “came natural.” Freddie’s confidence in his ability to interpret literary texts anddefend his arguments was evident in his quickly picking up the literary analysis practices emphasized in theinstruction at the beginning of the year, including analyzing textual evidence while considering criteria to buildinterpretive claims. In addition, his explanations backing up his claims consistently took into consideration thecontext of the novel and the larger messages he believed the author was trying to convey.Freddie’s pathway across the year in literary reasoning knowledge, practices and skills reflected thechanging texts, tasks, and learning goals of instruction. In the beginning of the year, while reading ATSS, thefocus of instruction was on analyzing the text to understand the complex interplay of gender and power inrelationships among characters in the novel, or what Hillocks and Ludlow (1984) refer to as complex impliedrelationships. The outside texts brought in were ones that focused on helping students better understand the realworld context of the novel (i.e., articles reporting on gender issues in Afghanistan). Freddie used knowledge ofthat context along with his understanding of events and characters in the novel to make and support claimsabout gender and power relationships among characters. For example, during the first Socratic seminar, most ofthe students agreed that a character’s wives had more power than the character; however, Freddie, in oppositionto that claim, read an excerpt from the book, explicitly brought up issues of power and gender, and invokedcriteria as support: the ability to make decisions (”at the end of the day he is a man and he makes the decisions,””he chose them as his wives not the other way around”) and the ability to make and spend money (”he is the onewith the money,” “he is the cinema owner”). These criteria were ones on the public list of criteria for gender andpower that had been generated by students earlier in the year. His use of these criteria also took intoconsideration the particular cultural context of the novel so relied on Freddie’s understanding of the world thecharacters inhabited. This knowledge included the idea that in Afghanistan men made decisions, including whoto marry, and that only men could hold jobs outside the home and build wealth.ICLS 2018 Proceedings443© ISLSThen, during the second semester, as instruction moved to focusing on understanding the largermessages of the dystopian fiction novel, Freddie expanded his strategies for interpreting the text, specifically todiscerning and describing similarities between the dystopian fictional world of the book and the history ofAfrican Americans in the US. Most of these claims fall into the category of author’s generalizations in Hillocksand Ludlow’s (1984) taxonomy as they reflect a “conception of the human situation as it exists outside thelimits of the work” (p. 12). For example, in the final discussion of the semester, after students had read theHistorical Notes at the end of the novel, the teacher asked students why Atwood included the historical notesinstead of just ending with the story of Gilead, the dystopian society. Freddie responded:Freddie: The way I kinda saw this was ok, so right after slavery there was sharecropping andthen after that there was segregation, when I compared this to it, this was like the aftermathsort of like they are not fully accepting women, but the women are in society but there is stilldiscrimination, like after slavery most White people didn't stop and still thought of AfricanAmerican as like a disgusting race and stuff like that, so I think it is sort of like they still inthe aftermath they still consider women, that's why he laughed, because they still considerthem like a jokeThis final contribution to discussions around HT expanded on Freddie’s ongoing comparison of the two worldsmaking the case that the story of the women in the novel directly paralleled the story of African Americans inthe US. He used the world to interpret the texts just as he used the text to interpret real world events.An empathic approachBrianna, an African American female, expressed early in the year her love of reading, making her stance as a“reader” clear throughout the year both in her contributions to discussions and in her writing. In her mid-yearinterview, Brianna reinforced this stance by immediately making it clear that she didn’t like writing but lovedreading: “that’s about all I like about English or literature… I like mysteries, I love love stories, I like a lot ofthings, that’s the thing, if it’s a good book I will read it.” Brianna’s approach towards reading literary textssurfaced in her affective reactions and empathic connections to the experiences and emotions of the charactersin the texts as well as in her willingness to entertain multiple perspectives on text. In describing good groupdiscussions, Brianna said: “that’s the part I really love, that’s the best part about it, and it make you think ofstuff like so different, like you be so into this one thing that you think is right to you, and then someone is like,nah, it’s like this, and then you like oh my god!” Throughout the year, her discussion comments and writingrevealed her openness and emotional investment in literary texts.Brianna’s approach towards literary reading defined her pathway across the year as her approach andwillingness to engage emotionally and personally intensified across time. While reading ATSS, one type ofresponse she had was in expressing hopes for the lives of the characters in the text. In an essay arguing that amale character had more power than his wife, Brianna ended with: “She seem to have no power whatsoever, butmaybe that can change for her. Maybe she can have that baby and [her husband] will respect her as the motherof his child.” Her personal reactions were often to express a sort of empathy with or understanding of thesituation of the characters. For example, in a passage towards the end of ATSS, the same man compared his firstwife to a Volga (an inexpensive, utilitarian Russian-made car) and his second to a Mercedes. In Brianna’swriting about it, she began with an empathic reaction to the comparison: “With this quote, I can say whensomeone tells you that you are worth less than someone else, it hurts, and that is what [his first wife] may feel.”Brianna’s responses to the characters and events in the text often pulled on her own personal understanding ofhuman emotions to arrive at an interpretation of the scene. These emotional responses are a type ofidentification with the characters in the text as she imagined herself in the position of the character in the novel(Mar, Oatley, Djikic, & Mullin, 2011). Identifying with the emotional experiences of characters was often a wayfor her to enter the world of the literary texts and a basis for constructing interpretations.Brianna’s personal and emotional approach towards text seemed to be accentuated as she read HT. Thisis evident in an early writing on HT, in which she compared women’s safety and fear of being attacked by mento the present day, relating the events of the novel to her own experience: “You can say that’s how women aretoday. People tell women to be safe at night and stay to yourself when outside. I’ve been hearing that since Iwas a little girl.” Here she drew on her own experience, making a comparison to it and the world of the text,similar to what Miall and Kuiken (2002) call “remembered emotion.” In another writing, she again referred toher personal reaction to and experience of reading HT: “Power seems to be big in dystopian stories, and it’sreally cool to see that. Going to a world that is normal, and then going to a nightmare is very hard for people.It’s better to read things that is going out of hand than really going through those things.” Here, her reaction toICLS 2018 Proceedings444© ISLSthe text was empathic, to imagine how it might feel to live inside the world of the text and experience what thecharacters were experiencing. This imagined entry into the world of the text occurred elsewhere in Brianna’swriting: “If you see this through the eyes of a person in Gilead…” Her ability to imagine different perspectivesand empathic reactions to emotional experiences of characters in the text characterized her particular approachtowards text. Like Freddie, she connected the world and the text, but her connections were emotional andpersonal, and the world was her own, rather than one experienced by an entire segment of society. Janssen,Braaksma, and Rijlaarsdam (2006) found “a more personal, subjective engagement with the stories” to be acharacteristic of stronger students of literature, so perhaps her intensified engagement over time indicated agrowing willingness to engage with texts, particularly with an unfamiliar and difficult text.A literary approachVincent, a Latino male, often participated in whole class discussions, usually providing elaborate explanationsof his reasoning. His contributions were often distinctive because of his use of analogies or hypotheticalexamples to explain his point, as exemplified in his response to the question of what he might do differentlywhen reading a literary text in the future. He said that he would look for hidden meanings in new books:Vincent: Before I was just like if it says I saw the same red apple on the same windowsill inlike Miss O’Leary’s house, there should be a reason why the apple is there, like maybe she istrying to feed a bird, I don’t know, maybe she is trying to scare away demons or maybe it isjust figurative language for like how Miss O’Leary’s is, so to speak that she is an apple or sheis shaped as an apple, you never know.This response highlights Vincent’s use of hypotheticals to explain a point, but also highlights his particularawareness of, and attention to, literary devices as a way for authors to communicate layers of meaning. Forexample, he noted that there might be special significance to the apple and where it was located, that it might bea symbol germane to understanding Miss O’Leary. Vincent’s written arguments and discussion contributionsshow that he regularly took this type of interpretive stance (Goldman, McCarthy, & Burkett, 2015) towards textsas well as his awareness of authors as intentional crafters of text.Vincent’s writing around ATSS showed his attention to details in the text and search for layers ofmeaning based on what he noticed in the language of the text. For example, in his essay on the relationshipbetween two characters in ATSS, he argued that a father had power over his daughter because he was able tocontrol her emotions. In one part of this essay, Vincent pointed out a pattern in the text: “[The father] is alwaysmentioned when [the daughter] shows her affection to [her teacher] on this page. This repetition of how muchand why she loves [her father] when Hosseini mentions [her teacher] deeply emphasizes how much [her father]means to her.” Vincent saw this pattern of the author’s never mentioning the daughter’s affection for onecharacter without the other character also being mentioned as the author’s way of indicating the daughter’sstrong emotional attachment. Further on, Vincent also noticed rupture in the text regarding the daughter’shappiness depending on her father: “Her body language, as implied by Hosseini, displays her emotions and [herfather’s] importance to them. The drastic change in body language if he is late further digs into how [thefather’s] power over [the daughter] continues to grow, and the emotions [the father] has most control over is herhappiness.” Here, Vincent attributed special significance to the unexpected or distinctive body language of acharacter. In these examples, Vincent used two rules of notice—the occurrence of patterns of language andruptures—that authors rely on their readers awareness of. That is, rules of notice can be cues to meaning beyondthe literal (Rabinowitz, 1987). Vincent noticed a pattern or strangeness in the text and surmised that the authorhad purposefully selected this language and in doing so, the author intended to indicate some specialsignificance. As part of instruction, acknowledgement and awareness of author intentionality in language choicewould become much more central to class discussions and analysis of text in reading the second novel.Vincent’s tendency to use elaborate analogies in his reasoning increased significantly during hisreading of HT. For example, in one discussion, he used a hypothetical example of riding a roller coaster tocounter a classmate’s claim that the narrator had kept her eyes open during a kiss because she did not enjoy it:Vincent: Let’s say we are on the roller coaster, we are on the roller coaster, do you want toclose your eyes on the roller coaster because you actually do not like it, it’s scaring you, or doyou want to open you eyes on the roller coaster because you are like this is fun, I love this?[…] She kept her eyes open like I don’t want to miss this moment cuz I actually enjoy it.ICLS 2018 Proceedings445© ISLSThis analogy to a hypothetical example helped clarify why he disagreed with his classmate’s assessment of thenarrator’s motivations in one scene in the novel and was immediately taken up as the student responded with ananalogy about closing one’s eyes while eating delicious food. Vincent would often use a more familiar everydaysituation to understand a situation or character in the text, which was unlike the analogies Freddie used, whichwere to real social and historical events and situations.Vincent also approached text aware of and trying to discern author intentionality. In several of hiswritings, he focused particularly on Atwood’s role as crafter of the novel. In one assignment, students wereasked to choose a passage of their own to analyze with a small group of classmates. In answer to why he chosethe passage he did, Vincent wrote:“We are containers, it’s only the inside of our bodies that are important” […] Atwood’sability to write with metaphors and craft these insanely creative sentences is immenselyimpeccable. I am forever respectful of her. “We are containers,” it is a metaphor for the factthat they are empty inside.Vincent’s answer shows his aesthetic response to Atwood’s writing, his focus on the function of language, andhis knowledge of metaphors as a literary device. Metaphors per se were never discussed as part of theinstruction in the class, so Vincent was pulling on his own experience with and knowledge of literature in thiscase to describe what Atwood was doing with language in the passage. In another short writing, Vincentexpanded on his vision of Atwood’s intentionality as crafter of this text:The fact that Offred says this story is a reconstruction is a little marketing scheme I’d say byAtwood. She uses the term as in this is not what was originally there. As in, Gilead was eithermuch worse, or the story was fabricated, but I’d say the much worse aspect. It’s a cheeky littledetail that brings more attention to the book. This lets us know that there are parts missing,some that could never be recovered. Of course, Offred is a fictional character but it creates anextra dimension to her story that we weren’t there for. Like I said, cheeky.His response moved between the world of the text and the idea of it as a fictional creation of the author. In thefirst part, he wrote as if Gilead actually existed: “Gilead was either much worse, or the story was fabricated” bythe narrator. Then, towards the end, he emphasized that the narrator “of course” was only fictional. Hisexplanation of why Atwood had her narrator claim that her story was a reconstruction showed Vincent’s view ofauthors as people who write books that they want to sell, “a little marketing scheme.” In Vincent’s view,Atwood used the idea of a reconstruction to create a bit of mystery around the world of Gilead to get thereader’s attention, as a sort of “hook.” This excerpt also shows Vincent’s own distinctive use of language in hisdescription of Atwood’s moves as a writer as being “cheeky.” Vincent seemed to have a strong opinion ofAtwood as an author.Discussion and implicationsThe three cases illustrate three qualitatively distinct approaches towards reading and interpreting literary texts,different ways of engaging in the practices of the class, and various pathways through the designed instruction.However, in terms of the learning goals for the year, all three students developed in their critical engagementwith literary texts. They all were able to make interpretive claims and support them with textual evidence andappropriate reasoning, which relied on making analogies or connections to the world outside the text. However,the nature of these differed. Freddie most often related the text to his knowledge of history or real-worldcircumstances. Freddie’s analogies reflected his analytical approach towards text. Brianna, on the other hand,related the text to her own personal, lived experiences, reflecting her emotional, personal response to literature.Vincent would often make analogies to everyday hypothetical situations. This creativity in reasoning echoed hisrepeated appreciation for creativity in the author’s writing. Interestingly, each student’s trajectory wassignificantly impacted by the change in texts, tasks, and focus of instruction during the second half of the year.As the texts and tasks increased in complexity and required a greater level of abstraction, all three were able tobuild on and deepen their particular approaches to meet the increasing challenges.Each approach reflects an acceptable way of “doing” literary reading. That is, knowledge, experience,and emotion are each legitimate and valuable ways of approaching literary texts. Interestingly, we see each oneof the students using primarily one of these resources in their interpretations throughout the year. Each student“read” the same text at the literal level, yet each took a different approach to interpretation. Importantly, eachapproach was valued and accepted in the classroom context; none were questioned or rejected. Expressing,listening to, and considering multiple perspectives on text is fundamental to the complex nature of literaryreading. These cases from the one classroom indicate a classroom community where these epistemic norms andICLS 2018 Proceedings446© ISLSvalues are alive and well. The variations in how these three students approached literary interpretation arenatural and in some sense predictable, especially for literary reasoning and interpretation where so muchdepends on who the reader is and how they transact with the text. Indeed, it appears that each of these studentsfound their own way of transacting with the text, seeing the world in the text and the text in the world. Eachindividual’s world and experience of it is different, as is what each individual reader brings to a text or seeksfrom a text. These different ways of interacting need to be supported and made manageable by the instruction,while instruction still supports students in being able to read more complex texts and engage in more complextasks over time. Lee et al. (2016) hold that knowledge in literary reasoning is complex, multidimensional, andcontextual. Therefore, designing to support development of that knowledge needs to consider all thecomplexities and dimensions of readers’ experiences of and approaches towards texts in order to leverage andbuild on them while also creating a community where students can learn from each other’s perspectives.ReferencesApplebee, A. N., Langer, J. A., Nystrand, M., & Gamoran, A. (2003). Discussion-based approaches todeveloping understanding: Classroom instruction and student performance in middle and high schoolEnglish. American Educational Research Journal, 40, 685–730.Atwood, M. (2006). The handmaid's tale (Vol. 301). Everymans Library.Goldman, S. R., McCarthy, K., & Burkett, C. (2015). Interpretive inferences in literature. In E. O’Brien, A.Cook, & R. Lorch (Eds.), Inferences during reading. Boston, MA: Cambridge University Press.Goldman, S.R., Britt, M.A., Brown, W., Cribb, G., George, M., Greenleaf, C., Lee, C.D., Shanahan, C. andProject READI. (2016). Disciplinary literacies and learning to read for understanding: A conceptualframework for disciplinary literacy. Educational Psychologist, 51(2), pp.219-246.Lee, C. D., Goldman, S. R., Levine, S., & Magliano, J. (2016). Epistemic cognition in literary reasoning.Handbook of epistemic cognition, 165-183.Dewey, J. (1934). Art as experience. New York, NY: The Berkeley Publishing Group.Earthman, E. A. (1992). Creating the virtual work: Readers' processes in understanding literary texts. Researchin the Teaching of English, 26, 351-384.Graves, B., & Frederiksen, C. H. (1996). A cognitive study of literary expertise. In R. J. Kruez & M. S.MacNealy (Eds.), Empirical approaches to literature and aesthetics (pp. 397-418). Norwood, NJ:Ablex.Hillocks, G., & Ludlow, L. H. (1984). A taxonomy of skills in reading and interpreting fiction. AmericanEducational Research Journal, 21, 7-24.Hosseini, K. (2007). A thousand splendid suns. Penguin.Langer, J. A. (2011). Envisioning literature: Literary understanding and literature instruction (2nd ed.). NewYork, NY: Teachers College Press.Lee, C. D. (2007). Culture, literacy, and learning: Taking bloom in the midst of the whirlwind. New York, NY:Teachers College Press.Mar, R. A., Oatley, K., Djikic, M., & Mullin, J. (2011). Emotion and narrative fiction: Interactive influencesbefore, during, and after reading. Cognition & emotion, 25(5), 818-833.Miall, D. S., & Kuiken, D. (2002). A feeling for fiction: Becoming what we behold. Poetics, 30(4), 221-241.Rabinowitz, P. J. (1987). Before reading: Narrative conventions and the politics of interpretation. Ithaca, NY:Cornell University Press.Rosenblatt, L. M. (1994). The reader the text the poem: The transactional theory of the literary work.Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.Scholes, R. (1985). Textual power, literary theory and the teaching of English. New Haven, CT: YaleUniversity Press.Smith, M. W., & Hillocks, G. (1988). Sensible sequencing: Developing knowledge about literature text bytext. The English Journal, 77(6), 44-49.Sosa, T., Hall, A. H., Goldman, S. R., & Lee, C. D. (2016). Developing symbolic interpretation through literaryargumentation. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25(1), 93-132.Wiggins, G. P., & McTighe, J. (2005). Understanding by design. Alexandria, VA: ASCD.AcknowledgmentsThe research reported here was supported by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education,through Grant R305F100007 to University of Illinois at Chicago. The opinions expressed are those of theauthors and do not represent views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Education.ICLS 2018 Proceedings447© ISLS