Examining Primary Teacher Expertise and Agency in theCollaborative Design of Project-Based Learning InnovationsSamuel Severance, CREATE for STEM Institute, Michigan State University, severa18@msu.eduJoseph Krajcik, CREATE for STEM Institute, Michigan State University, krajcik@msu.eduAbstract: Developing curriculum innovations aligned to research-based design principles andeducation reforms poses a daunting design challenge requiring substantial expertise. Thisstudy examines how prioritizing the agency of primary school teachers, engaged withresearchers in the collaborative design of curriculum innovations, may allow for teachers todevelop and productively leverage expertise. Using data from teacher surveys, interviews, andartifacts, our analysis has centered on what expertise teachers may develop around projectbased learning and national science education reforms and what agency teachers have toinfluence the design of curriculum. We found evidence (1) teachers increased theirunderstanding of project-based learning but showed fewer gains in understanding key ideas inscience education reforms and (2) teachers significantly influenced the design of curriculuminnovations. This study has implications for teacher learning and the design of curriculuminnovations aligned to research-based design principles and national education reforms.Major issues addressedSuccessfully implementing innovative education reforms will require equally innovative materials. In scienceeducation, novel science curricula should embody the vision of reform (National Research Council, 2012).Developing science curriculum innovations, however, that faithfully reflect reforms and draw on research-baseddesign principles has proven a daunting design challenge (Roseman, Fortus, Krajcik, & Reiser, 2015). Efforts todevelop more innovative solutions to complex challenges may benefit from the presence of multiple or variedforms of expertise (Engeström, Engeström, & Kärkkäinen, 1995). Traditionally, researchers have dominated theprocess of developing innovations like curriculum to support reforms, often relegating teachers to merely theenactors of others’ designs (Ormel, Pareja Roblin, McKenney, Voogt, & Pieters, 2012). Such approaches to thedesign of innovations fail to adequately develop or leverage teachers’ expertise to support reforms.We posit that positioning teachers to have the agency to develop and leverage expertise duringcurriculum design could serve to develop not only teachers’ expertise in research-based design approaches, likeproject-based learning (PBL; Krajcik & Shin, 2014), and science education reforms but also support thedevelopment of needed curriculum. Working within a large-scale curriculum development effort at the primaryschool level where we instituted a collaborative design framework, we explore the following research questions:(1) What expertise did primary teachers develop or leverage during the collaborative design process?(2) What agency did primary teachers have to productively shape the design of curricular innovationswithin the collaborative design process?SignificanceThis study coheres with established precedents in the learning sciences and design-based research, particularlyin using design to explore learning in real-world settings and in leveraging multiple forms of expertise todevelop education innovations (Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004). In addition, this study reflects designresearch efforts that promote more equitable arrangements of expertise through the use of collaborative design(co-design; see Penuel, Roschelle, & Shechtman, 2007). While some recent co-design work has focused ondeveloping curriculum, these efforts have occurred exclusively at the secondary level (see Severance, Penuel,Sumner, & Leary, 2016). This study is unique in its focus on the co-design of curriculum innovations and therole of agency at the primary level. Moreover, few studies posit, as this study does, that co-design alone canpromote deep teacher learning (see Voogt et al., 2015). Relatedly, few studies have examined using co-design todevelop teacher expertise in the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) or other national science reforms(see Severance et al., 2016), and no study has used co-design to promote teachers’ learning of key ideas in PBL.Theoretical frameworkGiven this study’s emphasis on examining transformations in activity (i.e., developing new curriculum toachieve reforms), learning within social and collective settings (i.e., co-design activity), as well as agency (i.e.,opportunities to leverage expertise to affect a design), we utilize a theoretical framework informed byICLS 2018 Proceedings1177© ISLSsociocultural and cultural-historical activity theory (CHAT; Cole & Engeström, 2007). We subscribe to the ideaof “learning by expanding” wherein individuals work in collective activity systems to develop new forms ofdesired activity leading to desired outcomes (Engeström & Sannino, 2010). When designers achieve new formsof activity (e.g. artifacts, practices etc.) during a design process we take this as potential evidence of learning.In sociocultural theory and CHAT, agency, defined as the capacity to produce an effect or a desiredchange in the world (Engeström & Sannino, 2010), proves essential for how people transform their activity andachieve new learning or expertise. In design work, individuals ideally share a common desired object (i.e., thegoal of designing curriculum innovations), and must exercise agency to pursue and achieve the object and bringabout desired outcomes. Achieving lasting transformative changes in activity requires a shared transformativeagency (Virkkunen, 2006), as well as attending to historical contradictions—such as teachers having little say incurriculum—that can manifest as tensions (Engeström & Sannino, 2010). We posit unresolved tensions mayserve as evidence of a lack of agency in collaborative design, whereas observing desired changes in activity andshared artifacts (i.e., shape of curriculum) serves as evidence of designers exercising agency.MethodologyDesign methodologyThis study takes place within a large-scale, multi-year curriculum design effort. Charged with developing 8week PBL science units at the primary school level, this effort recently adopted a co-design approach for twounits. The co-design team under study includes three researchers, and three primary school teachers: Frank, Jill,and Michelle. Co-design activity took place across in-person and online settings over the course of six months(see Figure 1). After an initial two-hour researcher-led session introducing key features of PBL and the NGSS,teachers, on average, participated in 30 hours of synchronous in-person design collaborations and 12 hours ofsynchronous online videoconferences. Our approach sought to position teachers in agentic design roles, fromseeking teachers’ expertise to negotiate initial unit storylines to having teachers lead the writing of actuallessons. Through mini-presentations and as-needed discussions, researchers sought to support teachers’understanding and application of key ideas in the NGSS, chiefly that students should use knowledge in thecontext of science and engineering practices, a knowledge-in-use approach. Researchers also sought to supportteachers in internalizing and leveraging certain PBL design principles: students (1) “figure out” (are not told thescience of) phenomena, (2) build ideas coherently following a storyline over time, (3) continually engage withdriving questions, (4) have choice in meeting learning goals (no one right way to build understanding).Figure 1. Activity of teachers (with researchers) in collaborative design over time.Research methodologyData collection and analysis for this case study occurred over six months. Sources of data for all teachersincluded pre-, mid-, and post-design process surveys assessing teachers’ understanding of PBL and key ideasfrom the NGSS; semi-structured exit interviews examining teachers design expertise and beliefs about teaching;and artifacts created by teachers during the design process, primarily snapshots of lesson development. Dataunderwent deductive, theoretically-driven coding and inductive, bottom-up coding. Code co-occurrencehighlighted data for finer-grained interpretive analysis to identify patterns of evidence for defensible claims.FindingsICLS 2018 Proceedings1178© ISLSWe make two claims based on patterns of evidence observed that respond to our research questions: (1) teachersincreased their understanding of PBL but showed fewer gains in understanding key science education reformconcepts (i.e., knowledge-in-use) and (2) teachers significantly influenced the design of curriculum innovations.Claim 1: Increased understanding of PBL (but not key tenets of reform)Data for the three primary teachers indicates internalization of several PBL ideas. For example, Frank’s surveyresponses show evidence he strongly internalized the idea, among others, of driving questions (see Table 1), anotion supported by his unprompted insertion of driving question discussions into his lessons. Patterns acrossJill’s interview and survey data indicates she connected most strongly with the idea of student choice, whereasMichelle showed she came to understand how PBL lessons move towards “a purpose” or have coherence.Table 1: Teachers’ responses describing PBL (Key PBL tenets in bold)TeacherFrankPre-Design Process SurveyPost-Design Process SurveyJillMaterials! Prep time! Inquiry! Organization! Loosening ofcontrol!I would describe it as giving the students powerful learningexperiences where they have to discover for themselves theprinciples behind the phenomena. There is room forquestioning, discussion, errors and all kinds of formative studentideas as they figure it out.Michelle...[A]llows for students to "discover" scientific ideas andtheories without being told outright by their educator. Theteachers role is that of mindful observer and travel guide. Theeducator may point out little clues by asking mindful questionsbut never spoons feeds students the answers...PBL is an approach that puts students in the drivers seat. Itallows students to take control of their learning and feel thattheir learning has a purpose. PBL allows the educator to playthe role of a coach, one that fosters learning through guidanceand mindful questioning.I would start by explaining the idea of teacher as facilitator, andhow they will need to guide the students through the activities,and allow the students to take risks, even when you may feelthat they will fail, it is often through that failure that success canbe found.Kids looking at phenomena, asking questions, experiencingand performing trials dealing with possible explanations,discussing and analyzing results, retesting and modifying whennecessary, making a claim supported by evidence, and finallyproviding scientific reasoning to explain or answer the originalquestion/s.Teachers showed fewer gains in understanding the knowledge-in-use approach called for in the NGSS.When prompted at the end of the design process to describe instruction embodying the NGSS, only Frankdiscussed students integrating science and engineering practices with science knowledge: “Kids…askingquestions…making a claim supported by evidence and finally providing scientific reasoning to explain oranswer the original question/s.” Conversely, Jill offered a practice-only approach where students “do variouschallenging tasks, like modeling principles” and Michelle noted only that students should have “control of theirown learning and the educator plays the role of coach.” Notably, all teachers could not write integrated learningperformance statements for their lessons without researcher support, even at the end of the design process.Claim 2: Teachers significantly influenced the design of curriculum innovationsTeachers had agency in the design process to make lasting contributions to the units that persisted even afterexternal reviews and editing. For example, Frank and Jill proposed early on in the design process an idea for afinal community-based artifact to end a unit. Though details surrounding the artifact shifted during months ofdesign, the kernel of the teachers’ idea remained focal in the unit. More tangibly, teachers’ contributions tolessons they developed, in terms of scope and substance, remained intact (See Table 2). Of note, teachersdeveloped the first set of lessons in each unit, which subsequent sets of lessons had to follow and cohere with.Table 2: Teachers’ lesson contributions by unitTeacherFrankLessons1.11.21.3Jill1.41.51.6Unit 1Present in Final Draft?YesYesYesTeacherFrankYesYesYesMichelleUnit 2LessonsPresent in Final Draft?1.1Yes1.2No1.3Yes1.4Yes1.5No1.6Yes1.7YesWhile teachers did make significant contributions, survey and interview data revealed tensions whenteachers felt researchers impinged upon their agency. On a pre-post survey item asking how much she feltvalued in the design project, Jill decreased her 4-point Likert rating from (4) extremely valued to (2) less valued,ICLS 2018 Proceedings1179© ISLSand remarked disappointment at the lack of adoption of her ideas: “I feel a key idea of the two-column lessonplan that I was told had been adopted has needlessly not been implemented.” Although Frank did not changehow much he felt valued ((3) more valued), he expressed similar dissatisfaction during his interview with thelack of adoption of certain ideas, citing “too many cooks in the kitchen” as a possible cause. Michelle did notexpress dissatisfaction, saying in her post-survey she felt her “ideas are taken seriously.”Conclusions and implicationsThis study illustrates how prioritizing the agency of primary school teachers, engaged in the co-design ofcurriculum innovations with researchers, can allow for teachers to develop and productively leverage expertise.Moreover, this study shows how co-design approaches can potentially disrupt traditional design approaches toenacting reform—where reform has been done to teachers rather than with teachers. As seen in this study,purposefully supporting and leveraging the expertise of teachers through deeply inclusive co-design can supportnot only teachers’ individual agency regarding reforms but supports a broader shared collective agency to enactreforms: teachers can develop expertise for innovative design (see Voogt et al. 2015), as well as bring aboutneeded curriculum innovations. Notably, this study provides a strategy for science education reformers toconsider when attempting to build capacity for the implementation of science reforms at the primary schoollevel, the critical foundation for all students’ future science education pursuits.This study also highlights novel challenges in collaborative design work. While seeking to show howco-design can help address tensions stemming from the historical contradiction of teachers not havingsignificant agency in reforms and curriculum, this study showed how new tensions can also arise. Primarily, thisstudy demonstrates the potential double-edged nature of agency in design: promoting teacher agency allows theleveraging of needed expertise, but subsequently circumventing this newfound agency can create new tensionsresearchers must attend to or risk alienating design participants. Additionally, this study showed underwhelminglearning gains for teachers in terms of their understanding of the idea of knowledge-in-use present in recentscience education reforms. This points to the difficulty of developing teachers’ understanding of key shiftscalled for in reforms while engaging in design. We encourage design researchers to engage with our process andresults and to further explore the interplay of design, learning, agency, and reforms.ReferencesCole, M., & Engeström, Y. (2007). Cultural-Historical Approaches to Designing for Development. In J.Valsiner & A. Rosa (Eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Sociocultural Psychology (pp. 484–507). NewYork: Cambridge University Press.Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design Research: Theoretical and Methodological Issues.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15-42.Engeström, Y., Engeström, R., & Kärkkäinen, M. (1995). Polycontextuality and boundary crossing in expertcognition: Learning and problem solving in complex work activities. Learning & Instruction, 5, 319–336.Engeström, Y., & Sannino, A. (2010). Studies of expansive learning: Foundations, findings and futurechallenges. Educational Research Review, 5, 1–24.Krajcik, J.S. and Shin, N. (2014) Project-Based Learning. In Sawyer, R.K. (Ed.) The Cambridge Handbook ofthe Learning Sciences (pp. 275–297). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.National Research Council. (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, CrosscuttingConcepts, and Core Ideas. Washington DC: National Academies Press.Ormel, B. J. B., Pareja Roblin, N. N., McKenney, S. E., Voogt, J. M., & Pieters, J. M. (2012). Research-practiceinteractions as reported in recent design studies: Still promising, still hazy. Educational TechnologyResearch and Development, 60, 967–986.Penuel, W., Roschelle, J., & Shechtman, N. (2007). Designing formative assessment software with teachers: Ananalysis of the co-design process. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 2(1), 51–74.Roseman, J. E., Fortus, D., Krajcik, J., & Reiser, B. (2015). Curriculum Materials for Next Generation ScienceStandards: What the Science Education Research Community Can Do. Chicago.Severance, S., Penuel, W.R., Sumner, T., & Leary, H. (2016). Organizing for teacher agency in curricularco-design. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25(4), 531-564.Voogt, J., Laferrière, T., Breuleux, A., Itow, R. C., Hickey, D. T., & McKenney, S. (2015). Collaborative designas a form of professional development. Instructional Science, 43, 259–282.AcknowledgmentsThis work was funded by the George Lucas Educational Foundation. The opinions expressed here are our own.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1180© ISLS