Knowledge Analysis Outside the STEM ClassroomEleanor R. Anderson (Organizer), Northwestern University, eleanor-anderson@northwestern.eduAyush Gupta, University of Maryland, ayush@umd.eduThomas M. Philip, University of California, Los Angeles, tmp@g.ucla.eduLina Markauskaite, University of Sydney, lina.markauskaite@sydney.edu.auYael Kali, University of Haifa, yael.kali@edtech.haifa.ac.ilPeter Goodyear, University of Sydney, peter.goodyear@sydney.edu.auArthur Hjorth, Northwestern University, arthur.hjorth@u.northwestern.eduOlivia Levrini (Discussant), University of Bologna, olivia.levrini2@unibo.itAbstract: Knowledge Analysis has proven an important and useful set of methods forcharacterizing the constituent parts and processes of human reasoning and learning. However,its application has largely been limited to knowledge in a narrow selection of STEM domains,limiting the generalizability of its findings. This symposium draws together scholarshipoperating within the Knowledge Analysis tradition to investigate reasoning and learning indomains outside of STEM classroom subjects. In doing so, each paper explores the affordancesand limitations of Knowledge Analysis to shed light on significant questions in their respectivedomains of knowledge, including: restorative justice practices, the ethics of drone warfare,undergraduate course design, and urban planning. By further expanding the use of KnowledgeAnalysis to include non-STEM subjects, we hope to raise important questions and offer richerand more generalizable views of knowledge and learning relevant to both STEM and nonSTEM domains.Keywords: Knowledge in Pieces, ideology, qualitative methods, educationSymposium overviewKnowledge Analysis (KA) is a central pillar of the learning sciences. Following diSessa, Sherin & Levin (2016)we use KA to refer to Knowledge in Pieces and related theoretical frameworks used to investigate humancognition through attention to relatively small units of meaning that are called up, revised, and re-organizedthrough processes of perception and reasoning. Insights from within the KA tradition have reshaped ourexpectations for what novice ideas look like, emphasizing the role of contextually cued intuitive knowledgeresources rather than fully coherent naïve theories (Smith, diSessa, & Roschelle, 1993). Scholars working in thistradition have built our understanding of how reasoning and learning occur at the micro level as well as overlonger timescales (diSessa & Sherin, 1998). And, building on these insights, KA has provided a foundation forthe design of learning environments that take advantage of learners’ intuitive understandings to facilitate learningprocesses (Hammer, 1996).However, with a few notable exceptions (Jansson, Wendt & Åse, 2013; Markauskaite & Goodyear, 2014;Philip, 2011), KA has been applied to a relatively narrow range of knowledge domains. Physics has been mostprominent among these (e.g. diSessa, 1993; Hammer, 2000; diSessa & Sherin, 1998; Smith et al., 1993).Moreover, while Knowledge Analysis has been applied outside of physics as well, to math, biology, chemistry,and computer science, for example, it has remained predominantly confined to STEM subjects.While these studies have offered important insights, the similarity of subject matter in the existing bodyof KA literature is also limiting. First, it represents an empirical limit on our understanding of intuitive knowledgeand learning processes in other domains of human knowledge and practice. It also represents a theoreticallimitation. Similarity in domain content can obscure the distinction between features of knowledge organizationand transformation that reflect general principles of human cognition, and those that reflect particularities ofcertain types of content. Moreover, the particular emphasis on STEM has often reified a view of scientificknowledge as objective and value neutral, obscuring the role of values and affect in the process of constructingmeaning. In order to continue to deepen our understanding of human cognition, learning scientists would be wellserved to explore the use of a KA approach for illuminating a wide range of learning contexts and content.This symposium draws together scholarship operating within the Knowledge Analysis tradition toinvestigate reasoning and learning in domains that have previously been little explored within this framework. Indoing so, each paper explores the affordances and limitations of KA to shed light on significant questions in theirICLS 2018 Proceedings1219© ISLSrespective domains of knowledge. Anderson does so in the context of the implementation of restorative justicepractices in schools. Linking educators’ conceptualizations of the nature of restorative justice to their ability toimplement it effectively, Anderson identifies a set of cognitive frames that seem to foreground and backgrounddifferent element of restorative justice practices--and put educators more or less at risk for common‘misconceptions.’ Gupta and Philip investigate the role of taken for granted assumptions in reasoning aboutideologically charged content--specifically, the ethics of drone warfare. They use a methodological approach atthe intersection of Knowledge in Pieces and Interaction Analysis, emphasizing the mutual benefits of connectingthese two approaches. Markauskaite, Kali and Goodyear use the lens of mental resources to investigate howuniversity academics make and explain their decisions about curriculum design and teaching. Synthesizinginsights from three studies in which they explored the nature of mental resources on which university academicsnaturally draw in their pedagogical sensemaking in different contexts, they present an integrative view about thegrounded nature of teachers’ pedagogical resourcefulness. Finally, Hjorth investigates undergraduate students’reasoning about data in the domain of urban planning. He examines the continual fine-grained changes in students’interpretation of data and describes how students shift their goals towards more ‘ideologically acceptable’versions, as they participate in an agent-based simulation classroom activity.In addition to their empirical contributions, these papers also offer valuable insights about the nature ofknowing and learning more broadly. Like prior Knowledge in Pieces work, the papers highlight ways thatknowledge is called upon flexibly. They counteract assumptions that educators’ approaches to practice are rootedin singular theories of instruction or discipline (Anderson; Markauskaite, Kali & Goodyear), and demonstrate howlearners may offer divergent or even contradictory statements depending on context or framing (Anderson; Gupta& Philip; Hjorth). Each characterizes relevant knowledge structures in a slightly different way, identifyingprimitives and more complex structures using approaches that build on existing theorizing to account for thenature of each domain and context. At the same time, these papers raise important methodological, conceptualand practical questions relevant to both STEM and non-STEM domains. For example: What challenges are posedby investigating knowledge in domains without clear boundaries, or measuring learning when there is not a clear‘right’ answer? What are ideological 'features' of a phenomenon, and do we attend to value-laden features in adifferent way than non-value-laden features? How can we design and facilitate learning environments that supportreasoning about issues of social importance in all their complexity? Olivia Levrini will act as discussant for thesymposium, commenting both on the papers’ individual merits and setting the stage for what we hope to be alively discussion on these cross-cutting themes.What are restorative justice practices? A cognitive account in elements andframesEleanor R. AndersonIn this analysis, I seek to investigate educators’ understandings of Restorative Justice Practices (RJP), an approachto school discipline and culture that eschews exclusionary punishment, and emphasizes problem solving andpositive relationships. Like all learners, educators make sense of new ideas—including new programs andpolicies—through the lens of their existing knowledge (M. G. Sherin, 2002; Spillane, 2004; Spillane et al., 2002).Given that programs designed for educational reform are frequently built around novel ideas regarding content,instruction, or philosophy, this makes educational reforms highly susceptible to misunderstanding (Coburn, 2005;Spillane, 2000, 2004).RJP is an umbrella term for a set of specific practices, as well as a philosophy that can be applied to abroad range of situations. Some RJP advocates fear that many teachers hold ‘punitive mindsets,’ requiring aradical shift in perspective to understand RJP fully. However, analyses of other knowledge domains have revealedthat seemingly coherent misconceptions may also reflect relatively simple differences in the organization ofsmaller pieces of knowledge (diSessa & Sherin, 1998). Thus, an empirical investigation of teachers’ constellationsof ideas about discipline and restorative justice is needed in order to assess (and facilitate) the task facing schoolleaders seeking to implement RJP.I draw from interviews with 26 staff members at Rustin HS, an urban public school adopting RJP. Thesample includes teachers, administrators and security staff plus two RJP experts who were supporting the school’simplementation process. Following Hammer et al. (2005), I characterize educators’ conceptions andmisconceptions of RJP in terms of cognitive elements and frames.Beginning with short ‘en vivo’ codes I identified 250 unique elements that educators attended to incharacterizing a particular disciplinary response as exemplifying RJP or not, ranging from named practices, tosample conversational elements, to usage situations, to goals, and beyond. Next, I identified four cognitive framesICLS 2018 Proceedings1220© ISLSthat educators used to articulate the essence of RJP more broadly. Each represents a different way of distillingwhat makes RJP distinctive: their Objective, the Alternative (i.e. what they are not), their Component Parts, andtheir philosophical Lens. Each of these frames was used both by educators who were relative novices with regardto RJP and also by local experts, invoked sometimes one at a time, often in combination.Next, I sought to understand how different frames might offer different cognitive affordances andconstraints with respect to teachers’ growing knowledge about RJP. Using the 30 most commonly invokedelements, I calculated the frequency with which each appeared in a response utilizing each of the four frames,finding distinctive patterns of elements foregrounded and backgrounded by each frame.Finally, I sought to connect this analysis of elements and frames to common challenges of understandingRJP that might affect their implementation. I used expert interviews to identify a common ‘misconception’ amongstaff at the school: that restorative justice means removing student accountability. I operationalized evidence ofthis misconception as the absence of a set of three critical elements in a given response. By comparing the relativefrequencies of these elements across responses using each of the four frames, I found that (only) one framebackgrounds all three key elements: the Alternative--that is, characterizing RJP in terms of what they are not. Itis notable that despite the shortcomings of this frame from a learning perspective, framing RJP as an alternativeto suspension and expulsion is probably the most common justification for their use in district and citywide policydocuments, popular press news stories, etc.This analysis offers practical contributions for school leaders and RJP advocates seeking to developeffective professional development around RJP. It demonstrates, first, how conceptually complex RJP truly are,including hundreds of potentially relevant elements. It also illustrates how educators can thoroughly grasp animportant facet of RJP (e.g. their use as an alternative to exclusionary discipline) and simultaneously missimportant features because of the power of any given cognitive frame to foreground and invite certain elementswhile backgrounding or obscuring others. It also offers a contribution to the KA tradition, raising theoreticalquestions about analyzing learning in domains where the ‘right’ answer is contested, and methodological issuesin bounding a knowledge domain without clear natural bounds.Integrating Knowledge in Pieces and Interactional Analysis to examine ethicalsense-making in an undergraduate engineering classroomAyush Gupta and Thomas M. PhilipFoundational research in Knowledge in Pieces (KiP) is grounded in empirical studies based on cognitive clinicalinterviews (diSessa, 1993, 2002; diSessa, Elby, & Hammer, 2002; diSessa & Sherin, 1998; diSessa & Wagner,2005; Wagner, 2006). The associated methods of data collection and analysis have brought the productivedimensions of students’ intuitive sense-making to the forefront. While certain threads of work within KiP haveattended to joint-meaning making processes (Parnafes, 2007; Scherr & Hammer, 2009; Rosenberg et al., 2006;Gupta et al., 2014), these studies haven't addressed why certain taken-for-granted assumptions become salientwithin a context and how interaction between participants afford or limit opportunities for students to take up andbuild on specific intuitive understandings. In other words, they haven't fully engaged the methods of conversationand interaction analysis (Goodwin, 2007; Goodwin & Heritage, 1990; Jordan & Henderson, 1995).A recently emergent line of research demonstrates the analytical value that is added by working at theintersections and tensions between KiP and interaction studies (diSessa et al., 2016; Gupta et al., 2016; Kapon,2016; Umphress, 2016). We situate the current study within this line of inquiry.The context of our study is an undergraduate engineering classroom discussion on militarized drones ata research university in the United States. This one-semester course was a requirement for all electrical andcomputer engineering students and was typically taken by 2nd year (sophomore) students. We transcribed thestudents’ discussion of drones from the video recording of a 58-minute class session led by a teaching assistant.We used Philip (2011) to code taken-for-granted ideological assumptions—what Philip (2011) refers to asnaturalized axioms and a social parallel to what diSessa (1993) refers to as p-prims—about the ethics of militarizeddrones. Additionally, we utilized methods developed in Philip et al. (2017) to examine how the interactionallyachieved processes of ideological expansion and convergence shaped the salience and persistence of these stancesin the participants’ shared discourse.The analytical affordances of KiP highlighted the significance of taken-for-granted ideological stancesin the students’ sense-making about militarized drones. For instance, a student remarked early in the discussionthat militarized drones would make killing more widespread because it was more “convenient.” From a KiPperspective, this argument is based on the taken-for-granted assumption that “the easier it is to do something, themore likely it is that someone would do it.” Resonant with findings in the KiP literature, students alsoICLS 2018 Proceedings1221© ISLSdemonstrated a range of contextually specific ideological stances that were often contradictory. As an example,one student’s ideological stances were highly varied over the course of the classroom discussion: civilian deathsare inevitable, no war can be humane, people resort to war because they are too lazy to engage with diplomacy,and a government has to protect its military despite the “civilian” toll on other countries. This range of ideologicalstances also points to the productive potential of such intuitions when meaning-making about the ethics of variousscenarios.Our analysis shows that despite the diversity of ideological stances within and across students, thesestances increasingly converged, as an interactional achievement between participants, to the position thatengineers’ ethical responsibility is limited to increasing the accuracy of drones to prevent the loss of civilian lives.Our analysis suggests that the process of ideological convergence made potentially expansive ideological stancesless salient for some students and simultaneously more difficult to invoke for other students. Additionally, weshow that marginalization of ideologically expansive stances constrained the possibilities for disciplinary andethical learning. In sum, our paper makes a case for the analytical affordances of working at the intersections ofKiP and interaction studies.Investigating university academics’ pedagogical sensemaking: A groundeddynamic perspective of teachers’ pedagogical resourcefulnessLina Markauskaite, Yael Kali, and Peter GoodyearStudies that investigate university academics’ pedagogical knowledge often assume that teachers have coherent,well-articulated ‘theory-like’ knowledge and beliefs (Kember & Kwan, 2000; Prosser & Trigwell, 2017). Suchconceptions are rather inflexible, and academics who hold a particular view deploy it consistently across manyteaching situations. The theory‐like conceptualizations of teachers’ knowledge are too coarse for investigatingteachers’ everyday pedagogical sensemaking; ignore intuitive, less articulated kinds of knowledge that areimportant in situated decision-making; and do not explain why teachers’ knowledge observed in action oftendiffers from their espoused views (Kane, Sandretto, & Heath, 2002). Our studies remedy this by investigating themental resources university academics actually draw on in reasoning about course designs and teaching.We draw on a line of theorization about people’s everyday knowledge, developed in the context ofphysics (diSessa, 1993; Hammer & Elby, 2002), and use this mental resource view to account for universityacademics’ pedagogical beliefs and knowledge. On this view, people have a large array of (mostly implicit)conceptual understandings of physical phenomena that they encounter in the world (diSessa, 1993) and a similarlylarge array of understandings of epistemological phenomena about how people learn and come to know (Hammer& Elby, 2002). By extension, we assume that people also have a rich array of mental resources for making senseof how people teach and are taught (Markauskaite & Goodyear, 2011, 2014). People develop these understandingsin a variety of ways: by remembering specific situations, forming intuitive abstractions from a range ofexperiences, deliberatively reflecting on their understanding, being explicitly taught, etc. The grain-size of thesepedagogical mental resources vary. Some can be quite small situation-specific units of meaning, similar to diSessa(1993)’s ‘p-prims’, and some might be broad theory-like generalizations and abstractions.We have explored the nature of pedagogical mental resources in a number of studies, investigatinguniversity academics’ sensemaking about how to design courses and teach. This paper reports insights from threesuch studies and offers an integrative view on the nature of teachers’ pedagogical resourcefulness. We examinedthree contexts:1. General course design: university academics’ explanations of their general course design decisions(Markauskaite, Bachfischer, & Goodyear, in preparation; Markauskaite & Goodyear, 2017).2. Activity context: pedagogical sensemaking of an individual teacher as she explained her everydayteaching decisions (Kali, Goodyear, & Markauskaite, 2011; Markauskaite & Goodyear, 2011, 2014).3. Situated action context: the kinds of mental resources used by academics in reasoning and makingdecisions in curriculum innovation team meetings (Markauskaite, Bachfischer, Kali, & Goodyear, 2017).Our results reveal that the academics tended to draw on quite different mental resources in each of thethree contexts.In the general course design context, the academics often drew on mental resources originating in formalpedagogical knowledge and intuitively-formed generalizations about knowledge, knowing, learning and teaching(e.g. Knowledge needs to be backed up with the latest evidence; People learn through analysis of their ownexperiences and reflections). While most drew on a range of such generalizations, these mental resources closelyresembled large macro-level theory-like pedagogical abstractions.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1222© ISLSIn the concrete activity context, the academic more often articulated their intuitive sense of the micromechanisms about how people come to understand and how they should be taught in a particular situation. Forexample, the teacher articulated such teaching and learning mechanisms as Reiteration (i.e. knowledge thatstudents tend not to remember could be taught by repeating it several times); Building-on (i.e. learning shouldstart from simple concepts or tasks and should gradually be made more complex). Many of these micro-levelmental resources originated in personal experiences about how people learn and how to teach and closelyresembled small intuitive, contextually-cued pieces of knowledge that we call “pedagogical p-prims”.In the situated action context, the academics often drew on knowledge of concrete experiences,affordances and constraints, such as experiences of how specific students reacted to a particular task design, orhow a decision about how to teach relates to particular functions of software used on a course. In making thesedecisions, teachers drew on pre-existing mental resources, and also coordinated and combined various mentalresources on-the-fly by taking into account affordances, constraints and other details of the situation.Our findings suggest that academics’ pedagogical resourcefulness should be reconceptualized from aperspective that acknowledges the diverse, dynamic nature of teachers’ knowledge and their pedagogicalsensemaking: grounded in concrete experiences and situations. Teachers’ pedagogical knowledge cannot be seenas an abstract theory or generic mental process that operates solely in the head. Rather this is knowledge that isfirmly entwined with the physical and social environment. Mental resources are not stable (large or small)representations, but multimodal constructs that are dynamically recombined in various ways: with each other andwith affordances of the emerging situation. They provide a highly populated, dynamically evolving knowledgebase for interpreting and making decisions about new situations. This grounded dynamic view of mental resourcesextends current Knowledge in Pieces perspectives and provides a new way for theorising and studying learningin complex, ill-structured knowledge domains, such as teaching.Moving the goalposts: The role of values in students’ shifting interpretation ofsimulated urban planning dataArthur HjorthRecent efforts to reform social studies in K-12 emphasize, amongst other things, ‘complex causal reasoning’ aboutsocial issues and policy (NCSS, 2013). This raises two understudied questions: first a definitional question: whatdoes it mean to reason causally about complex social issues? And second, a design question: how should wedesign learning activities that encourage and support this particular kind of thinking in social studies? This paperpresents data from an Urban Planning curriculum unit in which undergraduate students used agent-basedsimulations to design cities. I find that students would often shift their interpretation of data in ways that alignedwith their values, even if this meant making objectively dubious claims about the data. Taking a Knowledge-inPieces approach, I characterize the knowledge pieces and the process that students deployed when doing so.In response to the first question, this paper argues that we can borrow from existing work on causalreasoning in STEM (e.g. Machamer, Darden, and Craver, 2000; Russ et al. 2008) to analyze, categorize, andassess student reasoning about social issues. However, we must also consider an additional component whenstudying reasoning about social issues; the role in which values guide the sense-making process during the activeconstruction of knowledge. To address this somewhat unique aspect of studying reasoning about socialphenomena, I propose a preliminary framework for analyzing students’ thinking based on Knowledge-in-Pieces(e.g. diSessa 1993) and Michael Freeden’s work on ideology and sense making of policy (Freeden 2005; 2008).In response to the second question, this paper borrows from a long tradition in using agent-based models asexternal representations of complex systems and "objects-to-think-with" (Papert 1980; Eisenberg 2003; Wilensky& Rand 2015). The fundamental principle here is that by providing an external representation of the causality ina complex system, and by providing a purpose for students to manipulate the system and see how thesemanipulations result in different outcomes, students can align their internal, conceptual model of the system withthe external, computer-based model. Agent-based modeling-based classroom activities have been usedsuccessfully to support students while they learn to reason about complex phenomena like evolution, physics,chemistry (Wilensky & Jacobson, 2015).Taking this work as a starting point, I designed and implemented a 3-day undergraduate unit on urbanplanning in which students in groups of 2-3 built and iteratively improved on virtual cities in an agent-basedcomputer simulation. They were asked to set specific a measurable policy outcome as a goal, and then to designa city in the simulation that would meet this goal. At the end of each design iteration of their city, students wereasked to assess whether they “reached their goal”. This paper expands on an interesting finding from an earlyanalysis (Hjorth & Wilensky, 2014) of these data: the goals that students set for themselves were quantitative andICLS 2018 Proceedings1223© ISLSeasily measurable, and given the data that was available to students in the simulation, in theory this ought to be asimple yes/no answer. But when students in the unit assessed whether they had achieved their goals, they wouldoften shift their interpretation of the outcome data, if the outcome was ideologically acceptable to them. Forinstance, students would set a goal of reducing ‘commute times to less than 30 minutes for everyone’ (myemphasis) but would say that they reached their goal, even though they objectively did not, because ‘the poorest20% had really good commute times.’ I observed similar shifts in the interpretation of data as a result of students’ideological interpretations of data in other groups.This paper bases its analysis on the video data and students’ written responses that were collected duringthe classroom implementation. The analysis has two purposes: first, to identify and characterize a set of differentknowledge pieces that students activate when constructing meaning out of the simulation data. The second is tocharacterize the process of students’ re-organizing these knowledge pieces, forefronting some and backgroundingothers, while making sense of the simulation data, in order to facilitate these value-laden shifts in datainterpretation. These findings suggest that values qua knowledge can play a productive role in students’interpretation of data, and that future curriculum development can leverage this by designing open-ended datainterpretation activities with socially meaningful data.ReferencesCoburn, C. E. (2005). The role of nonsystem actors in the relationship between policy and practice: The case ofreading instruction in California. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 27(1), 23.diSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an epistemology of physics. Cognition and instruction, 10(2-3), 105-225.diSessa, A. A. (2002). Why “conceptual ecology” is a good idea. In Reconsidering conceptual change: Issues intheory and practice (pp. 28-60). Springer Netherlands.diSessa, A., Elby, A., & Hammer, D. (2002). J’s epistemological stance and strategies. In G. M. Sinatra & P. R.Pintrich (Eds.), Intentional conceptual change (pp. 237–290). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.diSessa, A. A., Levin, M., & Brown, N. J. S. (Editors) (2016). Knowledge and interaction: A synthetic agenda forthe learning sciences. New York, NY: Routledge.diSessa, A. A., & Sherin, B. L. (1998). What changes in conceptual change?. International journal of scienceeducation, 20(10), 1155-1191.diSessa, A. A., Sherin, B., & Levin, M. (2016). Knowledge analysis: An introduction. In A. diSessa, M. Levin, &NJS Brown (Eds.), Knowledge and interaction: A synthetic agenda for the learning sciences (pp. 30–71).diSessa, A., & Wagner, J. (2005). What Coordination Has to Say about Transfer. Transfer of Learning from aModern Multidisciplinary Perspective. JP Mestre. Greenwich, CT.Eisenberg, M. “Mindstuff.” Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media Technologies9, no. 2 (2003): 29.Freeden, Michael. “Thinking Politically and Thinking About Politics : Language, Interpretation, and Ideology.”In Political Theory: Methods and Approaches. Oxford University Press, 2008.Freeden, Michael. “What Should the ‘Political’ in Political Theory Explore?*.” Journal of Political Philosophy13, no. 2 (2005): 113–134.Goodwin, C. (2007). Participation, stance and affect in the organization of activities. Discourse & Society, 18(1),53-73.Goodwin, C., & Heritage, J. (1990). Conversation analysis. Annual review of anthropology, 19(1), 283-307.Gupta, A., Elby, A., & Sawtelle, V. (2016). Bridging Knowledge Analysis and Interaction Analysis ThroughUnderstanding the Dynamics of Knowledge in Use. In diSessa, A. A., Levin, M., & Brown, N. J. S.(Editors). Knowledge and interaction: A synthetic agenda for the learning sciences. New York, NY:Routledge.Gupta, A., Elby, A., & Conlin, L. D. (2014). How substance-based ontologies for gravity can be productive: Acase study. Physical Review Special Topics-Physics Education Research, 10(1), 010113.Hammer, D. (1996). Misconceptions or p-prims: How may alternative perspectives of cognitive structureinfluence instructional perceptions and intentions. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 5(2), 97–127.Hammer, D. (2000). Student resources for learning introductory physics. American Journal of Physics, 68(S1),S52-S59.Hammer, D., & Elby, A. (2002). On the form of a personal epistemology. In B. K. Hofer & P. R. Pintrich (Eds.),Personal epistemology: The psychology of beliefs about knowledge and knowing (pp. 169-190).Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Hammer, D., Elby, A., Scherr, R. E., & Redish, E. F. (2005). Resources, framing, and transfer. Transfer oflearning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective, 89.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1224© ISLSHjorth, Arthur, and U Wilensky. “Redesigning Your City-A Constructionist Environment for Urban PlanningEducation.” Informatics in Education 13, no. 2 (2014): 197.Jansson, M., Wendt, M., & Åse, C. (2013). Common-Sense Notions of “Nation”: A Challenge forTeaching. Journal of Political Science Education, 9(1), 34-51.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The journal of the learningsciences, 4(1), 39-103.Kali, Y., Goodyear, P., & Markauskaite, L. (2011). Researching design practices and design cognition: contexts,experiences and pedagogical knowledge-in-pieces. Learning, Media and Technology, 36(2), 129-149.Kane, R., Sandretto, S., & Heath, C. (2002). Telling half the story: a critical review of research on the teachingbeliefs and practices of university academics. Review of Educational Research, 72(2), 177-228.Kapon, S. (2016). Gestures, Speech, and Manipulation of Objects as a Window and Interface to IndividualCognition. In diSessa, A. A., Levin, M., & Brown, N. J. S. (Editors). Knowledge and interaction: Asynthetic agenda for the learning sciences. New York, NY: Routledge.Kember, D., & Kwan, K. (2000). Lecturers’ approaches to teaching and their relationship to conceptions of goodteaching. Instructional Science, 28(5), 469-490.Machamer, Peter, Lindley Darden, and Carl F Craver. “Thinking about Mechanisms.” Philosophy of Science 67,no. 1 (2000): 1–25.Markauskaite, L., Bachfischer, A., & Goodyear, P. (2017). Mental resources in university academics' coursedesign decisions. Technical report (in preparation).Markauskaite, L., Bachfischer, A., Kali, Y., & Goodyear, P. (2017). Knowledge and knowing in collaborativeeLearning design teams in higher education: some insights into what TPACK does not tell us. Technicalreport.Markauskaite, L., & Goodyear, P. (2011). Pedagogical p-prims: insights into the shape of teachers’ intuitivemental resources for educational design and action. Paper presented at the American EducationalResearch Association Annual Meeting. New Orleans, Louisiana, 8-12 April, New Orleans, Louisiana.Markauskaite, L., & Goodyear, P. (2014). Tapping into the mental resources of teachers' working knowledge:insights into the generative power of intuitive pedagogy. Learning, Culture and Social Interaction, 3(4),237-251. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lcsi.2014.01.001Markauskaite, L., & Goodyear, P. (2017). Epistemic fluency and professional education: innovation,knowledgeable action and actionable knowledge. Dordrecht: Springer.NCSS. The College, Career, and Civic Life (C3) Framework for Social Studies State Standards: Guidance forEnhancing the Rigor of K–12 Civics, Economics, Geography, and History. Author Silver Spring, MD,2013.Papert, Seymour. Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas. New York, New York: Basic Books,Inc., 1980.Parnafes, O. (2007). What does “fast” mean? Understanding the physical world through computationalrepresentations. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(3), 415-450.Philip, T. M. (2011). An “Ideology in Pieces” Approach to Studying Change in Teachers’ Sensemaking AboutRace, Racism, and Racial Justice. Cognition and Instruction, 29(3), 297–329.https://doi.org/10.1080/07370008.2011.583369Posner, G. J., Strike, K. A., Hewson, P. W., & Gertzog, W. A. (1982). Accommodation of a scientific conception:Toward a theory of conceptual change. Science Education, 66(2), 211–227.Prosser, M., & Trigwell, K. (2017). Student learning and the experience of teaching. HERDSA Review of HigherEducation, 4, 5-27.Rosenberg, S., Hammer, D., & Phelan, J. (2006). Multiple epistemological coherences in an eighth-gradediscussion of the rock cycle. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(2), 261-292.Russell, E, and U Wilensky. “Consuming Spatial Data in NetLogo Using the GIS Extension.” Chicago, IL, 2008.Scherr, R. E., & Hammer, D. (2009). Student behavior and epistemological framing: Examples from collaborativeactive-learning activities in physics. Cognition and Instruction, 27(2), 147-174.Sherin, M. G. (2002). When teaching becomes learning. Cognition and Instruction, 20(2), 119–150.Smith, J. P., diSessa, A. A., & Roschelle, J. (1993). Misconceptions Reconceived: A Constructivist Analysis ofKnowledge in Transition. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(2), 115–163.Spillane, J. P. (2000). Cognition and Policy Implementation: District Policymakers and the Reform ofMathematicsEducation.CognitionandInstruction,18(2),141–179.https://doi.org/10.1207/S1532690XCI1802_01Spillane, J. P. (2004). Standards deviation: How schools misunderstand education policy (Vol. 43). Harvard UnivPress.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1225© ISLSSpillane, J. P., Reiser, B. J., & Reimer, T. (2002). Policy Implementation and Cognition: Reframing andRefocusing Implementation Research. Review of Educational Research, 72(3), 387–431.Umphress, J. F. (2016). Parents as skilled knowledge practitioners. In diSessa, A. A., Levin, M., & Brown, N. J.S. (Editors). Knowledge and interaction: A synthetic agenda for the learning sciences. New York, NY:Routledge.Wagner, J. F. (2006). Transfer in pieces. Cognition and instruction, 24(1), 1-71.Wilensky, U, and R Jacobson. “Complex Systems in the Learning Sciences.” In The Cambridge Handbook of theLearning Sciences. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2014.Wilensky, U, and W Rand. An Introduction to Agent-Based Modeling: Modeling Natural, Social, and EngineeredComplex Systems with NetLogo. MIT Press, 2015.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1226© ISLS