Growing Teamwork Competency: A Mixed Methods Study of anIterative Digital Formative Assessment ApproachElizabeth Koh, Jennifer Pei-Ling Tan, Helen Hong, and Tee Yi Huanelizabeth.koh@nie.edu.sg, jen.tan@nie.edu.sg, mshelenhong@gmail.com, yihuan.tee@nie.edu.sgNational Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, SingaporeAbstract: This paper reports on an intervention project, based on a digital formativeassessment approach, to grow students’ teamwork competency. In this intervention, apedagogical framework and a teamwork competency measure were supported by a technopedagogical system. The intervention was carried out over two iterations with the sameteacher and class, over two different collaborative inquiry tasks. Student participants (n=39)were in Secondary One when they started. The study employed the design-based researchmethodology with a convergent parallel mixed methods design. The quantitative results ofstudents’ peer-rated teamwork ratings all increased positively in iteration two while thequalitative analysis of the teamwork reflection text revealed that students had a deeperunderstanding of their teamwork competency. The converging findings indicate that theintervention has helped students to grow their personal teamwork competency. Implicationsand future work of the study are highlighted.Introduction and backgroundTeamwork is one of the core competencies for the 21st Century student, yet, the mechanisms of teamwork areoften complex, and assessing teamwork can be difficult (Phielix, Prins, Kirschner, Erkens, & Jaspers, 2011).This is especially as there has been less research on the metacognitive, social and emotional aspects in groupwork as compared to cognitive processes (Järvelä et al., 2015). Being competent in teamwork, or teamworkcompetency, is a multi-dimensional construct that focuses on the process of members working in a team. Wefocus on four dimensions of teamwork competency: coordination (COD), mutual performance monitoring(MPM), constructive conflict (CCF), and team emotional support (TES; Koh, Hong, & Tan, 2018).While there have been many approaches to grow teamwork, a digital formative assessment approach,which refers to pedagogical mechanisms that utilize assessment for learning by means of electronic tools, hasshown some promise (Phielix et al., 2011). In this paper, we highlight how students’ perceptions of teamworkchanged through a digital formative assessment approach. This approach was designed as a pedagogicalframework, the Team and Self Diagnostic Learning (TSDL) framework (Koh et al., 2018), and supported by atechno-pedagogical system. This system had the core functions of a lesson page, ratings, visual analytic,reflections and steps-setting, and a status check page. It was implemented as part of an authentic collaborativeinquiry task in a class of Secondary One students over two iterative trials. We ask, to what extent and in whatways does the approach help students to grow their personal teamwork competency? The study employed thedesign-based research methodology with a convergent parallel mixed methods design.Team self diagnostic learning frameworkThe TSDL framework (Koh et al., 2018) is a four staged approach draw from theories such as experientiallearning, socially shared regulation, and the pedagogical framework for learning analytics intervention design. Itaims to build students’ teamwork competency through the following staged mechanisms:•team-based concrete experiences that engage students in team experiences such that they have priorknowledge and understandings of working with the members of their team.•self and team awareness building primarily through making visible teamwork processes throughformative assessment. This is currently enacted through self and peer ratings of their teamworkbehaviors, and a visual analytic provided.•team and self reflection and sensemaking that enables students to evaluate the visual analytics,diagnose their teamwork information and create new insights. Students are challenged to set specificgoals to grow their teamwork individually and as a team.•team and self growth and change through providing students the agency to monitor and enact theteamwork goals they have set.Method and brief findingsICLS 2018 Proceedings1461© ISLSDesign-based research was the overall methodology. Using convergent parallel mixed methods design,quantitative and qualitative data were collected simultaneously. The focus of this paper is on the peer-ratedteamwork competency scores and the reflection text that students wrote over the two iterations.There were 39 student participants, who were in the two iterations, with the same teacher over twodifferent collaborative inquiry tasks in the subject, Interdisciplinary Project Work (IPW). This is part of thecurriculum for Secondary One and Two students. Each IPW was six months long and the intervention wasdesigned to integrate with it. There were two cycles of TSDL in each iteration, i.e., two ratings.We focus on the peer-rated teamwork dimensions, i.e., how a student was rated by the members in histeam, as this provides a sense of how the team members perceived the participant in teamwork, a form of othersratings. The results show that time one and two ratings for each dimension was significantly positivelycorrelated. However, a paired samples t-test revealed no significant relationships between the dimension ratingsin iteration two. Interestingly, in iteration two, there was a significant average difference between MPM scoresbetween TSDL cycle one and two (t 38 = 3.324, p < 0.002). On average, peer-rated MPM scores grew .23 points(95% CI [.090, .370]). For TES too, there was a significant average difference, t 38 = 2.990, p < 0.005. Peer-ratedTES scores grew .18 points (95% CI [.057, .294]).As for the qualitative reflection text, two researchers thematically coded the text. Three themesemerged - teamwork competency shifted from head knowledge to applied knowledge, vague teamworkdescriptions changed to realizations of what one has to improve on, and from general reflecting to the quality ofteamwork and the collaborative inquiry task. For example, student 122ZC at the end of cycle 2 reflected onMPM, “this dimension is important as monitoring each other helps to complete the work faster as we canconcentrate better and complete work on time.” As can be seen, the reflection highlights this student’s deeperunderstanding of the teamwork dimension in personal terms. Another student even wrote out a heuristicformula, “no constructive conflict – [means] no interaction, [leads to] low productivity by group”, suggestingan internalization and application of teamwork competency in the student.Discussion and concluding remarksA digital formative assessment approach was trialed in two iterations on a class of Secondary One students. Thefindings converge to indicate that the students grew in their teamwork competency perceptions. However, thischange was seen only in iteration two. It could be that students were not keenly able to meta-cognitively thinkabout and reflect on their personal teamwork competency in the first iteration. This suggests that more time isneeded for students to cultivate the meta-cognitive thinking processes and language in understanding andgrowing their teamwork competency. Still, these findings have their limitations, and require further examinationof other data sources. Also, the study has several confounding factors such as the maturity of the students, andthe lack of a control group.One key practical implication is the extent that future collaborative inquiry tasks can employ thisdigital formative assessment approach. A key concern would be the time needed for such metacognitive activity.This suggests the need for instructional leadership and other stakeholder support. Also, further refinement isneeded to strengthen the pedagogical mechanisms and the flow of activities such that it integrates smoothly withthe curriculum. Nevertheless, the findings from this study highlight that such an intervention can work tonurture the teamwork competency of 21st Century learners.ReferencesJärvelä, S., Kirschner, P. A., Panadero, E., Malmberg, J., Phielix, C., Jaspers, J., . . . Järvenoja, H. (2015).Enhancing socially shared regulation in collaborative learning groups: designing for CSCL regulationtools. Educational Technology Research and Development, 63(1), 125-142.Koh, E., Hong, H., & Tan, J. P.-L. (2018). Formatively assessing teamwork in technology-enabled twenty-firstcentury classrooms: exploratory findings of a teamwork awareness programme in Singapore. AsiaPacific Journal of Education, 1-16. doi:10.1080/02188791.2018.1423952Phielix, C., Prins, F. J., Kirschner, P. A., Erkens, G., & Jaspers, J. (2011). Group awareness of social andcognitive performance in a CSCL environment: Effects of a peer feedback and reflection tool.Computers in Human Behavior, 27(3), 1087-1102.AcknowledgmentsThis paper refers to data from project NRF2015-EDU001-IHL08, funded by the eduLab Funding Programme.The views expressed in this paper are the authors’ and do not necessarily represent the views of NIE. Theauthors also appreciate the support from Dhivya Suresh and Varun Advani.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1462© ISLS