How Teachers Use Instructional Improvisation to Organize ScienceDiscourse and Learning in a Mixed Reality EnvironmentMaggie Dahn, University of California, Los Angeles, maggiedahn@gmail.comNoel Enyedy, University of California, Los Angeles, enyedy@gseis.ucla.eduJoshua Danish, Indiana University, jdanish@indiana.eduAbstract: In this paper we describe our model of instructional improvisation, which blends rulesof theatrical improv with a constructivist teaching approach to suggest practical moves teacherscan make during classroom lessons to support students’ science inquiry. We describeinstructional improvisation through an analysis of interaction in the STEP (Science throughTechnology Enhanced Play) environment, a mixed reality simulation in which young children(ages 6-8) learn about complex science concepts. We present a case study analysis (n=26) anddemonstrate how teacher moves aligned with our model of instructional improvisation supportjoint ownership of science knowledge and students having agency within science learning. Afterdemonstrating the effects of these moves, we end with a discussion of how teachers mightintentionally use instructional improvisation to support productive interactions in inquiry-basedscience classrooms.IntroductionGood teachers develop plans to help students learn course content, yet constructivist theory requires they alsorecognize the value of students’ prior knowledge and encourage students to be active participants in their ownlearning (Sanchez & Valcárcel, 1999). Thus, when students’ interests and previous experiences lead to unexpectedmoments in the classroom, teachers must deviate from their scripted plans. While it is true that students canactively construct knowledge from any experience, including lectures and videos, it is hard to predict in advancejust how instruction will interact with a child’s exisiting knowledge. Seemingly clear statements can be assimilatedinto a child’s existing understandings in unpredictable ways that distort the intended meaning to fit with what theyalready understand. Researchers have used improvisation as a metaphor to describe how teachers strike a balancebetween creating structures and being responsive to students during moments of instruction (Erickson, 1982;Sawyer, 2011).Improvisation of this form is not simple nor is it entirely spontaneous. Audiences of theatrical improvand popular television shows such as Whose Line Is It Anyway? can be led to believe that improvisation issomething that just happens between actors without much prior planning or thought (Yanow, 2001), however,theatre professionals describe improvisation as an overarching framework with specific rules that guide interaction(Fey, 2011; Halpern, Close & Johnson 1994; Sawyer, 2004). Prior work on improvisation and teaching has usedexisting rules of theatrical improvisation as a framework for identifying aspects of effective teaching andcurriculum planning (Borko & Livingston, 1989; Brown & Edelson, 2003) or as a set of theatrical activities forteachers to engage with and apply to their practice (Lobman & Lundquist, 2007). However, the rules of improvdo not neatly map onto the types of interactions that lead to student learning because teachers in classrooms havedifferent goals than actors in improv theatre. Sawyer (2004) draws from improv to suggest practical ways forconstructivist-minded teachers to integrate improv within their teaching. We aim for a more precise articulationof this translation and propose a hybrid model—instructional improvisation—of teaching as improv that aims toexplicitly blend the rules of theatrical improv with research on constructivist teaching within science classroomsto suggest moves teachers can make to support students’ science inquiry. Our model can help teachers remainflexible by offering guidance in how to respond to student contributions throughout a lesson and engage theensemble with emergent concepts. We describe the model of instructional improvisation through a case study ofone classroom (n= 26) in our context: the Science through Technology Enhanced Play (STEP) learningenvironment (Danish et al., 2015; Enyedy, Danish, & DeLiema, 2015), a mixed reality simulation used to teachchildren about science concepts.Rules of improvisational theatre in an education contextThe rules of theatrical improvisation are established, yet fluid. For our model we developed and adapted acomposite of six rules drawing from advice of improv experts (Fey, 2011; Halpern, Close & Johnson 1994;Sawyer, 2004). The rules of our model of instructional improvisation include: 1. Always agree; 2. Yes, and…; 3.Make statements or ask questions that elicit statements; 4. No mistakes, only opportunities; 5. The needs of theICLS 2018 Proceedings72© ISLSensemble are greater than the individual; and the rule towards which all the others aim, 6. Tell a cohesiveinstructional story. Below we describe the rules in theatre, focusing on how actors make and receive offers––dialogue or contributions that advance the narrative scene (Halpern, Close & Johnson 1994)––and translate therules to make the model useful for teachers.Always agreeThe always agree rule is usually introduced as the first rule of theatrical improv because it frames how actorsshould interact and support one another when developing a scene. To illustrate, if your partner says, “I can’tbelieve we’re stuck in this dungeon,” you should accept the premise that you are in a dungeon together whetheryou want to or not. If you instead say, “What are you talking about? We’re not in a dungeon, we’re on a boat,”you have undermined the contribution, making it difficult for your partner to know what to say or do next.In an education context this does not mean the teacher should agree with every student idea even if it isinaccurate, but it does mean that student contributions should be positioned as legitimate within the collectivestory the class is trying to tell. If in the case of discussing how bees pollinate a student suggests that bees try topollinate when they collect nectar, a teacher could “agree” by responding, “That’s interesting. You notice thatbees pollinate and collect nectar at the same time.” While the teacher is not agreeing with inaccurate information(bees incidentally pollinate flowers, they do not try to pollinate), she does not evaluate the student’s offer either.Instead, she effectively “agrees” by positioning the student’s everyday sensemaking as a legitimate resource(Warren, Ballenger, Ogonowski, Rosebery, & Hudicourt-Barnes, 2000) in service of moving the instructionalstory forward. If she had responded, “I don’t think that’s quite right” or “Are you sure?” she would be underminingthe idea, making it difficult for the student to know how to best respond. Because improv is a co-construction ofideas and events, it is important for actors (and in classrooms, teachers and students) to support one another as thescene (lesson) unfolds.Yes, and…The next rule of improv is intimately connected to always agree. In addition to agreeing with a partner’scontributions, an actor should also add something, or yes, and… her partner, to move the scene in a forwardtrajectory. If you only agree that you are in a dungeon but do not add detail––about your relationship with yourpartner, the plot, or what the dungeon looks/smells like––then you are essentially leaving all of the responsibilityon your fellow dungeon dweller to figure out what comes next. A yes, and… move could sound something like,“Yes, thank goodness I brought this spoon to dig us out of here.” In this case, the actor’s offer adds to the narrativethe partners are co-constructing as it pushes the scene forward.In the classroom example above, if the teacher agrees but does not add detail or elaborate further thenshe would be leaving all of the responsibility on the student to figure out what comes next in their collectiveinquiry. A yes, and… move could sound something like, “After the bee is pollinating and collecting nectar, I noticethat she goes back to the hive. What happens when she gets there?” By using a yes, and… move here the teacherprompts students to add to the story by describing the bees’ subsequent actions. The yes, and… move advancesthe instructional narrative by linking student contributions to the teacher’s broader learning goals.Make statements or ask questions that elicit statementsA third rule of theatrical improv is to make statements, meaning that statements usually trump questions becausewhen you ask questions you put pressure on your partner to come up with answers. If in the example above theresponding actor asks about the spoon, “How are we going to dig with that thing?” he would be relying on hisscene partner to come up with a quick, clever response. Instead, he could say, “Great work. And I have thisshovel.” This statement moves the scene forward as the two actors begin to formulate their escape plan.The make statements rule translates to the classroom a bit differently because it is necessary that theteacher and students ask questions. The main thrust of this rule in our model is that the statements the teachermakes should add to the story and her questions should elicit statements from students that advance the narrative.Regardless of whether the turn at talk is a statement or question, it is important that offers push the lesson forward.No mistakes, only opportunitiesThis next improv rule reinforces the first rule of agreement. It requires that as long as the general rules of improvare upheld, there are no mistakes, only opportunities for new discoveries. Because there are no wrong directions,all participants can help the scene evolve. In the classroom, this means that even if students veer down a path toexplore a conceptually inaccurate idea, the teacher should allow their interactions to organically unfold becauseshe knows that she can eventually pivot towards the target science content. In fact, she created structures and plansICLS 2018 Proceedings73© ISLSbefore implementing the lesson for exactly this reason. The no mistakes, only opportunities rule plays out similarlyin both the theatre and classroom because it is all about saying yes to whatever curveballs are thrown your way.The needs of the ensemble are greater than the individualIt is important that actors refrain from “stealing” an improv scene in order to have their ideas and jokes heard.Actors should be good listeners and focus on what they can contribute to the narrative rather than writing thescript in their heads. Improv is not really about individuals; a successful improv scene is evidenced through theform of the actors’ collective storytelling. This rule of putting the needs of the ensemble over the individual isrelevant in the classroom because teachers deal with conflicting demands from individual students and mustdecide which ideas to pursue while simultaneously honoring all student contributions and connecting ideas to coredisciplinary concepts.Tell a cohesive instructional storyWe end with the most central rule of improv for our model of instructional improvisation, which is to tell acohesive instructional story. In both theatrical improv and improv as used in our education context, the ultimateaim is for participants to tell a story through dialogue that develops relationships between characters and drivesthe narrative towards a set of co-constructed goals. While not evidenced through isolated moves, the story that theteacher and students tell together is a collective co-construction of knowledge and understanding over the courseof a lesson, instructional unit, or other bounded learning experience. Stories make content more memorable (Berk& Trieber, 2009), which is valuable both in the theatre and the classroom. This final rule is one on which all theothers depend because all improv moves are made in service of telling a cohesive and compelling story.Figure 1. The STEP mixed reality environment.Describing the STEP environmentThe Science through Technology Enhanced Play (STEP) environment (see Figure 1) is a mixed reality simulationbuilt to support the collective inquiry of teachers and students in science (Danish et al., 2015; Enyedy, Danish, &DeLiema, 2015). The mixed reality helps participants build conceptual understandings as they link movement inthe real world of the play space to what happens visually within the simulated system (Danish et al., 2015;Lindgren, Tscholl, Wang, & Johnson, 2016). In STEP, students participate by stepping into the space and“becoming” bees that retrieve nectar and pollinate flowers on the projected screen. As students move, their motionis tracked by Xbox Kinect cameras using the OpenPTrack software (Munaro, Horn, Illum, Burke, & Rusu, 2014)to feed their location and motion into a computer simulation. We encouraged teachers to be playful in theirpedagogical approach but did not explicitly suggest they engage in what we came to understand as instructionalimprovisation. Our model emerged from observing teachers during STEP lessons given our guiding suggestionsto support play-based inquiry.MethodsWe designed lessons to teach first and second-grade students about key science concepts, including the differencesbetween nectar and pollen, how bees communicate within the hive to forage for nectar, and the complex processof pollination. While young students might know that bees live in a hive and have something to do with honey,nectar, and pollen, they usually do not know much about how bee communication via a “waggle dance” allowsbees to efficiently gather nectar, which in turn supports the larger ecosystem by leading to pollination of theflowers they visit. To illustrate how our model can elucidate teachers’ interactional practices and support play asa form of inquiry, we present a case study analysis of when students first learned about the role of the “waggledance.” As we watched the teacher allow students to be productively playful, our model of instructionalICLS 2018 Proceedings74© ISLSimprovisation emerged as we found ways to name interesting moments in interaction that seemed to supportstudents’ agency in inquiry.ParticipantsThe STEP project was developed as part of a collaboration across two universities and affiliated elementaryschools. The present analysis focuses on the implementation of the bees unit at one school, which involvedchildren from three mixed-age classrooms (n=76; 42 first-graders and 34 second-graders). The three teachers eachhad more than six years teaching experience and two years working with the STEP system. When we firstintroduced them to STEP, we emphasized the value of pretend play and allowing students to discover content withminimal guidance. We focused on Ms. Jones’ classroom (n=26) for our initial theory-build because we felt shewas particularly successful at balancing students’ agency with the curricular goals in a manner that felt truly“playful” for all.Data sources and analysis approachOur goals were to understand how teachers supported the playful, conceptually rich narrative we witnessed andto identify specifically what teachers did to support that narrative. Understanding the teacher’s moves asimprovisation emerged during initial video analysis; we then used this frame to analyze the rest of the video dataand found similar moves throughout. To determine whether students in the classroom had learned the content, weused pre/post interviews that consisted of ten questions about the target science. Two coders analyzed responses(interrater agreement=97.5%). We developed our model by focusing on Ms. Jones’ class (12 hours). We madelogs that indicated where we felt like the teacher was using improvisation, developed conjectures around thesepoints, and adjusted conjectures as we reviewed additional video (Erickson, 2006). We chose two lessons to pursuewith the goal of showing how teacher moves encouraged student agency and supported engagement with content.FindingsEpisode 1. Using improv to introduce science content and support studentparticipationOur analysis of pre/post gains showed there was a significant increase in content learning across classes from pretest (M=3.8, SD=2.02) to post-test interviews (M=9.18, SD=3.03); (MD=5.38; t(75)= -15.47, p < .05), yet theprimary focus of our findings is on the model of instructional improvisation in classroom interaction. In the firstlesson, Ms. Jones’ objective was for students to understand that bees have the goal of collecting nectar and as theydo, they incidentally get pollen on their hind legs, which they bring with them to other flowers. The technologyindicated the bees were collecting nectar when they hovered over flowers and a number of hearts rose from thecenter of the flower (1 heart=okay nectar, 2 hearts=yummy nectar, and 3 hearts=outrageously yummy nectar). Asthey foraged, the pollen animation was simultaneously activated, meaning that golden sparkles emanated fromthe flower as the bees collected the nectar. Although students playing bees were not purposefully trying topollinate, it was impossible to collect nectar without also getting pollen on their legs. The scene below (see Table1) is from the end of the lesson in which five students played in the STEP space as others participated from theyoga mat hive.Table 1: Episode 1Turn12345678910SpeakerMs. JonesDavidMs. JonesMany studentsMs. JonesJesseMs. JonesJesseZedJade11Jesse12Ms. JonesICLS 2018 ProceedingsTalkAdam got some. Dylan’s going …You have to fill it and then bring it back to the hiveWhat are you filling it with?Nectar!The honey?NoNo honey?Oh, maybe that’s the pollination you did! TheOh, pollen!Oh, I thought of something. If you like go into there andfill up a lot of nectarWhen the little dots are coming out of you, that meansyou’re pollinatingOooh75ActionDylan walks back to hiveLeans in from yoga matPoints to screen from yoga matPoints to screen from yoga matGestures towards the screen from mat© ISLS1314151617ZedMs. JonesZedMs. JonesZed18Ms. Jones19MultipleOh, I get it!Sit down, sit down. Use your words, use your wordsI get this! I get this! SoWhat do you get? What do you get?Um, the, when, if you, if hearts come out that meansyour, your, your pocket fills up with nectar and then youbring it from the–out and then and then a heart comes upand that means you fill the, the bees are filling the hivewith nectarOooh there was some good observations that you justhad right there[Overlapping talk]Stands up to enter the spaceGestures for Zed to sit downSits downCrouches down towards ZedGestures towards the screenThis episode begins in line 1 when Ms. Jones agrees with student actions by making statements about whatstudents do with their bodies—collect nectar in the simulation. When she narrates, “Adam got some. Dylan’sgoing…” she is noting that a key aspect of their behavior is tied to the nectar they collected. By labeling thestudents’ actions in this way, Ms. Jones focuses students’ attention on how the story is one of collecting nectarand delivering it to the hive, thus tying students’ actions to the building narrative aligned with curricularobjectives. Ms. Jones’ labeling is an important first step that supports her next moves.In turns 5 and 7 Ms. Jones asks students questions that elicit statements––“What are you filling it with?”and “The honey?” Student responses are in the form of three distinct contributions connected to lesson objectives.In turn 8 Jesse predicts that what they see is pollen, not nectar, and Zed verbalizes agreement. In turn 10 Jadeconnects the location on the flower to nectar collection, and in turn 11 Jesse calls attention to what the animationis communicating––“when the little dots come out of you, that means you’re pollinating.” As students discusswhat they know about pollen and nectar, the most important instructional effect of Ms. Jones’ moves is thatstudents build on their prior knowledge and are ultimately able to make distinctions between honey, nectar, andpollen on their own. Of course this episode is just a snapshot of much longer, more involved conversations anddebates students had during the first several lessons of the unit. However, Zed’s understanding of the differenceis finally made evident in turns 15-17 when he excitedly declares that he “gets it” and provides an explanationthat correlates the hearts he sees on the screen with nectar, an understanding that aligns with the “correct science.”In turn 19 other students talk over one another in agreement. Through this short exchange, Ms. Jones’ intentionalmoves allow students to have the floor to author the class story and participate in the shared ownership of scienceknowledge.Episode 2. Improvisation to support joint construction of science learningIn the fourth lesson students investigated how the bees’ “waggle dance” works to communicate nectar locationsand then invented their own communication system in order to tell one another where to forage for the best nectar.A small group of students would fly into the mixed reality field as bees to find previously hidden flowers andcollect nectar. The students would then fly back to the hive (the literal inside of the hive was projected on thescreen) and dance for a partner bee to show them where to find a flower with nectar. Like bees, students inventedways to communicate three critical pieces of information about the flower––its distance from the hive, itsdirection, and the quality of the nectar. For bees, the distance is communicated by the length of the dance itself,direction is communicated in relation to the angle the flower is from the sun, and quality is communicated by theamount of times the bee repeats the dance and how rapidly the bee waggles (our students called it the bee’s “bootyshake”). Bees communicate this information to the hive at large when returning from a foraging trip. In the scenebelow (see Table 2), students in the hive just watched their partner bees’ waggle dances and went to find theflowers. However, they were unable to locate them in the field because instead of translating the dance from insidethe hive to out in the field, students went to the literal spot on the floor where their partner ended the dance (seeFigure 2).Table 2: Episode 2, scene 1Turn12345…SpeakerStudentJesseDylanJesseZedICLS 2018 ProceedingsTalkGuys, not near the sun!Go to the sun!Go to the red flower, David!David!Ah, I died!ActionA predator flies across the screen76© ISLS67891011121314151617181920ZedMs. JonesZedMs. JonesMs. JonesZedDavidMs. JonesZedMs. JonesJesseDavidMs. JonesZedMs. JonesI died! Did you see that?What happened?The, the eagle came, and I died!Oh, lay downLay downOhI can’t find itZed’s dead21…2223ZedNo, look it, no look it. I’m still alive!AdamMs. Jones24JesseThere is no other flower, Jesse!Why is there no other flower, Adam? So why,why isn’t there a flower up there?There’s no information that, from the last timewe did it, that there was a flower up thereStay there, stay there, don’t get upDavid, go to the sun!I tri- I am!So is there a flowerNope, sit down. You’re dead, lay down.Gestures for Zed to get down on the floorRepeats gesture for Zed to get down on floorLays down on floorBegins to lift his headZed stays on groundStands upPlayfully grabs Zed’s hand, gestures for him to laydown, laughsNotices his avatar is alive, runs to left side of thescreen, Ms. Jones laughsMs. Jones gives students the floor at the beginning as they offer suggestions and react to what is happening in thespace. In turns 7 and 9 Ms. Jones uses a yes, and… move to agree with Zed’s declaration of death and urges himto “lay down” to show that he is a dead bee. Zed plays along with his teacher, yet when he realizes that thetechnology stopped tracking him (the Kinect cameras lost his image when he was on the floor), he stands up inturn 21 and declares that he is “still alive!” While at first Ms. Jones plays with Zed and tries to get him to lay backdown, she realizes that he actually is being tracked once he stands up and according to the technology, that meanshe is still alive as a bee. She positions Zed’s return from the dead as no mistakes, only opportunities. Rather thanerasing and replacing his idea, Ms. Jones allows Zed to resume his play from this new starting point. Instead ofsticking to her plan, she laughs and turns her attention towards Adam and Jesse in lines 22-24 who are discussingideas in line with the learning objectives, that the bees must translate the waggle dance from inside the hive to outin the field by starting their dances at the hive. As a result of this pivot, Ms. Jones skillfully puts the needs of theensemble over the individual by getting back to the science content.Figure 2. Map of how students initially translated their partner bees’ dances.Ms. Jones’ turn to the ensemble is productive because it gets students talking together about how to translate thedance from the hive to the field. A few minutes into the discussion Ms. Jones realizes that in order to have a morefocused conversation about the translation and continue to advance the narrative, she needs to direct students’attention to where bees start from when foraging. She centers their conversation below (see Table 3).Table 3: Episode 2, scene 2Turn1SpeakerMs. Jones2MultipleICLS 2018 ProceedingsTalkActionWhere do the bees always start, though, when we go out intothe field?The hive!77© ISLS3Ms. JonesThey always start at the hive. So this red dot, I have to moveit to the hive, right? So I have to start at the, I have to move itthis way.456789ResearcherMs. JonesMs. JonesStudentMs. JonesZed1011ZedZed1213Researcher Put it at the hive, and point it in the right directionMs. Jones Put it at the hive and point it in the right directionOh, there’s a red arrow!So which way is my red arrow pointing?That waySo the red one?Look it, look itIt’s pointing the same way. See, look it!It’s pointing the same way. Can you see that?Hands teacher a large red arrowResearcher laughsStudent points to the leftMoves to take the arrow from theteacherRuns to the screen with the arrowRuns towards screen and holds arrowup to screenMs. Jones makes statements in turns 1 and 3 to help tell a cohesive story and focus students on curricularobjectives. Her improv moves, along with the physical red arrow prop, help Zed connect how the dance startingpoint translates from the hive to the field. In the turns following, the students finally come to a collectiveconclusion that because the bees start at the hive, to find the flower you have to start doing the dance at the hiverather than an arbitrary starting point. Although our case is from a mixed reality environment, teachers in all sortsof situations experience this tension between structure and responsiveness in pursuit of telling a story, and thusinstructional improvisation can be a way for all teachers to effectively respond to diverse student contributionsduring science inquiry.DiscussionInstructional improvisaton can help teachers think about balancing structures and responding to student needs.Furthermore, students can exercise agency and understand concepts even when the teacher acknowledges studentcontributions that fall outside of normative science. The rules––including agreement with contributions, yes, anding to elaborate on prior knowledge, making statements to advance learning, positioning mistakes as opportunitiesfor learning, prioritizing the work of the ensemble over individuals, and telling a cohesive story about content––are flexible and allow for ambiguity. For example, although Ms. Jones takes up Zed’s untimely death, theensemble discusses and constructs a cohesive story about lesson objectives that does not include tangential lessondigressions.Although our case study is from a mixed reality environment, we think that instructional improvisationcan apply to other contexts as a way of organizing learning and discourse in science more generally. Althoughimprov does not describe all of the moves that make a great conversation or lesson, as a lens on interaction it canhelp us understand the value of certain key moves. The effects of instructional improvisation include studentshaving agency and joint ownership over science knowledge––students came to conclusions on their own as Ms.Jones used improv to support their inquiry. Additionally, we believe our model can support productive interactionsthat complement current reform recommendations. For example, Michaels and O’Connor’s (2012) “talk moves”is a framework for productive science talk that details types of conversations students should be having with afocus on the academic purpose of the conversation and teacher moves that reinforce this purpose. Our model canfurther reinforce frames like “talk moves” by focusing the teacher on the nature of the joint inquiry and openingspace for student agency in conversations. Instructional improvisation emphasizes the subjective experience ofwhat the classroom conversation should feel like––a playful, spontaneous co-construction of science inquiry. Ourmodel also complements ideas like Reiser’s (2013) of building coherent storylines in science. Yet while storylinesemphasize how conversations ought to be structured in ways that build coherence for students, instructionalimprovisation focuses on the qualitative experience of the collective interaction of students and teachers workingtogether to write the story through a collaborative, coordinated effort. Future work might include explicitlysupporting instructional improvisation in classrooms to observe how teachers take up and implement theirinterpretations of the model in different contexts.ReferencesBerk, R. A., & Trieber, R. H. (2009). Whose classroom is it, anyway? Improvisation as a teaching tool. Journalon Excellence in College Teaching, 20(3), 29-60.Borko, H., & Livingston, C. (1989). Cognition and improvisation: Differences in mathematics instruction byexpert and novice teachers. American Educational Research Journal, 26, 473–498.ICLS 2018 Proceedings78© ISLSBrown, M., & Edelson, D. (2003). Teaching as design. Evanston, IL: LETUS.Danish, J. A., Enyedy, N., Saleh, A., Lee, C., & Andrade, A. (2015). Science Through Technology EnhancedPlay: Designing to Support Reflection Through Play and Embodiment. Paper presented at the Exploringthe Material Conditions of Learning: The Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL)Conference, Gothenburg, Sweden.Enyedy, N., Danish, J. A., & DeLiema, D. (2015). Constructing liminal blends in a collaborative augmentedreality learning environment. International Journal of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning, 10(1), 7-34.Erickson, F. (1982). Classroom discourse as improvisation: Relationships between academic task structure andsocial participation structure in lessons. In L. C. Wilkinson (Ed.), Communicating in the classroom (pp.153–181). New York: Academic Press.Erickson, F. (2006). Definition and analysis of data from videotape: Some research procedures and theirrationales. Handbook of Complementary Methods in Education Research, 3, 177-192.Fey, T. (2011). Bossypants. Boston, MA: Little, Brown, and Company.Halpern, C., Close, D., & Johnson, K. (1994). Truth in comedy: The manual of improvisation. Colorado Springs,CO: Meriwether Publishing.Lindgren, R., Tscholl, M., Wang, S., & Johnson, E. (2016). Enhancing learning and engagement throughembodied interaction within a mixed reality simulation. Computers & Education, 95, 174-187.Lobman, C. & Lundquist, M. (2007). Unscripted learning: Using improv activities across the K-8 curriculum.New York, NY: Teachers College Press.Michaels, S., & O’Connor, C. (2012). Talk science primer. Cambridge, MA: TERC. Retrieved fromhttp://inquiryproject. terc. edu/shared/pd/TalkScience_Primer. pdf.Munaro, M., Horn, A., Illum, R., Burke, J., & Rusu, R. (2014). OpenPTrack: People tracking for heterogeneousnetworks of color-depth cameras. Paper presented at the 1st Intl. Workshop on 3D Robot Perception withPoint Cloud Library, Padova, Italy.Reiser, B. J. (2013, September). What professional development strategies are needed for successfulimplementation of the Next Generation Science Standards? Paper presented at the Invitational ResearchSymposium on Science Assessment, Washington, DC.Sanchez, G., & Valcárcel, M. V. (1999). Science teachers' views and practices in planning for teaching. Journalof Research in Science Teaching, 36(4), 493.Sawyer, R. K. (2004). Improvised lessons: Collaborative discussion in the constructivist classroom. TeachingEducation, 15(2), 189-201.Sawyer, R. K. (Ed.). (2011). Structure and improvisation in creative teaching. New York, NY: CambridgeUniversity Press.Yanow, D. (2001). Learning in and from improvising: Lessons from theatre for organizational learning.Reflections, 2(4), 58–62.Warren, B., Ballenger, C., Ogonowski, M., Rosebery, A. S., & Hudicourt-Barnes, J. (2001). Rethinking diversityin learning science: The logic of everyday sense-making. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(5),529-552.AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to thank OpenPTrack, UCLA REMAP, Kelly Peters, and the STEP teams at University ofCalifornia, Los Angeles and Indiana University. This work was funded by National Science Foundation grantsIIS-1522945 and IIS-1323767.ICLS 2018 Proceedings79© ISLS