How Did a Grade 5 Community Formulate Progressive, CollectiveGoals to Sustain Knowledge Building Over a Whole School Year?Dan Tao, University at Albany, SUNY, dtao@albany.eduJianwei Zhang, University at Albany, SUNY, jzhang1@albany.eduYue Huang, Beijing Normal University, huangy.08@gmail.comAbstract: This research explores the metacognitive and discursive processes by which agrade 5 community formulated shared deepening goals to direct its inquiry about the humanbody across a whole school year. This inquiry was facilitated by Idea Thread Mapper (ITM)that supported the community’s metacognitive reflection and conversations. Qualitativeanalysis of classroom activities elaborated the evolution of collective goals of understanding,which were used by students to monitor the community’s progress, and regulate furtherinquiry. Analyses of pre- and post-tests and online discourse showed productive improvementof idea achieved by individuals and the community as a whole.Keywords: knowledge building, long-term trajectory, socially shared regulation, collective goals,metadiscourseIntroductionBuilding on the premise that in the Knowledge Age schools should operate as knowledge-creating organizationsto engage students of all levels directly in sustained creative work with ideas (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1999),recent research efforts strive for innovations to transform classrooms into knowledge-building (or knowledgecreating) communities (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 2014; Bielaczyc et al., 2013). In a knowledge buildingcommunity, members build on and advance the collective knowledge assets of their community throughsustained inquiry and idea improvement: by engaging in idea-centered dialogues involving multiple perspectives,constructive criticism, and distributed expertise; by formulating deeper problems as solutions are developed; andby assuming responsibility at the highest levels instead of relying the leader to direct their actions (Bereiter,2002; cf. Dunbar, 1997; Sawyer, 2007). The inquiry-based efforts are self-sustained over a long term as aprogressive, collective trajectory (Zhang et al., 2012, 2014). This study explores the processes by which aknowledge building community formulates collective deepening goals to develop a progressive shared trajectoryof inquiry to sustain knowledge building.Building a sustained trajectory of inquiry for productive knowledge building requires students to takeon collective cognitive responsibility (Scardamalia, 2002). They need to enact socially shared regulation: toconstruct shared goals, plan collaborative actions, monitor collective progress and engagement, and adaptcollaborative processes to optimize members’ contribution to achieving their shared outcomes (Järvelä &Hadwin, 2013; Winne, Hadwin, & Perry, 2013). However, collective and socially shared regulation ofcollaborative learning as an emerging new frontier of research in collaborative learning has mainly focused onshort-term collaboration of small groups to solve pre-defined problems or complete pre-specified tasks. In thosecontexts, students’ collective regulation usually focuses on “regulating how to follow the directions, divide uptask components, or complete superficial task components” (Rogat & Linnenbrink-Garcia, 2011, p.394).Sustained knowledge building requires all collective members to take much higher levels of responsibility forprogressively defining what they need to understand as their understanding is continually advanced over anextended time period (Scardamalia, 2002). As a critical component of such high-level responsibility andregulation, this research explores the evolution of collective shared deepening goals in a knowledge buildinginitiative within a whole school year. In a dynamic system of knowledge building, collective goals are not predefined by the teacher or a student leader, but emerge from ongoing interactive discourse across the social levelsof individuals, small groups, and the community. The collective goals of a community are co-constructed on thebasis of the emergent goals and interests of individuals or groups and continually reviewed and deepened asprogress is made (Zhang et al., 2007, 2009). Therefore, students need to develop reflective awareness of thediverse interests and deepening ideas of their community as reflected in the ongoing discourse, formulate shareddeepening goals, plan for joint and complementary contributions, and trace progress (Zhang et al., 2009).This study supports such collective regulation of long-term knowledge building efforts throughmetadiscourse: metacognitive conversations about the ongoing conversations focusing on collective goal setting,progress review, and planning (Scardamalia, 2002; Zhang et al., 2009, 2014). In online environments thatsupport knowledge-building discourse and conversations, students’ ideas are distributed across individualCSCL 2015 Proceedings419© ISLSpostings and comments over time (Suthers et al., 2008). It is hard for students to monitor the shared focusesevolving in the discourse and the progress made, especially in long-term online discourse (Zhang, 2009). Tomake collective focuses and knowledge trajectories in extended knowledge building discourse visible tostudents for ongoing reflection in support of progressive deepening goals, our team created a timeline-basedcollective knowledge mapping tool: Idea Thread Mapper (ITM) (Zhang et al., 2012, 2013). ITM support themetadiscourse and reflection of students: to define focal topics of inquiry, select and visualize importantdiscourse entries addressing each topic, as an idea thread; and map out the whole inquiry as clusters of ideathreads that address interrelated problems. The knowledge progress in each idea thread is further reviewed bystudents through co-authoring a “Journey of Thinking” synthesis focusing on focal problems, “big ideas”advanced along the inquiry process, and deeper actions needed for further work. This research examines how agrade 5 science community developed collective shared progressive goals to foster sustained knowledgebuilding supported by ITM and related classroom artifacts.MethodsClassroom contextsThe study was conducted in a grade 5 classroom (with 22 students in the fall and 21 students in the spring) inupstate New York. The students investigated human body systems over a whole school year, with two sciencelessons each week. Prior to this study, the teacher, who had 10 years of teaching experience, participated in athree-day workshop to learn about knowledge building principles and activity designs (Scardamalia, 2002;Zhang et al., 2011). Following the knowledge building principles, students engaged in all kinds of knowledgeactivities to expand their community’s knowledge, including individual and small group reading and onlinesearching, whole class meetings to share and reflect on work in progress, student-directed experiments andcreation of knowledge artifacts, as well as student-designed presentations about individual and small groupknowledge advancement. Initial wonderments, improved ideas, deepened questions, and refined theories fromthese activities were shared in Knowledge Forum (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006) for continual knowledgebuilding discourse. To make collective knowledge progress in online discourse visible to students, we used ITMin the middle (early January) and at the end of the school year (late May and early June). During all theseknowledge building activities, the teacher, who positioned himself as a facilitator and co-learner, encouragedstudents to take on collective responsibility (Zhang et al., 2009) to identify collective knowledge goals, plancollaborative activities, share and reflect on ongoing progress within the community.Data sources and analysesTo examine the effectiveness of knowledge building, we conducted a pre-test in mid-September and a post-testin early March. The test had nine open-ended questions that required students to explain how different humanbody systems work together. Due to student changes over this school year and schedule conflict, only 13students took both the pre-test and post-test. Student answers were rated in terms of scientific sophistication,which examined the extent to which students’ ideas align with a scientific framework on a five-point scale: 0 –no answer, 1 – pre-scientific, 2 – hybrid, 3 – basically scientific, and 4 – scientific based on our previous studies(Zhang et al. 2007). Using this coding scheme, two raters independently coded all the answers, resulting in aninter-rate agreement of 99.15% (Cohen’s Kappa = 0.98).To trace the evolution of collective goals and related inquiry, we conducted qualitative analysis withrich classroom data. Specifically, we analyzed observation notes that recorded classroom activities across thewhole school year. A close examination of those notes helped to identify the most critical moments whencollective goals were formed, adapted, and represented using related classroom artifacts (e.g. a collectivewondering list). We then selectively zoomed into relevant videos of the classroom moments to understand theprocess of goal evolution. The videos were transcribed and analyzed using a narrative approach to videoanalysis (Derry et al., 2010). Complementing the video data of the whole class processes, we also analyzed threestudents’ notebooks using content analysis (Chi, 1997) focusing on the goals of inquiry.To examine how individuals, small groups, and the whole community carried out inquiry and discourseto address the collective goals, we conducted content analysis of student’s online discourse, idea threads andJourney of Thinking recorded in ITM, and their final presentation posters at the end the academic year. EachKnowledge Forum note was coded using the coding scheme presented in Table 1 focusing on the emergentcollective goals in this community. Two raters independently code 20% of the notes (667 in total) to assessinter-rater reliability, which was found to be 98.5% in inter-rater agreement (Cohen’s Kappa = 0.95).CSCL 2015 Proceedings420© ISLSTable 1: Content analysis of students’ online discourse based on collective goals of inquiryFocal goal1. Why do we havemuscular andskeleton system?2. How does the brainfunction?3. How does thehuman bodydevelop?4. How does theimmune systemwork?5. Why do we have adigestion system?6. Why does bloodcirculate through thehuman body?7. How do vocal cordswork?8. How does therespiration systemwork?9. Why do we havecells?DescriptionStudents ask questions or share information,about bones and muscles.Example“How many bones, muscles, and joints are there inthe human body?”Students make notes about the architectureof the brain, roles of the different parts inthe brain and related nerves to supportthinking and sense.Students ask questions, or share informationabout the functions of different body parts.“The brain sends the messages to your brain stem,the brain stem then sends the messages straight toyour spinal cord. Then it sends it to theappropriate nerve. ”“We have nose hair so the dust won’t go all theway into our nose and some dust do have germs.”Students ask questions or share informationabout allergies, diseases, germs, virus, drugsand health issues.Students make notes about food, nutrients,energy transfer, as well as the organs thatfunction as part of the digestion system.“Maybe HIV won’t kill you it will just shut downyour immune system so other virus can do thejob.”“Did you know that your teeth is part of yourdigestive system? Because that helps you chewfood and send it down to your stomach. Teeth isyour first part of your digestive system.”“What does the blood carry through the humanbody? I know that blood carries oxygen, but doesit carry anything else? Does blood carry carbondioxide too?”“Vocal cords vibrate to make sounds but whatmakes the vocal cords vibrate?”Students share information or ask questionsabout heart, blood vessels, veins, and hownutrients, oxygen, carbon dioxide aretransported.Students make notes about how we talk, thestructure of the vocal cords, and how dothey help to make sound.Students make notes about the organs thathelp to breathe and explain the process thatoxygen is delivered into the body andcarbon dioxide is taken out.Student share information or ask questionsabout the structure, types and functions ofcells.“Why do we sneeze? What happens inside thebody when you sneeze?”“Without glia cells our neurons would not workproperly. With trillion of support cells it helps alot with the neurons.”FindingsContent analysis of students’ pre-test and post-testIndividual knowledge advancement was assessed based on the pre- and post-test that focused on deepexplanations. A paired samples t-test revealed a significant difference between the pre-test (M=1.43, SD=0.63)and post-test (M=2.99, SD=0.78), t (13) =-7.61, p<.001. Specifically, students’ ideas were mostly “2 – hybrid”at the beginning and mostly “3 – basically scientific” in the post-test.Qualitative analysis of classroom observation notes, classroom videos, and students’notebooksThis inquiry began with a kick-off activity in late September. Students watched a short movie that triggereddeep interests in the amazing functions of the human body. Understanding how the human body works wasidentified as the overarching topic of this year’s inquiry. The whole class began to negotiate collective goalsafter the kick-off. The negotiation originated from initial questions that students were really curious about. Theteacher collected all those questions and read them one by one to students. Students realized that some of themwere posing the same or similar issues. Therefore, the teacher suggested the students to work in groups tointegrate these individual questions into high-level questions. The groups then shared their big questions. Theteacher helped clarify these questions and encouraged students to rephrase them in a more scientific way. By theend of the first week (September 24), they came up with an initial list of four collective questions, as thecommunity’s shared goals: Why do we have bones? How does our brain function? How does the human bodydevelop? How does immune system work? Then the teacher used the metaphor of a tree trunk and branches tovisualize the collective questions, and encouraged student to add more big branches to the community tree astheir inquiry proceeded. One week later, students had a metacognitive meeting to share and reflect on collectiveknowledge progress. They sat in a circle, read KF notes projected on a screen together, and found that some ofthe notes “didn’t fit existing collective questions.” So students suggested that they might need new collectiveCSCL 2015 Proceedings421© ISLSquestions. Therefore, they generated the fifth collective question based on notes about food and water—Why dowe have a digestion system? (Added on October 1)—and the sixth collective question related to heart and blood:Why does blood circulate through the human body? (Added on October 3). The six knowledge goals wererecorded on a chart paper, which was posted on the classroom wall as a collective guide (see Figure 1). Eachstudent then chose one big question as his/her focal area based on interest and added the name on a sticker notenext to the question, leading to the formation of temporary/ flexible research groups. The teacher encouragedstudents to add more “branches” onto the collective question list if none of the questions reflected their focalinterest. Two students who had done initial research about vocal cords talked to the teacher. The teachersuggested that they start a new area about vocal cords, with two additional students who shared the sameinterest. The seventh question about how vocal cords work was added to the collective goal list on October 10.During the following two months, students did focused research on these themes while having the flexibility toswitch between these areas as their interest evolved. They made posters and models to show new ideas abouttheir focal question, and shared findings/further questions in face-to-face whole class meetings and on KF.Later, through a whole class reflection on knowledge advancement, students identified new goals in reflection ofexpanded aspects of their inquiry. On December 12, two new questions were identified: Why do we haverespiratory system, and how do human body cells work? Interestingly, as part of the reflection on collectiveknowledge progress, a student proposed a question about muscles as a new big question. His peers whoinvestigated bones suggested that this question about muscles could be integrated in the existing question aboutbones as the two are so closely related. On January 9, the first big question was renamed as “why do we havemuscular and skeleton system?” Altogether nine collective questions, representing the shared goals of inquiry,were progressively formulated (see Figure 1) and continually investigated in the rest of the inquiry.Figure 1. Evolution of shared goals of inquiry.These goals originated from students’ initial curiosities were refined and reframed throughmetacognitive conversations about diverse ideas and questions presented in the ongoing face-to-face and onlinediscourse. The excerpt below shows an example of such metacognitive conversations to review existingquestions and formulate collective questions. The teacher, as a co-learner, played a critical role in helping clarifyinitial wonderings to connect with deep domain knowledge in the area of human body research.Teacher:So far, we have “why do we have bones”, “how does the brain function?”and “how do human bodies develop?” What’s that?Student 1:Why do we have nose?Student 2:That would be a question under the human body development…Teacher:Is that a….Now, I’m asking you. Okay, please, please, why…is that a bigbranch? Or is that a smaller branch that could be added to something else?Now I have allergies. Is there any ideas that I can have the serious focuswith you? I have a larger mouth, stuffing my nose, every single day. Sonose, nose, nose goes where…Student 3:Why do we have mucus?Teacher:Mucus….Why do I have mucus? Mucus problems…They are always there,but when do you notice it? When you have mucus problems…when youwere sick. So can we make a bigger idea about something like…?Student 4:Health?Student 5:Why do we have health issues?Teacher:So there is a little question. Have you guys ever heard of immune system?CSCL 2015 Proceedings422© ISLSStudents:Teacher:(together) Oh….Yes!!!Is that what we were talking about? Does that sound like something that abig branch looks like…?Students:(together) (Nod)Teacher:So let’s try, write down something about immune system…How could youguys phrase something about the immune system?Student 6:How does immune system help us?Teacher:Wow…All right (write it on the poster). How…… does……immunesystem….What’s it?Student 4:Work?Teacher:(write on the poster) All right, that’s pretty awesome. You guys generatedthe branches (pointing at the questions on the poster)… all these things.The teacher, as well as the community as a whole, was open to including new questions from studentsinto the list of collective goals. The emergence of the vocal cords as an inquiry area is a sound example. OnOctober 8, student A read the book Kids InfoBits written by Beth Allen. She was really interested in the partabout vocal cords and took some notes in her notebook. Even though she had signed up for the immune systeminquiry, she talked to the teacher about her new interest in how vocal cords work. Meanwhile, student B who,was still hesitant about which group he should join in, read the magazine Science Spin (Primary). He took somenotes about how sound is produced through air vibration. Since he was not sure about his focus question, theteacher suggested that he started with what he was working on. Student C, who had signed up for the immunesystem, sitting next to student B, indicated the same interest in vocal cords, with some notes taken about pitchesof vocal cords based on movies on the BrainPop site. Then the teacher supported their proposal to start researchon vocal cords. Student D, who had not decided a focus area, showed interest in this new question. Therefore,these four members formed into a temporary group to study vocal cords.Content analysis of students’ contributions in online discourseTo examine how collective goals guided student participation in the online discourse, we coded students’ KFnotes based on the collective goals. Table 2 shows the number of notes created and the number of contributorsinvolved before and after the formation of each goal, with the date when each goal was formally added as thecutting point. For example, the question about vocal cords was identified as the seventh collective goal onOctober 10. Therefore, October 10 was used as the cutting point for the calculation.Table 2: The number of notes and authors before and after the formation of each collective goalCollective shared goals1. Why do we have bones (muscular and skeleton system)?2. How does the brain function?3. How does the human body develop?4. How does immune system work?5. Why do we have a digestion system?6. Why does blood circulate through the human body?7. How do vocal cords work?8. How does respiration system work?9. Why do we have cells?Before the formationNotesAuthors000000003312111122179After the formationNotesAuthors218131241252419423251065192511336018The first four goals represent a pattern of goal formulation driving subsequent discourse. The first fourgoals were identified in the beginning of the inquiry on September 24 based on student questions raised in faceto-face talks and written on Post-It notes. Therefore, no KF note was written before the formation of these goals.As the Table 2 indicates, these focal areas attracted intensive online discourse contributions of students. In theearly phase, the contributions in each area were mostly from members of the corresponding specialized groupwho signed up for the research. Interestingly, as the inquiry deepened and cross-theme connections becameevident, students contributed notes to discuss interrelated issues and further posted information beyond theirown focal areas. This was most evident in goal 2-4 that engaged contributions from almost every student. Thecollective goals, which were treated as open-ended and evolving, guided the formation of specialized inquirygroups while allowing students to interact flexibly within the whole community to address interrelated issues.CSCL 2015 Proceedings423© ISLSThe online discourse about how vocal cords work provides an example of collective goal emergencebased on individual contributions specialized in a topic, opening up a line of inquiry. Before the goal aboutvocal cords was formally identified, there was only one member from the human body development groupasking “how do we talk”. One week later, after the formation of this goal, the four members began to sharefindings about location of vocal cords, and how the vocal cords works through vibration. They also built on theinitial question “how do we talk”. After noticing the progress of work about this goal, the contributor of the firstquestion came back to share his experience that could be well explained with newly shared information. Thesecontributions caught the attention of a student from the brain function group. He joined in the conversation byrequesting more details about “larynx”. A girl from the blood circulation group noticed these notes and joined inthis talk, asking about the relationship between the thickness of pitches and the changes of voice at differentages. Meanwhile, a member in the group asked, “Vocal cords vibrate to make sounds but what makes the vocalcords vibrate?” Another student from the human body development group contributed to the vibration issue withan explanation of air moves. With a collective focus on the same goal, progressive ideas and questions emergedwith ongoing interactive discourse online, which further pushed the conversation to a deeper level.Another interesting pattern was seen in the origin of cells as a collective goal. It emerged from theongoing discourse across a range of topics that converged focusing on issues about cells. Before the formationof this goal, students investigating the immune system, bones, blood circulation, brain functions, and the humanbody development started to talk about cells in their own contexts: members from immune system groupfocused on white blood cells; members from the bone group were interested in how bone marrow made redblood cells; members from blood circulation group discussed the function of red blood cells; members from thebrain function group devoted to how support cells protected neurons; while members from human bodydevelopment group were sharing information about skin and tissue cells. As more students joined in theconversation, a collective goal was brought up on December 12. As Table 2 indicates, nine more students joinedin this conversation after the formation of this goal. New members began to contribute to it by makingconnections to their focal area. For example, a girl from the bones group made the following note on KF: “Mytheory is that bones are also made of cells. Some bone cells are star shaped. How many different types of bonecells are there and what do they look like? I can’t find anything more in depth”. A new member who joined in inthe later part built on previous work with this note: “The only thing that I know was the white blood cells butnow I combine what student A say and student B say so now I know the red blood cells”. Those who had beenin this group for a while moved onto discussion about cell itself, including different types of cells, the functionsof them, and different parts in a cell. As the conversation moved to a deeper level, a student who had been doingresearch on cells questioned herself and wanted to know more about the jobs of different parts of a cell: “I havebeen researching about the parts of a cell. I would like to find out why cells need different parts, and what eachpart does. I will write about the important facts soon!” In the later part of their conversation, even deeper issuesabout DNA, RNA, and cancers were brought up: “I can’t explain what is a DNA and RNA’; “Cancer is grownout of control cell. Cancers only happen when something is wrong with your DNA your body will fix it. ”Video analysis of ITM-aided reflectionTo reflect on knowledge progress in achieving collective goals, students conducted the first ITM reflection inearly January, and another ITM reflection session in late May. They engaged in metadiscourse to organize ideathreads based on the collective goals and co-authored “Journey of Thinking” synthesis for each thread.(a)(b)Figure 2. Idea threads created in the first ITM session (a) and the second ITM session (b).In the first ITM reflection, students worked in small groups to review contributions on KF thataddressed each collective goal. In each group, students used ITM to search for notes addressing their focal topicwith co-identified keywords, and screened and added relevant notes to their thread. Seven idea threads wereCSCL 2015 Proceedings424© ISLScreated: 1) why do we have bone? 2) how does the brain function? 3) how does the human body develop? 4)how does the immune system work? 5) why do we have a digestion system? 6) why does the blood circulate? 7)how do vocal cords work? ITM displayed selected notes on a timeline as an idea thread (see Figure 2a) andfurther retrieved authors involved in this work, with options to show build-on connections over time. Forexample, the thread created for circulatory system included 50 notes contributed by 23 authors. In the earlyphase of inquiry, students wrote several notes about this question. However, no contributions were made frommid-October to mid-November. While in December, they came back to deepen ideas in this thread.In the second ITM session near the end of the school year, students reviewed idea progress focusing onareas that had active contributions since the first ITM. Five emergent groups formed to set up and review ideathreads using ITM focusing on the muscular and skeletal system, nervous system, immune system, circulatorysystem, and cells. When working on the keywords to search notes on KF, students focusing on the nervoussystem and immune system found they had rich contents addressed, so they decided to break down into severalsub-groups focusing on more specific issues. Eventually, eight threads were created (see Figure 2b): 1) howdoes the muscular and skeletal system work; 2) nervous focus (basics of nervous system); 3) the amazing nerves(the functions of nerves in messaging); 4) basics of immune system; 5) diseases; 6) how do drugs affect thehuman body? 7) circulatory system; and 8) cells. Comparing the intensity of notes created in each thread in thetwo ITM sessions, it is obvious that more new contributions were made after the first ITM session from earlyFebruary to March. With reflective monitoring of progress in each collective goal through idea thread, studentsmade purposeful contributions and collaborations in subsequent work.The knowledge progress in each thread in the second session was further made transparent through theJourney of Thinking synthesis. Analysis of the Journey of Thinking suggested that the students effectivelyidentified problems as the collective goals, highlighted conceptual advances achieved in online discourse, andidentified deeper questions to be understood. Table 3 shows the joint efforts of three students from “the amazingnerves” group synthesizing the community’s progress on nerves across the whole year.Table 3: Journey of Thinking synthesis for nervesOur problemsBig ideas learnedNeed to do moreAt first, we had a hugequestion about thebrain. The questionwas: How does ourbrain function? At thispoint, which wasbasically October, wehad basic ideas aboutthe 3 parts of the brain,and the right and leftside of the brain.The glial cells protect your neurons. If your brain have toomuch memories it will delete a little bit of the memories.So there are enough for new memories. You right braincontrols your left side of the body and your left braincontrols the right side of your body. We got these newideas as we answered the first question. Then we gotVERY deep and scientific. We learned new facts: withoutcells there won’t be a nervous system. If there is no bloodcirculation. The nervous system won’t work. Brain is theimportant part of your body. However, the brain won’tfunction without the other parts.We obviously did not have time sofar to learn everything there isabout the brain. We need to learnmore about how fast the brain cansend messages throughout thehuman body and the nerves. Weneed to know more aboutneurotransmitters. We gave tolearn about how those little fatcells that do something we don’tknow!DiscussionIn this study, the course of the whole year inquiry unfolded in an emergent and improvised manner driven byprogressively expanded/deepened discourse. Students engaged in metacognitive conversations to review theideas and questions emerged in inquiry and online discourse to formulate collective deepening goals, reflect onprogress made, and plan for deeper inquiry. The analysis of the pre- and post-tests showed the productivity ofthe community in building deep understanding of how the human body systems work. (The productivity is alsoevident in our content-based coding of online discourse based on epistemic contributions, which is not reportedin this paper.) The qualitative analysis provided a detailed account of the evolution of the collective deepeninggoals, which were repeatedly used and referred to in the subsequent inquiry to guide student participation,discourse, and progress review and sharing. The collective goals emerged and evolved through several reflectivecycles: formulating an initial list of four big “juicy” questions based on diverse individual interests andquestions, expanding the list to include questions about digestive systems and vocal cords based on individualand collaborative proposes, reframing existing goals in reflection of new emergent issues, and developing newconceptual goals (e.g. cells) at the intersection of different lines of work focusing on deep concepts identified.The collective goals were co-constructed and continually adapted by the community through metacognitiveconversations in reflection of members’ diverse input and ongoing progress. These collective goals wererepresented and highlighted using classroom artifacts (e.g. collective question list) to guide student attention andparticipation. Students referred to and revisited these goals in classroom discussions, formed into flexible topicCSCL 2015 Proceedings425© ISLSbased groups to conduct specialized research, participated in online discourse to share and discuss findings anddeepening issues; and used collective questions as focuses to set up idea threads in ITM and synthesize progressmade. Based on the ITM Journey of Thinking syntheses, students further created poster presentations to shareknowledge within their own and with peer classrooms. These findings shed light on the possibility and processesfor young students to enact high-level regulation of long-term knowledge building initiatives. Collectivemetadiscourse supported by ITM provides a design to support such high-level regulation for students toformulate progressive goals and reflect on progress (see also, Zhang et al., 2013, 2014). Deeper analysis ofclassroom videos is underway to further understand the patterns of metadiscourse and the teacher’s roles.ReferencesBereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation. In C. Tan, H. J. So, & J.Yeo (Eds.), Knowledge creation in education (pp. 35-52). New York: Springer.Bielaczyc, K., Kapur, M., & Collins, A. (2013). Cultivating a community of learners in K-12 classrooms. In C.Hmelo-Silver, C. Chinn, C. K. K. Chan, & A. O’ Donnell (Eds.), International handbook ofcollaborative learning (pp. 233-249). New York: Routledge Taylor & Francis Group.Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analysis of verbal data: A practical guide. Journal of the LearningSciences, 6, 271-315.Derry, S. J., Pea, R. D., Barron, B., Engle, R. A., Erickson, F., Goldman, R., … Sherin, B. L. (2010).Conducting video research in the learning sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19, 3-53.Dunbar, K. (1997). How scientists think: Online creativity and conceptual change in science. In T. B. Ward, S.M. Smith & S. Vaid (Eds.), Conceptual structures and processes: Emergence, discovery and change(pp.461-493). Washington, DC: APA Press.Järvelä, S., & Hadwin, A. F. (2013). New frontiers: Regulating learning in CSCL. Educational Psychologist,48(1), 25-39.Rogat, T. K., & Linnenbrink-Garcia, L. (2011). Socially shared regulation in collaborative groups. Cognitionand Instruction, 29, 375-415.Sawyer, R. K. (2007). Group genius: The creative power of collaboration. New York: Basic Books.Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith(Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago, IL: Open Court.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1999). Schools as knowledge building organizations. In D. Keating & C.Hertzman (Eds.), Today’s children, tomorrow’s society: The developmental health and wealth ofnations (pp. 274-289). New York: Guildford.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In R. K.Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97-115). New York: CambridgeUniversity Press.Suthers, D., Vatrapu, R., Medina, R., Joseph, S., & Dwyer, N. (2008). Beyond threaded discussion:Representational guidance in asynchronous collaborative learning environments. Computers andEducation, 50, 1103-1127.Winne, P. H., Hadwin, A. F., & Perry, N. E. (2013). Metacognition and computer-supported collaborativelearning. In C. E. Hmelo-Silver, A. O’Donnell, C. Chan & C. Chin (Eds.), International handbook ofcollaborative learning. New York: Taylor & Francis.Zhang, J. (2009). Towards a creative social web for learners and teachers. Educational Researcher, 38, 274-279.Zhang, J., Chen, M.–H., & Mico, T. F. (2013). Computer-supported metadiscourse to foster collective progressin knowledge-building communities, In N. Rummel, M. Kapur, M. Nthan, & S. Puntambekar (Eds.),CSCL 2013 Proceedings Volume 2 (pp. 197-200). International Society of the Learning Sciences.Zhang, J., Lee, J., & Chen, J. (2014). Deepening inquiry about human body systems through computersupported collective metadiscourse. Annual Meeting of American Educational Research Association,Philadelphia, PA.Zhang, J., Lee, J., & Wilde, J. (2012). Metadiscourse to foster collective responsibility for deepening inquiry. InJ. van Aalst, K. Thompson, M. J. Jacobson, & P. Reimann (Eds.), Proceedings of the InternationalConference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 395-402). International Society of the Learning Sciences.Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., & Messina, R. (2009). Designs for collective cognate responsibility inknowledge building communities. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18, 7-44.AcknowledgmentThis research was sponsored by the National Science Foundation (IIS #1122573, IIS #1441479).CSCL 2015 Proceedings426© ISLS