Scaffolding Peer Facilitation in Computer-Supported ProblemBased Learning EnvironmentsAsmalina Saleh, Indiana University, asmsaleh@indiana.eduCindy Hmelo-Silver, Indiana University, chmelosi@indiana.eduYuxin Chen, Indiana University, yc58@umail.iu.eduKatherine Shanahan, Indiana University, kapshan@indiana.eduJonathan Rowe, North Carolina State University, jprowe@ncsu.eduJames Lester, North Carolina State University, lester@ncsu.eduAbstract: In this study, we explore the forms of expert-like facilitation that are adopted bystudents in the context of a collaborative game-based learning environment centered on anecological problem. Utilizing a case study approach, we examined four focus groupdiscussions with middle school students (N=10) to explore the nature of peer facilitation inCSCL group processes to better inform our design iterations. Peer mediated feedback(Walker, Rummel, & Koedinger, 2009) can be supported by including simple prompts andfurther supported by attending to an activity system (Kaptelinin & Nardi, 2012), whichincludes the software system and classroom context to support student facilitation. Putdifferently, the ontology of CSCL group processes must consider different group formationsto scaffold student facilitation and learning.BackgroundProblem-Based Learning (PBL) is an instructional method that engages groups of students in collaborativeproblem solving and reflection of this process (Barrows, 2000). A critical element of PBL is the role thatscaffolds, or supports that students receive in their learning process, which is often delivered by expertfacilitators. While research in artificial intelligence and computer supported collaborative learning havesuccessfully designed adaptive or intelligence-based scaffolds that explore how to support CSCL interactionsand learning (for a review, see Magnisalis, Demetriadis, & Karakostas, 2011), most modeling techniques andsoftware technologies focus on delivering explicit scaffolds to students (e.g., suggesting the next course ofaction). The research presented here represents an integration between the learning sciences and artificialintelligence focusing on how to scaffold group inquiry learning by attending to peer mediated feedback (Walkeret al., 2009). Specifically, we focus on a facilitating a design space where the adaptive collaborative learningsupport (ACLS) system provide hints to students so that they can better support their peer’s self-regulatedlearning, in addition to the direct feedback that students receive. We consider how this unfolds in the context ofthe collaborative game-based learning environment centered on an ecological problem. A primary goal of thiswork is to answer the following questions; 1) what forms of expert-like facilitation are undertaken by students ingroup inquiry and 2) what are the implications for designing adaptive scaffolds that support this process?Theoretical frameworkWe adopt activity theory (Engeström, 1987; Kaptelinin & Nardi, 2012) as our primary theoretical lens inconsidering the forms of facilitation that students engage in as part of the PBL process. Activity theoryconsiders learning as a collective activity, which consist of persons in activity (e.g., students and teachers, etc.)interacting with social others and material objects as they work towards individual and collective goals (knownas the object). Additionally, participants’ actions are mediated by tools, rules, and division of labor In a PBLscenario, students may take on roles (i.e., division of labor) to organize their work toward finding a solution tothe problem at hand (i.e., the goal). These roles are often structured and defined by rules for action andinteraction. Attending to these expectations in a group task as students use technology-rich learningenvironments will inform how to design the ACLS system.MethodsThe data sources are drawn from a larger study, which aimed to get feedback from students about design of acollaborative game-based learning environment centered on an ecological problem. In 45-minute activities,groups of middle school students (N=10) worked together to create a scientific model explaining on awhiteboard tool. Students used a Phenomenon-Mechanisms-Component (PMC) conceptual framework (HmeloSilver, Jordan, Eberbach, & Sinha, 2017) and explained how components (C) interact, giving rise tomechanisms (M) and/or ecological phenomenon (P).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1831© ISLSThere were four focus group sessions in two after-school clubs (three in one club; fourth in another).Due to the nature of the after-school club, there were a few returning participants in the multiple focus groupsessions in the first club. In each activity, students generated a model explaining the decrease in fish populationin a pond. Students were provided information about the problem in their journal, categorized according toPhenomenon (yellow), Explanations/Mechanisms (green) or Evidence (blue, Figure 1). To build their model,students moved information from their journal to a whiteboard. To facilitate the construction of the model, onlyComponents of the statements (e.g., underlined concepts), and arrows that demonstrated the relationships amongthe Components, Evidence and Explanations could be manipulated by the students.Figure 1. Information provided to students.Two groups of students worked with physical pen and paper models that approximated ACLSinteractions whereas another two worked used an online whiteboard tool to generate their models. Thesesessions were videotaped and transcribed. A case study approach was utilized to facilitate preliminaryexplorations of the nature of peer facilitation in group processes to better inform our design iterations. Toanswer our research questions, we adopted a fine-grained analysis of how students collaborated with oneanother to generate their models.ResultsDue to space constraints, we present key findings and present two excerpts that illustrate them. A key takeawayfrom the four sessions is the rich discussion that occur alongside students’ physical and digital interactions whengathering information and using the whiteboarding tool. When using the whiteboard tool, students were orientedtowards a shared goal of explaining the phenomenon, sharing their explanations and defending theseexplanations based on the information that they have. This pattern of discussion and negotiation was observedacross all groups, even with limited expert facilitation. This suggests that students were able to manage theinquiry process by using the materials provided to them and adopted facilitation roles even when unassigned(see excerpt 1). In the following segment of discussion, students were provided with the physical model andprovided with the prompts in the whiteboard (see figure 1). Students were tasked to generate a hypothesis as towhy the fish is dying by explaining the relationship between temperature, algae, and dissolved oxygen.Excerpt 1. Debating the mechanisms behind the fish kill phenomenon1SteveGuys, my idea is this look it says that the fish um- ((looks at background information))2NealAre dying((reads information)) Temperature, the temperature data shows that it has been an average3Steveof 90 degrees for this month4NealWhich means the algae will grow5Steve((reads information)) High water temperature does not kill this type of fish according to thevet6NealAnd also7SteveThe fish are used to the high temperature8NealYeah9SteveAnd so- the high temperature would make more algae and the more algae10HenryGets rid of11SteveSome of them die and that makes more dissolved oxygen12NealNo, the dissolved oxygen is good13* Henry:Is it?14NealYeah, dissolved oxygen is good for fishICLS 2018 Proceedings1832© ISLS15Steve16171819NealSteveJackNeal2021*SteveNealAnd then it doesn't give them very much sunlight [...] and they would die because they areused to the sunlightI just want to say somethingAnd they would die because of all the green muck on the pondLet Neal say somethingSo so the sunlight is helping the algae live which means that the algae is um getting rid ofum dissolved oxygen and dissolved oxygen is if there is not (.) it if there is low dissolvedoxygen the fish dieOh yeahAnd you’re saying the oppositeThe discussion highlights how students articulate, contest and/or build on each other’s ideas (e.g., lines2, 4, and 13). The students have a shared goal of developing a model that meets the rules of the PMCframework. We see a variety of moments where different mediators shape the groups collaborative inquiry (e.g.,the information provided, student prompts). A mediating factor in this productive discussion is the facilitatorrole that these students take on as they work with one another (lines 13 and 18). Jack adopts a facilitator role,asking his peers to cede the floor for other voices (line 18). Steve, on the other hand, generates discussion byexplicitly sharing the information to the group. The students in the discussion also make inferences based on thedata provided (line 3 and 9). These actions mirror the processes that Quintana et al. (2004) suggest should beattended to when designing software scaffolds (e.g., sense making, process management, and articulation andreflection. A key takeaway is the context within which the discussion occurs. Given that students were creatingthe physical model, the discussion occurred as they were working with the model. We see similar productivegroup inquiry when students were using the digital tool to generate their model (excerpt 2).Excerpt 2. Student and facilitator scaffolds in group inquiry when using a digital model1*NatalieAlgae doesn't increase the green muck. That doesn't make sense.2EvanYes it does because algae- dead algae is green muck.3KateYeah. But then4NatalieSo then the water temperature (5 second pause) the water temperature5Kate((reading information from the screen)) Yeah it says the green muck is actually dead algae.6NatalieYes, we know. Ok. So the water temperature also7Evan((mutters)) Ok it decreaseSo hold on. We have the sunlight that increases the algae, the algae which increases the greenmuck, even though they're the same thing, which makes zero sense. But, then it decreases the8*Nataliefish population so then ((working on the model as Natalie is speaking)) The algae. Ok. The green muck also9Evandecreases algae. Er, has no impact on algae.10NatalieYeah11EvanNo- green muck decreases it because it is dead algae. Or something like that.The green muck is the same thing as the algae. So the algae cannot increase by green muck.12NatalieAnd the green muck cannot decrease by algae.13EvanBut algae can decrease by green muck.14* NatalieNo, it cannot. Because they're the same thing!15* Kate((to Evan)) What are you saying? I am so confused.16EvanOk ok, well then in that case. Green muck has no impact on algae.17NatalieYes.18EvanOk.19NatalieSo you need to take away the increases arrow20EvanI already did that21NatalieFlip around that has no impact arrow.The group of students in excerpt 2 utilized the roles that were introduced; the timekeeper, facilitatorand the modeler. Like their peers in excerpt 2, the students in this group also negotiated their ideas, specificallydebating how to represent green muck or algae in the model. Students again drew on provided information (lineICLS 2018 Proceedings1833© ISLS5) but also engaged in sense making processes (lines 8-14). Moreover, Natalie engaged in overt processmanagement, directing Evan on how to manipulate the model.Implications and future directionsIn both excerpts, peer mediated feedback came in the form of questioning, often accompanying explanationsthat could be debated or were unclear (see asterisked lines in excerpts). While we did not provide explicit hintsfor students, the constraints provided to students in the form of the modeling tool helped students with thissensemaking practice. From a design perspective, embedding scaffolds that signal students to question therelationships in the model is a next logical step. Simple prompts such as “does this make sense” similar to howstudents voice their questions will likely support and facilitate group inquiry. However, this alone is notsufficient to ensure productive discussions. Students must also be aware of the kinds of roles that they need toadopt as part of the group inquiry process, especially since these roles are not always necessarily defined bystudents themselves.Another implication of the rich group interaction that students have as they engage in the modelingprocess, whether digitally or physically is that such interaction might not be accounted for by the system. Forexample, behaviors and actions in a digital environment are often captured by user input (e.g., movement in thephysical space). Often, non-actions are construed as inactive or disengagement from group inquiry andinteractions. The results from the focus groups however suggest that students engage in productive actionsoutside of the digital space.Based on these findings, we generate two design take-aways. We suggest two group formations thatwill support student facilitation and learning. First, students can be assigned to PBL groups and solve theproblem presented to them. In the PBL groups, the ill-defined problem in the game-based learning environmentwill be introduced by various stakeholders who will present different facets of the information provided tostudent at each given stage. For instance, the stakeholders might all discuss algae as a contributing factor to thefishkill problem, but these ideas will be presented in various ways (e.g., graphs, simulations, pictures).Scaffolding the PBL group could take the form of process management, such as making sure that studentsengage in hypothesis generation and reflecting on their group in-game learning actions and processes.Secondly, given that students naturally engage in discourse outside of the technology, this means thatthe classroom configuration must support this form of discourse. For instance, students could be physicallyarranged in the classroom to sit with peers who are assigned the same stakeholder, thereby generating groups ofexpert peers. Scaffolding provide to the expert peer group can take the form of facilitation prompts meant totrigger discussions and sense making processes. In this way, the spatial configuration will support studentsgroup inquiry process and ensure that these ideas are then communicated to their in-game members in chat. Webelieve that this is a productive approach since research has also suggested that timing student interactionsaround successfully completing tasks and reporting them in chat will support students group inquiry (VanEaton, Clark, & Smith, 2015).ReferencesBarrows, H. S. (2000). Problem-based learning applied to medical education: Southern Illinois UniversitySchool of Medicine.Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by Expanding: An Activity-Theoretical Approach to Developmental Research.Helsinki: Orienta-Konsulti Oy.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Jordan, R., Eberbach, C., & Sinha, S. (2017). Systems learning with a conceptualrepresentation: a quasi-experimental study. Instructional Science, 45(1), 53-72.Kaptelinin, V., & Nardi, B. (2012). Activity theory in HCI: Fundamentals and reflections. Synthesis LecturesHuman-Centered Informatics, 5(1), 1-105.Magnisalis, I., Demetriadis, S., & Karakostas, A. (2011). Adaptive and intelligent systems for collaborativelearning support: A review of the field. IEEE transactions on Learning Technologies, 4(1), 5-20.Quintana, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R. G., . . . Soloway, E. (2004). Ascaffolding design framework for software to support science inquiry. Journal of the LearningSciences, 337-386.Van Eaton, G., Clark, D. B., & Smith, B. E. (2015). Patterns of Physics Reasoning in Face-to-Face and OnlineForum Collaboration around a Digital Game. International Journal of Education in Mathematics,Science and Technology, 3(1), 1-13.Walker, E., Rummel, N., & Koedinger, K. R. (2009). Beyond explicit feedback: new directions in adaptivecollaborative learning support. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 9th international conferenceon Computer supported collaborative learning-Volume 1.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1834© ISLS