Robots That Help: Moving Toward Human-Centered DesignsErin Tolar, Andrea Gomoll, Pei-Jung Li, Benjamin Oistad, Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver, Selma Šabanovićetolar@iu.edu, agomoll@indiana.edu, peijli@iu.edu, boistad@umail.iu.edu, chmelosi@indiana.edu,selmas@indiana.eduIndiana UniversityAbstract: Secondary school students following a problem-based human-centered robotics(HCR) curriculum designed and built robots as a way of engaging with engineering designpractices. In this preliminary analysis, we identified a shift in a focal classroom from technicallyto socially focused robot designs across two semesters. This poster considers how teacherframing and scaffolding supported a social orientation in student designs.Keywords: problem-based learning, STEM learning, human-centered roboticsRobotics has been a popular approach for engaging learners in Science, Technology, Engineering andMathematics (STEM), as it enables students to co-construct tangible artifacts based on personal interests andvalues (Blikstein & Krannich, 2013). Human-centered robotics (HCR) can help students understand how robotscan help humans in their everyday lives and, by using social aspects of engineering, it can engage learners whomay not otherwise display interest in STEM (Rusk et al., 2008). Here, a problem-based learning (PBL) curriculumwas adapted to different school contexts. In PBL, students are presented with an authentic, ill-structured problem(Hmelo-Silver, 2004). Teachers scaffold student learning and inquiry by directing them toward resources,providing just-in-time information, and helping them evaluate what they have learned (Puntambekar, 2015). Inthis HCR unit, students were presented with a design challenge to create robots that both served a need in theirlocal community and could be used to communicate telepresently with other geographically distant classrooms(Gomoll et al., 2016). One of the challenges in this unit is the tension between the technical and social aspects ofdesign. Here, we compare the final robots created in different implementations of the unit as the teacher introduceddesigning for clients and emphasized the social aspects of STEM. Thus, we seek to understand what aspects ofthe design challenge were taken up in the students’ final designs and how teacher framing may have influencedthat uptake.MethodsUsing a qualitative coding scheme, we analyzed the students’ final robot artifacts (n=42), which were created insmall collaborative groups composed of 2-4 students at three middle schools, one high school, and an afterschoolclub. Two researchers used images and descriptions of the final robots to code for visibly obvious function, socialneed, telepresence function, advanced components (e.g., laser-cut or 3D printed pieces), sensors and actuators(e.g., moving limbs, LED lights), embellishment, safety features, and client personalization. After achieving 92%agreement on a 20% sample of the artifacts, the researchers coded the remaining artifacts and resolved alldisagreements. Descriptive statistics of artifact codes highlighted differences across school contexts andsemesters. This preliminary analysis centers on the work of 12-14 year old students from Rose Stem MiddleSchool (RSMS) (pseudonym), as this context showed the most dramatic change across two semesters, with fivegroups of 2-3 students each per semester. Teacher interviews were used to understand how the RSMS teacherconceptualized the unit, the changes between the two semesters, and if and how the teacher’s framing affectedstudent designs.Results and discussionDescriptive statistics on the coded artifacts are shown in Figure 1. The obvious function, advanced components,sensors, and actuators categories remained relatively constant across these two semesters. Other categorieschanged dramatically. For example, social need increased from 0% in 2016 to 100% in 2017, embellishmentdropped from 100% to 40%, and client personalization increased from 0% to 100%. Telepresence also increasedfrom 20% to 80%. We conjecture that these changes reflect an increased focus on the social aspects of STEM andclient-oriented design from 2016 to 2017. Multiple codes that decreased (e.g., safety features, sensors) weretechnical features, allowing more balanced attention to social and technical aspects of design overall.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1407© ISLSFigure 1. RSMS artifact design features.Figure 2. RSMS 2017 artifact.Given this shift from technically to socially-oriented robot designs, we sought to understand what roleteacher framing of the unit played in these changes. A post interview with the RSMS teacher showed increasedattention to the social aspects of design in the 2017 iteration. She pointed out that it was important to frame theunit in a way that would “get kids to think about how the social interaction comes in, not just the programming.”Students in 2017 selected clients in their school and designed their robots to meet the client needs. Forexample, in Figure 2, the students added animals to their design to appeal to their clients (students with specialneeds) after receiving feedback that the robot did not look friendly enough, showing increased attention to socialneed. The teacher demonstrated her own orientation toward client-centered design when she suggested tellingfuture facilitators “not to worry too much about the programming…but to focus on the creativity and the designfor clients.” She emphasized that the most important things the students learned were “teamwork, workingtogether, the programming, and just the whole idea of design and build and test,” which showed her commitmentto both the social and technical aspects of the HCR unit, and her foregrounding of the engineering design cycle.ConclusionThese preliminary results suggest that we need to better understand how teachers can frame engineering designunits in ways that make the social aspects of STEM more salient in order to engage more diverse learners. Afternoting substantial differences in RSMS, further analysis is needed across all contexts to see if similar patterns ofmovement from technical to social focus occurred, and ways that framing may have supported or hindered thisshift. The adaptability of this PBL curriculum shows promise for supporting students as they design robots thatmeet local needs. As instructors incorporated the voices of familiar community stakeholders into the PBLproblem, students moved from designing for themselves toward designing for others—a key aspect of theengineering design cycle. The emphasis on the social and human-centered aspects of engineering design showspromise for empowering student voices, sparking student interest, and diversifying involvement in STEM.ReferencesBlikstein, P., & Krannich, D. (2013, June). The makers' movement and FabLabs in education: Experiences,technologies, and research. In Proceedings of the 12th international conference on interaction designand children (pp. 613-616). ACM Digital Library.Gomoll, A., Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Šabanović, S., & Francisco, M. (2016). Dragons, ladybugs, and softballs: Girls’STEM engagement with human-centered robotics. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 25(6),899-914.Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2004). Problem-based learning: What and how do students learn?. Educational PsychologyReview, 16(3), 235-266.Puntambekar, S. (2015). Distributing scaffolding across multiple levels: Individuals, small groups and a class ofstudents. In A. Walker, H. Leary, C. E. Hmelo-Silver, & P. A. Ertmer (Eds.), Essential readings inproblem-based learning (pp. 207-221). West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press.Rusk, N., Resnick, M., Berg, R., & Pezalla-Granlund, M. (2008). New pathways into robotics: Strategies forbroadening participation. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 17(1), 59-69.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1408© ISLS