ORBIT - Overcoming Breakdowns in Teams With InteractiveTabletopsPatrick Sunnen, University of Luxembourg, patrick.sunnen@uni.luBéatrice Arend, University of Luxembourg, beatrice.arend@uni.luValérie Maquil, Luxembourg Institute of Science & Technology, valerie.maquil@list.luAbstract: ORBIT implements and studies a joint problem-solving activity at a tabletoptangible user interface (TUI) providing participants with the opportunity to develop theircollaboration methods through jointly overcoming breakdowns. The design and the researchprocess relies on user-centered design methods and on an ethnomethodological conversationanalytic framework. The project will both generate scientific knowledge on participants’collaboration methods and create a powerful TUI-mediated collaborative learning tool.IntroductionThere is an increasing recognition that future societal and intellectual challenges can only be solvedcollaboratively (Stahl, 2010). However, constructive collaboration on new challenges is a difficult matter andthe mere joining of people’s forces does not help unless people know how to collaborate (Schwarz et al., 2015).Hence, learning to learn and to work together must become an important goal in education and professionaltraining. So, the design research project ORBIT aims at implementing and studying a joint problem-solving(JPS) activity mediated by a tangible user interface (TUI). The main objective of the project is to implement andstudy a TUI-mediated JPS activity that gives adult participants the opportunity to deal with and overcomebreakdowns through collaboration (by that way learning to collaborate). Accordingly, the following researchquestions will be addressed: (1) How to design a TUI-mediated joint problem-solving activity elicitingparticipants’ collaboration to overcome breakdowns? (2) How do the participants cope with and overcomebreakdowns in a TUI-mediated joint problem-solving activity through collaboration?Methodological frameworkHaving both analytic and design components that are closely interwoven, the current project adopts a designbased research approach (DBR) (Reimann, 2011). Koschmann et al. (2007) point to the need for conductingfine-grained video-analytic studies of instructional practice to address the issue of how to account for thefunctioning of the design in authentic settings and to have at their disposal an appropriate method to “documentand connect processes of enactment to outcomes of interest”. They advocate for the implementation of anapproach that relies on ethnomethodology (Garfinkel, 1967) and conversation analysis (Sacks et al., 1974) tosystematically and rigorously study practice. In the meantime, many CA investigations go beyond talk and alsotake into account gestures, gaze, body postures and movements, and spatial and material resources mobilized bythe participants. Additionally, the TUI developments in the DBR process will turn to user centered design(UCD) methods (e.g., prototyping, multi-disciplinary design workshops, walkthroughs) which give attention tothe needs of the end-users. CA and UCD are “rooted in a shared methodological credo. To understand humaninteraction and the use of technologies, CA rigorously examines the participants’ perspective” and UCD takes“as point of departure how the users interact with technologies” (Egbert, 2001, 208).Study designThe ORBIT problem-solving activity will be implemented in two different settings: with in-service teachersduring of a workshop on “collaboration”, and with municipal staff members in the context of their trainings onsoft skills and diversity. The TUI-activity will be based on a rule induction problem whose difficulty willincrease as the participants progress. In a first phase, participants will, for example, have to discover how tosteer an unknown vehicle demanding them to simultaneously operate several control devices (materialized bywidgets). The process of mastering the steering of the vehicle will provide participants with a shared experienceof successful joint problem solving. In the subsequent phase the difficulty of the problem is increased byimplementing software-generated breaches in order to generate breakdowns (1) which have to be overcome bythe participants to complete the task successfully. More precisely, the breaches will be designed either as“information gaps” or as “procedural mismatches”. The former distribute essential information unevenly amongthe participants thus creating an asymmetry of knowledge, while the latter change the rules of the underlyingsystem. Coping successfully with the dynamics of the designed problem requires the participants to rely onmultiple resources, create a joint focus, work interdependently, exchange ideas and information, and co-ICLS 2018 Proceedings1459© ISLSconstruct a shared understanding. However, the research team is aware that “intended pedagogical aims andideas” (task-as-workplan) do not necessarily “translate directly” into actual problem-solving practice, and so themain focus “will be on what actually happens, that is the task-in-process” (Seedhouse, 2004, 93, 95), which isreflected in our EM/CA approach. The design process will use seven iterations (two walkthroughs and fivetrials), which progressively deal with a different focus and related sub-activities of the JPS activity (see Figure1). The five trials will be video-recorded from different angles and perspectives (see Arend et al., 2014)generating approximately fifteen hours of video data. The latter will be searched to identify relevant sequences(accounts of collaboration, accounts of breakdown) and the findings will feed back into the design process.Figure 1. Synoptic plan of ORBIT.Expected outcomesThe project will result in the design of a TUI mediated JPS activity of high usability and integrating series ofbreaching moments with the aim of supporting learning to collaborate. In this vein, it will develop and refinedesign guidelines to support the design of TUI-mediated JPS activities. Furthermore, ORBIT will contribute tothe construction of a theoretical and methodological framework regarding the analysis of collaborationprocesses and methods to overcome breakdowns in a digitally mediated environment. More precisely, it willcreate collections of participants’ accounts of breakdowns, of participants’ methods of overcoming breakdowns,and of participants’ methods of doing collaborative work; and contribute to the creation of a methodological andtechnical apparatus for instantiating and researching JPS activities.ReferencesArend, B., Sunnen, P., Fixmer, P. & Sujbert, M. (2014). Perspectives do matter – Expanding MultimodalInteraction Analysis with Joint Screen. Classroom Discourse, Special Issue Multimodality, 5, 1, 38-50.Egbert, M. (2011). Conversation Analysis Applied to User-Centred Design: A Study of Who ‘The User Is’. InC. Antaki (ed.), Applied Conversation Analysis. Intervention and Change in Institutional Talk (pp.207-221). New York: Palgrave Macmillan.Garfinkel, H. (1967). Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs/NJ: Prentice Hall.Koschmann, T., Stahl, G. & Zemel, A. (2007). The Video Analyst’ Manifesto. In R. Goldman et al. (eds), VideoResearch in the Learning Sciences (pp. 133-143). Mahwah, NJ: LEA.Reimann, P. (2011). Design-Based Research. In L. Markauskaite, P. Freebody & J. Irwin (eds.). MethodologicalChoice and Design (pp. 37-50). New York: Springer.Sacks, H., Schegloff, E.A. & Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-taking forconversation. Language, 50, 4, 696-735.Schwarz, B.B., de Grootet, R., Mavrikis, M. & Dragon, T. (2015). Learning to learn together with CSCL tools,International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 10, 3, 239-271.Seedhouse, P. (2004). The Interactional Architecture of the Language Classroom. Malden, MA: Blackwell.Stahl, G. (2010). Group Cognition as a Foundation for the New Science of Learning. In M.S. Khine, & I.M.Saleh (eds.), New Sciences of Learning: Cognition, Computers and Collaboration in Education (pp.23-44). New York: Springer.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the Luxembourg National Research Fund (FNR) for funding this research under the CORE scheme.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1460© ISLS