Linking Identity Resources Across Roles: Family ScienceWorkshops and BadgingGavin Tierney, Theresa Horstman, and Carrie Tzougtierney@u.washington.edu, thorst@uw.edu, tzouct@uw.eduUniversity of Washington BothellAbstract: With the goal of broadening participation in STEM, this paper reports on researchthat combined ideas of identity resources to support STEM-identity development and digitalbadge systems that combine social, emotional, and academic achievements. Specifically, weexamined the identity resources linked to badges in a family robotics workshops held through anorthwest library system. We found that badges, if framed correctly, can support transitionalSTEM-identity development by linking qualities across different roles.Major issues addressedPopulations of youth that have limited or no access to STEM education are at greater risk to fall behind theircounterparts as STEM fields continue to require more technical expertise, rendering such youth less able to directtheir own social and economic success. Research on broadening participation has shown the interaction betweenSTEM learning and STEM identity development (Bell et al., 2013; Calabrese Barton & Tan, 2009). Further, thiswork has explored how learning environments can be designed to better support participants’ identitydevelopment. In this paper we ask: What are the family shared identity resources in an informal science learningsetting and what role can badging play in supporting STEM identity development?Potential significance of the workKey design components of this work are to afford opportunities for families to work together and explore what itmeans to do robotics and e-textiles. The unique structure of the workshops is to combine tasks, such asprogramming, with other areas of expertise such as storytelling. In addition, participants are awarded badges torecognize achievements in the program. We argue the combination of critical analysis of badges supported by aconceptual framework of identity resources we can better understand how identity resources are and can beutilized in informal learning spaces. We hope to add to the conference theme of rethinking the learning sciencesin the digital age by a) specifically addressing inequity in STEM, b) challenging standard practices of digital badgeuse in educational settings, and c) exploring how digital advances can usefully support identity development.Theoretical frameworkWe take a sociocultural perspective on identity, viewing identity as formed not only by actions, but also byinteractions with other people within the structures of the learning environments that they encounter (Holland etal., 1998; Wortham, 2006). In this work, we consider identities as one of the ways people mediate participationand demonstrate learning (Nasir, 2012) and look at identity as not just identification, but changes in practice. Inaddition, to marking learner trajectories and establishing membership in a community, we view badges as a toolthat allows program values to be made explicit and visible to participants and educators and further develop theiridentities as learners. We seek to identify how badges can purposefully build identity development, recognizingthat identity development is an interactive process as individuals participate within and across specific contexts(Holland et al., 1998; Wenger, 1998).Methodologic approachesThis paper represents a portion of a 4-year NSF funded project Robotics Backpacks for Family Learning. Theoverarching project utilizes a design-based research approach (c.f. Barab, 2006) of iterative cycles of design andimplementation. Data used for this paper was collected from January-February 2018 and included five workshopdates in one location, involving five number of families (fourteen individuals total). We gathered video data (onecamera per family) to capture family interactions and used these data to identify and classify moments of rolespecific activity along with interactions and discussions about badges. Through collaborative qualitative analysisof recorded family activity, discourse, and timeline of family generated artifacts, we mapped to the workshoproles as identified through the badging system provided enough context to determine which identity resourceswere or were not taken up.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1753© ISLSMajor findings, conclusions, and implicationsThere are two major findings associated with this work. First, using roles as the organizing structure for a badgesystem affords the opportunity to highlight a range of practices associated with those roles. We found that badges,if framed correctly, can support transitional STEM-identity development by linking qualities across differentroles. In each workshop learners earned badges as a roboticist, artist, computer scientist, electrical engineer,researcher and storyteller. The roles bound specific characteristics while exposing shared qualities.What surfaced through workshop play are qualities such as attention to detail and precise that participantswho are skilled at programming and others skilled at storytelling, both possess. This interdisciplinary approachafforded the opportunity for badges to highlight skills that can be found in multiple types of roles and openingmoments for participants to see themselves as “programmers”, “artists”, and/or “electrical engineers” who maynot normally identify as such. Though qualities such as attention to detail or precise have specific requirementsfor each role domain (an electrical engineer is precise through different practices than a storyteller is precise).However, through linking participant activity to qualities of different roles, we are able to demonstrate throughproximity that Participant A was precise in her depiction of her family story as indicated by the continualmodification of her storyboard in the same way her brother was precise in correcting his coding. Both ensuredtheir work represented the end results accurately. Employing a broad definition of “precise” in badge criteriapermits the type of flexibility needed in order for participants to be able to see themselves in different roles. Theycan begin to identify qualities they already possess as being applicable to domains where they have little or noexperience.Second, we identified when practices shifted in the context of the program. For example, how familiesimagined robotic components in their story shifted as their understanding of how to make the robotics workdeveloped. One father played with LED configurations in week 2 that informed the families’ use of lights in theirfinal diorama (week 5). With shifting practices, individual participation within families also shifted, as too did theresources available to participants in the activities. An example of this occurred when one mother shifted herpractice from “project coordinator” to “programmer”, changing the family dynamics and the resources availablefor identity development. Badges, if framed correctly, can support transitional STEM-identity development bylinking qualities across different roles.We propose badges and STEM practice-linked identity resources work together in two directions. In oneway, badges support roles and practices that impact identity development by highlighting specific activities andmarking achievement. In the other way, badges tell us in what ways the program is supporting identitydevelopment through the analysis of the types of resources and practices required to earn each badge. Badgingcan then serve as a design tool and as an analytical tool for examining the type and quantity of specific identityresources geared towards a specific aim, such as STEM.ReferencesBarab, S. (2006). Design-Based Research: A Methodological Toolkit for the Learning Scientist. CambridgeUniversity Press.Bell, P., Bricker, L., Reeve, S., Zimmerman, H. T., & Tzou, C. (2013). Discovering and supporting successfullearning pathways of youth in and out of school: Accounting for the development of everyday expertiseacross settings. In LOST Opportunities 23 (pp. 119-140). Springer Netherlands.Calabrese Barton, A. C., & Tan, E. (2009). Funds of knowledge and discourses and hybrid space. Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching, 46(1), 50-73.Holland, D. C., Lachicotte, W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds. Cambridge,Mass.: Harvard University Press.Nasir, N.S. (2012). Racialized identities: Race and achievement among African American youth. Stanford:Stanford University Press.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge, U.K.; New York,N.Y.: Cambridge University Press.Wortham, S. (2006). Learning identity: The joint emergence of social identification and academic learning.Cambridge; New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1754© ISLS