Supporting SEL in Progressive Design ContextsDhvani Toprani, Marcela Borge, and Yu Xiadhvanitoprani@psu.edu, mborge@psu.edu, yzx64@psu.eduThe Pennsylvania State UniversityAbstract: The current study examines the use of CA approach to support SEL and identifymicro-level instructional strategies. Using interaction analysis, we identify eight strategies usedby an expert facilitator that have implications for designing situated professional developmentprograms for training novice facilitators to become more effective at fostering SELcompetencies.Keywords: Social and emotional learning, Progressive Education, Cognitive ApprenticeshipIn the recent years the field of Education has brought holistic education to the forefront by emphasizing issuessurrounding socio-emotional learning (SEL). SEL is the process of regulating one’s thoughts, feelings, andbehaviors for making responsible decisions, maintaining empathetic learning environment, and collaborating withothers by becoming aware of one’s own and other’s behavior (CASEL, 2012; Weissberg, Durlak, Domitrovich &Gullotta, 2015). Despite SEL’s success in enhancing children’s mental well-being and academic performance(Elias & Moceri, 2012), developing productive SEL environments is challenging. The challenges emerge from alack of support for teachers to develop socio-emotional skills among the students, and SEL’s reliance on traditionalbehavioristic instructional paradigms in developing the curriculum. To address these challenges, systemic levelchanges, along with a movement towards more progressive socio-cultural instructional paradigms are needed(Elias & Moceri, 2012). The strategic choices that teachers make to enact the curriculum are fundamental inimplementing SEL curriculums, yet rarely studied by researchers. Hence, we propose the use of a CognitiveApprenticeship (CA) model of instruction (Collins, Brown & Newman, 1988) for promoting SEL among children.We examine (RQ) What strategies a teacher uses to operationalize CA methods in the teaching of SEL. Byunpacking how SEL principles align with CA model, we analyze the difficulties in applying the CA methods inSEL environments and recommend professional development strategies to adopt progressive forms of instruction.The study was conducted during Fall 2015 and Spring 2016 semesters, in a weekly afterschool designclub at an elementary charter school in the Northern US. Two facilitators led four groups of sixteen 3rd to 6th gradestudents, who worked on fictional design projects using different kinds of technologies. One of the facilitator wasan expert with 15 years of experience working with children developing socio-emotional skills and the otherfacilitator was a 2nd year graduate student with limited experience in the field. The afterschool club was a programthat emphasized developing children’s design skills in collaborative learning environment. Video recordings ofclassroom sessions were reviewed for identifying lessons taught by the expert facilitator (expertise in CAmethods), addressing aspects of SEL. Eight episodes of varying lengths (approximately 14 incidents and 80minutes of teacher talk) were preliminarily selected for further analysis. An episode was an uninterrupted wholeclass discussion and incidents were split within episodes based on the topic of discussion. Using InteractionAnalysis methods (Jordan & Henderson, 1995), the episodes were analyzed for understanding teacher’sinstructional moves and open-coded for specific strategies used by the teacher. Once the first level codes weregenerated and reviewed collaboratively they were refined, compared and reorganized around the teaching methodsdesigned by the Cognitive Apprenticeship model (Collins, Brown & Newman, 1988).SEL encompasses competencies pertaining to cognition and emotion. Eight strategies emerged fromthe data that connected to or extended CA methods within SEL environments. As shown in Fig. 1, thesestrategies were embedded within the larger context of situated, reflective practices and further categorizedas Emotion-focused or Cognition-focused strategies. The Emotion-focused strategies mostly pertained toSEL competencies of self-management and self-awareness: regulating and recognizing emotions, sensemaking, positive mind-set etc. The Cognition-focused strategies mostly pertained to SEL competencies ofresponsible decision-making, relationship skills and social awareness: making constructive choices,problem-solving, empathy, effective communication etc. Although similar evidences were gathered for allthe strategies, in this section we will only discuss the Emotion-focused strategies. In one of the episodesfrom L4 (Fall 2015), the expert facilitator used Emotion-focused strategies to appreciate a team’s effort atregulating their emotions and managing conflicts; and encouraged other students to do so. She Replayed anexperience from previous class in order to help students develop a deeper understanding of desired designprocesses. She discussed this incidence during the whole-class reflection session by saying “So, last time,they (group 2) were trying to design a garden just like many of you were, but they had some differences withICLS 2018 Proceedings1573© ISLSregards with types of things they wanted. Leo really wanted to design a car, and the other team memberspush Leo to try and explain and provide some reasons for why he should try & build a car. Now, Leo triedto provide some rationale, and they tried to think about it very, you know, very hard, but, was this an easyconversation for you guys to have?” She then reframed some of the difficult conversations as evidence of‘hard work’ and acknowledges their frustration by saying “that happens because it's really difficult for anygroup to try to make a joint decision. This is really, really, common, but that level of frustration and difficultyshows that you are actually doing something right”. The facilitator used a variety of other strategies notexplicitly stated in the CA framework. These strategies focus on helping students regulate their emotions.By reframing, the facilitator reduced the amount of negativity associated with a difficult process andacknowledged emotions using articulation. Unlike CA model, the facilitator helped the students think aloudabout their thinking processes and encouraged the class to talk about how it makes them feel so as tonormalize and contextualize these feelings.Our findings show that SEL can be integrated by using CA model of instruction; however, themodel needs to be extended for supporting the emotional aspects through practices grounded in theoriesof emotional scaffolding and regulation (Rosiek, 2003). The strategies used by the teacher for developingthese competencies have to be equally diverse and well-integrated. The teacher’s allegiance with thestudent’s classroom experiences and letting their needs drive the curriculum is fundamental. As such,helping teachers to develop the necessary professional skills to learn how to support SEL with progressivemodels of instruction like CA may require us to rethink our approach to professional development.However, more research is needed on unpacking expert progressive practices to support the types ofcomplex socio-emotional and domain-specific learning required by an increasingly collaborative, sociotechnical society.ReferencesCollaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional Learning (CASEL). (2012). 2013 CASEL guide:Effective social and emotional learning programs-preschool and elementary school edition.Chicago.Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1988). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the craft of reading,writing and mathematics. Thinking: The Journal of Philosophy for Children, 8(1), 2-10.Elias, M. J., & Moceri, D. C. (2012). Developing social and emotional aspects of learning: the Americanexperience. Research Papers in Education, 27(4), 423-434.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of theLearning Sciences, 4(1), 39-103.Rosiek, J. (2003). Emotional scaffolding: An exploration of the teacher knowledge at the intersection of studentemotion and the subject matter. Journal of Teacher Education, 54(5), 399-412.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1574© ISLS