Detecting Patterns of Dynamic Teacher-Learner Interactions inOnline Adult Learning Through a Dynamic Systems ApproachYohei Kato, Michael Tscholl, and Saskia Kunnen,y.kato@student.rug.nl, m.tscholl@rug.nl, E.S.Kunnen@rug.nlUniversity of Groningen, NetherlandsAbstract: This study investigated teacher-learner interaction patterns in the context of adultonline learning. This study shows the applicability of dynamic systems approach in researchon online adult learning. We employ a dynamic systems approach method, the State SpaceGrid, to capture dynamic interaction patterns between a teacher and learners. Results showedthat the interaction patterns and their characteristics were distinct in each experimental classbut also indicated that some interaction patterns were recurrent over the course.IntroductionIn this paper, we describe the detection and visualization of complex and dynamic interaction patterns in onlineadult learning by utilizing one of the methods in dynamic systems approaches, the State Space Grid (Granic,Hollenstein, Dishion, & Patterson, 2003; Hollenstein, 2013; Lewis, Lamey, & Douglas, 1999). Prior researchhas utilized the approach in the context of parent-child interaction (Granic & Lamey, 2002); in the studypresented in this paper, we apply it to teacher-student interaction to detect patterns and show how the patternschange over time.The research questions are: “What kinds of combination of utterances can be seen in the interactionbetween a teacher and learners?” and “How do the combinations change over the course?”Methods11 Japanese adults participated in this study (two females and nine males). Their ages vary from early 30s tomid 50s. The professional backgrounds of the participants varied (e.g., CEO, business consultant,business/personal coach). The high variability of the participants allows inferences on the ability of theapproach to detect recurring dynamic patterns. All of the participants voluntarily participated in this study.The data in this study are obtained from recordings of an online course held by the first author in 2015.The course consisted of 5 two-hour classes over two months. Teaching consisted primarily in discussing topicsintroduced in the first class of the course. The course aimed at offering academic and practical knowledge ofadult development theory. The coding scheme was developed using a Grounded Theory Approach (Glaser &Strauss, 1967); the coding categories are listed in table 1. The Cohen’s Kappa statistic was .87, showing stronginter-rater reliability of the coding system.Table 1: Codes for utterances of teacher (left column) and learners (right column)Number1234567Teacher Utterance CategoryInstructionOpen QuestionClosed QuestionEncouraging Open QuestionEncouraging Closed QuestionReframe ResponseSimple ResponseLearner Utterance CategorySpontaneous Simple CommentSpontaneous Meaningful CommentSpontaneous Open QuestionSpontaneous Closed QuestionEncouraged Simple CommentEncouraged Meaningful CommentEncouraged Open QuestionState Space GridState Space Grid (SSG) is a software program to analyze a dynamic system’s behavior in a state space (Granicet al., 2003; Hollenstein, 2013; Lewis et al., 1999). The uniqueness of the method is to highlight recurrentpatterns within the interaction of two state variables. The method can also generate automatically the trajectoryof the change of interaction patterns. In addition, SSG can provide researchers with a number of indicators onthe screen of the software to examine a specific characteristic of an interaction.ResultsICLS 2018 Proceedings1395© ISLSInteraction patterns and the trajectoriesSSG generated the following figures (See Figure 1). Each numeric symbol in the figures corresponds with thecontents in Table 1.Figure 1. State space grids for five classes in terms of behaviors.Figure 1 illustrates that each class showed different types of trajectories. It also demonstrates that acouple of cells frequently appeared. E.g., (Teacher utterance, Learner utterance) = (4, 6). The figure also showsthat some combinations occurred less frequently (i.e., (1, 1), (4, 1), (7, 2)).One captivating phenomenon is that the teacher started to frequently use “reframe response” from thesecond class. One reason might be related to the fact that the learning environment of the first class was moreconventional than the other classes in that the teacher had to explain the purpose and structure of the course andhad to offer theoretical instructions so that the learners can deepen the discussion in the succeeding classes.DiscussionThe characteristics of combinations of utterances identified by this study offer rich information on the dynamicnature of the teacher-learner interaction. If we focused only on either a teacher or learners, we would not detectsuch a dynamic process of interaction. In sum, this study suggests researchers that a study on dynamicinteraction processes should not examine variables separately but investigate combination of variables thatcharacterize the interaction. Also, SSG enables us to explore the trajectories of change of interaction patterns.ReferencesGlaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research.Hawthorne, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.Granic, I., & Lamey, A. V. (2002). Combining dynamic systems and multivariate analyses to compare themother-child interactions of externalizing subtypes. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 30(3).Granic, I., Hollenstein, T., Dishion, T. J., & Patterson, G. R. (2003). Longitudinal analysis of flexibility andreorganization in early adolescence: A dynamic systems study of family interactions. DevelopmentalPsychology, 39(3), 606-617.Hollenstein, T. (2013). State space grids: Depicting dynamics across-development. New York: Springer.Lewis, M. D., Lamey, A. V., & Douglas, L. (1999). A new dynamic systems model for the analysis of earlysocioemotional development. Developmental Science, 2(4), 457-475.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1396© ISLS