A Design Approach to Understanding the Activity of Learners inInterdisciplinary Settings: Environment and DiversityKate Thompson, Griffith University, kate.thompson@griffith.edu.auJulia Svoboda Gouvea, Tufts University, Julia.Gouvea@tufts.eduGeoffrey Habron, Warren Wilson College, ghabron@warren-wilson.eduAbstract: The aim of this paper is to describe the design approach developed to analyze thedesign and consequent activity of learners engaged in an undergraduate environmental sciencecourse. The course was taught using the EMBeRS method that emphasizes generation ofexternal representations of mental models to build shared understanding of socio-environmentalsystems (Pennington et al., 2015). The design approach adopted combined expertise in (1)design research (from Sandoval, 2014) and (2) design for learning (from Carvalho & Goodyear,2014). Taking a systems view of the design, activity, and learning outcomes, this paperdescribes the linkages between these and extracts the design conjectures of the instructor andthe theoretical conjectures implicit in the EMBeRS approach. In collaboration with theinstructor, the use of this approach: identified disconnects between design and theoreticalconjectures; linked these disconnects to specific design considerations so that;recommendations for areas of redesign and parallel research were made.Keywords: design, interdisciplinary problem solving, collaboration, environmental scienceIntroduction and backgroundIn environmental science, finding ways to engage in productive interdisciplinary collaborative research is essentialto finding solutions to real world problems, such as climate change. A synthesis approach to research focuses onthe integration of perspectives to create a shared model of a given system, as a negotiated boundary object, torepresent and mediate conversations about the phenomenon in study. In synthesis research, interdisciplinary teamscome together to refine existing data, ideas, theories or methods, from many sources, and across multiple fields(NCEAS, 2014; Kemp & Boynton, 2011). A synthesis approach is necessary when an individual perspectivecannot answer questions, but the integration of knowledge and perspectives across disciplines into a shared modelhas been identified as one of the key challenges to the success of this method of research (Roy et al., 2013). In2013, a number of programs were funded to investigate the design of undergraduate and postgraduate programsaround socio-environmental synthesis skills. This paper focuses on one of these projects: Employing Model-BasedReasoning in Socio-Environmental Synthesis (EMBeRS). The EMBeRS approach (Pennington et al., 2015)combines model-based reasoning with an emphasis on the creation of, and conversation around, boundarynegotiating objects (Lee, 2007; Pennington 2010). Model-based reasoning is a feature of scientific thinking (e.g.Nersessian 2002) that science educators have been striving to support in science learners (e.g. Jacobson &Wilensky, 2006; Lehrer and Shauble, 2006; 2000; Raghavan & Glaser, 1995). The EMBeRS project elaborateson this approach for use in interdisciplinary contexts. Specifically, the approach allows disciplinary experts toshare aspects of their internal mental models by collaborating to generate and refine external representations ofcomplex systems. During this process, it is expected that experts will uncover and reconcile discrepancies in theirunderstandings of a system and over time develop a more comprehensive synthetic understanding of a complexproblem (a shared problem model).In parallel to developing the EMBeRS approach (for a full description see Pennington et al., 2015),members of the project team also developed an approach to design for, and analyze, the resultant learning. Ouraim was to describe the organization of collaborative interdisciplinary learning environments in terms of thedesign, the activity of learners and instructors, and the outcomes of learning so that we could articulate and testconjectures about learning to do synthesis research. In this paper we present an example of an analysis of a lessonfrom an undergraduate environmental science course designed using the EMBeRS approach.MethodsWe take a systems approach to analyzing learning that allows us to propose conjectures about the mechanismsunderlying commonly reported measures of effectiveness, such as learning gains. Understanding the relationshipsbetween the components in a system of learning helps us to better predict whether a successful design is repeatableor transferable. We can ask whether the observed success is linked mechanistically to intentionally designedICLS 2016 Proceedings870© ISLSaspects of the program, or whether it emerged from as yet unconsidered features of the program or participants(learners or instructors). We draw on recent work in design for learning (Carvalho & Goodyear, 2014) and designbased research (Sandoval, 2014) to map learning systems in a way that centralizes the activity of the learner –where the mechanisms of learning unfold. Drawing on the work of Carvalho & Goodyear (2014) we map learningenvironments by accounting for (1) the designed elements, including tasks (epistemic), role and rules ofinteractions (social) and digital and physical learning environment and tools (set); (2) learner activity (observablelearner behavior); and (3) the learning outcomes (measurable changes over time). We will then illustrate how toanalyze such systems adapting conjecture mapping (Sandoval, 2014) to draw out and evaluate the (1) designconjectures that link designed elements of a learning environment to the desired activity of learners (conjecturesabout how the design will be enacted); and (2) theoretical conjectures that link the activity taking place in alearning environment with anticipated learning outcomes (conjectures about how people learn).This paper focuses on an exercise designed as part of an undergraduate, first year seminar course calledEverybody’s Environment. The course included 16 students with an expressed interest in a range of majors. Wedescribe the design of the EMBeRS exercise, as well as the observations made of learner activity, particularly inrelation to assessing the ability of students to engage in the core objectives of the EMBeRS approach (broadeningof individual perspectives mediated by boundary negotiating objects in a collaborative setting).FindingsThe students engaged in a sequence of activities to explore different understandings and conceptualizations of theterm environment. The instructor intended to use this exercise to prepare students to adopt the EMBeRS approachto address a more complex problem later in the course. As outlined in the EMBeRS approach (Pennington et al.,2015), students were expected to have the opportunity to a) identify their own view (perspective) of environment;b) listen to and understand other students’ perspectives; c) share their own and others’ perspectives (written andoral); d) collaboratively construct a representation of their shared understanding; and e) apply this to anotherproblem. Students engaged in a sequence of tasks over three days:Task 1 required students to identify one resource that represented their view on environment and providea reason for their choice. The responses were submitted online, and brought to class. In Task 2 students wereplaced in dyads to describe their resource, changing partners several times over 20 minutes, until all students hadinteracted with each other. Students individually reflected on a guiding question about what they had learnedabout others’ representations of the environment, and these were presented to the class. Students were then dividedinto groups of three based on proximity and given ten minutes to identify commonalities and differences in theirresources, followed by another individual written reflection about their learning. Finally, the whole class discussedthe individual reflections, which were recorded on the board by the instructor. Task 3 was completedasynchronously. Students were asked as individuals to identify one resource (visual, symbolic) that representedtheir small group’s view on environment and provide a written description as well as a reason for choosing theresource, submitted online and face-to-face in the following class. In Task 4 the resource and explanation fromTask 3 were shared in class with the same groups of three as the first day, and the students were asked to write aguided reflection as individuals. In the same groups of three, students were asked to generate a mind map of sharedunderstandings and perspectives of the environment, which were photographed and shared with the class. One ofthe groups utilized computer software to generate their concept map, while the remainder drew their maps onnotebook paper.The design of the exercise is outlined in Figure 1 below. The epistemic elements of the design were aseries of subtasks that elicited external representations as well as explanations and reflections of perspectivesabout the definition of the environment. Repetition around the key skills (creation of artefacts, discussion,reflection) was used to train students in the cyclical nature of the EMBeRS approach. The set design supportedthe creation and sharing of artefacts, explanations, and reflections, and allowed these to be accessible by theinstructor and learners as needed during the subtasks. The social design included a series of individual, dyad,small group, and whole class discussions, aligned carefully with the epistemic elements. Beyond this, however,the social activity of the learners was unscripted; there was no scaffolding of the collaboration in terms of rolesin the groups or rules to follow.The observable learner activity was characterized in terms of the same three constructs: epistemic, socialand set. The key epistemic aspect of learner activity was identifiable changes in perspectives about theenvironment, most obviously identified in the written reflections and descriptions of the artefacts. It wasanticipated that learners would use the tools available, physical and digital, to aid them in communicating theirperspective to the group and the instructor. It was also anticipated that the social interactions, and the rules androles that emerged during the structured collaboration would help learners to shift perspectives, as per theICLS 2016 Proceedings871© ISLSEMBeRS approach. The projected learning outcomes revolved around preparing learners with the skills requiredto adopt this approach later in the semester, including collaboration, artifact creation, and writing.Figure 1: Representation of the key design elements considered in Everybody’s Environment.Discussion and conclusionOur analysis allows us to explicitly draw out the conjectures embedded in the design of this lesson. The primarydesign conjecture (D1) was that the design elements would work together to generate discourse and activity inwhich students would share and negotiate their perspectives. It was assumed that the construction and refinementof representations would mediate this process, allowing students to record and reference their ideas. The instructoralso assumed that a range of understandings of environment would exist among the students. The designpurposefully encouraged a range of modalities to present these understandings, including written and verbal,interpersonal, intrapersonal, as well as visual and spatial. Most of the resources identified by the learners weredigital (including photos and music), however some were physical resources (including a book and a terrarium).There were two theoretical conjectures identified. The first (T1) linked this intended activity (iterative,collaborative externalization and negotiation of perspectives) to shifts in individual students’ perspectives aboutenvironment. The second (T2) was that participation in this exercise would prepare learners to participate infurther model-based reasoning in groups later in the semester.With these conjectures articulated we were able to identify evidence in the observed learning activityand learning outcomes. The instructor observed various levels of sharing, description, inquiry and collaboration,and noted discrepancies between the collaboration in real-time, and written explanations submitted. What was notclear without recordings of the collaborative tasks was the role that the different social groups had in the generationof artefacts or shifts in perspectives. Further investigation is needed before support can be given to the designconjecture. A shift in perspectives was observed by the instructor in the written and oral descriptions (related toT1), most noticeably in recognizing that not all students identified nature as environment, but identifiedthemselves or their neighborhood or some other physical space as environment. Students did articulate their ownand others’ perspectives, and participated in generating shared representations. Further analysis needs to be doneof the artefacts produced to understand how the interaction of different types of learner activity supported this. Totest T2, the instructor applied the same design to the discussion of another term (diversity), rather than anenvironmental case study. Student comments included feedback that the exercise was not academic enough, as itprovided no grounding in the literature in terms of defining or conceptualizing the concept of environment.In the following, we consider the feedback from the three aspects of the activity of learners, and thelearning outcomes. The epistemic design seems to have been successful, at least in terms of anecdotal reportingof participation in the task. Further research could investigate the reflections and artefacts for evidence ofperspective change, particularly to understand how this interacts with the other design elements. The design ofthe set was complex with online, digital and physical artefacts created and shared by individuals and in groups.Future research should address the interaction between this heterogeneous learning environment and the role ofICLS 2016 Proceedings872© ISLSthe boundary negotiating objects in the shared understanding of the key term. The design of the social groupingswas complicated (individual, dyads, small groups and whole class), further investigation is needed of the rulesand roles that emerge in further iterations in order to ensure that timely support is given to groups as necessary,or to reconsider the complexity of the groupings. The feedback from students implies that they lacked motivationto apply these skills to the negotiation of a second key term. This may be linked to the epistemic design. Insynthesis research, experts come together around a pressing environmental problem that they want to solve. In theclassroom task, students were engaged in defining a term (an initial step towards solving a problem) without thecontext of the bigger problem that this would help them to solve. Changing the focus of the exercise to an authenticenvironmental issue, around which differences in worldviews or mental models exist, warrants furtherinvestigation.By combining the approaches that foreground both design-based research and design for learning, thekey considerations of the instructor as well as learning sciences researchers can be included, and in so doing,provide a more informed design of a complex task. Given the roll out of the EMBeRS approach in multipleinstitutions (Pennington et al., 2015), a systematic way of assessing the variations of the design as well as theresulting activity and learning outcomes support their comparison across learning environments. As the resultsare further refined, design guidelines can be developed to support the successful implementation of EMBeRS.ReferencesCarvalho, L., & Goodyear, P. (2014). The architecture of productive learning networks. New York, NY:Routledge.Jacobson M, Wilensky U (2006) Complex systems in education: scientific and educational importance andimplications for the learning sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences 15(1):11–34.Kemp, M. W. & Boynton, W. R. (2011) Synthesis in estuarine and coastal ecological research: What is it? Whyis it important, and how do we teach it? Estuaries and Coasts, 35, 1-22.Lee, C. (2007). Boundary negotiating artifacts: unbinding the routine of boundary objects and embracing chaosin collaborative work. Computer supported Cooperative Work, 16, 307-339.Lehrer R, Schauble L (2000) Developing model-based reasoning in mathematics and science. Journal of AppliedDevelopmental Psychology, 21(1), pp. 39–48.Lehrer R, Schauble L (2006) Cultivating model-based reasoning in science education. In: The Cambridgehandbook of the learning sciences. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 371–387, Retrievedfrom: http://www.uky.edu/฀jwi229/PBLE/readings/ Lehrer%20and%20Schauble.pdfNCEAS (2014). NCEAS: Advancing ecology to improve lives and the environment.http://www.nceas.ucsb.edu/overview (accessed 19th March, 2014).Nersessian, N. J. (2002). The cognitive basis of model-based reasoning. In The cognitive basis of science (pp.133–153). Cambridge University Press.Pennington, D. (2010). The dynamics of material artifacts in collaborative research teams. Computer SupportedCooperative Work. 19, pp. 175-199.Pennington, D., Bammer, G., Danielson, A., Gosselin, D. C., Gouvea, J., Habron, G., Hawthorne, D., Parnell, R.A., Thompson, K., Vincent, S., & Wei, C. (2015) The EMBeRS project: Employing model-basedreasoning in socio-environmental synthesis. Journal of Environmental Studies and Sciences, October.Raghavan K, Glaser R (1995) Model-based analysis and reasoning in science: the MARS curriculum. ScienceEducation, 79(1), pp. 37–61.Roy, E. D., Morzillo, A. T., Seijo, F., Reddy, S. M. W., Rhemtulla, J. M., Milder, J. C., et al (2013). The elusivepursuit of interdisciplinarity at the human-environment interface. Bioscience, 63(9), pp. 745-753.Sandoval WA (2014) Conjecture mapping: An approach to systematic educational design research. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 23: pp. 18–36.AcknowledgmentsWe gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Australian Research Council, through grant FL100100203,the Socio-Environmental Synthesis Centre (SESYNC), through grant 2013T6-002, as well as the ideas andfeedback of colleagues from the Laureate Team and EMBeRS group.ICLS 2016 Proceedings873© ISLS