Constructing Entities in Scientific ModelsLeslie Atkins Elliott, Boise State University, leslieatkins@boisestate.eduLauren Barth-Cohen, University of Utah, Lauren.BarthCohen@Utah.eduAbstract: Science education research on modeling has often overlooked the prevalence oftheoretical objects in scientific models. The phenomena being modeled are often notobservable (e.g., what causes a ball to move), but theoretical (e.g., what causes kinetic energyto increase); similarly, objects responsible for those phenomena are often not tangible, buttheoretical. Supporting students modeling requires support for developing theoretical objectsthat populate models, and embodied representations may uniquely support the construction oftheoretical objects.IntroductionWhen one billiard ball strikes another—the first one stopping and the second rolling away—it seems intuitivethat the first ball had something that was transferred to the second ball in this interaction. In a model of thisinteraction, a physicist would say that the first ball had kinetic energy, and that work transferred that energyfrom the first ball to the second.A hallmark of engagement in scientific inquiry is students’ pursuit of such coherent, mechanisticmodels of natural phenomena (Hammer & Van Zee, 2006). An articulation of the construct of mechanistic byRuss et al. (2008, p. 512) emphasizes the importance of identifying entities (“the things that play roles inproducing the phenomenon”), their properties, and their organization such that they can be said to causallyproduce the phenomenon being modeled. However, the entities and phenomena that populate most scientificmodels are not physical objects that are readily noticed, categorized and employed in causal stories, buttheoretical objects. In the example above, energy—a non-physical object—is positioned as an entity that istransferred by a similarly non-physical entity. Other examples include “entropy causes solubility to rise,” “genescause transcriptional interference,” and “topological defects cause phase winding.” The construction and sharedunderstanding of such entities represents a significant scientific achievement. Entities in scientific models arenot so much physical objects that are readily identified as they are theoretical objects that are carefullyconstructed as a significant accomplishment in the development of scientific models.In this poster, we describe a pedagogical embodied activity used to model energy in systems, EnergyTheater (Scherr, et al, 2013). Drawing on video data from students as they engage in this activity, wedemonstrate how the embodied nature of the activity supports students in constructing new theoretical entities aspart of an iterative process of generating mechanistic models of phenomena. We highlight that such constructionof theoretical entities by students is a significant part of modeling. More broadly, this work suggests thatexplicitly embodied activities may be uniquely powerful in supporting students in such causal, mechanisticreasoning because of the ways in which embodiment supports the construction of entities – a process callednominalization. Finally, we argue that such nominalization supports students not only in using the construct ofenergy to model phenomena, but in recognizing energy itself as a phenomenon to be modeled.BackgroundBelow, we begin with a brief overview of nominalization and mechanism, the connections betweennominalization and embodiment, and then describe Energy Theater. In our poster, we provide transcripts andrelated data from classrooms in which high school and university level students use Energy Theater as theyconstruct scientific models.Nominalization and mechanismA feature of academic language in general, and scientific language in particular, is the prevalence ofnominalization, in which “any element or group of elements is made to function as a nominal group in theclause” (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2004, p. 41). For example, if we rephrase decide as making a decision,“decide” has shifted from a verb to a noun – a nominal group in a clause. Nouns have affordances, as theybecome objects, and then categories of objects, to reason about and with.The word “mechanism”—suggesting the interacting parts of a machine—underscores the importanceof nominalization in science: we construct nominal groups and then treat them as objects, as if such objects canhave a causal - even mechanical - influence on events. Reasoning mechanistically in science, then, usuallyentails a process of nominalization as we construct theoretical entities; those entities populate our models, andICLS 2018 Proceedings1679© ISLSare responsible - causally - for phenomena. Below we will consider how explicit embodiment when modelingphenomena can support students in developing those entities, thus supporting mechanistic reasoning.Embodied cognition and embodied learning activitiesEmbodied theories of cognition take the perspective that knowledge representations are fundamentallyconnected with sensorimotor experiences. Our concepts are largely communicated via metaphors to experiences,such as the saying "there’s trouble coming down the road” as if trouble were an object traveling in space. Whendealing with abstractions, embodied metaphor is natural, unconscious and pervasive (Lakoff, 1993) andinstruction can take advantage of this by engineering experiences that promote certain metaphors.We anticipate that an explicit embodiment will support students not only in reasoning mechanistically,but in constructing “entities” responsible for phenomena. In science education, for example, students have beensuccessful in understanding new topics with causal mechanisms where the mechanisms account for objects thatcause local changes (White, 1993). We now turn to an explicitly embodied learning activity, Energy Theater.Energy TheaterEnergy Theater (ET) is an embodied modeling activity aiming to support learners in understanding energyflows, transfers, and transformations, using a substance model of energy. In this activity, regions of the floorsignify objects, and people (students) denote units of energy that move from region to region to represent theflow of energy, and by signaling their form of energy to represent transformations from one form of energy toanother (Daane, et al., 2014). Prior research on ET has shown that this activity promotes the disambiguation ofmatter and energy, distinguishing among energy processes, and representing energy as a conserved. It is notsurprising that this embodied activity supports students in using “energy” as a theoretical entity in their models;as we will argue, below, the representation also supports students in constructing other theoretical entities.Contribution and focusOur contribution is, first, recognition that defining phenomena to be modeled, and then constructing the entitiesthat populate those models, represent a nontrivial part of scientific modeling. We also argue that employing anexplicit embodiment activity when modeling phenomena can support students in developing theoretical entitiesto populate their model, thus supporting mechanistic reasoning. Our approach is to focus on two settings inwhich groups of learners are engaged in an embodied modeling activity; in each, their activities promote thedevelopment of theoretical objects in a mechanistic model. In the first example in our poster, we demonstratehow this embodied activity supports students in developing a mechanistic model of energy itself. In the lattertwo examples, we show how using an embodied activity to model physical phenomena leads to the constructionof novel theoretical entities in the model (e.g. "regulation," "input," and "output"). These cases illustrate twoways in which the embodiment in ET supports the development of theoretical entities.ReferencesDaane, A. R., Wells, L., & Scherr, R. E. (2014). Energy theater. The Physics Teacher, 52(5), 291-294.Halliday, M.A.K., & Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. (2004). An introduction to functional grammar. London: Arnold.Hammer, D., & van Zee, E. (2006). Seeing the science in children's thinking: Case studies of student inquiry inphysical science. Heinemann Educational Books.Lakoff, G. (1993). The contemporary theory of metaphor. In Ortony, A. (Eds.,) Metaphor and Thought (2ndedition), Cambridge England; New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press.Russ, R. S., Scherr, R. E., Hammer, D., & Mikeska, J. (2008). Recognizing mechanistic reasoning in studentscientific inquiry: A framework for discourse analysis developed from philosophy of science. ScienceEducation, 92(3), 499-525.Scherr, R. E., Close, H. G., Close, E. W., Flood, V. J., McKagan, S. B., Robertson, A. D., ... & Vokos, S.(2013). Negotiating energy dynamics through embodied action in a materially structuredenvironment. Physical Review Special Topics-Physics Education Research, 9(2), 020105.White, B. Y. (1993). Intermediate causal models: A missing link for successful science education? In R. Glaser(Ed.), Advances in Instructional Psychology, Vol. 4 (pp. 177-252).AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank the SPU Energy Project group, particularly Hunter Close, Rachel Scherr, and StamatisVokos. This work is funded through NSF 1712051.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1680© ISLS