Teachers’ Mediation of Students’ Interactions with Physical andVirtual Scientific Models in BiologyNicole D. Martin, Dana Gnesdilow, and Sadhana Puntambekarndmartin@wisc.edu, gnesdilow@wisc.edu, puntambekar@education.wisc.eduUniversity of Wisconsin – MadisonAbstract: This study explored the mediating role that teachers play in helping students utilizemultiple models as tools for scientific thinking. We analyzed two teachers' discourse as theyfacilitated students' use of virtual and physical models and compared their students'understanding of and engagement with models during a biology unit. We found that oneteacher had significantly more talk than the other about the affordances and constraints ofmodels, and his students more purposefully used the affordances of the models to engage inscientific thinking on their own and seemed to learn more about affordances and constraints ofscientific models than students in the other teacher’s class. Our findings suggest that the waysin which teachers talk about the affordances and constraints of scientific models is importantfor students to understand and utilize them as tools for thinking and building knowledge.IntroductionModels and modeling play a central role in the practice of science, and teaching students to understand and usescientific models is an important goal of science education (Lehrer & Schauble, 2006; National ResearchCouncil, 2012; Windschitl, Thompson, & Braaten, 2008). Scientists use models to represent particular aspectsof phenomena and to generate, test, and revise scientific ideas. In this way, scientists employ models as tools forthinking and building knowledge. Scientific models such as physical representations and lab experiments havebeen pervasive in classrooms, and other types of models such as virtual simulations are becoming increasinglyprevalent. However, modeling is a complex practice, and the widespread presence of models in scienceclassrooms does not mean that students know how to use them as tools for scientific thinking. Research hassuggested that students often do not understand the practice of modeling in science, and teachers need to supportstudents in learning this practice (Schwarz et al., 2009; Treagust, Chittleborough, & Mamiala, 2002).From a sociocultural perspective, learning is mediated by interactions with cognitive tools and culturalresources (Vygotsky 1978, Wertsch 1991). Scientific models are cognitive tools that mediate thinking and haveparticular norms and practices that guide their use. Tools contain the intelligence of the maker (Pea, 1993), andby using a tool, it is possible to capitalize on and benefit from the distributed intelligence embedded in the useof the tool. Thus, tools can support thinking and reasoning in ways that may not be possible without the aid ofthe tool (Pea, 1993). Additionally, tools are designed to have particular affordances and constraints thatinfluence their use. While the affordances of a tool are features intended to draw the user’s attention and guideeffective use, such affordances are not always obvious to the user (Norman, 1988). Thus, the tool may not beused in ways that fully benefit the user. Further, being able to use or learn from a tool also requiresunderstanding the cultural norms around its use (Cole & Engeström, 1993). From this perspective, usingscientific models not only requires understanding the affordances of particular models, but also how thescientific community uses such tools to generate, test, and revise scientific ideas to build knowledge.Teachers can play an important role in mediating students’ engagement with models to successfullyutilize their affordances and realize their potential for supporting students’ learning. As discussed by Cole andEngeström (1993), while tools can mediate students' thinking, the ways in which students interact with and use atool can be further mediated by a teacher. This mediation is often manifested in teachers' discourse as theyinteract with and support students during activity in the classroom. However, prior work suggests that teachersmay not effectively mediate students’ interactions with tools in classrooms (Kozulin, 2003). This may be due toteachers’ beliefs or assumptions that the meaning and affordances embedded in tools are explicit enough forstudents to understand on their own, and thus do not necessitate mediation (Kozulin, 2003), or due to teachersthemselves not understanding the meaning and affordances of tools.Additionally, mediation from a teacher may be increasingly important in environments where differenttypes of models or tools are being employed to help students learn. In science, different types of scientificmodels can provide unique affordances and are often used to provide students with alternative ways toexperience scientific phenomena. For example, virtual models such as simulations afford altering the time andvisual scale of phenomena to allow for fast experimentation about unobservable or slow processes and allowstudents to constrain complex systems (de Jong, Linn, & Zacharia, 2013; Olympiou & Zacharia, 2012). PhysicalICLS 2018 Proceedings280© ISLSrepresentations, on the other hand, can expose students to authentic problems and complex systems about realphenomena, provide concrete qualitative and quantitative observations or measurements, and raise challengesstudents would not face in a virtual experiment (de Jong et al., 2013; Olympiou & Zacharia, 2012). Previousresearch on using models in science has explored students’ learning from conducting experiments with eithervirtual or physical models, as well as participating in different sequences of virtual and physical experiments(e.g., Zacharia & Olympiou, 2011). This work has yielded mixed results about the most beneficial modality andsequencing for learning science content. Rather than focusing on one type of model, using virtual and physicalmodels together offers the potential of capitalizing on the unique affordances of both types of models to supportstudents' learning (Olympiou & Zacharia, 2012). Initial investigations into how students are able to coordinateinformation from virtual and physical models suggest that understanding and utilizing the affordances of thesemodels may be quite challenging for students (Martin, Gnesdilow, & Puntambekar, 2017). Thus, while there isgreat potential for utilizing the unique affordances of both virtual and physical models to support students’learning, these previous findings suggest that this potential will not be reached without proper support andorchestration by the teacher. Despite calls for teaching students via modeling in K-12 science education andresearch showing that students have difficulty using models, little is known about how teachers actually mediatestudents' effective use of models in the science classroom.Given the difficulties students’ face in understanding and coordinating virtual and physical models totake advantage of their unique affordances, we explored the mediating role that two teachers played in helpingstudents to utilize multiple models to learn science. Specifically, we aimed to answer the following two-partquestion: How do teachers mediate students’ interactions with multiple models to help them: a) use models astools for scientific thinking and, b) understand the affordances of different models to learn science? To explorethis question, we analyzed two teachers' discourse as they facilitated students' use of virtual and physical modelsand compared their students' understanding of and engagement with models during a biology unit.MethodsParticipants and contextThe participants in this study were two experienced 8th grade science teachers, Mr. Fox and Mr. Smith, and thestudents in each of their science classes (n = 27, n = 21 respectively). The teachers taught at different urbanmiddle schools in the same U.S. Midwestern city. The students at Mr. Fox’s school were 64% white, 18%Hispanic, and 8% black or African American, and 55% were economically disadvantaged. The students at Mr.Smith’s school were 78% white, 10% Hispanic, and 4% black or African American, and 40% wereeconomically disadvantaged. Mr. Fox’s class happened to be designated as a “challenge” class, in whichstudents were often given more open-ended tasks. Mr. Smith’s school did not offer challenge classes, thus hisclass consisted of students with a range of abilities including students who could have succeeded in a challengeclass. This was a design-based research study in which we did not purposefully select these two classes forcomparison a priori, but rather we selected these teachers because we had a complete corpus of teacher andstudents data to pursue our research question.This study was a part of a larger project aimed at helping students learn biology by engaging them insolving 21st century real-world bio-engineering problems. Both teachers taught the same 10-12 week designbased, biology curriculum that incorporated the use of both virtual and physical models. The curriculumchallenged students to design a compost that would break down quickly and contain a lot of nutrients, to reducethe amount of waste going into landfills. Students learned key concepts related to energy transformation andmatter cycling in ecosystems to solve their challenge. To study decomposition and collect data to justify theircompost designs, students worked in small groups of three to four to build, monitor, and refine a physical bioreactor during the unit. Given that decomposition takes several weeks, towards the middle of the unit studentsalso used a virtual compost simulation to investigate how abiotic factors influence decomposers’ ability to breakdown matter. In their small groups, students conducted three sequential virtual compost experiments related tothe carbon to nitrogen ratio, amount of moisture, and particle size of the materials in compost. Based on theirfindings from the virtual experiments, students were asked to revisit their physical bio-reactors and use thescience ideas and data from the virtual experiments to make decisions and justify a change to increasedecomposition in their physical bio-reactors. Teachers facilitated small-group and whole-class discussions asstudents engaged in these activities throughout the unit.Data sources and analysisWe used three data sources: i) classroom videos of teachers’ interactions with their students as they conductedall three virtual experiments, ii) audio-recorded student conversations during the last virtual experiment, and iii)ICLS 2018 Proceedings281© ISLSstudents’ pre and post scores on an open-ended question about the affordances and constraints of physical andvirtual models in science, taken at the start and end of the unit.We examined the classroom videos of both teachers to investigate each teacher’s discourse as theymediated students' work with the virtual compost simulations and physical compost bio-reactors. We selectedparticular lessons in which students used the virtual simulations to investigate factors affecting decomposition intheir physical bio-reactors, because these lessons captured opportunities for students to interact with both theirphysical and virtual compost models and allowed us to investigate how teachers mediated students’ thinking anduse of multiple models to learn science. We used a mixed-methods approach to quantify the qualitativediscourse data present in the videos (Chi, 1997). The videos were transcribed and teachers’ turns of talk weredeductively and inductively coded to capture how teachers supported students' interactions with the virtual andphysical models. Based on previous literature suggesting that students likely need support to learn about thenature of models (Schwarz et al., 2009), the affordances and constraints of models (Kouzlin, 2003; Norman,1988), and how to coordinate multiple scientific models (Martin et al., 2017), we were particularly interested inhow teachers discussed the general nature of models, the affordances and constraints of virtual and physicalmodels in this context, and connections between the models. Additionally, we were interested in how teachersused the virtual and physical models to support students’ learning of science content and practices. This resultedin the five mediation codes described in Table 1. The nature of models code was adapted from our prior work onteachers’ discourse related to using models (Gnesdilow, Smith, & Puntambekar, 2010), while the codes foraffordance and/or constraint of virtual or physical models, connecting models, science content, and sciencepractices were developed to specifically capture important discourse about the virtual and physical models inthe context of this study. Some talk was coded as not applicable, which often consisted of managing proceduraland social interactions. Turns of talk could receive multiple codes if multiple forms of mediation discourse werepresent. Ten percent of the teachers’ turns of talk were coded by the first and second author and an 84%agreement was achieved. The remaining discourse was coded by the second author. We then calculated theproportion of the different types of talk that both teachers engaged in as they mediated students’ use of themodels. These proportions accounted for the different amounts of overall teacher talk during all the virtualexperiments, so the proportion of each type of talk could be compared between teachers. To do this, we dividedthe frequencies for each type of mediation discourse from Mr. Fox and Mr. Smith by the total number of turnsof talk for that teacher. We then conducted a Chi-squared test of homogeneity of proportions to compare theprevalence of talk related to mediating students’ use of the virtual and physical models between teachers.Table 1: Coding scheme for teachers’ discourse to mediate students’ interactions with modelsCodeNature ofModelsAffordanceand/orConstraintsof Virtual orPhysicalModelsConnectingModelsDescriptionTalk referring to scientists’ construction and useof models, roles of models in science, models asabstractions, model evaluationExplicit or implicit talk about usefulness of virtualmodel to: quickly run multiple trials; constrainthe complex system by isolating variable; inputcurrent physical conditions into the simulation toquickly run trials to make predictionsExplicit or implicit talk about usefulness ofphysical model to: understand, explore messinessof complex system in real world; raisechallenges; provide concrete observations;quantitative & qualitative measurementsExplicit or implicit talk about how to use bothvirtual and physical models in tandem tosynthesize ideas and learn science. Helpingstudents to see connections between informationprovided by both models, or to use informationprovided by one model to guide or justifyusage of other model.ICLS 2018 Proceedings282Example"What’s a model? Your bio-reactors right? Alright,and your bio-reactors are a model for what? What arethey trying to model for you, what are they trying toshow you?"“…What’s the advantage of using a computersimulation of a compost pile, or of a compost? …Wecan control it better because we don’t have variablesoutside of what we’re just looking at. Ok? So, that’swhat these, uh, virtual experiments are meant to do.”“You gotta think about this and doing it on a largescale, too. Remember the challenge. The challenge is:compost, doing this at our school, with, fast, and a lotof nutrients. Right? Well, what would happen to acompost pile at school? With regards to, addinggreens or browns?”“After you run your particle size (virtual experiment)then you as a group need to talk about what changesyou think you could make or what problems you have(in bio-reactor) ....What problems do you have, whatcould you do about it...what’s your evidence, and thenwhat one do you think is going to improve”“And then we can use that information, that you findin the (virtual) experiment, and apply it to what© ISLSScienceContentUsing results or information from one or bothmodels to help students understand scienceconceptsSciencePracticesUsing one or both models to scaffold students’ability to conduct fair tests, collect accurate data,analyze, and draw conclusionsyou’ve got going on in your bottles. Ok?”“What do the bacteria in your decompo- the bacteriathat are acting as decomposers, what are they doinginside your compost? What are they doing with thecarbon?”“You’re gonna start looking at these variables that wecan control and, and, manipulate. If we’re controllingone, say the carbon to nitrogen ratio. Should we,change, where we’re placing the bioreactor?”To investigate how students’ discussions around the virtual and physical models may have related tothe mediation provided by the teachers, we also analyzed conversations from all the small groups of studentsthat we had audio-recorded during the unit (n=3 for Mr. Fox, and n=3 for Mr. Smith). These groups were chosenfor audio-recording by each teacher at the beginning of the unit as representative, average-performing groups inthe class. We selected students’ conversations from the third virtual experiment, in which students investigatedhow the size of particles in compost affected the rate of decomposition. We chose this last experiment as anoutcome measure to examine how students used the virtual and physical models as tools for their inquiry, sincethey had received mediation from their teacher during the prior two experiments. When examining students’discourse during the experiment, we looked to identify any patterns or themes in the types of interactions thatstudents engaged in as they used the models to better understand if there were any key differences in the waysthat the students in each teacher’s class used the virtual and physical models as tools for scientific thinking.Additionally, we used students’ pre and post scores on an open-ended question about the affordancesand constraints of physical and virtual models in science. The question presented students with a scenario inwhich one student conducted an experiment using a virtual computer simulation and another student conductedthe same experiment using physical models. Students were then asked to describe reasons why the two studentsin the scenario might have gotten different results from their experiments. Students received a score of 0 forresponses that were incorrect or lacked any mention of an affordance of either type of model, a score of 1 forresponses that discussed one affordance that could contribute to different results, and a score of 2 for responsesthat discussed two or more affordances. We used a non-parametric analysis of covariance (Young & Bowman,1995) to compare students’ post-test scores based on the teacher they had, with students’ pre-test scores as thecovariate. This test was chosen because our dependent variable (post score) was categorical and our sample sizewas small, and thus the data were non-normal.ResultsTeachers’ mediation of students’ interactions with modelsTo better understand how the teachers mediated students’ interactions with multiple models to promote theutilization of the affordances of different models to learn science, we conducted a Chi-squared test ofhomogeneity of proportions to compare differences in teachers' talk within our 5 coding categories.0.6**Proportion of Talk0.50.4Mr. FoxMr. Smith0.30.2*0.10Nature of ModelsAffordance /ConnectingScience Content Science PracticesConstraintModelsTeachers' Mediation DiscourseFigure 1. Proportion of teacher talk to mediate students’ interactions with virtual and physical models.* Result significant at p < .05. ** Result significant at p < .001.As seen in Figure 1, our results showed that Mr. Fox had a significantly higher proportion of talk about theaffordances and constraints of models (0.05) than Mr. Smith (0.03) (p < .05). Additionally, Mr. Smith had asignificantly higher proportion of talk about learning science content (0.52) than Mr. Fox (0.29) (p < .001).ICLS 2018 Proceedings283© ISLSHowever, there were no significant differences in the proportions of talk that Mr. Fox and Mr. Smith engaged inabout science practices (0.17 & 0.15, respectively), making connections between the models (0.08 & 0.07,respectively), and the nature of models in general (0.005 & 0.004, respectively).Students’ use and understanding of modelsExamination of groups' discourseWe examined groups’ conversations (n=3 groups for Mr. Fox, n= 3 groups for Mr. Smith) to understand howstudents’ discussions about and interactions with the virtual and physical models may have been influenced bythe mediation they received from their teacher. By examining students' discourse while they conducted theirparticle size simulation experiment, we identified several interaction patterns that revealed key differences inhow students used models in Mr. Fox’s and Mr. Smith’s classroom. A major theme we identified was that Mr.Fox’s students showed several instances of purposefully using the affordances of the models to engage inscientific thinking, while Mr. Smith’s students rarely took advantage of these affordances and, instead, focusedon procedural aspects of completing the experiment and getting a “good result.” Below, we provide a generaloverview of the groups’ discussions in each teacher’s class and an excerpt from one group in each teacher’sclass to clearly illustrate the differences in the types of discussions that groups had depending on their teacher.During the particle-size virtual experiment, all three groups of students we audio-recorded in Mr. Fox’sclass had conversations about inputting conditions from their physical model into the virtual simulation to makeconnections between the two models, and they utilized the affordances of the virtual model to explore sciencecontent. For example, in the excerpt below, one group used the visualizations presented in the virtual simulationto test their ideas about how air circulation might affect the rate of decomposition in compost. To do this, theytook advantage of the affordance of quickly comparing the visualizations in the model of both smaller and largerparticle sizes to analyze, make inferences, and explain how the amount of space between particles might affectair circulation in compost. They then used this information to decide on an optimal particle size of 50mm fortheir physical bioreactor.Student 1: Did they talk about the air circulation in this simulation?Student 2: Um, we talked about it the other day. I don’t think it talked about it in the simulation. But Imean, here, make it really small. Like make the particle size really small. Make it 5. And then putsome in. And then make it 100.Student 1: What?Student 2: Now make it 100.Student 1: Right now?Student 2: Yeah.Student 1: You can’t.Student 2: Yeah you can.Student 1: It just deletes. (Note: the simulation only allowed students to use one size particle per trial,deleting previous particles if a student tried to add multiple sizes to the virtual compost)Student 2: Oh. Well you saw how much was in there for 5?Student 1: Yeah.Student 2: And then, you know, you go to 100…Student 1: And there’s more pockets, there’s more space.Student 2: Exactly. So there’d be better air circulation the bigger the particle size.Student 1: But if it’s too big there’s too much air and not enough moisture.Student 2: Exactly. So you’d have it, like 50.Student 1: 50 would be perfect. ‘Cause it’s in between 15 and 75.This excerpt exemplifies how Mr. Fox’s students used the virtual simulation not only to complete theirexperiment, but to actually capitalize on the visualizations afforded by the simulation to use this model as a toolfor scientific thinking. Rather than just focusing on the size of the particles, students discussed the concept of aircirculation and its relationship to the rate of decomposition. Further, they chose to compare the amount of spacecreated between the smallest and largest particle sizes allowed by the simulation, instead of choosing randomparticle sizes, to optimize the visualization to test their ideas. Understanding the relevance of air circulation inICLS 2018 Proceedings284© ISLSthe simulation was important for being able to think about air as an abiotic factor that influenced decompositionin their physical compost bio-reactor. The students used the simulation as a tool to think through these ideas.In contrast, the groups we examined in Mr. Smith’s class predominately capitalized on the efficiency ofthe virtual simulation to quickly conduct trials and find the particle size range that was ideal for decompositionso they could answer the questions at the end of the lab. Overall, the students seemed to use the virtualsimulation as a game to find an ideal result, rather than as a tool to help them think more deeply about thescience content or test their science ideas. For instance, in the excerpt below from one group, Student 1described how he was “messing around” with the simulation, happened to get a “good result,” and was excitedthat he had “won.” When Mr. Smith interacted with this group shortly after, it was clear that the students’ maingoal was to find the upper and lower bounds of the ideal particle size range, without using the affordances of thevirtual model to think about what was important about particle size from a scientific perspective.Student 1: Okay. I just gotta, I’m just messing around this first time okay?Student 2: Whoa.Student 1: I actually did good. I did good. I did good. I won. I just put it to a random size and shook it all inthere andStudent 2: It was at like 74. Yeah, see 74. That’s our first simulation.Student 3: Set it there.Student 1: I didn’t even try, how did I, like what? Particle size 74…Rate of decomposition fast.Temperature, ideal. Odor, normal…What is the result? It’s a good result.…Mr. Smith: So what are you guys thinking? What have you guys found?Student 1: Um the smallest is way too slow to decompose.Mr. Smith: And what was the smallest?Student 3: 5mm, right? Millimeters that’s the double m?Mr. Smith: Millimeter. Yeah. So you guys started with, what is that?Student 1: 74.Mr. Smith: 74 is where you started?Student 1: Yeah. So then 50 now it goes backMr. Smith: So you guys are all over. So you guys were just trying to hit the upper and lower immediately?Student 2: Yeah.Student 1: Yeah I was messing around the first time and then it actually worked.This excerpt is one of many that could have been used to demonstrated that students in Mr. Smith's classcommonly used the simulation in a trial-and-error fashion, rather than thoughtfully identifying parameters to testtheir ideas in a scientific way. Further, the students in this group and the other groups in Mr. Smith's class nevertalked about why different particle sizes influenced the rate of decomposition. For example, they never used thesimulation to go beyond finding the "right" answer and to discuss the cause-and-effect relationships betweenparticle size and aerobic versus anaerobic conditions or how larger particles have less surface area fordecomposers to break down. The simulation gave students comments, questions, and visualizations to help themthink more deeply about factors that influence decomposition, but they did not utilize these affordances.Examination of students' pre - post performance on open-ended question about affordances andconstraints of modelsTo further examine if there were differences between Mr. Fox's and Mr. Smith's students' understanding of theaffordances and constraints of virtual and physical models, we compared students’ pre and post responses to anopen-ended question about the affordances and constraints of virtual and physical models. We used a nonparametric analysis of covariance (Young & Bowman, 1995) due to our small sample size. When using the prescores as a covariate, we found that Mr. Fox's students' post scores were significantly higher than Mr. Smith'sstudents' scores (p < .01). This showed that Mr. Fox's students learned more about the affordances andconstraints of virtual and physical models than Mr. Smith’s students.DiscussionResearch suggests that the use of tools can be further mediated by a teacher to support students' learning (Cole& Engeström, 1993). Scientific models are tools that help students engage in the practices of science. Therefore,ICLS 2018 Proceedings285© ISLSthe ways in which teachers talk about the affordances and constraints of scientific models is important forstudents to understand and utilize them as tools for thinking and building knowledge. Our findings supportedthis idea and provided evidence that the type of mediation students received from their teacher may haveinfluenced their understanding of and engagement with models. Mr. Fox engaged in a greater proportion of talkabout the affordances and constraints of models than Mr. Smith, and Mr. Fox’s students utilized the affordancesof the virtual simulation more purposefully and in intended ways to think and reason about science content.Further, Mr. Fox’s students seemed to learn more during the unit about the affordances and constraints ofmodels than Mr. Smith’s students, as indicated by better performance on an open-ended question about theaffordances and constraints of models. This suggests that teachers' mediation to help students understand theaffordances and constraints of models may have been important to help students understand how to use themodels as tools for scientific thinking. Given that the affordances of tools are not always obvious to the user(Norman, 1988) and that explicit mediation may be needed (Kozulin, 2003), differences in the teachers’discussion about affordances may have differentially helped students see and understand how to take advantageof the intelligence built into the models. This offers a more nuanced understanding of prior findings thatteachers’ discourse can play an important role in mediating students’ interactions with models to help themmeaningfully use the affordances of models in science (Martin et al., 2017).Overall, both teachers discussed science content and practices more than models, which is consistentwith prior research (Gnesdilow et al., 2010) and the suggestion that teachers may not explicitly support studentsto understand the meaning and affordances embedded in tools (Kozulin, 2003). However, while the teachers’proportion of explicit talk about the affordances and constraints of models was low in comparison to their talkabout science content and practices, we found that even the small proportion of talk by Mr. Fox about theaffordances and constrains of models may have had a big impact on his students’ use of and learning aboutthem. Thus, it may be that minimal, but purposeful and explicit, discussion about the affordances andconstraints of models by a teacher can have important benefits for students to understand the complex process ofscientific modeling. A productive avenue for future work could be to further investigate the utility of workingwith teachers on conducting such discussions with their students, or designing prompts about affordances andconstrains of models within curricula and technologies such as the virtual simulation used in this study.Another significant difference in the types of mediation that the teachers provided their students wasthat Mr. Smith engaged in more discourse focused on science content. It is not clear whether Mr. Smith’sdiscourse contributed to or was a result of his students’ use of the models. For instance, was it the case that Mr.Smith's students did not take advantage of the models as tools for thinking, as Mr. Fox's students did, becauseMr. Smith did not talk about the affordances and constraints enough? Or, was it the case that Mr. Smith spentmost of his time discussing science content to redirect students’ attention from procedural aspects of the virtualsimulation to get them to think more deeply about the underlying science? Asking students questions related toscience content may have been productive to engage students in scientific thinking in the moment while theteacher was present, but perhaps this type of mediation was not sufficient for supporting students to use themodels to engage in scientific thinking when they were on their own. Thus, while Mr. Smith engaged in somedeep conversations about science content with his students, our results suggest that this type of mediation maynot be sufficient to help students understand and utilize models as scientific tools. As suggested by others,balancing support for science content with science practice, the practice of using models in this case, seemscrucial for student learning (e.g., Lehrer & Schauble, 2006; Windschitl et al., 2008).While Mr. Fox rarely discussed the nature of models overall, his talk about the affordances andconstraints of the models seemed to help his students use them in ways that were intended. However, we do notknow if this understanding would transfer to students’ use of other models or other contexts in the future. Sincetool use is situated and context dependent (Kozulin, 2003; Pea, 1993), it will be important to further investigatewhat forms of teacher mediation are needed for students to be able to do this. For instance, we still do not knowthe extent to which explicit discourse about the general nature of models might further help students use avariety of scientific models effectively, since the teachers engaged in little of this type of mediation. Futureresearch with more teachers in different contexts will be important in exploring these questions. Additionally,the fact the Mr. Fox’s class was a “challenge” class at his school with students capable of engaging in moreopen-ended activities may have contributed to his students needing less mediation than Mr. Smith’s students.Higher ability learners might be able to better take up mediation provided by a teacher or simply be able tobetter use the affordances of multiple tools. Future research could further investigate how teachers’ mediationmight affect students of different abilities to use multiple models for scientific thinking.Even though scientific models are pervasive in K-12 science classrooms, students often have difficultyusing scientific models as tools for thinking and building knowledge without the help of a teacher (Schwarz etal., 2009). As multiple models are employed in future science classrooms, helping students to capitalize on theICLS 2018 Proceedings286© ISLSunique affordances of virtual and physical models will be essential to support their learning. It is important thatstudents understand how to use these types of models together as tools for scientific thinking and for teachers toknow how to support this learning. It is well documented that students struggle to understand and utilizescientific models (Schwarz et al., 2009; Treagust et al., 2002) to learn. Yet, little research has investigated howstudents use both virtual and physical models in an integrated way to learn science (Olympiou & Zacharia,2012), and even less research has investigated how teachers can mediate students' interactions with these modelsto support students’ scientific modeling practices. Our paper begins to address this gap and highlights theimportant role of teachers’ discussions about the affordances and constraints of multiple models in helpingstudents to understand and use models as tools for scientific thinking.ReferencesCole, M., & Engeström, Y. (1993). A cultural-historical approach to distributed cognition. In Gavriel Salomon(Ed.), Distributed Cognitions: Psychological and Educational Considerations (pp. 1–46). CambridgeUniversity Press.de Jong, T., Linn, M. C., & Zacharia, Z. C. (2013). Physical and virtual laboratories in science and engineeringeducation. Science, 340(6130), 305–8.Gnesdilow, D., Smith, G.W., & Puntambekar, S., (2010). An analysis of science teachers’ classroom discourserelating to the use of models and simulations in physics. In Z. C. Zacharia, M. P. Constantinou, & M.Papaevripidou (Eds.), Application of New Technologies in Science Education: Proceedings of theInternational Conference of Computer Based Learning in Science, (pp. 141-152). Warsaw, Poland:OEIiZK.Kozulin, (2003). Psychological tools and mediated learning. In A. Kozulin, B. Gindis, V. Ageyev, & S. Miller(Eds.), Vygotsky’s Educational Theory in Cultural Context, (pp. 15-38). Cambridge University Press.Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2006). Cultivating Model-Based Reasoning in Science Education. In R. K. Sawyer(Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 371-387). New York: CambridgeUniversity Press.Martin, N. D., Gnesdilow, D., Puntambekar, S. (2017). Integrating physical and virtual models in biology: Astudy of students’ reasoning while solving a design challenge. In Smith, B. K., Borge, M., Mercier, E.,and Lim, K. Y. (Eds.). (2017). Making a Difference: Prioritizing Equity and Access in CSCL, 12thInternational Conference on CSCL 2017, Volume 1 (pp. 327-334). Philadelphia, PA: InternationalSociety of the Learning Sciences.National Research Council. (2012). A Framework for K-12 science education: practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.Norman, D. (1988). The psychology of everyday things. New York: Basic Books.Olympiou, G., & Zacharia, Z. C. (2012). Blending physical and virtual manipulatives: An effort to improvestudents’ conceptual understanding through science laboratory experimentation. Science Education,96(1), 21–47.Pea, R. D. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In Gavriel Salomon(Ed.), Distributed Cognitions: Psychological and Educational Considerations, (pp. 47-87). CambridgeUniversity Press.Schwarz, C. V., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Kenyon, L., Acher, A., Fortus, D., … Krajcik, J. (2009). Developinga learning progression for scientific modeling: Making scientific modeling accessible and meaningfulfor learners. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(6), 632–654.Treagust, D. F., Chittleborough, G., & Mamiala, T. L. (2002). Students’ understanding of the role of scientificmodels in learning science. International Journal of Science Education, 24(4), 357- 368.Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Wertsch, J.V. (1991). Voices of the Mind: A Sociocultural Approach to Mediated Action. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Windschitl, M., Thompson, J., & Braaten, M. (2008). Beyond the scientific method: Model-based inquiry as anew paradigm of preference for school science investigations. Science Education, 92(5), 941-967.Zacharia, Z. C., & Olympiou, G. (2011). Physical versus virtual manipulative experimentation in physicslearning. Learning and Instruction, 21(3), 317-331.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the teachers and students who participated in this study. This research reported in this study wassupported by a DRK-12 grant from the National Science Foundation to the last author.ICLS 2018 Proceedings287© ISLS