Advancing Learning Visualizations: Situated Action Networks asScalable Representations of Learning in Social SettingsAlejandro Andrade, Indiana University, laandrad@indiana.eduRafi Santo, Indiana University, rsanto@indiana.eduAbstract: We propose a distinctive method, Situated Action Networks (SANs), rooted in sociocultural theories of learning that affords visualization and analysis of learning in a way that istheoretically robust yet scalable to large data sets. While visualization is increasingly looked toas a key means of understanding learning, there are few tools at learning scientists’ disposal thatare simultaneously scalable yet also aligned with sociocultural perspectives. Situated ActionNetworks attempt to address this by appropriating techniques from social network analysiswhile aligning them with Cultural Historical Activity Theory. They accomplish this by (1)elevating learning activities to the forefront of learning visualizations, allowing for richqualitative analyses of learning and (2) creating theoretically aligned indices that affordquantitative analyses within and across learning environments. Using data on collaborativelearning dynamics between informal learning organizations as they engage in joint projects, weshow the affordances of this method for understanding learning.Keywords: learning visualization, Cultural-Historical Activity Theory, Social Network Analysis,Situated-Action Networks, sociocultural learning theory, sociocultural learning methodologiesIntroductionAnalysis and visualization of large-scale learning data is an increasingly viable and powerful means ofunderstanding the dynamics and environments that support learning activity (Siemens & Baker, 2012). In thispaper we propose and show the affordances of a distinctive method, Situated Action Networks (SANs) that canbe applied to these ends in a way that is aligned with sociocultural theories of learning. We aim to fill a key gap—many learning visualization techniques that operate at scale are not aligned with sociocultural learningperspectives, and those currently used by sociocultural learning theories cannot operate at scale and havelimitations even in their affordances when it comes to qualitative analyses.SAN appropriates methods from Social Network Analysis (Marin, Wellman, Scott, & Carrington, 2011)and retrofits them in a way that aligns with and solves a number of analytic challenges (Spinuzzi, 2011; Witte &Haas, 2005) associated with Cultural-Historical Activity Theory (CHAT, Cole, 1996; Engeström, 1987;Vygotsky, 1978). To illustrate this technique, we use data on collaborative learning dynamics between informallearning organizations as they engage in joint projects, and we empirically show the affordances of this methodfor understanding learning. We find that SANs have two key affordances. They (1) elevate learning activities tothe forefront of learning visualizations, allowing for rich qualitative analyses of learning and (2) createtheoretically aligned indices that afford quantitative analyses within and across learning environments.Elevating activity and mediational means within CHAT representationsAs the study of learning has shifted from looking at learning as a phenomenon specifically concerned withindividuals’ minds to a process that is fundamentally rooted in social processes (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989;Lave & Wenger, 1991), researchers have turned to sociocultural theories of knowledge and learning. CHAT(Cole, 1996; Engeström, 1987; Vygotsky, 1978) provides a sound theoretical framework to ground theinterpretation of small-group collaborative learning situations, as well as an expansive lens towards largertransformations of social practices. A central tenet in CHAT is its focus on mediation and object-directed activity.Mediated activity has been conceptualized as a triangle representing a higher-level/cultural path between thesubject—i.e., the collective or individual participant—and the object—i.e., the intended goal or motive of theactivity. CHAT triangles have been useful in that they have provided a theoretically robust framework that allowsrich analyses of complex socio-cultural contexts while, at the same time, provide a common grammar for manysociocultural learning theorists.However, various researchers (Spinuzzi, 2011; Witte & Haas, 2005) have questioned its methodologicalutility. For if the object of an activity is not empirically bounded, then it runs away, merging itself with otheractivity systems or as part of larger activity systems (Spinuzzi, 2011; Witte & Haas, 2005). In a sense, learningactivity is invisible as it is everywhere and nowhere. Further, the data is not scalable as it does not afford an easyICLS 2016 Proceedings434© ISLSway for comparisons. To overcome this limitation, various alternative approaches have been proposed (forinstance see Spinuzzi, 2011), but in this paper we align our own with Witte’s (2005) proposal to focus onmediational means as the primary methodological tool to leverage our understanding of learning. We can thinkof two reasons for doing this. First, we want to observe and study mediational means to compare and contrastacross activity systems or the change of one activity system over time. Second, the very nature of a human motivecannot be observed directly, but has to be inferred from the participants’ actions and/or from intersubjectiveaccounts. Therefore, we believe a promising approach to visualize learning should start by identifying theconcrete, observable mediational means, and then test the hypotheses about the possible motives/subjective goalsthat underlie that activity. By focusing on the mediational means at the outset, without pre-defining an assumptionabout the relationship between mediational means and goals, we can more accurately model the complexity ofactivity systems in situ.Our Situated Action Networks (SAN) approach (Andrade, 2015) tries to strengthen this socioculturaltradition by drawing on Social Network Analysis and retrofitting it to make it more theoretically aligned withCHAT. Social Network Analysis is useful for creating visualizations and quantitative descriptors of socialstructures. Although other approaches have either used or adapted social network analysis to analyze learners’data (see i.e., Oshima, Oshima, & Matsuzawa, 2012; Shaffer et al., 2009; Suthers, 2011), SAN provides an explicitaccount of how to integrate social network measures and reframe them to be meaningful within a CHATframework. In a previous paper, Andrade (2015) introduced the approach and some of the technical details usingthe example of a pilot apprentice learning how to land an airplane in a computer simulation. Briefly, SAN isintended as a functional model that takes action as the unit of analysis. When action is the unit of analysis,participants and tools (or as we refer here, mediational means) are placed in the model at the same level, that is,as nodes in the graph. The actions represent edges (or links) between one actor node and one mediational meannode. SAN models the activity system by representing the functional link between the social structure and themediational means. Goals and motives are then hypothesized from the observed actions. SAN aims to take bestof both worlds—rich and theoretically rigorous representations of learning on the one hand and scalabletechniques for representation and analysis on the other. In doing so, it maintains the ability to look qualitativelyat individual or small numbers of representations, in combination with additional qualitative data of the contextin question, facilitating rich analyses of learning activity. But it also adds the ability to quantitatively analyze,through use of indices, across multiple representations in ways that allow for powerful pattern analyses.As our early work focused on short timescales and micro-analysis (see Andrade, 2015), this paper focuseson application of the technique to longer timescales and meso-level analyses with data from informal learningorganizations, which illustrates how this method is flexible and scalable. First, we outline the methods.MethodsAs this paper is primarily methodological in nature, we outline the process we went through as we developed theSAN technique, including the rules used to visualize activity and the attempts at creating theoretically meaningfulindices that can be used for quantitative analysis. Our technique was one of methodological exploration; we tookearly experiments conducted by the first author to develop SANs (Andrade, 2015) and actively built on them usinga larger data set. We engaged in the following activities as part of that process, each of which we detail in depthwithin the findings: (1) experimented with a variety of representational forms to see what each afforded in termsof analysis, (2) conducted pilot qualitative analyses on various SANs, (3) brainstormed various quantitativeindices that we saw as theoretically aligned with CHAT and (4) conducted interpretation and analysis based onthe application of indices to empirical data.The data we used comes from Hive Research Lab (Santo, Peppler, Ching, & Hoadley, 2015), where weanalyzed 94 collaborative project proposals produced by out of school learning organizations, members of theHive NYC Learning Network (hivenyc.org), focusing on developing educational initiatives that align withConnected Learning approaches (Ito et al., 2013). Supplementary qualitative data included 20 one hour interviewswith out of school educators discussing their collaborative work. The proposals were submitted in responserequests for proposals by the Hive Digital Media and Learning Fund, a collaborative donor fund, over the courseof a four year period, 2012-2015. The projects were always collaborative, with at least two organizations playingroles within a project.As we will share in more detail in the findings section, the project proposals and interviews were firstanalyzed in order to develop a coding scheme of the mediational means these organizations used within projectsin order to achieve project goals. One researcher coded the full corpus of proposals while a second coded 30%.The researchers discussed disagreements, which helped further refine the coding scheme. Although a secondround of discussions to find interrater agreement is still under way, we are confident in the face validity of thecoding scheme as we performed member checking and included organization member’s feedback. The codedICLS 2016 Proceedings435© ISLSproposals formed the basis for the generation of SANs which were then subjected to further analysis detailedbelow.Constructing situated action network visualizationsWe delineate a series of steps involved in creating a SAN. First, tally the occurrence of actions, that is, the use ofmediational means by actors. In practice, this means tallying up who is doing what action. For instance, wetallied up which organizations were designing the educational initiative and which were evaluating it (see table1). Second, bound the activity system. This sometimes is easy, as is our case here because the project submissionsdefined which organizations were involved in what. Sometimes this requires a little more work, as the object orother elements in the system change. Sometimes, when studying how the system transforms through time, theanalyst has to meaningfully decide boundaries. For instance, in previous work when we studied the way anapprentice learned how to land a plane, each attempt was regarded as its own SAN (Andrade, 2015). Third,preprocess the raw data into an appropriate format. This procedural step transforms the raw data frame into asquare symmetric matrix in which rows and columns are actors and mediational means, and the entries to thematrix are tallies of the links between actors and means (see Figure 1.a). This matrix looks very much like aregular adjacency matrix, but it is a very sparse matrix with many zeros (on the diagonal, and between actor-actorand means-means entries). Fourth, use a computational package to visualize the graph (see Figure 1.b). We useigraph in R for this. Some additional procedural decisions are involved here. First, different node shapes candifferentiate between actors and means (e.g., rectangles and circles). Colors can differentiate types of mediationalmeans (e.g., community or design oriented) or kinds of actors (e.g., lead or non-lead). Edges can have differentwidths according to tallies and/or weights assigned to them. Fifth, try different visualizations to help refine thedisplayed elements and try different configurations so that particular pieces are highlighted, get peer feedback,and revise the visualization.Table 1. Raw Data MatrixOrganizationProject TitleYearDesignEvaluationScience Exploration Center (SEC)Hive Awesomeness201410SciMapping (Sci)Hive Awesomeness201411Figure 1. Left: (a) Adjacency Matrix. Right: (b) Visual Representation.FindingsQualitative affordances of situated action networksIn exploring the methodological affordances of SANs, we will first examine how they can support various formsof qualitative analyses and theory building. We see three specific analytic affordances from a qualitativeperspective that SANs support: (1) prompting the identification of meditational means within a context, (2)identifying new qualitative patterns by looking across SANs, and (3) identifying new qualitative patterns bylooking within SANs. Below, we explore each of these affordances.SAN approach as prompt to identify mediational means within a contextPrior to and in order to create SANs, the method asks a researcher to identify the primary mediationalmeans within the context of investigation. To accomplish this, we first began with an in-depth review of thestudy’s qualitative data. We identified particular resources that organizations used as mediational means toachieve specific goals, means that together supported the project’s broader object(s). For example, in someprojects an organization would utilize design expertise that would shape the curriculum associated with anICLS 2016 Proceedings436© ISLSafterschool program, another organization would utilize its existing networks to recruit educators that wouldparticipate in professional development, and a third might provide the physical space for program. In all, 21mediational means were identified across the 94 project proposals, falling into the broad categories of expertiserelated (leveraging specialized knowledge or competencies), network-related (leveraging access to particularnetworks of either young people or educators) and resource-related (leveraging provision of material orintellectual property). For each of the codes, an associated description and set of examples from the data sourceswas compiled into a coding guide.This process took tacit understandings of the data and formalized them into a consistent list ofmediational means that were then clear to the research team. Following this step, the coded data were then usedto generate SANs. Additionally, through the full application of the codes to the data, the research team gained anadditional ‘felt sense’ of how certain mediational means were used in relation to one another, an understandingthat played a critical role in unearthing further qualitative insights that we detail next.Identifying new qualitative patterns by looking across SANsOnce the full data set was coded and the SANs generated, the research team then sat down and began to lookacross the SANs to make sense of them. During this process, we utilized qualitative understandings gained boththrough our fieldwork as well as the process of generating and applying the mediation means codes to the data.When we say ‘looked’ here, we mean that in a very literal sense—the similarities and differences between SANswere brought into sharp relief through the visual representations with certain structural features clearly standingout. As we looked across the SANs, initially tacit hypotheses about common configurations of mediational meanswere clarified through these empirical representations.Specifically, we looked to see how hypotheses regarding common objects that might be achieved bycertain collaborative configurations might be confirmed, augmented and highlighted through the SANs. Putsimply, we sought to see what kinds of broad goals were trying to be achieved through distinctive forms oforganizational collaboration, and how these might be characterized into typical models. Upon investigation ofthe SANs in relation to these hypotheses, six new categories of objects, with associated collaborative partnershipconfigurations, were identified, each representing different objects and utilization of mediational means. Below,we detail two of these categories. For each, we first describe the nature of the distinctive object, highlight how thevisual features of that SAN assisted the research team in identifying them, and engage in a brief theoreticaltreatment of the SAN.Collaborative design and implementation partnershipsOne of the first configurations immediately identified by the research team was that of collaborative design andimplementation, wherein many or all of the mediational means relating to the creation, development, executionand reflection are shared amongst key actors. The ‘starfish’ visual structure of this kind of configuration wasimmediately evident across a range of the SANs, and mapped immediately onto qualitative understandings of ourteam. In the project presented in Figure 2 below, two organizations, the Reese Music Institute and Rhythm Centralare all co-engaged in their use of mediational means within a project that involves a series of day-long workshopsthat engage youth in digital hip hop music production and remix. See Figure 3 below for the legend.Within the SAN, edges (connecting lines) indicate which actors (circles) are engaged in whichmediational means (hexagons), with thicker lines indicating substantive action and thinner lines indicating lighteraction. Here, the fact that all mediational means nodes are shared by both actors (indicated by edges going fromeach actor to all action nodes) shows a high degree of shared object across actors and mutual involvement intransforming all facets of the activity system at hand—both of the organizations are equally involved in the designprocess, internal training for teaching artists, recruitment of youth, facilitation of the program, etc. The overallstructure of visual parallelism in the representation reflects this shared object and joint involvement intransforming the associated activity system.ICLS 2016 Proceedings437© ISLSFigure 2. Collaborative Design and Implementation Partnership.Figure 3. Legend for Situated Action Network visualizations.Program refinement and spread partnershipAs a contrast to the above where mediational means are largely shared across actors, the second configuration weshare, program refinement and spread partnership, highlights a highly specialized division of labor. Like thefirst example, this configuration was immediately evident through the highly visible clusters of specializedactivity. In this configuration, the lead organization is aiming to circulate a tool and curriculum to new contexts,and collaborating organizations act as sites of adoption. In this example shown in Figure 4, the ScienceExploration Center (SEC) is aiming to refine and spread a program it developed that focused on neighborhoodbased citizen science that uses sensor technologies to have youth engage in environmental investigations andadvocacy. SEC utilizes a number of mediational means relating to supporting other organizations, Children’sBenefit Group and Whitman College, to act as adoption sites. SEC designs curriculum, creates additional materialsto support adoption such as rubrics and educator tip sheets, and then trains the adopting organizations throughprofessional development activities. The adopting organizations similarly have a specialized cluster of activities—providing networks of youth and educators, providing the spaces where the program will be implemented, andengaging in the actual facilitation of the program. Two other organizations, SciMapping and the TeachingCapacity Institute (TCI), each play distinct roles around technology development and formative research andrefinement activities, respectively. These supporting organizations make viable, along with SEC, the process ofmodel circulation to new activity systems associated with adopting organizations.From a CHAT perspective, this configuration is characterized by a highly specialized division of labor,as indicated by the various unconnected clusters. While of course each of the actors is working on the same largerproject and shared object, each is leveraging specific mediational means it has access to that tackle a distinctiveaspect of the work, impacting different parts of the related activity system(s) and indexing different degree ofagency and ownership over the learning process. SciMapping is only working on the technological aspect of theinitiative, while both SEC and TCI are involved in the larger tool of the curricular model in which this technologyis being utilized. TCI plays a role providing feedback loops, through formative research, about how the project isplaying out in new activity systems where it is being adopted, supporting refinement of the tool, but is in atechnical assistance role here that has somewhat less ownership over the object—it is assisting SEC andScimapping with their broader shared object of bringing the program to new contexts.ICLS 2016 Proceedings438© ISLSFigure 4. Program Refinement and Spread Partnership.Each of the configurations shared above, along with others, was identified through a process of drawingon rich qualitative understandings of underlying data in combination with a visual examination across the 94action networks generated. This sense-making led to the identification of new categories that helped us understandwhat kinds of problems these collaborative configurations were solving. From a CHAT perspective, we were ableto understand what kinds of objects this collective of SANs were addressing.Identifying new qualitative patterns by looking within SANsA final qualitative affordance of Situated Action Networks lies in the way they support identification of newqualitative patterns, and associated theoretical implications, by looking closely at a single SAN (as opposed toacross multiple SANs). Close attention to specific SANs yielded consequential findings related to the nature ofactivity systems that spanned multiple organizations within a SAN. Specifically, we found that multiple relatedbut distinct local objects can be at play within an activity system.The example below took the form of an implementation site partnership, a particular configuration ofmediational means noted briefly above. In this instance, the Sync Institute was the central organization, enactingits PhysComp Tinkering program at the Brooklyn Neighborhood Center (BNC) which acted as an implementationsite. The Sync Institute engaged in a wide range of critical mediational means, including curricular design,technology design, program implementation, documentation, evaluation, and others. BNC simply provided itsspace and assisted in recruitment activities. It might be expected that the central learning process involved in sucha collaboration would be centered on the Sync Institute’s advancement of its prototype physical computinglearning tool that it was developing to support beginner level hardware programming, and indeed, in interviewsSync Institute staff members shared that the implementation at BNC was contributing to a larger process ofrefining this invention. But interviews with BNC’s staff revealed that their participation as an implementationsite was actually part of a much larger and ongoing learning process the organization was engaged in and that itplanned to create a maker space. Represented within this single SAN were both Sync Institute’s object of learningin relation to its prototype as well as BNCs object of learning about if and how its young people and staff wouldbe engaged and interested in ‘maker’ learning activities.As the example shows and put most simply, organizations can hold differing, but overlapping, localobjects as they participate within the same SAN. This finding is supported by the reality that it is rare for twoorganizations to come to a collaboration with the same prior knowledge and experience, and rarely are the exactsame mediational means engaged in by two organizations in a collaboration. Looking closely at the SAN withrich qualitative data in hand allowed the research team to uncover and empirically examine this phenomenon ofparallel objects within a SAN, of the unbounded and overlapping nature of activity systems, how an object in onesystem can be a tool in another, and other important nuances. This all points to the need for careful inquiry intothe mediational means as an approach to bounding the activity system so that it can be empirically studied,elaborating on insights by Spinuzzi and Witte that have criticized CHAT methods. Having established multiplequalitative affordances of SANs, we now move to the quantitative affordances of the approach.Quantitative affordances of SANs: Network indices supporting analysis at scalePrevious adaptations—e.g., Epistemic Network Analysis (Shaffer et al., 2009), Knowledge Building DiscourseAnalysis (Oshima et al., 2012), Traces (Suthers, 2011)—have made use of traditional measures to describe thecharacteristics of a network such as centrality, in- and out-degree, or path sizes. We propose new coefficientsICLS 2016 Proceedings439© ISLSbecause traditional SNA descriptors are not appropriate for SAN—in that adjacency matrices are sparse as thereare no connections within the same type of nodes (i.e., actor-actor or mediator-mediator). We propose three kindsof indices that describe different properties of the SAN: (a) global, (b) average egocentric, and (c) individual actoror mediator descriptors. Global indices describe the distribution of actions among participants, and differentiateamong types of contributions by particular actors or mediators. By global descriptors we mean overall networkcomposition measures. Average egocentric descriptors do not capture the distribution of actions among actors,instead they reveal the overall number of actors, means, and actions in the network. On the other hand, anegocentric descriptor is an individual node measure, for instance, the number of other connected nodes or the sumof its edges (for weighted networks). The arithmetic average of an egocentric index describes the whole actionnetwork. In particular, we include two types of average egocentric descriptors. First, we pay attention to theextent mediational means are used across actors, called shareness. We chose this label to indicate that this indexrepresents the average use of mediational means, that is, how much they are shared. Second, we pay attention tothe extent to which actors act on various mediational means, called participation. This label represents the ideathat the more an actor uses mediational means, the greater its participation is in the network. Taking the average,participation produces a general action network descriptor. Individual descriptors acknowledge that not allmediational means affect the course of the activity in the same way. For instance, one may want to distinguishbetween mediational means that have an effect on the activity object and those that affect other system elements,such as the community. Put another way, different mediational means shape the system in different ways, andtherefore individual indices describe different combinations of mediators in the action network. Finally, one canuse individual actor node indices. For instance, egocentric descriptors for the leading organization of the projectprovide valuable information about the way the project is enacted.Table 2 SAN DescriptorsDescriptor TitleTheoretical BasisOperationalizationTotal # of ActorsTotal number of actors in the network# of actor nodesTotal # of MediatorsTotal number of mediators in the network# of mediatorsTotal # of ActionsTotal number of weighted links in the network.# of actions# of ClustersNumber of connected components in the network (as originally intended in SNA). Thisindex can inform whether there is specialization of some actor-mediator relationships.Average SharenessEgocentric index measuring the degree to which a mediator is shared. It rangesbetween 0, for totally individual mediators, to the total number of actor nodes, fortotally shared mediators. Normalized by dividing over the number of actors. A globalmeasure is produced by taking the mean or median.(Number of actions for ithMediator node minus 1) /Total number of ActornodesAverageParticipationEgocentric index measuring how busy an actor is. It ranges between 0, for totally freeactors, to the total number of mediator nodes, for totally proactive actors (i.e., the actorparticipates in all mediators). Normalized by dividing over the number of mediators. Aglobal measure can be produced by taking the average (mean or median).(Number of links for jthActor node minus 1) /Total number of MediatornodesSpecific MediatorLeverageIt weights the number of specific mediational means to provide a proxy for the agencyan actor has on a specific mediator of the activity.∑ [number of jth actoractions * specificmediator weight]Specific ActorDegree% of actor actions upon mediational means in the network# of actor actions / total #of actionsTable 3 shows the results of applying the global and average egocentric descriptors to the two networksdescribed above. It can be seen that these indices capture the greater integration in the Collaborative Design andImplementation Partnership type, where all mediators are acted upon by the actors. It also captures the specializednature of the Program Refinement and Spread Partnership type, where there are three distinct clusters and thereforeless shareness and participation than the first type.Table 3. SAN indices for two network typesNetwork TypeCollaborative Design andImplementation PartnershipProgram Refinement and SpreadPartnershipICLS 2016 ProceedingsActorsMediatorsActionsClustersSharenessParticipation281610.500.885131830.100.20440© ISLSConclusions and implicationsWe introduce a visualization technique to explore sociocultural learning activity that is both scalable andtheoretically rigorous. Previous CHAT representations, such as Engestrom’s triangle, while effective indelineating elements of a given activity, have very limited affordances to show distinctive relations within oracross activity systems (cf. Witte & Hass, 2005; Spinuzzi, 2011). Essentially, they do not allow the researcherto consistently model the relationships between these elements in a way that is tailored to the particular situation.Situated Action Networks, as we have shown, produce robust visualizations of the observable activity systemcomponents—i.e., the actors and the mediational means these actors act upon. Through these visualizations,inferences can be made about the object of the activity (which is not directly observable), and how the mediationalmeans interact with other vertices of the activity system. For instance, some mediational means are directedtowards bounding the object of the activity, whereas others interact with the community within which the activitysystem is embedded. Furthermore, SANs can be described by quantitative indices, which would allow formeaningful scalable comparisons across activity systems or examine longitudinal changes of an activity system.In future work we intend to explore how statistical tools, such as regression and cluster analysis, can help findpatterns across the collaborative projects presented here and the ways these indices relate to other key variablessuch as the size of the organizations involved and the intended learning outcomes.ReferencesAndrade, A. (2015). Using Situated-Action Networks to Visualize Complex Learning. In Oskar Lindwall, PäiviHäkkinen, Timothy Koschmann, Pierre Tchounikine, & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.), Exploring the MaterialConditions of Learning: The Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) Conference (Vol. 1).Gothenburg, Sweden: The International Society of the Learning Sciences.Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. EducationalResearcher, 18(1), 32.Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline: Harvard University Press.Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding. An activity-theoretical approach to developmental research.Helsinki: Orienta-Konsulti Oy.Ito, M., Gutierrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., . . . Watkins, S. C. (2013). Connectedlearning: An agenda for research and design: Digital Media and Learning Research Hub.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation: Cambridge Univ Pr.Marin, A., Wellman, B., Scott, P., & Carrington, P. (2011). Social network analysis: An introduction. Scott J,Carrington PJ, editors. The SAGE Handbook of Social Network Analysis, 11-25.Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Matsuzawa, Y. (2012). Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer: a social networkanalysis application for knowledge building discourse. Educational technology research anddevelopment, 60(5), 903-921. doi:10.1007/s11423-012-9265-2Santo, R., Peppler, K., Ching, D., & Hoadley, C. (2015). Maybe a Maker Space? Organizational Learning aboutMaker Education within a Regional Out-of-School Network. Paper presented at the FabLearn:Conference on Creativity and Fabrication in Education, Stanford, CA.Shaffer, D. W., Hatfield, D., Svarovsky, G. N., Nash, P., Nulty, A., Bagley, E., . . . Mislevy, R. (2009). Epistemicnetwork analysis: A prototype for 21st-century assessment of learning.Siemens, G., & Baker, R. (2012). Learning analytics and educational data mining: towards communication andcollaboration. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on learninganalytics and knowledge.Spinuzzi, C. (2011). Losing by Expanding Corralling the Runaway Object. Journal of Business and TechnicalCommunication, 25(4), 449-486.Suthers, D. D. (2011). Interaction, mediation, and ties: An analytic hierarchy for socio-technical systems. Paperpresented at the Hawaii International Conference on the System Sciences (HICSS-44), HawaiiVygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society (M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner, & E. Souberman, Eds.):Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Witte, S. P., & Haas, C. (2005). Research in activity: An analysis of speed bumps as mediational means. WrittenCommunication, 22(2), 127-165.AcknowledgmentsThis work was made possible through the participation of Hive NYC Learning Network member organizationsand the generous funding of the Hive Digital Media and Learning Fund at the New York Community Trust.ICLS 2016 Proceedings441© ISLS