Internalization of Physics Concepts and Relationships Based onTeacher Modeling of Collaborative PromptsAmanda L. Evenstone, University of Wisconsin – Madison, alevenstone@wisc.eduSadhana Puntambekar, University of Wisconsin – Madison, puntambekar@education.wisc.eduAbstract: As students create shared artifacts, individuals and the social system co-evolvethrough dynamic processes in which individuals and groups shape each other. Aftercollaboration, however, it is not always clear what students internalize from this interaction.Even when students are aware of group-work benefits, effective collaboration does notnecessarily occur spontaneously within the group context. To address this potential issue, theteacher can facilitate collaboration by modeling how to foster elaborative group discussions.In this paper, we evaluate how teacher modeling of collaboration prompts may increase thequantity and quality of concepts that students internalize before, during, and aftercollaboration. We found that students who did not observe modeling increased the quantity ofconnection on their post concept maps. In contrast, students who did receive modelingincreased both the quantity and quality of their connections. This suggests that modeling ofprompts before collaboration can deepen the internalization of concepts.Keywords: shared knowledge, collaboration skills, network analysisIntroductionWhat happens to individual learning after working in a group? Building on Vygotsky’s (1978) idea ofinternalization, social interactions shape individual learning and development, as “interpersonal processes [are]transformed into an intrapersonal one” (p. 57; emphasis in original). We base our study on a socioculturalframework that emphasizes that learning is a dynamic individual and collective practice that highlights thetransformative nature of social interactions (Rogoff, 2008). As people create shared artifacts, both theindividuals and the social system co-evolve through internalization and externalization (Cress, 2013). Theindividual shapes the group’s understanding, and the group shapes each member’s understanding.While learning may be a social process, the degree of internalization depends on both the individuallearner and the social context and interactions of the activity (Smagorinsky, 2012). Internalization, also referredto as appropriation by some researchers (Rogoff, 2008; Grossman, Smagorinsky, & Valencia, 1999), means totransform and take as one’s own. One key factor that might affect the degree of internalization is the nature ofthe collaborative interactions. Research suggests that effective collaboration does not necessarily occurspontaneously within the group context (Barron, 2003). The classroom teacher can facilitate collaboration bymodeling how to interact within groups and foster better group discussions (Mercer, 2000).In this study, we examined how teacher modeling of effective collaboration affected students’understanding and internalization of physics concepts and the relationships between concepts. To examine theextent of internalization of ideas resulting from group discourse, we used concept mapping as a tool to organizeand represent knowledge. Concept maps help connect ideas by describing the relationship between two concepts(Novak & Cañas, 2006). When students are working in a group, they “engage and interact with theirenvironment to transform particular objects of activity to achieve an outcome, which is mediated by cognitiveand physical artifacts” (Hmelo-Silver, Jordan, Liu, & Chernobilsky, 2011, p. 86). Collaboratively constructedconcept maps can be used as an external artifact representing shared knowledge (Cress, 2013; Teasley &Fischer, 2008), and changing conceptual understanding (Roth & Roychoudhury, 1994). Our research questionwas: How does teacher modeling of collaborative learning through prompts for effective collaboration changestudents’ internalization of physics concepts?MethodsStudents in two eighth grade science classrooms taught by the same teacher participated in this study. Studentsworked in groups of three to five, comprising 11 groups for a total of 42 students (22 female, 20 male). Studentsengaged in the CoMPASS design-based curriculum (Puntambekar, Stylianou, & Goldstein, 2007), which is an8-week curriculum about work and energy using simple machines. Students worked in the same groupsthroughout the unit and had opportunities to practice developing individual concept maps.CSCL 2015 Proceedings562© ISLSExperimental design and procedureThis study used a 2 x 3 experimental design to examine the effects of teacher modeling of prompts oninternalizing ideas from a group concept mapping activity. During the study, students in both conditions createdconcept maps before, during, and after collaboration for a total of 93 maps. Students either received modeling ofprompts (6 groups, 27 students) or received no modeling (5 groups, 15 students). In the intervention, studentsreceived a list of four individual and four group prompts to support individual and collaborative thinking duringthe activity. The teacher then read several prompts to the class and explained what the prompt meant in her ownwords. An example individual prompt was “Justify your thinking about why the concepts or relationshipbetween concepts you contribute are important,” and a group level prompt “Ask other group members to justify,give evidence, or support their ideas.” Further, the teacher demonstrated a hypothetical situation, such as “Howcould you help your group if someone says, ‘I think we should start with lever’?” Finally, students practicedenacting these prompts in their small groups.First, students spent 12 minutes creating an individual concept map about the physics ideas they hadlearned up until that point in the unit. Students in the teacher modeling condition received an additional sevenminutes of instruction in how to support individual and collaborative thinking during the group activity time.Then, the teacher gave the students in both conditions identical directions to make their group maps; studentswere given 20 minutes to collaboratively create their map. The teacher instructed all students to think aboutdeep connections between concepts and provided ideas for starting words and linking words. While working intheir groups, students could access resources from previous activities in this unit. At the start of the next classperiod, students had fifteen minutes to create a final individual map. The entire activity took less than one hour.Data sources and analysisIn each of the 93 concept maps, we extracted propositions that consisted of a concept – connection – conceptset. For example, if a student connected two nodes, “levers” and “simple machines,” with a line that had thewords “type of” on top, then the proposition is “levers – type of – simple machine.” To maintain theseconnections, the full proposition was chosen as the unit of analysis. We assigned each proposition two codes: aconcept profile code and a depth of relationship code. Concept profiles scored the presence (1) or absence (0) ofa connection between two concepts. For example, any connection between Friction and Work received a scoreof one. This isolated what concepts were added or left out of maps over time but did not examine the nature ofconnection between them. Concept profile codes were useful in assessing concept quantity and surface changes.To extend beyond simply identifying what concepts students connected in their maps, we used a depthof relationship code to examine changes in the quality of relationships between concepts over time. Connectionsbetween concepts could be assigned a number from zero to four to indicate the depth of relationship betweentwo concepts: absent or incorrect relationships (0), simple relationships (1), equations and definitions (2), simpledirectional relationships (3), and relationships that elaborate and specify the conditions for the relationship (4).We analyzed concepts as written to preserve the original language during coding, but we later convertedconcepts into a categorized and reduced format to permit network analysis of key concepts. Two researcherscoded the concept maps for depth of relationship and achieved good inter-rater reliability with an overallagreement of 91.5%, weighted κ = 0.885; all discrepancies were resolved through discussion.Our analysis explored the quantity and quality of propositions in maps created before, during, and aftercollaboration to assess internalization. Social network analysis (SNA) provides the opportunity to look atpatterns of relationships to provide a more comprehensive picture of student understanding in CSCL contexts(Aviv, Erlich, & Ravid, 2003). In order to quantify the patterns of relationships between concepts whilemaintaining the networked nature of the maps we used the Epistemic Network Analysis (ENA; Shaffer et al.,2009) tool. This tool, based on SNA, transformed the propositions into co-occurrences and allowed us to buildnetwork graphs to study the quantitative relationships between maps. To condense the complexity of eachconcept map, ENA reduced the number of data dimensions to geometrically reproduce the internal structure ofthe data and then plotted that reduced map as a node in the space (x, y, z). The resulting dimensions, whichexplain the greatest variability between the maps, became the axes upon which the mean center (network score)of each map was projected (Shaffer, 2014). Therefore, each concept map became a node in this highdimensional space and could be analyzed with other nodes from the same condition or time of map creationusing a t-test. Because we used two separate coding schemes, we compared the concept maps in two loadingspaces: one for the concept profiles (Concept) and one for the depth of relationships (Depth).ResultsBecause ENA is a data reduction procedure, each dimension contrasts connections with extremes at each axisend showing primary differences. For each dimension, the first phrase denoted dimension loadings to theCSCL 2015 Proceedings563© ISLSnegative end of that axis and the second phrase characterized the positive loadings of that axis (see first columnin Table 1). A dependent-samples t-test was performed to compare the mean network scores between pre andpost maps for each ENA dimension for both conditions. This resulted in 12 comparisons that identified whatconnections accounted for the most difference within the sample, which are also listed in Table 1.Table 1: Comparing mean network scores by condition over timeDimension Name and DescriptionConcept1: Simple Machine VS. Force &Mechanical AdvantageConcept2: Lever Examples; Applied ForceVS. ForceConcept3: Specific Machines VS.Mechanical Advantage, Work, & ForceModelingPrePost-0.1530.005(0.274)(0.199)0.055-0.124(0.169)(0.24)-0.0550.057(0.139)(0.237)t-1.79df253.40**25-2.12*25No ModelingPrePost-0.0270.135(0.292)(0.260)0.183-0.064(0.187)(0.169)-0.0910.063(0.158)(0.197)Depth1: Core physics concepts & Simple-0.152-0.087-0.76250.142machines VS. Force & Specific machines(0.299)(0.276)(0.411)Depth2: Force & Simple machines VS.-0.0760.093-2.42*25-0.099Force & Specific Machines(0.331)(0.185)(0.231)Depth3: Force, Distance, & Work VS.0.044-0.0371.7925-0.061Force & Specific and Simple Machine(0.234)(0.208)(0.260)Note: Standard deviation of mean network score is shown in parenthesis; * p < .05, ** p < .01.0.119(0.353)0.058(0.170)0.023(0.094)t-2.47*df134.10**132.34*13-0.0413-1.9213-1.0413When comparing changes in Concept1, the No Modeling group included significantly moreconnections to Force and Mechanical Advantage after collaboration. While the Modeling group changed in thesame direction, this was not significant. For Concept2, students in both conditions significantly internalizedmore concepts about Mechanical Advantage, Work, and Force but created fewer connections to specificmachines. Students in both conditions added more concepts to Applied Force and fewer to Force and SimpleMachines over time (Concept3).In comparing relationship depth, there was only one significant comparison among the six. Neithergroup of students changed over time when contrasting connections from core physics concepts and simplemachines versus Force and Simple Machines (Depth1). However, for Depth2 only the Modeling conditionshowed a significant difference indicating a shift from connecting Force to Simple Machines versus connectingto Specific Machines. Although there was no significant difference in Depth3, each group moved the oppositeway of the other. The Modeling group shifted toward interconnecting Force, Distance, and Work; the NoModeling group shifted toward connecting to Force, Specific Machines, and Simple Machines.DiscussionThis study examined how individual learning may be affected by collaboration. Analyzing concept mapnetworks using a network based analysis allowed investigation of the commonality and variance in underlyingstructures of sets of maps from each condition.A key focus of collaborative learning is to improve students’ individual learning outcomes; the extentof what each student learns, or internalizes, is therefore important to examine (Grossman et al., 1999;Smagorinsky, 2012). We found that students produced higher quantity and quality maps after collaboration;however, this finding had different implications across the two conditions. While students in the No Modelingcondition seemed to show more evidence of internalization of connections between force and mechanicaladvantage (Concept1), this condition did not show differences when comparing changes in maps based onincreasing the depth of their ideas. Though students added more concepts, these relationships failed to establishdeeper connections such as directional relationships between concepts. Students in the Modeling conditionshowed both higher quantity and quality of conceptual relationships after working on their group maps. Thissuggests that the nature of the collaborative discourse that occurred while students worked on their group mapsmight have had an effect on internalization of the relations between science ideas.Because individual physics knowledge was discussed and collaboratively combined to produce a groupmap, students processed ideas and accessed these collective ideas when constructing their final individual maps(Cress, 2013). The goal of collaboration was not just to create longer lists but to create deeper relationshipsbetween concepts, which was seen in maps for the Modeling condition but not in the maps for the No Modelingcondition. This difference in condition supports the idea that when teachers model how to elaborate ideas andCSCL 2015 Proceedings564© ISLSencourage the elaboration of others, students learn to understand when and how to apply these resources(Mercer, 2000). Student and group understanding underwent multiple and varied transformations during thisactivity, and each student may have internalized a different set of conceptual relationships. This supports Cress’s(2013) assertion that the individual and group system co-evolved. Our study also supports identification ofmultiple levels of internalization or appropriation across individuals and groups (Smagorinsky, 2012).The next step in this analysis will be to analyze each proposition in the concept maps in detail and tobetter understand how relationships between force, distance, work and mechanical advantage change over timeand across groups. To support this analysis, we will use the discourse data recorded during collaboration tobetter understand what happened during collaboration to explain the differences in internalization.This paper identifies ways in which students’ ideas and understanding about physics concepts evolvedover time and were affected by their group discussions. Only by analyzing concept maps before, during, andafter collaboration could we observe the different ways students may have internalized different concepts duringthis short, one-hour activity. In summary, our results suggest that after receiving collaborative support for theirgroup work, students improved the quantity and quality of internalized concepts.ReferencesAviv, R., Erlich, Z., & Ravid, G. (2003, July). Cohesion and roles: Network analysis of CSCL communities.In Advanced Learning Technologies, 2003. Proceedings. The 3rd IEEE International Conferenceon (pp. 145-149). IEEE.Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The Journal of the Learning Sciences,12(3), 307-359.Cress, U. (2013). Making use of collective knowledge: A cognitive approach. In N. Rummel, M. Kapur, M.Nathan, & S. Puntambekar, (Eds.), To See the World and a Grain of Sand: Learning across Levels ofSpace, Time, and Scale: CSCL 2013 Conference Proceedings Volume 1 – Full Papers and Symposia(pp. 129-136). International Society of the Learning Sciences.Grossman, P. L., Smagorinsky, P., & Valencia, S. (1999). Appropriating tools for teaching English: Atheoretical framework for research on learning to teach. American Journal of Education, 1-29.Hmelo-Silver, C. Jordan, R., Liu, L., & Chernobilsky, E. (2011). Representational tools for understandingcomplex computer-supported collaborative learning environments. In S. Puntambekar, G. Erkens, &C.E. Hmelo-Silver (Eds.), Analyzing Interactions in CSCL (pp. 83-106). New York: Springer.Mercer, N. (2000). Words & minds: How we use language to think together. London: Routledge.Novak, J. D., & Cañas, A. J. (2006). The origins of the concept mapping tool and the continuing evolution of thetool. Information Visualization, 5(3), 175-184.Puntambekar, S., Stylianou, A., & Goldstein, J. (2007). Comparing classroom enactments of an inquirycurriculum: Lessons learned from two teachers. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(1), 81-130.Rogoff, B. (2008). Observing sociocultural activity on three planes: Participatory appropriation, guidedparticipation, and apprenticeship. In K. Hall, P. Murphy, & J. Soler (Eds.), Pedagogy and Practice:Culture and Identities (pp. 58–74). Sage.	  Roth, W. M., & Roychoudhury, A. (1994). Physics students' epistemologies and views about knowing andlearning. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 31(1), 5-30.Shaffer, D. W. (2014). User guide for Epistemic Network Analysis web version 3.3. Madison, WI: Games andProfessional Simulations Technical Report 2014-1.Shaffer, D.W., Hatfield, D., Svarovsky, G.N., Nash, P., Nulty, A., Bagley, E., Frank, K., Rupp, A.A., andMislevy, R. (2009). Epistemic network analysis: A prototype for 21st century assessment of learning.The International Journal of Learning and Media, 1(2), 33-53.Smagorinsky, P. (2012). Vygotsky and literacy research: A methodological framework (Vol. 2). SensePublishers.Teasley, S.D., & Fischer, F. (2008) Cognitive Convergence in Collaborative Learning. In G. Kanselaar, V.Jonker, P.A. Kirschner, & F. Prins, (Eds.), International perspectives of the learning sciences:Cre8ing a learning world. Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference of the LearningSciences (ICLS 2008), Vol. 3 (pp. 354-359). International Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:Harvard university press.AcknowledgmentsWe thank all of our student and teacher participants. This research has been supported by the Bill & MelindaGates Foundation and EDUCAUSE NGLC grant and NSF SAVI grant # 1258471.CSCL 2015 Proceedings565© ISLS