Unpacking ‘Signs of Learning’ in Complex Social Environments:Desettling Neoliberal Market-Driven Educational Methodologies,Epistemologies and Recognitions of LearningJennifer Adams, University of Calgary, jdadams215@gmail.comSylvie Barma, Laval University, sylvie.barma@fse.ulaval.caMarie-Caroline Vincent, Laval University, marie-caroline.vincent.1@ulaval.caSamantha Voyer, Laval University, Samantha.voyer.1@ulaval.caJrène Rahm, Université de Montréal, Canada, jrene.rahm@umontreal.caFerdous Touioui, Université de Montréal, Canada, ferdous.touioui@umontreal.caPratim Sengupta, University of Calgary, Pratim.sengupta@ucalgary.caMarie-Claire Shanahan, University of Calgary, mcshanah@ucalgary.caStephanie Hladik, University of Calgary, skhladik@ucalgary.caDylan Paré, University of Calgary, dylan.pare@ucalgary.caRachel Chaffee, American Museum of Natural History, rchaffee@amnh.orgApril Luehmann, University of Rochester, april.luehmann@rochester.eduAngela Calabrese Barton, Michigan State University, acb@msu.eduDay Greenberg, Michigan State University, green106@msu.eduJessica Thompson, University of Washington, jjthomps@uw.eduSara Haganah, Boise State University, sarahagenah@boisestate.eduKevin O’Connor (discussant), University of Colorado, kevin.oconnor@colorado.eduAbstract: This structured poster session examines the design and study of meaning making inand across multimodal contexts, exploring how recognition of new signs of learning, in newways, might enter into the reconfiguration of educational practices and institutions. Weexpand on recent work in the learning sciences that challenges prevailing power structures andthe ways that they are produced by existing ways of recognizing learning. The presentationsbuild on the work of sociocultural and semiotic theories to challenge current neoliberal idealsabout what counts as knowing, learning, and becoming, as well as who can come to know.IntroductionContemporary educational institutions are, as Gunther Kress (2013) has noted, in an unsettled state broughtabout by broken linkages among school, society, and economy. “The social,” Kress argues, “is marked bymultiplicity, diversity, fragmentation, fluidity, provisionality, by far-reaching changes in distributions andassignation of power, which affect the agency and the potentials of individuals” (2013, p. 120). This opens up aneed for reconsidering learning, in particular for understanding how recognizing new “signs of learning” mightenter into the reconfiguration of educational practices and institutions. The Learning Sciences (LS) have ofcourse for some time been engaged in this project. Like Kress, some in LS have called for a move beyondunderstanding learning research as an “administrative science” (Stevens, 2010) that identifies learning throughthe use of “metrics of achievement” (Kress, 2013) with origins and interests exogenous to learning contexts andultimately grounded in “the power of an institution and conformity to convention” (Kress, 2013). In other ways,Kress’s call for “a re-calibration of pedagogic relations congruent with contemporary social givens” not onlyresonates with contemporary LS work, but also holds promise for the continuing development of the field. Kressemphasizes that learning researchers’ practices of recognition must remain attuned to the semiotic work oflearners and teachers, to how they “realize meaning” through producing and using signs, in multiple modalities,within and across contexts. In so doing, learning researchers, he argues, are better able to attend to the agencyinvolved in learning contexts, and thus to meet the challenge posed by Stevens (2010), who calls for LS to be anendogenous science, that is, to look “from within” at the work being done in and across learning contexts.The papers in this session are tied together through an interest in the design and study of meaningmaking in and across multimodal contexts. We draw on existing work in the learning sciences and also explorenew ways of understanding signs of learning. We engage with creative, agentic aspects of learning, and attend tosociomaterial practices that function as “pedagogical pivot points in enabling critical learning and socialchange” for learners often forgotten about in the current market driven education system (McKenzie & Bieler,2016, p. 16). We attend to the multimodal and multisensory and how they mediate the production of learnersand learning, and to “the agency evident in semiotic work” that offers new possibilities (Kress, 2013, p. 129).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1320© ISLSThe papers explore different research sites and imaginaries, marked in different ways by globalization,mobility, diversity, and inequity. Gutiérrez’s (2014) metaphor of “learning as movement” helps us ask newquestions about “what takes hold as people, tools and practices travel across activity settings of everyday life,and on how individuals develop, repurpose and reorganize repertoires” (p. 48). We document learning of“border crossers,” who must learn “to negotiate the power, violence, cruelty of the dominant culture” throughtheir “own lived histories, restricted languages, and narrow cultural experiences” (Giroux, 2012, p. 13). Hence,we not only unsettle learning but its grounding in Western and Indigenous epistemologies and methodologies.We address issues of design, expanding on issues that Bang and Vossoughi (2016) judge to be essential to“create sustainable and transformative change.” Building on the work of sociocultural and semiotic theory andchallenging current neoliberal ideals about what counts as knowing, learning, becoming and who can come toknow, we aim to engage in a dialogue with the audience about new ways to recognize and engage with learning.Identity, agency and subjectivities of Afro-diasporic teachers in STEMclassroomsJennifer AdamsIntroductionThis presentation describes “signs of learning” in relation to the emerging professional identities of new teachersof colour. It is a part of a larger study that articulates relationships between science teacher identity and learningto teach with an emphasis on informal science teacher education. Responding to calls for greater collaborationbetween science-rich informal institutions and teacher education programs, this research focuses on exploringaspects of teacher identity that related to their learning to teach experiences with informal science institutions.The study is situated in a large, diverse urban public school district that has long-standing issues withscience teacher recruitment and retention and student performance in STEM, especially that of racialized,minoritized and economically marginalized students. In this paper I examine the lived experiences of threefemale new teachers (within their first three years of teaching) of colour in science classrooms as they navigatetheir identities and subjectivities of teaching and learning to teach vis-à-vis the racialized storylines aroundschooling in general and STEM education specifically. I unpack the discursive fields in which they exist,particularly the narratives around disparities of Black and Latinx people in STEM how their own racializedsubjectivities shifted and responded to these discourses, and the ways that they adapted meanings of informalscience learning in these enactments.Theoretical and methodological approachNasir et al. (2012) frame relationships among race, racism and learning through racial storylines—pervasivenarratives about race in social discourse that get enacted in schools and other settings. Racial storylines makeidentities available to learners (and teachers) in learning contexts, in turn influencing how people are positionedand position themselves. With learning, goals, and identity being “three prongs of a triangle, with bidirectionalarrows between each two points” (p. 294), evolving together in social practice, racial storylines offer spaceswhere learners could resist, articulate new goals and take up new identities.In learning settings, teachers are both subjected to the racial storylines as individuals while alsoshaping learning experiences for their students, often in response to these narratives. Agency describes how oneaccesses and appropriates resources in a given field in order to meet goals (Adams & Gupta, 2017). Teacheragency is the belief that the teacher-self is capable of making the right instructional decisions, knows how toacquire and use resources to teach, and confident about creating and maintaining a safe and effective learningenvironment for all learners to meet instructional goals. For science teachers, agency also means confidence incontent knowledge and ability to motivate and sustain science learning in all students. Racial storylines present achallenge in that it often positions people of colour counter to positive science achievement. Therefore how ateacher learns to respond to the racial storylines in practice, with equitable science learning central to being aneffective science teacher, contributes to agency and subsequently identity.This study draws from two and a half years of data from a group of science teachers who met bimonthly as a collaborative teacher inquiry group. The teachers are middle and high school science teachers in alarge, public, urban system. The meetings were structured around co-generative dialogues—structured dialoguesaround shared events or practices—that aim to generate new understandings, meanings and practices (Martin,2006). During these meetings teachers shared experiences and artifacts (lesson plans, pictures, videotapes, etc.)for group analysis and discussion. Three participants emerged for analysis in this paper because of theiridentities as Afro-diasporic teachers coupled with their enactments of teaching. Individual interviews and one-ICLS 2018 Proceedings1321© ISLSon-one informal dialogues also informed this study. I am also a Black woman who taught high school science inthe same public system. Engaging in reciprocal vulnerability (Kohli, 2014) I shared my experiences of learningto teach, teaching, and educating teachers as well as my experiences with race vis-à-vis these contexts.Identities and subjectivities are made and remade through discourses, i.e., recurrent themes orstorylines: “discourses…mark out identifiable systems of meaning and field of knowledge and belief that, inturn, are tied to ways of knowing, believing, and categorizing the world and modes of action” (Luke,1995). During the analysis, I specifically looked for a) what storylines emerged, b) how they viewed themselvesvis-à-vis these storylines and c) they ways that these storylines influence their becomings/identities as teachers.FindingsWithin the different contexts, teachers enacted teaching in different ways in relation to how they viewedthemselves vis-à-vis their students. Their goals for creating STEM learning experiences were shaped andenacted around STEM futures that they imagined for their students and to counter the prevailing deficitdiscourses around students of colour and STEM. Teachers challenged and resisted storylines by developingstructures that allowed their students to create alternative narratives and imagine a broader range of futures forthemselves: weekend science-related field trips, interactions with graduate students and scientists of color,creating new activities and out-of-classroom learning spaces, etc.The three teachers defined and redefined informal science teaching in ways that resonated with theiridentities as teachers and how they viewed themselves in relation to their students. In describing their identitiesas teachers, it is hard to separate their professional and social identities as they are both present and continuouslyinfluenced the other, thus “I am a black teacher, and because I am a black teacher I function in this way in thisclassroom.” This classroom speaks to the complexities of urban schools and classroom in that although all threeteachers teach within the same public school system, each of their schools and classrooms diverge in thestudents and resources that structure them.In dreaming of and creating possibilities for their students, these teachers engage in theemotional/psychological labor of the constant struggle to resist the racial storylines of people of color in relationto science and school, for themselves and their students.Retracing the experiential trajectory of Science and Technology teachers’ asthey change the pattern of their teaching practice and engage in curriculumdevelopment.Sylvie Barma, Marie-Caroline Vincent, and Samantha VoyerIntroductionThe curricula of several Western nations have made a priority of improving the contextualization of Science andTechnology (ST) education through the study of problems with relevance to the lives of students (Barma, 2011).Roth & Lee (2004) argue that teachers should avoid creating learning environments that funnel students intoperformance-based tracks and should instead offer students a broad variety of situations conducive toparticipation enabling them to make decisions in line with their own interests. ST education should beunderstood in terms of the definition provided by Fourez (2002, p. 198, our translation), for whom it is a“person’s capacity, in a sociotechnical society, to build for him or herself a field of autonomy, communicationand negotiation with his or her environment”. Teachers are thus considered sense makers instead of grademakers. It challenges encapsulated forms of school activity (Engeström and Sannino, 2010). Our contributiondocuments the trajectory of the professional development of three science teachers engaged in designing a newform of practice for learning and expanding.ContextIn 2006, Quebec ST teachers were asked to integrate technological design of prototypes to support theappropriation of scientific concepts (MELS, 2006). However, after the implementation of the curriculum, therewas a great lack of teacher training and tensions rose. From 2010 to 2017, we engaged in a school-universitypartnership with three ST teachers coming from different schools. They acted as collaborators and co-creators toco-model prototypes for workshop activities. Over the seven years, more than 165 teachers, lab technicians andpedagogical counselors coming from 15 school districts benefited from five workshops co-produced by theparticipants for their peers’ professional development. We documented the agency and actions of the threeleading teachers as they engaged in the co-design of new curricular materials in the form of concrete artefacts tobe presented to their colleagues as an opportunity to modify their practice. The results presented will describeICLS 2018 Proceedings1322© ISLSwhy, how and where ‘meaning-making’ took place and how, over the years, the individual and collectivecreativity changed the development of their professional practice. The participant teachers actively worked toshape their new form of practice and got involved.Theoretical frameworkWe use the key concept of boundary to understand the activity under construction (teachers’ professionaldevelopment). Boundaries are “established distinctions and differences between and within activity systems thatare created and agreed on by groups and individual actors during a long period of time while they are involvedin those activities” (Kerosuo, 2006, p. 4). The metaphor of “learning as movement” helps us ask new questionsabout “what takes hold as people, tools and practices travel across activity settings of everyday life, and onhow individuals develop, repurpose and reorganize repertoires” (Gutiérrez, 2014, p. 48). According to Vooght etal. (2015), partnerships constitute a move from within, instrumental in exploring new ways of teaching andlearning. Those ways take a variety of forms and shapes and involve boundary crossing as tensions arise and areovercome (Engeström, 2001). To document “what is not yet there” we adopted the theory of ExpansiveLearning, focusing on individual and joint agency to understand why and how participants collectively creatednew artefacts that revealed key boundary crossing instruments. We document how teachers created “sustainableand transformative change” that had an impact on their educational communities (Bang & Vossoughi, 2016).MethodsWe adopted a collaborative and interventionist methodology to document the co-design of the teachers’professional development (Barma et al., 2017). Ethnographic data was collected over the seven years in the formof audio-video recordings of teacher training sessions, interviews and photographs during co-teaching sessions,and artefacts produced by the team (teaching documents, YouTube videos, prototypes, online resources,administrative documents, speaking turns, etc.). We pooled in (‘bricolage’) all the data gathered over the sevenyears and analyzed them in keeping with the experiential trajectories of the participants (Kincheloe & Berry,2004). Focusing on individual and joint agency allowed us to understand why and how participants engaged inexpansive learning and came to collectively progress to create new tools that revealed boundary crossing objectsand determined new roles to reconceptualised the object of their joint activity. The construct of a hybrid space inthe form of a new activity implies that multiple levels of activity systems expand their own activity to establish azone of proximal development and boundary crossers were identified as key players between activity systems.FindingsFindings will be presented as a narrative, respecting the chronological development of the participants’ agencyand creativity as well as the unfolding of the co-design of artefacts. As the participants reflected on theirproductions and experiences, their professional identities evolved and redefined the borders of their teachingactivities. The data is still under analysis but, already, we are able to reconstruct an experiential trajectory of thereconfiguration of the teachers’ practice in response to their need for professional development. For example,different co-designed prototypes were presented during 6 teacher training sessions where 165 peer-teachers,student-teachers, lab technicians and pedagogical counselors of 15 different school districts participated. Theseprototypes were created to integrate several elements of the ST curriculum and implemented with high schoolstudents. We presented the prototypes to 124 university student-teachers during didactic classes and crossedanother unexpected border. Quantitative data was also collected through seven online questionnaires. Weobtained a total of 776 students’ responses and a total of 39 responses from teachers with relation to their ownrelationship to ST education. Three sections will orient the presentation of the narrative: 1) critical contexts,questioning and resistance to change; 2) contexts of discovery, creativity and modelling of new forms ofpractice and 3) contexts of practice and the social relevance of the integration of the tools produced in thecommunity. The issues of teachers’ will to design for learning and expanding was traced back in their individualand collective agency as well as in the artefacts that acted as boundary crossing objects.Coding science as boundary Work: The role of publicness in scientificcomputingPratim Sengupta, Marie-Claire Shanahan, Stephanie Hladik, and Dylan ParéObjective and theoretical backgroundFor Papert (1987), technocentrism was the fallacy of referring all questions about technology to the technologyitself. Despite Papert’s call to action, educational computing has predominantly reified and perpetuatedICLS 2018 Proceedings1323© ISLStechnocentric images in which learning to code has become synonymous with the “proper” use and productionof computational abstractions (Sengupta et al., 2018). In contrast, we argue that rather than viewing computingas regurgitation and production of a set of axiomatic computational abstractions, scientific computing usingopen source code in public spaces that invite playful engagement can be reconceptualized as boundary work.We conceptualize science and computing as figured worlds (Sengupta & Shanahan, 2017). Holland etal. (1998) argue that individuals’ identities and agency both constitute and are constructed within culturalrealms, or figured worlds, in which particular characters are recognized, significance is assigned to certain acts,and particular outcomes are valued over others. Gieryn (1999) defined “boundary work” as the continuous actsof figured world creation that scientists engage in when they frame their work through what it is not (“notreligion,” “not-mechanics,” “not this kind of research but that kind”).Sengupta & Shanahan (2017) introduced public computing as a new form of open-ended, publiclearning environments, in which visitors can directly access, modify and create complex and authentic scientificwork through interacting with open source computing platforms. Framed phenomenologically, technologyshould be viewed not only as ways and means of performing disciplinary work, but also in light of broadernorms of participation in disciplinary and ancillary cultures developed around localized technologicalinfrastructure. We posit that when placed in the public domain—both as a public space and in the form of opensource code—where members of the public can freely access, alter and manipulate the code—scientificcomputing becomes freed from being beholden to narrowly forms of disciplinary authenticity. Scientific code,in such contexts, becomes a boundary object, their ill-structured nature allowing them to have differentmeanings in the different social worlds that they cross and therefore to be acted on in completely different ways.MethodThis paper presents ethnographic analyses of the experiences of teaching and learning coding across twodifferent contexts of public computing: a science and technology museum (M), and a public space within aUniversity (U). The participants include children 10 years and above and their parents (in settings M and U),museum facilitators who act as teachers (in setting M), students and pre-service teachers (who act as bothteachers and learners in setting U). In each setting, we designed an open source, interactive exhibit allowingvisitors to directly interact with open source simulations of complex systems. These simulations modeled howflocks emerge from simple rules of interactions between many individual-level virtual agents, allowing anyvisitor to modify the underlying open source code. We conducted participant observations over a period of 15months in each setting.Analysis and findingsWe show that the experience of coding in these settings can be conceptualized as boundary work (Gieryn,1999), i.e., continuous acts of creating “as if” worlds that learners jointly engage in along with their parents,teachers and facilitators, where they frame their work as “coding” through comparing with other disciplinaryframes. These lateral frames are initiated by the interest of learners (and in some cases, parents and facilitators)in disciplines other than computing, and by their personal narratives and interpretations. Our analysis alsoillustrates how code fragments serve as pivots, artifacts that shift the frame of an activity and evoke or “open upfigured worlds” (Holland et al., 1998, p. 61). Working directly with the code pivoted visitors partially andplayfully into the designers’ figured worlds. We identify how specific fragments of the code may have served aspivots, allowing play between larger disciplinary cultures in which the designer’s and visitors’ figured worlds ofthe simulation were embedded. A final key finding is that teaching coding, in these informal spaces, oftenrequires facilitators to step back and let these other disciplinary frames come in. The work of the teacher asdesigner can therefore be understood as facilitating back and forth movements between these frames, an imageof reflection in action that further urges us to move beyond technocentric images of coding and teaching coding.SignificanceOur work challenges epistemologies of certainty (Dewey, 1929), in the context of democratizing disciplinarycultures of science and technology and suggests that an emphasis on publicness within the technologicalinfrastructure, especially in the context of educational and scientific computing, can potentially create spaces forplayful representational and epistemic uncertainties, which in turn can make it possible for science andtechnology to become public experiences.Youths’ circulations in STEM networks of multiple scales: Case studies ofagency and transformation of self and practiceICLS 2018 Proceedings1324© ISLSJrène Rahm and Ferdous TouiouiObjectivesStudies of youth circulations within complex networks of STEM practices over time have led to thedocumentation of moments of youth agency and the temporary overcoming of injustice (Bang & Vossoughi,2016; Bricker & Bell, 2014). Yet, we still need to better understand: 1) how youth engage locally in creative,agentive meaning making in science, 2) how youth address injustice as they enact agency through local andglobal meaning making, and 3) how adults may open up spaces for the development of critical agency andmeaning making that challenge deeply rooted historicized oppression.Theoretical frameworkWe invoke a conceptual reading of STEM practices as a complex matrix of practices (Leander et al., 2010).Imperative is a focus on relations among practices and the tracing of youths’ circulations, agency, andtransformations within and across practices, next to implications for social justice in STEM. We juxtaposeanalysis of local meaning making and explore “signs of learning” as emergent from youths’ multimodal,multivoiced, embodied, and creative enactment of science. We rely on video analysis, attending to embodiedaction rather than just discourse or “the moving image” (de Freitas, 2016). We focus on the affective andemotional that transpires and constitutes the kind of complex dances of meaning making that we document.Data sourcesWe present two case studies. Case 1 examines elementary children’s engagement with science in a spacebetween school and out-of-school, a community organization offering access to meaningful activities in science,mathematics and robotics to enrich the education of children in schools in underserved communities. Case 2draws from a multi-sited ethnography tracing a cohort of six girls for seven years beyond their participation inan afterschool program. The narratives of each case emerged from a bricolage (Kincheloe & Berry, 2004) ofmultiple data sources (participant observation, video-ethnography, interviews, youth initiated joint productions).ResultsCase 1 tells the story of two teams engaged in two different science activities, one implying extraction of DNAfrom a strawberry, following a session on DNA and the creation of a DNA chain, while the second activityimplied dissection of a plant. We noted an interesting tension between children’s engagement in “administrativescience” and successful pursuit of the science protocol, and moments of “realizing meaning” made possiblethrough the manipulation of the tools in creative ways owned by the children, supported by exchanges with eachother and by positioning one another as doers of science. The case makes evident the value of analysing situatedand practical experiences in which materials and selves are entangled in ways that make them pivots for learningand becoming in science. Case 2 explores circulations and learning on the move of Achyntia and Alana. Wemake evident the power of sisterhood and affinity that supported the girls’ circulation among diverse STEMpractices beyond the afterschool program, into high school, and later, higher education. The case makes evidenthow the two girls became agents of circulation by opening up spaces of the STEM network for each other, astheir paths crossed, and as they shared ongoing struggles as youth of color and insiders of STEM.SignificanceThe cases offer rich insights into circulations of bodies, epistemologies of science, and identities in science.They challenge what it means to make meaning in science and the long-held vision of a linear STEM pathway.Both explore youth circulations, yet at different scales: one within a science project, the other across practicesover time. Both point to social justice in STEM as emergent, as affectively charged, and as implying a sense ofbelonging, sustained by youths’ circulations, grounded locally and globally in supportive communities. The twocases raise methodological issues of scale, in particular the challenge of having others recognize these momentsas signs of learning. Youths’ agency and transformations of learning environments in ways they valuedremained marginalized and essentially unattended to by others in power. To conclude, we discuss the complexdynamic of oppression at work and its implications for social design based research but also methodology.Learning that matters: Critical science agency in and through teen women’sfilm productionRachel Chaffee, April Luehmann, Day Greenberg, Jessica Thompson, Sara Haganah, and Angela CalabreseBartonICLS 2018 Proceedings1325© ISLSIntroductionNew ways of recognizing learning can aid in reconfiguring STEM learning opportunities and lenses whosecurrent inertia cements an unwelcome environment for youth already marginalized in STEM. Working withteens engaged in out-of-school learning allowed us to investigate how three groups of teen women took up andre/shaped science for their own purposes through STEM film projects. We explored what aspects of filmmaking served as transformational pedagogical pivots for inviting teens’ Critical Science Agency (CSA), i.e.,the ability to collectively leverage scientific understanding in conjunction with other forms of expertise toidentify, investigate and take actions on problems that matter within the community and that relate to justiceoriented issues. Here, we explore CSA as one expansive outcome promoting more equitable engagement andfutures in science and engineering (S/E). CSA offers important pivots into deeper engagement with scienceknowledge and practice as well as into the contexts in which their science-related concerns take place. Pivots are“mediating or symbolic devices” not just to “organize responses, but also to pivot or shift into the frame of adifferent world” (Holland et al., 1998, p. 50). When youth leverage their funds of knowledge, they etch theirinsideness onto their work in ways that impact the design process, how/where it unfolds, and their roles in it. Aspivots, these funds are not simply complementary to the youths’ investigations, but essential to who they areand their project work. We asked: 1) How and why did teen scientists develop and use repertoires ofpracticesacross their films?; and 2) How was power re/negotiated through youths’ acts of CSA, and what servedas transformational pivot points for developing that agency?Cross-site methodsWe engaged in multimodal analysis of four films created by four sets of young women in three different out-ofschool contexts serving low-income populations of color. Beginning with the construction of five transcripts foreach film that documented interpretations of youth’s productions by foregrounding five unique lenses (auditory,visual, editorial, cinematographic, and background), we coded choices youth made in recruiting and organizingresources in particular arrangements within filmic episodes, across trajectories of episodes, and in overall filmproductions (Halverson, 2013). We repeated this process for all films before cross-analyzing the film data. Thisprocess of visual analysis allowed us to identify young women’s efforts to enact CSA through multimodalrepresentations of themselves and the science in which they engaged.FindingsAnalysis across the four films revealed patterns of prioritizing issues of caring: for the local environment, forfamily and community members, for peers suffering with depression, for animals. Teen-developed repertoires ofpractice, emerging within and across films, consisted of repeated forms of framing, sources of motivations, andprocesses of meaning-making. First, each group of teen filmmakers constructed global narratives to sequencethe film by introducing themselves as investigators, detailing a problem of significance to them, describing theirvaried S/E inquiry endeavors, and sharing their research findings with their audience(s). Second, teen womenconsistently acted and spoke as a collective “we” across episodes, centering their collective voices in theinvestigation, outcomes, and implications of the work. All four films evidenced teens’ overlapping attention toexpectations of varied cultural memberships as they embodied S/E learning: addressing accountabilities ofscience while also attending to cultural expectations of being a teenager (music choices, cartoons), being a teenwoman (removal of Hijab in all girl space), and a filmmaker (credits, transitions, candid and full-frontal shots).In doing so, S/E productions foregrounded the humanity of doing S/E work, thus recentering themselves in S/E.Film production supported and reflected moments of developing and enacting CSA through dynamicand purposeful use of transformational pivot points. Teen filmmakers re/negotiated traditional STEM powerstructures by positioning themselves as authors and owners of STEM investigations and designers ofsocioscientifically informed solutions, leveraging funds of knowledge, and collectively making S/Econtributions with implications for intended audience action. They capitalized on multimodal affordances offilm production: text overlays for counternarration, coupling of moving and still images for representingmultidimensional identity and skill development in-the-moment, full frontal shots with eye contact for claimingphysical presence in STEM, dramatic role play as radical reenvisioning of scientific communication). Teenspivoted science and digital technology to merge personal stories with scientific understandings, to inviteexternal expert perspectives while maintaining story ownership, and to simultaneously address diverse culturalexpectations. Films documented the investigative process and taught the science behind the investigationsthrough traditional artifacts like charts and graphs as well as through non-traditional methods of science practiceand teaching. Filmmakers drew from community memberships while simultaneously leveraging the project todevelop new social networks/coalitions to advance their work towards their goals of change.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1326© ISLSSignificanceThe study demonstrates the power of youth-driven multimodal production to afford rich opportunities for CSA.Through the publication of their films, teen women challenged current conceptions of who can do meaningfulscience and engineering, in what ways, and toward what ends. The need for this work is underscored in the needto recognize diverse forms of participation and production for students who have been traditionallymarginalized. Foregrounding the role of CSA in S/E shifts the process and outcomes of learning from a primaryfocus of developing and deepening practice-based S/E understandings to one of enabling and empoweringindividuals and communities to leverage S/E knowledge in ways that matter to them in the present.ReferencesAdams, J. D., & Gupta, P. (2017). Informal science institutions and learning to teach: An examination ofidentity, agency, and affordances. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 54(1), 121-138.Bang, M., & Vossoughi, S. (2016). Participatory design research and educational justice: Studying learning andrelations within social change making. Cognition and Instruction, 34(3), 173-193.Barma, S. (2011). A sociocultural reading of reform in science teaching in a secondary biology class. CulturalStudies of Science Education. doi:10.1007/s11422-011-9315-9Barma, S., Laferrière, T., Lemieux, B., Massé-Morneau, J., & Vincent, M.-C. (2017). Early stages in buildinghybrid activity between school and work: the case of PénArt. Journal of Education and Work, 30(6),669-687. doi:10.1080/13639080.2017.1294247Bricker, L. A., & Bell, P. (2014). “What comes to mind when you think of science? The perfumery!”:Documenting science-related cultural learning pathways across contexts and timescales. Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching, 51(3), 260-285.de Freitas, E. (2016). The moving image in education research: Reassembling the body in classroom video data.International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 29(4), 553-572.Engeström, Y. (2001). Expansive learning at work : toward an activity theoretical reconceptualization. Journalof Education, 14(1).Gieryn, T. F. (1999). Cultural boundaries of science: Credibility on the line. University of Chicago Press.Halverson, E. (2013). Digital art making as a representational process. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 22,121-162.Holland, D., Lachicotte, W. Jr., Skinner, D., Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds. Cambridge,MA: Harvard.Kincheloe, J. L., & Berry, K. S. (2004). Rigour and complexity in educational research: Conceptualizing thebricolage. McGraw Hill, England: Open University Press.Kerosuo, H. (2006). Boundaries in action. An activity-theoretical study of development, learning and change inhealth care for patients with multiple and chronic illnesses.Knappett, C. and Malfouris, L. (2008) Material agency. New York: Springer.Kress, G. (2013). Recognizing learning. In I. de Saint-Georges and J.-J. Weber (Eds.), Multilingualism andmultimodality (pp. 119-140). Sense Publishers: Rotterdam.Leander, K. M., Phillips, N. C., Taylor, K. H. (2010). The changing social spaces of learning: Mapping newmodalities. Review of Research in Education, 34, 329-394.Luke, A. (1995). Chapter 1: Text and discourse in education: An introduction to critical discourseanalysis. Review of research in education, 21(1), 3-48.Nasir, S. N., Snyder, C. R., Shah, N., & Ross, K. M. (2012). Racial storylines and implications forlearning. Human Development, 55(5-6), 285-301.Papert, S. (1987). Information technology and education: Computer criticism vs. technocentricthinking. Educational Researcher, 16(1), 22-30.Sengupta, P., & Shanahan, M. C. (2017). Boundary Play and Pivots in Public Computation: New Directions inSTEM Education. International Journal of Engineering Education, 33(3), 1124-1134.Sengupta, P., Dickes, A., & Farris, A.V. (2018). Toward a phenomenology of computational thinking in K-12STEM. In Khine, M.S., (Ed). Computational Thinking in STEM: Foundations and ResearchHighlights. Springer.Stevens, R. (2010). Learning as a members’ phenomenon: Toward an ethnographically adequate science oflearning. Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education, 109(1), 82-97Wilson, S. (2008). Research is ceremony: Indigenous research methods. Halifax, NS: Fernwood.Voogt, J., Laferrière, T., Breuleux, A., Itow, R. C., Hickey, D. T., & McKenney, S. (2015). Collaborative designas a form of professional development. Instructional Science, 43(2), 259-282.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1327© ISLS