Exploring the Composition Process of Peer FeedbackMaryam Alqassab, LMU Munich, Department of Psychology, maryam.alqassab@psy.lmu.deJan-Willem Strijbos, LMU Munich, Department of Psychologyjan-willem.strijbos@psy.lmu.deStefan Ufer, LMU Munich, Mathematics Institute, ufer@math.lmu.deAbstract: This paper presents a study that explores the composition process of peer feedback.It adopts an interactional framework for feedback that takes into account feedback sender’s andrecipient’s factors. Participants were pre-service mathematics teachers (N = 47) enrolled in acourse about feedback and assessment. Quantitative content analysis was used to analyzestudents’ reflections after being involved in a peer feedback provision activity on a geometryconstruction task. Students’ reflections illustrated that the composition process is not purelycognitive, and can also involve self-reflection and self-evaluation activities as well as peerrelated activities. Some examples of self- and peer-related activities during peer feedbackcomposition are reported, followed by a discussion of implications for using peer feedback as alearning activity.Keywords: Peer feedback, assessment for learning, feedback training, mathematicsIntroductionThe role of students in classrooms has changed in the last decades with a strong emphasis on empowering studentsand actively involving them in assessment activities. Peer- and self-assessment are now common practices inwhich students evaluate quantitatively or qualitatively the correctness and the quality of their peer’s or their ownperformance. The purposes of involving students in such assessment activities can vary, but they are normallymeant to improve students’ performance, evaluation and analytical skills, or both (Topping, 2003). Peer feedback(PF), which is regarded as the qualitative component of peer-assessment, is used as an instructional tool in manyfields. Since the value of feedback is in the information that can be used to improve learning, most of the PFresearch focuses either on the quality of the feedback message or its application. Only recently some studies startedto explore the learning gains of students who provide PF. In an experimental study Cho and MacArthur (2011)showed that, compared to the control group, the quality of students’ written scientific reports improvedsignificantly after involving them in providing PF. They hypothesized that while providing PF, students mightengage in problem solving processes through which they reflect on and improve their own learning. While theirstudy illustrated the learning gains resulting from providing PF, it purely focused on the outcomes of the act ofproviding PF. To date, little is known about the process resulting in the provided PF, i.e. the composition processof PF, and the cognitive, social and affective processes involved in that process. A survey by Nicol, Thomson andBreslin (2014) highlighted some cognitive processes that could be part of the PF composition activity, such ascritical evaluation, reflection on one’s own work, and comparing one’s own work with peers’ work. However,composing PF is not just about reflection on one’s own work as students are expected to produce a feedbackmessage to be delivered to their peers. It can be hypothesized, therefore, that multiple self-related and peer-relatedcognitive, metacognitive and affective processes take place simultaneously during the composition of a PFmessage. Further, involving students in PF provision cannot guarantee that they will automatically engage in selfreflection and problem solving activities. For instance, PF can be cognitively demanding, especially for studentswho have insufficient knowledge about the topic at hand. These students might spend most of the PF activitytrying to understand the peer’s solution. This is supported by Van Zundert, Sluijsmans, Könings and VanMerriënboer (2012) who showed that providing PF, when combined with insufficient domain-knowledge, wasdetrimental to the PF provider’s performance; especially when the task was complex.Many prominent feedback frameworks focus on the type, function and/or purpose of feedback (e.g.,Kluger & DeNisi, 1996; Hattie & Timplerley, 2007), partly because most of the feedback research focuses onteacher’s feedback which is used to help students improve their learning. However, when it comes to PF differentinterrelated processes and moderators can shape students’ learning. Strijbos and Müller (2014) proposed aconceptual framework of feedback which incorporates the composition, provision, reception and processing offeedback as interactive processes taking into account the context and the personal and interpersonal factors of thefeedback provider and the receiver. Particularly interesting is the composition process, which is mostly ignoredby PF research or regarded identical to the provided PF message. According to Strijbos and Müller (2014) theICLS 2016 Proceedings862© ISLScomposition process is influenced by the context (e.g., learning environment, the task), the providers’ personalfactors (e.g., empathy) and their personal representations of the feedback recipient (e.g., vulnerability to negativefeedback). Although the feedback message can act as a good indicator of what the feedback provider knows ordoes not know, it does not provide any information about how the provider went about creating that feedbackmessage. Moreover, instructional guidance during PF training tends to focus on the PF message (e.g., markingrubrics) rather than scaffolding students’ learning from the PF activity (e.g., self-reflection support). In sum, theseobservations signify a need to explore the cognitive, metacognitive and affective processes students engage induring the composition of PF.Research questionsThis paper addresses the following research questions: (1) Which processes (cognitive, metacognitive, andaffective) are reported by students while composing PF on a geometry construction task?, and (2) To what extentdoes the PF composition process reflect a self-orientation versus a peer-orientation?MethodParticipants and designThe participants were forty-seven pre-service mathematics teachers enrolled for a teaching degree for middleschool. They had a mean age of 22.7 years (SD = 2.57, age range: 19-29) and seventy percent were female. Weconducted an intervention study as a part of a mathematics teacher education course about feedback andassessment. Participation in the PF activities was mandatory as part of course requirements, but inclusion in thestudy was voluntary (informed consent).MaterialStudent reflections were collected during the intervention study in which pre-service mathematics teachers weretrained to provide PF (based on Hattie and Timperley’s (2007) model) on a geometry construction task. Studentsreceived an evaluation rubric for geometry construction, a worked example, and feedback prompts. After PFprovision, the students were asked to reflect on PF provision and the PF composition process guided by thefollowing prompts (this paper only focuses on prompts 2 and 3):(1) What did you learn about geometry construction from providing feedback?(2) What did you consider/ focus on while composing feedback on the solution of your peer?(3) Please write down other things you thought about while giving feedback.AnalysisQuantitative content analysis was used to analyze the reflections, because it is a systematic technique for textanalysis. A coding system is the main instrument for analysis and the interpretation of data is theory guided(Mayring, 2014). Before coding the reflections, they were segmented based on Strijbos, Martens, Prins andJochems’ (2006) procedure using the smallest meaningful segment as the unit of analysis. Two independent coderssegmented 7 out of 47 reflections (15%) reaching an agreement level of 81% lower bound and 88% upper bound.One of the coders segmented the remaining reflections. A coding scheme was developed using the segmentedreflections and guided by the research questions. Two independent coders coded 15% of the reflections reachingan acceptable level of inter-rater reliability on the main categories (Krippendorff’s α = .78). One of the coderscoded the remaining reflections. A total of 222 segments from 47 students were analyzed.FindingsPeer feedback composition processesThree main categories emerged from the data namely cognitive, metacognitive and affective, with specific subcategories for each main category (see Table 1). The cognitive category involves all statements about actions orthoughts about the PF message (e.g., structure and accuracy) and the composition of PF (e.g., evaluation ofsolution) at the cognitive level. The metacognitive category is about monitoring and regulation thoughts or actionsabout the provider’s own learning or PF. The affective category refers to attempts to motivate or preserve thefeelings of the peer by avoiding negative comments or emphasizing positive aspects. Most of students’ reflectionswere at the cognitive level (76%), followed by the metacognitive (15%) and the affective (9%) level. At thecognitive level students focused mostly on the structure and accuracy of the PF message (32.5%) followed by theICLS 2016 Proceedings863© ISLSevaluation of the peer’s solution (23.5%), which is not surprising given the instructional support (i.e., feedbackprompts, evaluation rubric and worked example). At the metacognitive level, students focused mostly onmonitoring and evaluating their PF message (53%), self-reflection (31.3%) and PF provision self-efficacy(15.6%).Table 1: Categories of the PF composition processes with definitions and examplesMain categoryCognitiveSub-categoryStructure and accuracyDefinitionRelated to the structure andclarity of the PF messageProcedural and conditionalRelated to the process ofcomposing the PF messageRelated to error detection andevaluation of peer performanceEvaluating the solution relativeto one’s own solution orthoughtsRelated to clarity of and trying tounderstand the peer solutionInferring what the peer knows orwas thinking aboutEvaluation of solutionSelf-reference evaluationComprehensibility ofsolutionInferring peer’s knowledgeHigher cognitive processingImprovement purposeQuestioning solutionBeing criticalMetacognitiveSelf-reflectionSelf-efficacyMonitoring and selfevaluationAffectiveMotivating and praisingThinking of alternative solutions,and going beyond correctness ofthe peer solutionTo help peer improve theirsolutionMaking peers think about theirsolutionRelated to being critical andobjective when providing PFReferring to one’s own ability tosolve the taskRelated to perceived difficulty ofproviding PFMonitoring of the PF provisionprocessRelated to motivating the peer,avoiding negativity oremphasizing correct parts of thepeer solution.Examples“I tried to write my feedback ina clear and understandableway”“How to give feedback whenthe answer is correct?”“Identifying mistakes”“I compared the solution tohow I would do it”“Can I understand all thedescribed steps?”“Trying to see if the studenthad a basic level ofknowledge”“I tried to find another way tosolve the task”“Make peer’s solution workwith changes”“I asked questions to see if heknew what he was doing”“How to be objective”“Would I solve it the sameway?”“Difficult to find mistakes”“Is my feedback as good thatthe same or another task can besolved without any problems?”“Encouraging by emphasizingthe correct”Me and my peer: Two overarching themesWithin the cognitive, metacognitive and affective main categories, we identified self-related (me) and peer-related(my peer) aspects. Examples of the peer-related actions/thoughts at the subcategory level include:comprehensibility of solution (cognitive), inferring peer’s knowledge (cognitive) and motivating and praising(affective). Examples of the sender’s self-related actions/thoughts were: self-reference evaluation (cognitive),higher cognitive processing (cognitive), being critical (cognitive), reflection on one’s own ability to solve the taskor to provide PF (metacognitive) and monitoring the PF composition process (metacognitive). Figure 1 shows theproportions of self-related (me) and peer-related (my peer) statements at the main category level (i.e., cognitive,metacognitive and affective). Peer-related statements are very prominent in the cognitive and affective categories.This might be because students are concerned with how to compose feedback to their peer, how it should appearto their peer and how to evaluate the solution by their peer.ICLS 2016 Proceedings864© ISLSProportions of students'reflection statements100%My peer80%Me60%40%20%0%CognitiveMetacognitiveAffectiveFigure 1. Cognitive, metacognitive and affective self- (me) and peer-related (my peer) statements.Conclusions and implicationsOur results show that the PF composition process involves multiple self- and peer related activities which are notnecessarily evident in the PF message. They also show that students can engage in critical evaluation and selfreflection during PF composition as suggested by Nicol et al. (2014). Nonetheless, students appear to focus moreon the structure of the PF message (at least in this study). One of the limitations of this study is that students’ selfreports were used to explore a complex process like the PF composition. Therefore, the reported activities are byno means regarded as the only experienced activities. Rather, they provide a glimpse of possible cognitive,metacognitive and affective activities of the PF composition process. The findings of this study have severalimplications for educators who use PF as a learning activity. First, we should pay attention to the PF training andsupport materials we provide to the students, which are based mostly on the PF message. We cannot expectlearning to take place through self-reflection during PF composition if we do not train and scaffold such selfreflection. Second, as suggested by Strijbos and Müller’s (2014) interactional framework, representations of peers’characteristics or expected reactions (i.e., affective) seem to be activated during the PF composition activity. Onedirection for future research is to investigate the effects of affective aspects of a PF message on the learning of thePF sender and recipient. Additionally, the PF sender could receive instructional support about how to balanceone’s representation of the peer recipient, regulating personal learning, and the impact of such support on thecomposition of a meaningful and useful PF message.ReferencesCho, Y. H., & MacArthur, C. (2011). Learning by reviewing. Journal of Educational Psychology, 103(1), 73-84.doi: 0.1037/a0021950Hattie, J., & Timperley, H. (2007). The power of feedback. Review of Educational Research, 77(1), 81-112. doi:10.3102/003465430298487Kluger, A. N., & Denisi, A. (1996). The effects of feedback interventions on performance: A historical review, ameta-analysis and a preliminary feedback intervention theory. Psychological Bulletin, 119(2), 254-284.Mayring, P. (2014). Qualitative content analysis: Theoretical foundation, basic procedures and software solution.Retrieved from: http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0168-ssoar-395173Nicol, D., Thomson, A., & Breslin, C. (2014). Rethinking feedback practices in higher education: A peer reviewperspective. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 39(1), 102-122.Strijbos, J. W., Martens, R., L., Prins, F. J., & Jochems, W. M. G. (2006). Content analysis: What are they talkingabout? Computers & Education, 46(1), 29-48. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2005.04.002Strijbos, J. W., & Müller, A. (2014). Personale Faktoren im Feedbackprozess. In H. Ditton & A. Müller (Eds.),Feedback und Rückmeldungen: Theoretische Grundlagen, empirische Befunde, praktischeAnwendungsfelder [Feedback and evaluation: Theoretical foundations, empirical findings, practicalimplementation] (pp. 87-134). Münster, Germany: Waxmann.Topping, K. (2003). Self- and peer assessment in school and university: Reliability, validity and utility. In M.Segers, F. Dochy & E. Cascallar (Eds.), Optimising new modes of assessment: In search of qualities andstandards (pp. 55-87). Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.Van Zundert, M. J., Sluijsmans, D. M. A., Könings, K. D., & Van Merriënboer, J. J. G. (2012). The differentialeffects of task complexity on domain-specific and peer assessment skills. Educational Psychology: AnInternational Journal of Experimental Educational Psychology, 32(1), 127-145. doi:10.1080/01443410.2011.626122ICLS 2016 Proceedings865© ISLS