The Role of Visual Representations Within theScientific Practice of ExplanationRebecca Quintana, University of Michigan, rebeccaq@umich.eduTom Moher, University of Illinois at Chicago, moher@uic.eduJim Slotta, Boston College, slotta@bc.eduAbstract: Two Grade 5/6 classes (n=47) participated in an 8-week biology unit where theyinvestigated WallCology, a digital ecosystem. During a series of oral presentations, studentspresented findings from their digital experiments. Our goal is to understand the role of thevisual representations (e.g., digital screens, graphs) that students referenced during thesepresentations. We use the Claim Evidence Reasoning framework to establish the suitability ofthe presentation task for scientific explanations and for evaluating students’ explanations. Weshow that student groups were proficient in their scientific explanations and effectively used avariety of representation types across all three components of their explanations. We concludethat visual representations did not just influence scientific discourse, but were part of it.IntroductionA fundamental aim of science is to explain the world around us, in order to make sense of how and why variousphenomena occur (Berland & Reiser, 2009). Scientists use a variety of representations (e.g., diagrams,equations, notations) to communicate what is currently known about phenomena, even whilst they are stillworking on a problem (Prain & Tytler, 2013). However, in typical science classrooms, learners are rarelyafforded the opportunity to engage with visual representations in ways that align with scientific practice(Ainsworth, Prain, & Tytler, 2011). Instead, a common practice is to ask learners to construct representations ofsomething, rather than to produce a representation for something (i.e., serving a concrete purpose, such ascommunicating to peers) (Greeno & Hall, 1997). If learners are to become more than passive consumers ofscience, educators need to envision scenarios where learners have the opportunity to invent, modify and discussscientific representations (Danish & Enyedy, 2007). In this paper, we present a study where students arepresented with the challenge of making sense of unfamiliar scientific phenomena and are offered theopportunity of “practicing representations” (Greeno & Hall, 1997) as they engage in the scientific practice ofexplanation with their peers.Theoretical foundationsA scientific explanation responds to a question, using data analysis and interpretation of scientific principles.The Claim Evidence Reasoning (CER) framework (McNeill & Krajcik, 2011) is designed to provide studentswith guidance on how to structure scientific explanations that are part of their scientific writing, discussions,and oral presentations. This instructional model includes three components (claim, evidence, and reasoning) andasks learners to create a coherent explanation by linking all three components together, with evidence providingsupport for a claim and reasoning linking evidence to the claim. To date, research that uses the CER frameworkhas not focused on the role of visual representations within the scientific practice of explanation. To that end,this paper offers a new dimension that can contribute to this body of work.WallCology narrativeWallCology is a digital simulation that is part of the Embedded Phenomena framework (Moher, Uphoff, Bhatt,López Silva, & Malcolm, 2008). WallCology consists of fictional animated species that interact with each otherand the environmental features of their ecosystem. Students investigate ecological concepts, such as howspecies interact with each other (e.g., producer consumer relationships) and the effect of environmental stressorson population levels.In the first phase of the unit, students are introduced to the environment when their teacher asks themto imagine that there are four distinct ecosystems that exist behind each of their classroom walls. They are toldthe only way to view them is through specialized “wallscopes” (i.e., digital monitors). Students are tasked withobserving the ecosystems and asked to pay close attention to the behaviors and interactions of digital species.Each ecosystem contains its own unique configuration of abiotic characteristics including temperature, availablepipe, and available brick, as well as a unique subset of the 11 WallCology species. These factors combine tocreate a complex inquiry space for students to explore. The students work together as a scientific community tounderstand how each species interacts with its environment and to discover the food web relationships amongCSCL 2017 Proceedings503© ISLSthe species. In the second phase of the unit, a major perturbation (e.g., habitat destruction, climate change)impacts each ecosystem, causing dramatic changes to population levels within the ecosystems. Working in oneof four table groups, students are then challenged to uncover the chain of events (starting from the initialperturbation) that led to the current state of the ecosystem. In the final phase of the unit (the investigationsphase), student groups are given the opportunity to adjust the population levels of species within each ecosystem(by increasing or decreasing them) and to introduce new species into the ecosystem. After each investigationcycle (ecosystem manipulation), student groups present the results of each “investigation" to their peers in theform of an oral presentation. The role of visual representations within the scientific practice of explanation asdemonstrated through these presentations is the focus of this study.Research questionsIn this study, we explore how students engaged in scientific explanations as part of the presentations that theymade within the investigation phase of the WallCology unit, with a focus on the types of visual representationsthat they elicited as evidence for their claims. The following research questions guided our analysis.1. How does the WallCology curriculum and learning environment create opportunities for students toengage in the scientific practice of explanation?2. What role do visual representations play within each component of students’ scientific explanations(e.g., claim, evidence, and reasoning)?MethodologyParticipantsThis study was conducted at a university laboratory school in Ontario, Canada. The school has a long history ofpromoting inquiry-based approaches to learning and instruction, including knowledge building and learnercentered pedagogies. The student body consisted of learners from varied cultural and socio-economicbackgrounds. Two Grade 5/6 classes participated (n=47), along with their teachers, Brad and Mark(pseudonyms). Both Brad and Mark had experience in facilitating collaborative forms of learning within theirclassrooms, with ten and five years of teaching experience respectively.Learning environment and curriculum materialsTwo research groups from the University of Toronto and the University of Illinois at Chicago and classroomteachers from our partner schools participated in a co-design process (Roschelle, Penuel, & Shectman, 2007) todesign and develop the learning environment and technology-enhanced learning materials. Co-design processescan foster a sense of trust among design team members and can ensure that innovations are a good fit for aparticular classroom context.Technology designsThe co-design team, including teachers, researchers, software developers and graphic artists, worked together tocreate a suite of web-based tools to support idea and knowledge exchange among students as they progressedthrough the WallCology narrative. Included within these tools was a brainstorm space, where students couldshare newly emerging ideas with peers, an observation space, where students could exchange structured notes(including visual media) and pairwise observations about producer-consumer relationships, a population graphtool, where students could specify species and environmental factors (e.g., temperature) to compare, and aninvestigation space, for student groups to propose a population change to one or more species in an ecosystem,predict how all other species will be affected by the change, justify predictions, and record the results of theinvestigation, including an explanation for the reported results.In this study, we focus on students’ use of the investigation space, and consider how they used thepresentation screens within that tool to spotlight the important elements of their investigations. The investigationspace consisted of several screens that allowed students to proceed stepwise through each stage of theirinvestigation to (1) describe the current state of the ecosystem (i.e., health of the ecosystem as evidenced bypopulation levels), (2) write an investigation plan whose goal is to improve the overall health of the ecosystem,(3) make a prediction concerning the outcome of an investigation (i.e., manipulation to the population of one ormore species), and (4) report the results of their investigation. After contributing descriptions, plans, predictions,and reports for all stages of their investigation, students could display a condensed view of their investigationsusing the tools present screens: plan, predict, and results. We designed these three views to allow students toeasily show their peers an overview of their investigation by reducing the number of screens that they wouldCSCL 2017 Proceedings504© ISLShave to display during their presentations. Using these present screens, students could tap on attached media toenlarge them. Figure 1 shows a student group displaying an investigation present screen on the classroomSMART Board during one of their investigation presentations.Figure 1. Student group enlarges media (a graph) during one of their investigation presentations.Activity designsAn important aspect of our activity designs was requiring students to engage in scientific explanations,particularly within the investigations phase of the unit. The classroom teachers introduced the investigationsphase by asking students to consider the question: What makes an ecosystem healthy? Through whole classdiscussion, both classes elaborated on this concept and identified many features that would be indicators of theoverall health of an ecosystem (e.g., balance of pretty and predators, variety of species, able to support life).Teachers captured the important ideas from these discussions in concept maps that remained on display for theinvestigation phase.Brad and Mark explained that table groups would have the opportunity to make adjustments to thedigital ecosystem that they were responsible for using one of three mechanisms: introducing one or more newspecies, increasing a species that was already present in the ecosystem, or decreasing an existing species. Theteachers reminded their students that in order to be successful in improving the health of their ecosystems, theywould have to take into account the underlying cause of the changes in the ecosystems. For example, inEcosystem 3, when an invasive predator entered the ecosystem, the indigenous predator was eliminated becausethe new predator had a significant advantage; it was a location generalist, whereas the indigenous predator was alocation specialist (i.e., only existed in the brick habitat). The invasive predator had access to food sources thatthe indigenous predator did not. Since each ecosystem was impacted by a different perturbation, each tablegroup needed to address a unique set of issues. However, because the interactions among species and the waysthat species interacted with the abiotic features of their habitat were consistent across ecosystems, studentgroups needed a forum to share their scientific explanations with the entire knowledge community. The formatfor this knowledge exchange was the investigation presentations, where students used the present screens thatare described above as a shared referent during their scientific explanations.Analysis and findingsResearch question #1In the first phase of our analysis, we evaluated the WallCology learning task (i.e., investigation presentations) toestablish that CER was “a good fit” to be used as a framework to evaluate students’ scientific explanations. Wemapped the WallCology learning task to three categories outlined by McNeill and Krajcik (2011): (1)opportunities in the curriculum that are appropriate for CER, (2) the complexity of the learning task, and (3)classroom supports. To perform this mapping, we used a variety of data sources including provincial curriculumdocuments, field notes, photographs, and video recordings.Opportunities in the curriculumTo establish that WallCology presented a sufficient curricular opportunity, we looked at “learningperformances” (i.e., a specification of what the students should be able to do, given both the content standardand scientific inquiry standard that is being targeted within a given activity) McNeill and Krajcik (2011). Forthis analysis, we were interested in examining the learning performances that related to the investigationpresentation task. The co-design team consulted curriculum guidelines outlined by the Ontario Ministry ofEducation (2007) during the design phase and sought to map these curriculum goals to our activity designs. TheCSCL 2017 Proceedings505© ISLSsixth grade “Understanding Life Systems: Biodiversity” unit outlines both content standards (i.e., expectationsof student performance) and scientific inquiry standards (e.g., experimentation skills). According to McNeilland Krajcik (2011), a learning performance is defined as a product of content standards and scientific inquirystandards. Table 1 provides an overview of the learning performances that were part of the WallCologyinvestigation presentation task.Table 1: Overview of the learning performances that were part of the WallCology investigation taskOntario curriculum expectations3.2. Demonstrate an understanding ofbiodiversity as the variety of life onearth, including variety within eachspecies of plant and animal, amongspecies of plants and animals incommunities, and the physicallandscapes that support them (p.114).3.7 Explain how invasive speciesreduce biodiversity in localenvironments (p. 114).3.3 Describe ways in whichbiodiversity within species isimportant for maintaining theresilience of these species (p. 114).3.4 Describe ways in whichbiodiversity within and amongcommunities is important formaintaining the resilience of thesecommunities (p. 114).Scientific inquiry/experimentationskillsInitiating and planningStudents make predictions, based onprior knowledge from explorationsand investigations about the results ofan investigation (p. 13).WallCology learning performanceAnalyzing and interpreting dataStudents identify patterns in the data,suggest explanations fordiscrepancies, and summarize thedata. Students draw conclusions onthe basis of data gathered(p. 14).CommunicatingStudent present steps in and results ofan experimental procedure usingnumeric, symbolic, graphical, and/orlinguistic methods (p. 14) to answerthe question investigated (p. 16).Students explain how an invasivespecies can reduce the biodiversitywithin their WallCology ecosystem,drawing on available data, such astheir own observations andpopulation graphs.Students use their understanding ofthe WallCology ecosystems,including environmentalcharacteristics and the species thatinhabit each one, to plan, makepredictions, and report on the resultsof each investigation.In the form of an oral presentation,students state a claim about theoverall health of their ecosystem.They present their investigationplans/predictions/and reports to theirpeers, answering the question “Howcan we/did we improve the overallhealth of our ecosystem?”As shown in Table 1, the WallCology learning performances associated with the investigation presentation taskrequired that students engage in meaningful scientific explanation, combining curriculum expectations withscientific inquiry/experimentation skills. Students had to state a claim about how the health of their ecosystemwill be improved through their manipulation, provide evidence in the form of known food web relationships andchanges in population sizes of other species, and give reasoning about how changing the population of onespecies impacts multiple species in the food web, including both direct and indirect relationships.Complexity of the learning taskComplexity of the learning task can be described in terms of two aspects: (1) openness of question, (2) type ofdata, and (3) amount of data. The WallCology learning environment is on the more complex end of thespectrum in all three of these areas. Table 2 provides an overview of these three areas to demonstrate thatstudents were working in a complex inquiry space. For example, students provided explanations in response toopen-ended and semi-structured questions, rather than highly structured questions. Also, students used multipleforms of data, including quantitative, qualitative, and even contradictory data. The inquiry space was large andhighly complex, with student groups having the ability to manipulate multiple species in one investigation andto perform multiple consecutive and accumulative investigations.Table 2: Three aspects that describe the complexity of the learning taskOpenness of questionStudents constructed explanations inresponse to open-ended questions:•How can we improve the health ofour ecosystem?CSCL 2017 ProceedingsType of dataStudents used multiple forms of datato construct their explanations.Qualitative data:•Students made observations about506Amount of data•Students could manipulate up to11 species at one time.•Students performed multiple© ISLSHow can the factors under ourcontrol be manipulated to improvethe health of our ecosystem?Students also made claims in responseto semi-structured questions:•Is our ecosystem more or lesshealthy than it was prior to ourlast manipulation?•How has the introduction of aninvasive species (the increase intemperature or habitat loss)contributed to a reduction in thehealth of our ecosystem?•the populations of species withintheir ecosystem and about thestate of the habitats within theirecosystem.Quantitative data:•Students constructed populationgraphs using the WallCologygraph tool.•Students constructed populationgraphs using the graph tool.•Students considered seeminglycontradictory data.consecutive and accumulativeinvestigations.•Students attended to theinvestigations and ecosystems ofother groups, not just their own.Classroom supportsMcNeill and Krajcik (2011) recommend that the components of the CER framework be displayed in theclassroom as a memory aid for students as they provide written or oral explanations. Such charts could containvarying degrees of detail, from categorical titles (CER), to titles with descriptions and/or examples. In theclassrooms we studied, there were no representations that referenced CER on display. However, therepresentations that captured the healthy ecosystem discussion (i.e., concept maps) remained on displaythroughout the investigation phase. These underlying concepts provided guidance for student groups as theyconstructed claims regarding the health or future health (i.e., after a manipulation) of their ecosystem.According to McNeill and Krajcik (2011), curricular scaffolds are “sentence starters, sub-questions,graphic organizers, or prompts that help break down the task and provide students with hints on how tosuccessfully complete the scientific explanation task” (p. 60). Our technology designs included CER specificlanguage within the investigation phase prompts. McNeill and Krajcik (2011) also distinguish between generaland content-specific scaffolds. General scaffolds provide support for scientific explanation but could be usedwith any content. Content-specific scaffolds provide support that is specific to the content area and to the task.The prompts that were provided to students in the investigation space were content-specific because they relateddirectly to the tasks of planning, predicting, and reporting on a WallCology investigation. Table 3 provides amapping of CER components to curricular scaffolds.Table 3: CER components mapped to the WallCology curricular scaffoldsCER componentClaimEvidenceReasoningWallCology curricular scaffoldsWhat is your goal? What are you hoping to accomplish?What were the results of this investigation?You can add evidence to support your prediction (e.g., food web)For each species, choose whether the species went up or down.Give your reasoningJustify your predictions. Why will some species go up or down? How do these changesaffect other species in the ecosystem?Research question #2The second phase of our analysis concerns the role of visual representations within the investigationpresentation task. We analyzed all investigation presentations given by student groups in both Brad and Mark’sclasses (n=32). We analyzed the content of student groups’ scientific explanations using a customized rubric,drawing on McNeill and Krajcik (2011). Table 4 presents a succinct version of this rubric. We cross-referencedeach CER component with the type of visual representation(s) that students referenced during theirpresentations. We chose to include multiple forms of visual representations including system-generatedresources (i.e., investigation present screens) and student-generated representations (e.g., population graphs,photographs). We also considered other knowledge resources that students referenced, including when theycited the “wallscopes” themselves. We used StudioCode to analyze the investigation presentation videos andcreated segments according to the claim, evidence, and reasoning portions of student groups’ explanations. Wecoded segments with labels to describe representation types (learning environment, investigation screens,graphs, other representations, and none) and to describe the CER level that we assigned to each segment, usingthe customized rubric.CSCL 2017 Proceedings507© ISLSTable 4: Succinct view of customized CER RubricCERComponentLevel012Claim – A conclusionthat answers theoriginal question: Howcan we make ourecosystem healthier?Does not make a claimMakes an accurate/reasonable andcomplete claim (e.g., relates tohealthy ecosystem concepts and/oraddresses underlying cause ofchange to ecosystem).Evidence – Scientificdata that supports theclaim. The data needsto be appropriate andsufficient to support theclaim.Does not provide anyevidence or provides onlyinappropriate evidence(i.e., inaccurate)Makes an accurate/reasonablebut incomplete claim (i.e.,does not relate to healthyecosystem concepts and/orunderlying cause of change toecosystem).Provides appropriate evidence(e.g., based on observations,known facts about theecosystem such as food webrelationships, or analysis ofgraphs), but is insufficient tosupport claim.Reasoning – Ajustification that linksthe claim and evidence.It shows why the datacounts as evidence byusing appropriate andsufficient scientificprinciples.Does not providereasoning or providesreasoning that does notlink evidence to the claim.Provides reasoning that linksthe claim and evidence, butdoes not include appropriateand sufficient scientificprinciples (e.g., healthyecosystem concepts orunderlying cause of change tothe ecosystem).Provides reasoning that linksevidence to claim. Includesappropriate and sufficientscientific principles (e.g., healthyecosystem concepts, referencingunderlying cause of change to theecosystem).Provides appropriate and sufficientevidence (e.g., based onobservations, known facts aboutthe ecosystem such as food webrelationships, or analysis of graphsto support claim.Using the rubric shown in Table 4, we evaluated each component of student groups’ explanations, giving it ascore of 0, 1, or 2. There were a total of 19 claims made in Brad’s class and 18 claims made in Mark’s class. InFigure 2, we present the results of our CER analysis. Student groups in both classes achieved more level 2s withtheir reasoning than with their evidence. In Brad’s class, they achieved more level 2s with their evidence than inmaking claims; in Mark’s class, this result was reversed.Figure 2. CER levels of student groups’ in Brad’s class (left) and Mark’s class (right).Next we examined the percentage of instances when student groups made reference to one or more visualrepresentations during each CER component. Student groups in both classes directly referenced visualrepresentations most frequently during the evidence component of their explanation—approximately 80% of thetime. However, student groups also referenced visual representations with high frequency during both the claimand reasoning components of their explanation, with some variation across classes (see Figure 3). To see if therewas any possible connection between whether or not a student group utilized a visual representation and thelevel they scored in each CER component of their explanation, we calculated co-efficient values for thesevariables. In all instances, there were no positive correlations. Similarly, when we also looked for a connectionbetween number of visual representations utilized and CER levels, we found no positive correlations.CSCL 2017 Proceedings508© ISLSFigure 3. Percentage of time student groups made reference to a visual representation during CER components.Finally, we examined the type of representation (e.g., investigation screens) that student groups referencedduring each CER component (see Figure 4). While we were not able to show that there was any strongcorrelation between reference to a visual representation or a specific type of visual representation and higherCER level scores, our analysis shows that student groups successfully used the investigation screens to supportall three CER components of their explanations. Students used a variety of other representations to support theirexplanations, sometimes using more than one type within a single CER component, and most often during theevidence component of their explanations.Figure 4. Breakdown of representation types referenced during each CER component for Brad and Mark’sclasses, with totals shown in brackets.DiscussionBy mapping the WallCology curriculum designs to the three features outlined by McNeill and Krajcik (2011),we were able to portray a complex inquiry space that created space for students to engage in the scientificpractice of explanation. An activity structure that allows students to persuade an audience that is unfamiliar withtheir data and work is not typical in science classrooms (Berland & Reiser, 2009). The WallCology curriculumdesign created opportunities for learners to construct complex scientific understandings through sociallyconnected processes (Engle & Conant, 2002; Gray & Szalay, 2007). In the presentation task, student groupswere only moderately familiar with the specifics of other ecosystem investigations, making them “unfamiliarreaders” of each other’s work (Berland & Reiser, 2009). The implicit goal, therefore, of the student groups’presentations was that of persuasion—to provide evidence (connected by reasoning) to support a claim that theyhad made about their ecosystem. By carefully evaluating another groups’ explanations, student groups coulddetermine whether or not to incorporate new approaches and evidence into their own future investigations.Greeno and Hall (1997) speak about “practicing representations” as part of social practice. It involves“learning to participate in the complex practices of communication and reasoning in which the representationsare used” (p. 361). During the investigation presentations, student groups used various forms of visualrepresentations as a communication tool. They were able to demonstrate their ability to understand and interprettraditional forms (e.g., graphs, food web relationship diagrams), but they also put these representations to use,and used them as a device to strengthen their explanations. Greeno and Hall (1997) distinguish betweenrepresentations that are of something and representations that are for something. During the investigationpresentations, student groups took representations that were of something (e.g., simulation screens that wereCSCL 2017 Proceedings509© ISLSvisible in the classroom) and retooled them into representations that were for something. In addition to“practicing representations” as a form of social practice, student groups used various representation types as aform of scientific practice. Although the investigation presentations were a form of culminating task, studentsgroups presented to their peers while they were making new discoveries and refining their understanding. In thissense, students were engaging in work with representations in a manner that is similar to the way scientists userepresentations. Student groups coordinated a variety of representation types and used them with competenceand fluency and to support their knowledge claims. Our study portrays a scenario in which visualrepresentations played a vital role. They did not just influence or support scientific discourse; rather, theybecame woven into the fabric of the discourse.LimitationsDuring design discussions, the teachers on the co-design team indicated that they would like to include thelanguage of “claim, evidence, and reasoning” in our prompts. The co-design team included scaffolds that askedstudents to stake a claim (by responding to a driving question) and to use the language of “evidence” and“claim.” However, the students themselves were not explicitly guided to use the framework during theirpresentations, nor did the teachers explicitly model the approach. Nevertheless, the classroom culture had longestablished knowledge building practices that provided learners with the necessary background to engage in thescientific discourse of explanation.ReferencesAinsworth, S., Prain, V., & Tytler, R. (2011). Drawing to learn in science. Science, 333(6046), 1096-7.Berland, L. K., & Reiser, B. J. (2009). Making sense of argumentation and explanation. ScienceEducation, 93(1), 26-55.Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1996). Psychological theory and design of innovative learning environments:On procedures, principles, and systems. In L. Schauble and R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovations in learning:New environments for education, (pp. 289-325). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Danish, J. A., & Enyedy, N. (2007). Negotiated representational mediators: How young children decide what toinclude in their science representations.Science Education, 91(1), 1-35.Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition andInstruction, 20(4), 399-483.Gray, J., & Szalay, A. (2007). eScience - A transformed scientific method (PowerPoint slides). Retrieved fromhttp://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/gray/talks/NRC-CSTB_eScience.ppt.McNeill, K. L., & Krajcik, J. S. (2011). Supporting Grade 5-8 Students in Constructing Explanations inScience: The Claim, Evidence, and Reasoning Framework for Talk and Writing. Boston, MA:Pearson.Moher, T., Uphoff, B., Bhatt, D., López Silva, B., and Malcolm, P. (2008). WallCology: designing interactionaffordances for learner engagement in authentic science inquiry. In Proceedings of the SIGCHIConference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI). (pp. 163-172). ACM.Ontario Ministry of Education. (2007). The Ontario Curriculum Grades 1-8: Science and Technology.Retrieved from http://www.edu.gov.on.ca/eng/curriculum/elementary/scientec18currb.pdfPenuel, W.R., Roschelle, J., & Shechtman, N. (2007). Designing formative assessment software with teachers:An analysis of the co-design process. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 2(1),51-74.Prain, V. & Tytler, R. (2013). Representing and learning in science. In R.Tytler, V.Prain, P.Hubber & B.Waldrip (Eds). Constructing representations to learn in science. Sense Publishers: Amsterdam, p 1-14.Studiocode Group. (n.d.). Retrieved October 29, 2016, from http://www.studiocodegroup.com/AcknowledgmentsWe heartily thank the teachers who partnered with us to design and implement the curriculum. We also thanktheir students, who enthusiastically engaged in this curriculum. The authors are grateful for the substantialsupport that was provided by many members of the Encore Lab, notably, Renato Carvalho, Armin Krauss, ColinMcCann, and Meagan O’Hara. The material presented is based on work supported by the U.S. National ScienceFoundation under grants IIS-1065275 and DRL-1020027, as well as the Canadian Social Sciences andHumanities Research Council under grant 410-2011-0474.CSCL 2017 Proceedings510© ISLS