Preparing Students for Learning Statistics with Adventure Game:Learning Cycle Model of Gaming, Watching, and PracticingHiroki Oura, Tokyo Institute of Technology, houra@citl.titech.ac.jpRyohei Ikejiri, Kae Nakaya, Ryota Yamamoto, and Yuhei Yamauchiikejiri@iii.u-tokyo.ac.jp, knakaya@iii.u-tokyo.ac.jp, ryota@iii.u-tokyo.ac.jp, yamauchi@iii.u.tokyo.ac.jpThe University of TokyoAbstract: Learning statistics is challenging for non-major students. Prior research suggestsengaging students in some preparatory activity for them to explore statistical problems with avideo game and tangible simulation before providing formal learning resources leads to largerlearning gains than the other order. The present study extends this line of theoreticaldiscussion by demonstrating adventure game as another suited format for such preparatoryactivity as part of a learning cycle combined with collaborative formal practice.IntroductionLearning statistics is challenging for non-major students, and it is a significant goal to develop such instructionaltheory that helps a wide range of students without a strong mathematics background learn statistics effectively.Literature suggests engaging students in some form of inquiry as a promising approach; some emphasizeengaging students in scientific practices (e.g., Lehrer, Kim & Schauble, 2007); some emphasize engagingstudents in informal statistical inference (ISI) (e.g., Makar, Bakker, & Ben-Zvi, 2011). Another line of researchengages students in some preparatory activity for them to explore statistical problems with a deliberatelydesigned video game and tangible simulation designed to prepare them for future learning before providingformal learning resources (e.g., Arena & Schwartz, 2013; Schneider & Blikstein, 2015).Conceptual frameworkBransford and Schwartz (1999) discussed a point of view of transfer to solve new problems given relevantresources in Preparation for Future Learning (PFL). Schwartz and Martin (2004) engaged students in an“invention” activity that they first attempt to invent their own solution for a statistical problem before its brieflecture and individual practice, and demonstrated that students in such condition outperformed those in the “telland-practice” condition. Later, Arena & Schwartz (2013) designed an invader game that visualizes probabilitydistributions of invaders and demonstrated consistent results by engaging participants in playing the game andreading expository texts. Schneider and Blikstein (2015) designed a tabletop simulation of permutations andcombinations and demonstrated that the “table-and-video-lecture” condition outperformed the “video-lectureand-table” condition. These suggest that PFL can be characterized by the preparatory stage that engage studentsin some exploratory activity before providing formal learning resources (FLRs). In this study, we propose anadventure game as an alternative format for designing such PFL activities combined with another collaborativeformal practice (CFP) step after the “PFL-and-FLR” sequence as part of the unit of learning cycle.Adventuregame for PFL followed by formal learning resource and practiceAdventure game is a popular category in video, computer, and mobile games, which can present various, bothreal and virtual, and context-rich scenarios to users and engage them in a sequence of questions and answers inthe form of problem solving. In the present study, we designed an online adventure game in which students canexplore such statistical-problem-solving scenarios (Figure 1). First, users choose a scenario and they are given abackground context and its problem such as “Is your friend’s coin deceptive?” and “Which store has the longestwaiting time?” with answer options aimed to engage them in informal statistical reasoning (Table 1). To solvethe problems, users go to the investigation mode in which they collect sample data by choosing a sample size(N= 10, 100, or 1000) and interpret the histograms from randomly varied but computationally controlledpopulation distributions. Based on their own reasoning with the graphs, users choose their answer and thesubsequent story acknowledges them if and how their choice was correct in the scenario context or not. Afterexploring the probabilistic phenomena and activating their prior knowledge, they are provided with FLR such aslectures and the videos, and this “PFL-and-FLR” sequence is expected to lead to better learning gains than theother order as discussed in aforementioned studies. In addition, we also stress the third step of CFP as part of theunit of learning cycle. CFP refers to such activity that students collaboratively work on conceptual andmathematical tasks that help students practice their formal knowledge and skills after the FLR step (Figure 2).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1507© ISLSSuch collaborative exercise step has not been stressed as part of the unit of learning cycle in prior studies, but itwill help students develop their conceptual understanding and its application skills through the exercise step.Figure 1. Screen Captures of the Adventure Game—top left and right: presenting the background context (candyfactory scenario), bottom left: presenting the problem and answer options (Line A, B, and C), and bottom right:histograms in the diameter and thickness of a candy (Line A has a larger variance in thickness than other lines).Figure 2. The Learning Cycle Model of PFL, FLR, and CFP Steps Drawing from the PFL FrameworkFuture workThe present study illustrated a learning cycle model with the adventure game followed by formal learningresource and collaborative practice. This study is still in a preliminary stage and a comparative experiment isgoing to be held to test effects of the adventure game on learning gains and processes in the near future.ReferencesArena, D. A., & Schwartz, D. L. (2013). Experience and explanation: Using videogames to prepare students forformal instruction in statistics. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 23(4), 538-548.Bransford, J. D. & Schwartz, D. L. (1999) Rethinking transfer: a simple proposal with multiple implications.Review of Research in Education, 24: 61-100.Lehrer, R., Kim, M., & Schauble, L. (2007). Supporting the Development of Conceptions of Statistics byEngaging Students in Measuring and Modeling Variability, International Journal of Computers forMathematical Learning, 12(3), 195–216.Makar, K., Bakker, A., & Ben-Zvi, D. (2011) The Reasoning Behind Informal Statistical Inference,Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 13, 152–173.Schneider, B. & Blikstein, P. (2015) Flipping the Flipped Classroom: A Study of the Effectiveness of VideoLectures Versus Constructivist Exploration Using Tangible User Interfaces, IEEE Transactions onLearning Technologies, 9(1), 5-17.Schwartz, D. L. & Martin, T. (2004) Inventing to Prepare for Future Learning: The Hidden Efficiency ofEncouraging Original Student Production in Statistics Instruction, Cognition and Instruction, 22:2,129-184.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1508© ISLS