Exercising the Heart of History Education: Negotiating the PastThrough a Principle-Based, Technological Driven KnowledgeBuilding CultureMelvin Chan, Teck Whye Secondary School, Chan_Joo_Seng_Melvin@moe.edu.sgTeo Chew Lee, MOE, Singapore, Teo_Chew_Lee@moe.gov.sgAbstract: This study examined the use of historical concept in a class of Secondary onestudents inquiring on the topics on “Pre-1819 Singapore” and the “British Heritage inSingapore History” using a Knowledge Building approach and Knowledge Forum technology.Analysis of a selected groups of students ‘contributions was done according to four level ofnegotiation revealed in the class’ discourse. Students engaged in such historical discoursesuggests the development of concept and process skill which points to the fact that knowledgebuilding pedagogy and technology are conducive to quality teaching and learning of history.Results also pinpoint common misnomer about knowledge building in history class and how ateacher can facilitate such discourse.IntroductionLearning History is often perceived to involve mainly memorizing of historical facts. To do well in Historymeans to cramp those facts from the textbook into memory and then to be able to regurgitate the facts at anexamination. This notion translates into a persistent pedagogical problem in history classes that emphasized onconventional narratives as the “dominant educational tool” (Resendes & Chuy, 2012). The Recent educationalshift towards cognitive and social processes served to remind educators about the need to look into the nature ofthe subject as well as to how students think and learn about complex concepts. The introduction of historicalthinking in History classroom, liken to the way a historian work to construct a historical explanation, is slowlyinfluencing the way people understand about history lessons. In recent years, history teachers realize that theycan no longer be the only knowledge dispensers in class because of how quickly their students could search forsimilar, if not more, of the required facts on the Internet. They are sensing a shift in their role to engage studentsin historical reasoning and inquiry on complex historical issues (Fulbrook, 2002).Also, Learning Sciences Research (Bransford, 2002; Sawyer, 2008) has provided sufficient evidence toconvince educators that students should engage in collaborative knowledge building activities which includequestioning, researching, evaluating, analyzing, negotiating, and synthesizing to prepare for real knowledgework. This study attempts to study (i) the way in which students negotiate a historical phenomenon and recordedthe pattern of interactions designed by the teacher in his Knowledge Building history class.The classroom and teacher’s designThe participants of this study were from one secondary one (grade 7) class. This class is considered the lessacademically inclined group in school. Humanities subjects for lower Secondary in the school ran on a modularsystem which means students only have three months (July to September) of a history lesson in a year while therest are for Geography lessons. The teacher observed that the class tends to ignore contesting views or change toadopt the new view when they are made to do whole-class discussion during the introductory sessionsCSCL 2017 Proceedings696© ISLSKB principles, activities, and teachers’ rationale.Table 1. Mapping the KB principles, the KB activities and the teachers’ rationales behind the design.KB principlesInquiry processdefined in SyllabusTeacher’spedagogical moveKB Activitiesdesigned by theteacher(Stage 1: Pre-1819Singapore)KB activitiesdesigned by theteacher(Stage 2: BritishHeritage inSingapore)Rationales for KBactivitiesDemocratizing Knowledge; Improvable Ideas;Community KnowledgeSparking CuriosityImprovable Ideas; Real Ideas and Authentic Problem; Epistemic Agency;Constructive use of Authoritative SourcesGathering Evidence and Exercising ReasoningEpistemic agency; Rise above;Knowledge building discourseReflective ThinkingStart: Design forstudents to surfacecurrent/ intuitiveunderstanding to theissue or themeTeacher facilitateswhole class discussionthrough a class mindmap recordingstudents’ initial idea ofPre-1819 SingaporeSpark: Design for students to read,exchange and craft online comments.Stretch: Design for students tosynthesize ideas based on peers’suggestions and craft “a bettertheory” note.Scale: Design for students to reflecton their ways of learning and/ways ofthinkingStudents, in pair, craft their initial standto the overarching inquiry question thenthey read and comment on their peers’notes (using KF scaffolds).Students, in pair, review peers’comments.Students reflect on how they derive atthe enhanced theory (KF notes).Students share ideasand examples of“British Heritage inSingapore”.Seek: Design forstudents to formulateideas/ questionsrelating to the issue ortheme.Students post initialquestions about pre1819 Singapore. Next,there will be a wholeclass discussion indeciding theoverarching inquiryquestion.Students work ingroups to synthesizeideas on heritagebefore formulating agroup inquiryquestion that theywant to explorefurther.They read the buildons to their ideas(agree/ disagree withjustification).Increases students’ ownership and engagementof learning.Understands students’ prior knowledge and/ormisconception related to the historical issue.Rationales for smallgroup and wholeclass activitiesAffordance andRationale(s) ofKnowledge ForumBrings about a culture of “democratization ofKnowledge” and collaboration.Allows students to appreciate diverse ideas froma community and for them to understand theneed to “pull-together” diverse ideas to developimproved ideas.The comments can be a disagreement,suggestions or areas of concern.Students brainstorm and research on theirgroup inquiry question and craft theirinitial stand.They then build-on to their peers’ entriesin the following areas: (i) relevance oftheir examples and research, (ii) qualityof their research and/or (iii) suggestionsof other examples.Enculturates meta-cognition for historyGets students to appreciate conflictingopinions.They then make reference to theseThey weigh which is the bestcomments and synthesize informationenhanced theory. Teacher showto formulate a “better theory” (KFstudents’ historical growth throughscaffold) to the overarching inquirythe KF analytical tools andquestion.observations.Students, in groups, make reference,Students reflect on the followingreview and synthesize the informationthrough a survey on:(i)their perception of historyto formulate a final group inquiryquestion.(ii) their ideas/ viewpoints of acollaborative classroom cultureThey also consider comments to their (iii) their opinions about KB and KFnew inquiry questionand its use in facilitating theirhistorical thought processes.Strengthens students’ meta-cognitionthrough iterations of evaluation andreconciliation of varied opinions,perspectives and/or ideas to the issue.Brings about a “building-on” versus“answering” cultureCreates authentic history learningenvironment that emphasises on colearning and referencingSupports assessment as learning through the culture of cross-referencing.Helps students appreciate that history is a social construct and historical discourseinvolves negotiation and collaboration.Provide a collaborative space for students to see the reservoir of ideas (e.g. questions, viewpoints and concerns) at a glance andincreases possibility of students seeing connections between varied information/ideas.Support students’ historical and meta-cognitive reasoning through its six KB scaffolds. Referencing tool facilitates the habits ofincorporating others’ ideas to refine one’s own idea.CSCL 2017 Proceedings697Encourages reflective thinking withregards to personal learning processand development.Celebrates the growth of historicalunderstanding and personal attributesof the studentsDevelops students’ understandingthat good history research requirescollective questioning and inquiry.KF analytics tool provide timelyanalysis that allows students to reflecton their interactions and growth.© ISLSAnalysis of Stage 1 inquiry: Pre-1819 SingaporeData collected includes students’ notes and learning artefacts, teachers’ design document and reflection. In thiscase, we focused on students’ notes to analyse for how and to which degree the students negotiate ideas on thehistorical significance of Pre-1819 Singapore and the historical phenomenon of British heritage in Singapore.We traced and analysed each group’s theory development, their reflection on their reasoning process, using the4 level of students’ stance in KB discourse in History (Table 2).Table 2: 4 level of students’ stance in KB Discourse in HistoryLevelLevel 1Students’ stance from kbdiscourseIgnore opposing ideas in KBdiscourseLevel 2Switch to take up opposingideas without explanationLevel 3Summarize information fromdifferent viewpoints/KFentriesSynthesize to formulate newunderstanding of the variedviewpoints, ideas andsuggestionsLevel 4DescriptionsCancellation of challenging or contesting comments (be itdiffering stands or areas of concerns) without explanation orjustificationConformity to the opposing stand of the contesting commentsand disregard their initial stand without explanation orjustificationContent Combination by merging and matching ideas due totheir similarity or relevance. No clear evidence of historicalconcept as the overarching frame of thinkingConceptual Combination by forming an ‘theory’ or ‘question’that uses the discipline of history such as procedural concepts(i.e. causation, change and continuity) or substantive concepts*(i.e. power, political, economic) as the overarching frame ofthinkingWe trace a series of students’ build-on notes on the inquiry question: “Why must we study pre-1819 Singapore?”Pair A’s first KF entry provided a reason for the importance of studying pre-1819 Singapore.My (Our) Theory: “We need to know Singapore before 1819 because we can know aboutSingapore past… By doing this we can better understand Singapore recent excavation of FortCanning (that) provide evidence that Singapore was a port of some importance in (the) 14thcentury and used for transaction between (the) Malays and Chinese. We can also know whatplaces in Singapore has changed and what significant event that took place in Singapore, wecan also know that if Singapore is in connection with the countries.”Pair B neither agree or disagree with A. They posed a question to suggest a different perspective that Pair Acould consider to better understand the question.“My theory – we are convinced by them, We agree that it is important to know more about thehistory before the year 1819…“I need to understand – can you do research and tell us moreabout Singapore importance in the 14th century itself ”“This theory cannot explain – howdoes knowing the recent excavation help us understand better of Singapore”.They seemed to suggest that the importance of knowing pre-1819 Singapore should not be measured solely onhow it has led Singapore to who we are today or the lessons that we could learn. Instead, every period of time isimportant for its’ own existence (historical context). In short, Pair B was seen to be adopting a meta-view ofstudying history for its own sake and not history for something (level 4 stance in KB discourse).With this build-on from their friends in mind, Pair A went ahead to read others’ notes and using KFreferencing tool, Pair A referred to a note with detailed elaboration on two points, first being that 14th centurySingapore, and second point that emphasized on the need to study the different time period for its own purposes.Pair A then connected these ideas in their “better theory”.Analysis of Pair A’s “better theory” showed an elaborated description of the 14th century (level 3stance of KB discourse). It included phrases that stressed on time, which happened to be an important Historicalcontextualization. Example of the phrases include “so that we will know what exactly happened then”, “at thatpoint of time”, “back at that time Singapore is not…” Also, Pair A’s note also constrasted events included inCSCL 2017 Proceedings698© ISLSpeers’ entries to highlight Singapore’s importance in the 14th century, e.g. “Singapore fell after 14th centurybecause of better port in Melaka”.Finally, they reflected on “how do they come to this better theory” and “why do they choose this way”,Pair A echoed on how the idea of “that time” in their reading of other pairs’ notes made them realise that “time”is an important element in historical explanation (conceptual combination, level 4). Pair A also expressed thatthey could not ignore the word “better” in the KF scaffold A Better Theory and therefore was constantlythinking of ways to make all information “glued together”.In summary, Pair A was observed to be reading and referencing to their friends’ ideas in their notes. Itwas in this context of co-learning that explained how Pair A was able to synthesize different pieces ofinformation and to use historical contextualization of time and causation to generate a better explanation for theinquiry question. In a similar vein, analysis generated from the KF analytic tool showed a higher frequency andlonger span of conceptual words (e.g. relate, impact) as compared to content words (e.g. heritage, British) in thedatabase.Analysis Stage 2: British Heritage in SingaporeAfter experiencing an inquiry cycle showing how students were able to collaboratively construct newunderstanding, The teacher focused the second stage on bringing them through iteration of synthesizing andimproving ideas. Students started at the initial stage of questions generation, then moving on to negotiationprocess and finally towards building a consensus that was demonstrated in their final product. Group A’s KBentry it has been observed to change from “Is the British regulations good for Singapore?” to “Are we biasedthat we follow some British Education system until now?” through the knowledge building process. Studentswere more fluent in using KB scaffolds to ideate, e.g. (i) <I need to understand> the earlier question as toobroad with no exact time reference and category and (ii) <New Information>a history-related question is aboutchange.A collaborative culture was developing as the teacher observed that Group A were able to enhancetheir final inquiry question using the idea of change and continuity, e.g. “during our time with Malaya versusour time now” (level 4, conceptual combination). This conceptual consideration was also evident where theyincorporated various concerns raised by their peers by cross-referencing to Hong Kong and India (Both of whichwere British colonies too).Findings and discussionThere were no entries that took the first two stances of level 1(Ignore) or level 2 (switch to opposing ideas in KBdiscourse). In fact, students even mentioned that they should not discount or be indifference to other comments(be it differing stands or areas of concerns). This is in sharp contrast to what the teacher experienced during theintroductory session when students were noticed to be quick in either dismissing differing ideas or disregardingsuggestions and comments.The teacher also reflected that he was pleased to note that the students were not merely sharinginformation but mainly working towards synthesizing to derive at conceptual knowledge. The opportunities forthis group of students to synthesize their initial ideas, question, research and build-on their peers’ commentshave very positive impact on students’ engagement in historical reasoning. The study presented here shows howengaging in knowledge building discourse can help secondary school students build conceptual combinationfrom diverse ideas for historical phenomena. The analysis also suggests that students are capable of engaging insuch knowledge creation endeavor and they are genuinely interested in building collective understanding.ReferenceBransford, J., Vye, N., & Bateman, H. (2002, April). Creating high-quality learning environments: Guidelinesfrom research on how people learn. In The Knowledge Economy and Postsecondary Education: Reportof Workshop (pp. 159-198).Sawyer, R. K. (2008). Optimising learning implications of learning sciences research. Innovating to learn,learning to innovate, 45.Resendes, M., & Chuy, M. (2010, June). Knowledge building for historical reasoning in Grade 4.In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of the Learning Sciences-Volume 2 (pp. 443-444).International Society of the Learning Sciences.Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge building. Encyclopedia of education, (2), 1380-1373.Fulbrook, Mary. (2002). Historical Theory: Ways of Imagining the Past. Routledge: London.CSCL 2017 Proceedings699© ISLS