Situated Learning, Situated Knowledge: Situating Racialization,Colonialism, and Patriarchy Within Communities of PracticeJoe Curnow, University of Toronto, joe.curnow@mail.utoronto.caAbstract: This paper brings feminist theories of situated knowledge into theorizations ofsituated learning, arguing that racialization, colonialism, and patriarchy shape members’experiences of communities of practice. I argue that situated learning must accommodatestandpoint epistemologies in order to theorize learning from the margins. Using anenvironmental activist group, I demonstrate how modes of full participation can be racialized,colonial, and gendered in ways that inhibit women and people of colour from beingrecognized as full participants. Video data from activist actions shows that dominant practicesare rooted in standpoints and that the social locations of participants shape their learning andwillingness to participate in racialized, colonial, and gendered modes of participation.IntroductionAs we focus our conversations around transforming learning at this International Conference of the LearningSciences, we are presented with an opportunity to expand situated learning theory (Lave and Wenger, 1991) sothat it is better able to account for transformations of learners from non-dominant racialized, gendered, andcolonized standpoints. For decades, Black feminists (Collins, 1986), third world feminists (Mohanty, 1988;Sandoval, 1991), and standpoint feminists (Haraway, 1988; Harding, 1992; Hartsock, 1983) have argued that thesocial location from which we experience the world shapes what we know and how we know it. Within situatedlearning theory, though, there has been little attention to power dynamics (Contu and Willmott, 2003) and socialrelations of racialization, class, gender, colonialism, dis/ability, or others. Situated learning argues learning is aprocess of becoming, where people move from positions of novice peripherality into positions of masterythrough their engagement with the skills, dominant frames, and social processes of the community of practice(Lave and Wenger, 1991). This view privileges the ongoing construction of community and how the immediatecontext shapes how participants perform skills, talk about their work, and work together.However, within situated learning theory and the subsequent development of communities of practicetheory (Wenger, 1998), the focus on local context leads to an erasure of the trans-local context. Communities ofpractice appear to exist outside broader social relations, free to enact whatever norms they want, unbound (orbound) by patriarchy, colonialism, and racism depending on the practices of the local community. In situatedlearning, it is assumed that communities of practice are not bound by social location or the standpoints ofmembers in positions of mastery. This limits the theory’s ability to analyze learning in diverse groups, wheremembers of a community may not share worldviews or modes of engagement based on their social locations.Since this body of theory underpins much of sociocultural theories of learning, we must address this gap.In the sections that follow, I revisit situated learning and critique the social constructivist elements ofcommunities of practice that suggests communities create their own modes of practice and perform them outsideof or ambivalent to dominant social relations. Drawing on feminist standpoint theorists, I argue that we cannotextract communities of practice from their historical context, and suggest an anti-racist, feminist, dialecticalmaterialist approach to situated learning that centres, rather than erases, the standpoint of people producing andcirculating knowledge in a community of practice. I then use a case study of learning in the environmentalmovement to illustrate how standpoint matters in the ways that practices are privileged, how people participate,and how mastery is achieved and not achieved in a community of practice. This data demonstrates that movinginto full participation is not available to everyone equally, and people’s social locations – constituted beyond thelocal community of practice as well as within it – dramatically impact their ability to become full participants.Situated learning and communities of practiceLave and Wenger (1991)’s theories of situated learning and legitimate peripheral participation explain learningas becoming, where through participation, members learn the skills and social performances of the community.Communities of practice are understood as groups of people engaged in ongoing collective work in a jointenterprise using shared repertoires (Wenger 1998). The theory articulates the learning process as legitimateperipheral participation, where new members move from the periphery into full participation gradually, throughdeeper immersion in the community. Rather than envisioning learning as mimicry or acquisition, situatedlearning claims people learn through absorption and integration into the community, where all membersparticipate in generative, ongoing negotiation of the community itself, though in differentiated ways.ICLS 2016 Proceedings218© ISLSSituated learning and communities of practice theories have been critiqued for their inattention topower dynamics (Contu and Willmott, 2003) and their consensual framing of communities (Hughes, Jewson,and Unwin, 2011). Most of these critiques have centred on the nature of the employee relationship in workplacesettings, where worker exploitation by capital is a core function of the relationship, defining and limiting thelearning relationship to one of reproduction (Contu and Willmott, 2003; Hughes, Jewson, and Unwin, 2011). Farless attention has been paid to social relations of racialization, colonialism, and gender. While genderedparticipation has been addressed in a small portion of the literature (Hodges, 1998; Paechter, 2003; SalminenKarlsson, 2006), nothing has extensively addressed the ways racialization and colonialism shape experiences oflegitimate peripheral participation in a community of practice. Notably, the pieces that have engaged women’sexperiences in a community of practice centre White women’s experiences or undifferentiated women’sexperiences, a move that universalizes and flattens women’s experiences into a unified whole that feminists ofcolour have argued against. The articles on women in communities of practice show not all practices areattainable (Hodges, 1998; Salminen-Karlsson, 2006). They identify the naturalized standpoint of mastery in thecommunity of practice and name practices as masculine and in service to the ways men navigate the world.In the next section, I introduce standpoint theory as a way of addressing situated knowledges withinsituated learning. Understanding and accounting for the different ways that people of colour and women knowand participate enables us to theorize learning dynamics more effectively. Rather than assume all members willbelieve and adopt the same narratives that circulate in a community of practice or be able to enact forms ofparticipation in the same ways, we need a situated learning that situates the knowledge of the members of acommunity of practice within their historical social relations.Situated knowledge and standpoint epistemologiesSituated learning focuses attention on the immediate community and centres how particular groups produce andsustain practices and philosophies of the local community of practice. Situated knowledge and standpointepistemologies, in contrast, locate people’s ways of knowing within their social location. They argue, forexample, that Black women understand and experience the world differently than White women and Black menbased on how relations of patriarchy and racialization shape their lived experiences. This view of knowledge,while rooted in the immediate community experiences of gender and racialization, shift our attention to translocal relations of power (Smith, 1987). So while it may seem that these two bodies of theory are speaking toeach other, they actually speak past each other, with situated learning deeply attentive to the specifics of thelocal while situated knowledge attends to the ways the trans-local is enacted in the local.Situated knowledge and standpoint theories have been sites of extensive feminist scholarship. Withoutengaging deeply in the nuances of the field, it is important to identify some of the major contributions situatedknowledge theories offer situated learning. The first contribution is the basic premise that social location shapeswhat we know and how we know it (Collins, 1986; Harding, 1992; Haraway, 1988). Early feminist theorizationsargued against the so-called objectivity and neutrality of dominant thought in sciences and sociology, anddemonstrated the ways that the types of knowledge that those fields produced were rooted in the standpoint ofWhite men. As a result, the questions asked and their answers interpreted the world through the experiences ofmen, ignoring questions that feminist scholars prioritized. Standpoint theorists argued that feminist researchshould be built from the everyday/night experiences of women (Smith, 1987), and include attention toreproductive and affective labour (Hartsock, 1982). Other feminist standpoint theorists argued that feministviewpoints were superior because those standpoints saw the world with fewer distortions than men in theirrelative positions of power, suggesting that subjugated knowledges (Sandoval, 1991) were preferable becausethey allowed a more comprehensive view of social relations. This approach stresses that non-dominantstandpoints not only perceive the world differently, but also that those standpoints open up more expansiveunderstandings of social relations.Patricia Hill Collins’ work (1986) is foundational to this line of argumentation, and her contributions ofBlack feminist thought bridge situated learning in productive ways. Collins argues that people from outsideWhite male dominance can learn to act in masculine and White ways, but that those people can also see andquestion dominant paradigms. She claims that people outside dominant social relations have perspectives andinsights to offer, based on where they are situated within relations of racialization, gender, and other relations ofoppression. She states that people of colour may choose to remain “outsiders within”, opting out of certaincommunities and practices, and that learning to navigate dominant social relations is itself an accomplishment.Black feminist thought and feminist standpoint theories are necessary components of situated learning.Without acknowledging that all forms of participation are rooted in certain peoples’ standpoints, we cannottheorize learning, and we certainly cannot accommodate oppositional consciousness that seeks to challengedominant ways of knowing and being. Acknowledging how communities of practice are situated within socialICLS 2016 Proceedings219© ISLSrelations and enact them at the same time allows us to interrogate how dominant social relations can becomenormalized in a community of practice and how that reflects the standpoints of participants in positions ofdominance. This articulates a more nuanced critique of learning that moves beyond mere reproduction, allowsfor non-dominant modes of participation, and centres critical praxis within communities of practice.Situated knowledge and learning in and beyond communities of practiceLave and Wenger’s discussion of full participation in a community of practice fails to accommodate socialrelations of race, colonialism, and gender in several ways. The first is their suggestion that communitiesestablish their own practices and guidelines. While this is true in the sense that members jointly enact andproduce their co-negotiated modes of participation, it separates the practices and the communities from thelarger context. Communities of practice are situated within historical relations of racism, patriarchy, andcolonialism, as much as we may try to resist. Suggesting that communities of practice are able to create theirown practices outside of those dominant social relations de-historicizes them, making it seem as though theracism people face in a particular community of practice is rooted in the racism of that community alone, ratherthan being rooted in socio-historical and trans-local relations of colonialism and racialization. While theparticularities of racialization are navigated in specific ways within a community, they do not act in isolation.Another way that Lave and Wenger’s descriptions of communities of practice fail to integrateracialization, colonialism, and patriarchy into their analysis is through the neutralization of dominant forms ofparticipation by members in positions of mastery. Lave and Wenger propose a value-neutral approach tolearning that suggests that whatever the norms of the community are is what will need to be learned within thatcommunity in order to become a full participant. This erases socio-historical difference between members incommunities of practice and the ways social relations shape and limit members’ ability to act in certain ways.This approach effectively removes the standpoints embedded in ways of knowing and being in a community,making it seem as though the full practices are not tied to certain standpoints, that all forms of practice areuniversally available and unbound by members’ social locations. Lave and Wenger’s approach also encountersproblems in their articulation of “community”, which has been critiqued extensively (Hughes, Jewson, andUnwin, 2011). It presupposes that communities are homogenous, free from power differentials, and open toeveryone. When combined with the neutralization of standpoint, which makes it seem as though performingWhiteness, for example, is equally available to members of colour within a community, and the decontextualization and de-historicization of social relations, this view of community erases the experiences ofmarginalization that many members of a community of practice experience based on their social location. Thismay have little to do with their learning, abilities to perform skills, or understanding of a community, but rathermay have everything to do with their social location. It neglects the subjugated knowledges that non-dominantmembers bring communities of practice and erases different epistemologies, ontologies, and cosmologies ofmembers from outside dominant social relations. In this way the notion of “community” masks a process ofcolonization, patriarchy, and racialization that erases forms of knowing and being.This tension between situated knowledge and the theorization of full participation within communitiesof practice is an epistemological and ontological problem for situated learning. Theorizations of situatedlearning do not take seriously that how we know and what we know are rooted in how we are situated withinsocial relations. This is an ontological problem in that it does not address the dialectical relationship between thelocal experiences of a community of practice with the trans-local relations. While racism, sexism, andcolonialism may manifest in nuanced ways within a community of practice, those relations extend beyond theboundaries of the community, while being enacted and reproduced in the local space.In the sections that follow I demonstrate how practices in an activist community of practice illustratethe ways modes of participations are rooted in particular ways of knowing and being – in this case, a Whitemasculine mode of participation in a multi-racial, multi-gender environmental campaign. I trace how Whitemale participants easily enacted the modes of participation and were rapidly recognized as masters while womenand people of colour were kept from full participation despite their learning and mastery of skills within thecommunity. I demonstrate how the modes of participation that were valued in the group in order to achieve fullparticipation were rooted in White, masculine ways of being and knowing, while other modes of participationbased in Black, Indigenous, and/or women’s social locations were not valued and prevented members frommarginalized social locations’ participation from being recognized as full members.ICLS 2016 Proceedings220© ISLSMethodsSelf locationIndigenous and feminist researchers (Absolon and Willett, 2005; Collins, 1986; Wilson, 2008) emphasizelocating the self to clarify relational accountability (Wilson, 2008) and allow readers and research participants tofully understand why we engage particular questions. They challenge researchers to explicate how research fitsinto a broader theory of change that benefits communities we are accountable to. As a White settler, myapproach to this research stems from White anti-racist allyship work while being accountable to communities ofcolour. As a cis woman, I enter into questions of marginalization and silencing in group settings through myexperiences, in schooling and activist spaces, of having my voice silenced, ignored, and talked over. I feel aresponsibility to the young women I work with to carve out alternative spaces and to help them to recognize theways that their contributions are not equally valued based on their gender. I recognize that as a White ciswoman, my racial and cis privilege shape my experiences as a woman and that the way I position myself and ampositioned by others in groups is very much shaped by the multiple locations of privilege.Data collectionThis paper is based on an ongoing participatory action research project that examines how student activists learnabout race, colonialism, and patriarchy through their involvement in environmental activist campaigns. Videowas collected with the University of Toronto (UofT) fossil fuel divestment campaign. The group of youngpeople met weekly. Meetings had from 11-42 participants, representing all years in school, (1,2,3,4,5, Law, MA,PhD). Men and women students attended in roughly even numbers and there were no openly trans or othergendered students. Racial and ethnic make-up shifted over the course of the campaign, but the group remainedpredominantly White, even as Indigenous, Black, Latino, South Asian, and East Asian students becameincreasingly involved, in terms of numbers and leadership in the group. Video was collected at 29 meetings, 6actions and 2 focus groups over the course of the campaign, resulting in over 6,500 minutes of video. Videoslast from 60-240 minutes, depending on the meeting length. Interviews and stimulated recall interviews (SRIs)were conducted with 8 focal participants. Interviews were semi-structured, lasting from 30-90 minutes. SRIswere held 1-2 days after a meeting and participants reviewed video, discussing group dynamics and their ownthoughts during the meeting. SRIs lasted from 40-120 minutes and were held intermittently over the year, basedon participants’ interest and availability. Videos were captured from one to four angles and stacked so allstreams are visible and watched and coded simultaneously.AnalysisAfter video was collected, it was content-logged and pre-coded using preliminary codes based on the researchquestion (including race, gender, and colonialism). The first substantial analytic pass of coding was conductedby five women participants from the group, one White, one South Asian, two East Asian, one Indigenous, andone Black man. We watched segments of videos from across the year together and coded “interesting”segments, asking the broad question of how race matters in our group, discussing every instance someone raisedand making extensive notes. After conducting “interesting” coding on three segments from the beginning,middle, and end of the year, we reviewed consolidated them into codes that were most present in the video wereviewed and in our experiences of the group. Codes included default space, including instances where Whitesettler participants assumed the room was White or settler by using “we” and universalizing their experience orby mobilizing White settler ways of acting and knowing in the group. Codes also included taking up space,tokenizing, dismissing, and labeling strategies as distractions. We assessed who was in a position of mastery byanalyzing who made decisions for the group, who controlled what the whole group prioritized including types ofwork and mode of participation, who other members included in decisions or deferred to, and who was publiclyrecognized. Based on the coding, relevant segments of video were transcribed. A draft of this analysis wasshared with the participants who co-developed the codes and their feedback was integrated.FindingsThe full practices of the divestment campaign at UofT included three main areas. The first was participating inmeetings, where decisions and strategy were decided. The second set of practices was interacting with theofficial institutional actors of the university, including the office of the President, the Governing Council, andthe President’s Ad Hoc Committee. The third set of practices was publicly representing the campaign, mostoften by presenting to a group or presenting on a panel. Since the members who positioned themselves asmasters were overwhelmingly White men, they effectively dictated what the important tasks were and how theyICLS 2016 Proceedings221© ISLSought to be completed. We can trace how women and people of colour’s performances were not recognized aslegitimate by men in positions of power, which shows how the practices themselves were rooted in thestandpoint of White men and were thus difficult for people from other social locations to master.Participating in meetingsThe divestment campaign met once a week for one and a half to two hours. Meetings were open to all membersand were facilitated by rotating chairs. One of the main ways people established themselves as core members ofthe community was by participating vocally in the meetings. This ensured one’s voice would be present and onecould be involved in the strategy setting and decision making of the group. White men – particularly those inpositions of full participation, though not only them – participated in meetings at very high levels. Men spokefar more often and for longer duration, and in doing so, they positioned themselves as experts.Graham provides a good example of how participating in the space enabled him to move into a positionof full participation very quickly. Graham had never been involved in activism before, but joined the groupduring his second month of law school at UofT. By the first all-group outreach meeting, he had already becomea campaign lead and presented to new potential members, speaking assertively about the campaign and theimportance of the “inside game strategy” where we focused on working through institutional protocols in orderto win divestment. Graham’s participation was marked by frequent speaking, responding authoritatively toquestions, and weighing in often on the decisions of the group, typically masculine modes of engagement. Othermembers of the group often deferred to him, named him explicitly as an “expert”, and cited his experience asimportant and helpful, despite the fact that he had less experience and formal expertise than other members.In contrast, we can trace Ariel and Amil’s participation in the group. Though they had been involved inthe campaign and environmental organizing on campus longer and in more comprehensive ways, their modes ofparticipation, rooted in their racialized and gendered performances, kept them from being recognized as fullparticipants. Ariel, a White woman in fourth year, had been involved in the group longer than all but twoparticipants. She was a co-president of the group, yet her authority was continually questioned, with her malecolleagues regularly talking over her, making decisions without her, and attributing her contributions to othermen. One example of the ways she had participated in the key practices of the community was her interaction ingroup meetings. This was one of the most important and visible ways that group members demonstrated theirauthority and positioned themselves as experts. In meetings, women spoke far less frequently and for shorterdurations each turn, and were engaged in exclusive talk between a small group of insiders half as often. Whenwomen were engaged in exclusive talk, Ariel was almost always the woman included. She often inserted herselfinto conversations and participated vocally in a very different way from most of the women and people ofcolour in the room. In these exclusive talk turns, though, she was almost always outnumbered 2:1 by men andher participation was often made up of continuer statements, to acknowledge other people’s contributions andencourage them to keep going, rather than her own substantive contributions. This was true in her speaking overall; her mode of participation tended to be highly gendered. She asked questions rather than speaking indeclaratives (as the men in positions of authority did), she hedged her statements with qualifiers and apologies,and she often ended her statements at a higher pitch, even when she was not asking a question. Her feminineperformance of the practices often meant that the men in positions of mastery did not treat her as an authority,and engaged other men in decisions without her. At the end of the year in a focus group, multiple women saidthey had not known she was a co-president. Her mode of participation was considered peripheral, and she waskept out of many of the important high stakes activities, having to fight for her inclusion in many instances.While Ariel’s participation was kept peripheral because she performed the core practice but did not doit in a masculine way, Amil’s experience showed how his social location precluded doing them. As a fourth yearBlack man and immigrant to Canada, he did not perform certain practices because he knew his performance ofwould be judged as inadequate for his Black racialized mode of engagement. Though he had been involved inenvironmental organizing for three years on campus, he almost never spoke and was asked for his opinion onlyonce during the first year. His non-participation in group meetings meant that most of the men in positions ofmastery cast him as peripheral, despite his engagement in the tasks of the community of practice. Amildescribed his decisions to not speak in a stimulated recall interview saying:I'm generally more reserved in meetings... being in White spaces… in general… have thateffect, personally, on me. It's something I've been dealing with since I’ve been at thisuniversity, in terms of putting out your opinions and having them scrutinized, because ininstances it's been very vicious.... [White people say] “you see things this way because itaffects you” and it's like you can't make an objective argument because you are somehow self-ICLS 2016 Proceedings222© ISLSinterested in this... and it just shuts me down right away […] every time I say something in aWhite space, in my mind it's like: how are these people perceiving what I say?Amil made explicit the racial norms of the community that he had to navigate, including the Whiteness of thespace. He talked about his pervasive sense of otherness and his “hyper awareness” of how White peopleperceived what he said (or did not say) and acknowledged that he did not think and speak in the same way thosein positions of authority within the group did. Rather than push back against them and experience the blowbackhe anticipated, he stayed silent in meetings and talked to people one on one or in small groups outside themeetings. His strategy made sense for his social location, but had the impact of keeping him from beingrecognized by the men in positions of mastery in the group, despite his skills, his experience, and his expansiveunderstanding of climate change and impacts in frontline communities.Both Ariel and Amil were not treated as masters in the community of practice, by other members or bythe men in positions of mastery, because the ways they participated were shaped by their experiences ofpatriarchy and racism, both in this specific community of practice and beyond it. As a result, they did not getacknowledged for their contributions to the community, while a brand new White man did quickly and easilyand was able to drive the strategy decisions for the group.Notably, women of colour almost never spoke in the group, regardless of how long they had beeninvolved or how much work they put in behind the scenes. Their opinions were rarely sought and decisions wereregularly made without any participation from women of colour, even on discussions of race, gender, andintersectionality. Their non-participation seemed to be considered a legitimate form of participation, whichraises concerns about whose standpoints are required for decision-making, whose are not, and how that impactsframing, strategies, and approaches to political action.Framing, strategy and theory of changeStrategy is the next area where we can see a core practice being demonstrated. At UofT, strategy was oftennegotiated at the weekly meetings, where the speaking dynamics noted above played a significant role inestablishing whose ideas were included in short and medium term strategies. Group strategy was a process offrame alignment, where in order to be brought into the full forms of participation, one had to buy into thedominant logic of divestment. The people who started the campaign initially had charted an institutional coursethat consisted of going through the UofT’s official process for divestment, including preparing a brief, gatheringsignatures, and supporting the brief in consultation with the President’s Ad Hoc Committee for evaluating thepetition. This required alignment with a theory of change that centred logical argumentation and respecting theinstitutional process, rather than protest, confrontation, or more direct resistance.Graham demonstrated his alignment with the philosophies of the group right away, and he took upleadership of the inside game strategy within his first month of involvement. Here he advocated for meetingwith the President’s office staff and working through official channels. He, and the other White men from theinside game group, stressed “not rocking the boat”, and in a strategy meeting he said, “We don't want to give theGoverning Council any reason to dismiss us... they are on Governing Council because the game works for them,because the system works for those people. They're all wealthy and a lot of WASPs in there, and that sort ofthing. So we're left with, how do we play that game?” Again and again, the White men in positions of masterybrought the group back to a theory of change based on compliance with institutional protocol and rooted in nonconfrontational action, including providing logical arguments to the administration when they engaged us.In contrast, Amil balked at this strategy, as did other members of colour, arguing that the institutionalpathways do not work for everyone, and rarely work for people of colour, poor people, and other marginalizedgroups. In one moment of contestation in a meeting this exchange occurred:Sam:Amil:Sam:Amil:Graham:Sam:ICLS 2016 ProceedingsIf we can get 200 people sit in the Governing Council room at the meeting wearing,like, suits with divestment X’s pinned to them and divestment signs – I think that'd bepowerful.Do we have to wear suits?Uh, generally Governing Council meetings are like – you dress up.Is there like a dress code?No, it's not like ‘men must wear blazers’ –It would be frowned upon if you just showed up in a t-shirt and jeans.223© ISLSAmil:Sam:Amil:Graham:Sam:But if a bunch of students go in there... let's not play that weirdrespectability politics –I think we should play –– They're not going to kick us out –No, they won’t.Look, they won't kick us out, but they will respect us more if we play intotheir respectability politics.The exchange made explicit some of the philosophical underpinnings of the group, where women and folks ofcolour pushed back against the logic that the system would work for us and that we should try to conform to thedominant relations that govern it. Amil’s disagreement made plain the different ways that different participantsnavigate the world and how it underpins the strategic choices of the group. Even though Amil was active in theinside game breakout group, he never fully bought into the idea that the governing council would bend topersuasive arguments. His life experience suggested that the system would not always work for him. Because ofhis view on this, rooted in standpoint, he was kept at the margins of the inside game group. He was not invitedto speak to the President’s staff or the Ad Hoc Committee (only White people from the group interacted withthem). However his analysis of the situation does not suggest he is not competent, has not mastered the skills, orhas not learned—in fact his ability to navigate the system differently demonstrates his learning and ongoingnegotiation of White supremacist colonialism. Keara, a Cree woman in first year, also identified the inside gamephilosophy as central to the group, and said that she could never support it, because she knew that institutionslike UofT did not work in Indigenous students’ interest. Students of colour within the group believed thatGoverning Council would not interact with them as they did with the dominant White men, and did not alwaystrust the men from our group to broker in our collective interest, but worried that the Whiteness of the approachwould serve to tamp down the racial justice components of the campaign that they advocated for.Public presentationsOur group also prioritized outreach to groups through public presentations. In order to be a full member of thecommunity, one had to be able to coordinate and deliver presentations to groups on and off campus in order topersuade them to endorse the brief. Being able to perform this public task was an important marker of fullparticipation. It demonstrated one’s grasp of the issues, framing, and strategy, as well as one’s ability to speakpersuasively and build coalitions with other power brokers on campus.Joanna serves as an example of this process. As a 3rd year White woman, she had been involved inother environmental work on campus, but joined the divestment campaign halfway through the year. She talkedabout herself as a “bold woman” and about her ability to “lean in”, joining in the activities that only thedominant men tended to participate in as a way of proving herself. On her second meeting, she volunteered tochair the meeting and she continually volunteered to take on public speaking tasks that tended to include onlythe people in positions of full participation. In a women’s focus group she noted that it was not enough, saying:Our breakout group has consistently been, like, going to groups to seek out endorsements. Ifeel like – pretty consistently – um, we've had a buddy system of two people going each time.And every time there has been at least one male – like, intentionally – it feels likeintentionally. And yeah, I mean, I went to the medical society, originally I think I wassupposed to go with Sam, and then Sam couldn’t make it, so then they were like, oh Graham,he'll go with you. It's good because they are knowledgeable... but women are knowledgeabletoo. I don't think there's a single group that we presented to this entire year that there hasn’tbeen one of the like, three or four main White males that went with someone else – whetherthat was a man or a woman. I wasn't encouraged to go alone, I wasn’t even told it was anoption would be for me to go and present alone or to go with another woman.She recognized the gendered control of recognition of full participation and that she was kept from it. Joanna,more than any of the women or people of colour in the group, played by the rules of the community or practice.She presented publicly, spoke often and assertively in meetings, but still was not recognized.ConclusionsIn this community of practice, race, colonialism, and patriarchy shaped whose/which modes of participationwere deemed legitimate and whose/which were not. Dominant social relation played out through the fullICLS 2016 Proceedings224© ISLSpractices of the community and entrenched White men in positions of mastery, while people of colour andwomen’s modes of participation remained peripheral. White men in the group experienced the modes ofparticipation as neutral and familiar, while other members worked at a disadvantage in adopting the forms ofparticipation deemed appropriate or the logic that underpinned them. Regardless of engagement and experience,people of colour and women did not become recognized as full participants in the community of practice.As learning scientists, we cannot afford to ignore the ways race, colonialism, and gender shapecommunities of practice through their histories and continuities. When people of colour and women are kept atthe periphery – either through so-called “failure” to perform Whiteness and masculinity or through acts ofresistance, it is not adequate to suggest they cannot/have not reached full participation, or that their position ofperipherality is legitimate. None of these explanations capture what is happening as people in dominantpositions normalize their everyday ways of interaction and have their reproduction of dominant social relationsconflated with learning, mastery, and full participation. They do not account for how people at the marginsdeftly navigate the community to achieve small concessions, to gain recognition, and to withdraw, resist, orembrace their outsider status. Through the terminology of the theory we would articulate their position aslegitimate peripherality, but there is nothing legitimate about being marginalized based on one’s race andgender. When we ignore the standpoints of people in positions of mastery and the full practices they seek toreproduce, we suggest to members from other social locations that through their participation and engagementthey might achieve full participation. But when racism, colonialism, and patriarchy make it impossible ordisproportionately difficult, this may not be the case. We cannot assume that everyone has the same potential toact and understand in the same ways. In doing so, we pathologize oppressed peoples and their inability tobecome full participants and legitimize the racist and sexist modes of participation that keep women and peopleof colour on the periphery of communities. Standpoint epistemologies represent one intervention that begins tobring attention to social relations, history, and difference. Acknowledging standpoint is a necessary step towarda more comprehensive transformation of situated learning to account for race, colonialism, and patriarchy in andbeyond communities of practice.ReferencesAbsolon, K., & Willett, C. (2005). Putting ourselves forward: Location in Aboriginal research. Research asresistance: Critical, Indigenous, and anti-oppressive approaches, 97-126.Collins, P. H. (1986). Learning from the outsider within: The sociological significance of Black feministthought. Social problems, 33(6), S14-S32.Contu, A. & H. Willmott. (2003). Re-embedding Situatedness: The Importance of Power Relations in LearningTheory. Organization Science, 14(3), 283-296.Haraway, D. (1988). Situated knowledges: The science question in feminism and the privilege of partialperspective. Feminist studies, 575-599.Harding, S. (1992). Rethinking standpoint epistemology: What is "strong objectivity”? Centennial Review.Hartsock, N. C. (1983). The feminist standpoint: Developing the ground for a specifically feminist historicalmaterialism. 283-310. Springer.Hodges, D.C. (1998). Participation as Dis-Identification with/in a Community of Practice. Mind, Culture, andActivity, 5(4), 272-290.Hughes, J., Jewson, N., & Unwin, L. (Eds.). (2013). Communities of practice: Critical perspectives. Routledge.Lave, J. & E. Wenger. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. NY, NY: Cambridge.Mohanty, C.T. (1988). Under Western Eyes: Feminist scholarship and colonial discourses. Feminist review.Paechter, C. (2003). Learning masculinities and femininities: Power/knowledge and legitimate peripheralparticipation. Women’s Studies International Forum, 26, 541– 552.Salminen-Karlsson, M. (2006). Situating gender in situated learning, Scandinavian Journal of Management, 22.Sandoval, C. (1991). US third world feminism: The theory and method of oppositional consciousness in thepostmodern world. Genders, (10), 1-24.Smith, D. E. (1987). The everyday world as problematic: A feminist sociology. Toronto: U of T Press.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning and identity. Cambridge: Cambridge Press.Wilson, S. (2008). Research is Ceremony: Indigenous Research Methods. Winnipeg: Fernwood.AcknowledgmentsMany thanks to Jody Chan, Amil Davis Tresanne Fernandes, Keara Lightning, and Jade Wong for theirparticipation in developing this analysis. Thanks to Thelma Akyea, Andrew Kohan, and Genevieve Ritchie fortheir conversations throughout the process. This work was funded by the Vanier Canada Graduate Scholarship.ICLS 2016 Proceedings225© ISLS