Data Transformations: Restructuring Data for Inquiry in aSimulation and Data Analysis EnvironmentMichelle Hoda Wilkerson, UC Berkeley; mwilkers@berkeley.eduKathryn Lanouette, UC Berkeley; kathryn.lanouette@berkeley.eduRebecca L. Shareff, UC Berkeley; becca@berkeley.eduTim Erickson, eeps media, eepsmedia@gmail.comNicole Bulalacao, UC Berkeley; nbulalacao@berkeley.eduJoan I. Heller, Heller Research Associates, jheller@gordonheller.comNatalya St. Clair, Concord Consortium, talya@concord.orgWilliam Finzer, Concord Consortium, wfinzer@concord.orgFrieda Reichsman, Concord Consortium, freichsman@concord.orgAbstract: We explore data transformations, actions investigators take to make datasets moreuseful for intended inquiries. Fourteen young adults were interviewed while they interacted withonline science and engineering games and were provided their own gameplay log data toimprove their scores. We investigate the conditions under which data transformations are likelyto emerge; provide examples of data moves as enacted by participants; and propose an initialtaxonomy of data transformations and potential developmental supports.Working with data is an important epistemic practice across disciplines, including within K–12 education.However, students often treat data as a static representation of “the answer”, rather than as a source of evidence.Specifically, we are interested in how learners come to engage with provided or “second-hand” data (Hug &McNeill, 2008) as transformable (Duschl, 2008). Using provided data has the potential to engage learners withtopics and scopes of analysis that would be difficult in a classroom setting. But students may not automaticallysee those data as relevant for inquiry, or engage in critical reasoning about those data. Thus, we argue that just asstudents should learn to construct, represent, and analyze their own data in service of an investigation (Konold &Pollatsek, 2002), they should also learn how to re-construct, re-represent, and re-analyze provided data.Theoretical frameworkTo engage in data transformation, learners must navigate three nested, interactive processes (Figure 1). The firstinvolves identifying a goal and deciding whether provided data are relevant for that goal. The second involvesconsidering the context in which provided data were generated, including the data collection instruments used, forwhat purposes the data were constructed, and how well the data reflect their own experiences of the context. Thethird concerns making data more useful through restructuring, supplementing, or subsetting, constructing newmeasures or visualizations, and so on. Such reconstructions are made possible, and reified as valuable, by anemerging genre of data analysis software (e.g., Tableau, RStudio) used by practitioners and increasingly thegeneral public (Wickham, 2014). The Common Online Data Analysis Platform (CODAP) used in this study makesreconstructions accessible to K-12 students. These nested processes are similar to others’ descriptions of evidenceconstruction and use in the science education literature (e.g., Kelly, Regev, & Prothero, 2007).RelevanceCan this dataset be useful formy goals?ContextDoes this dataset’s context and purposeaffect its appropriateness for my investigation?Reconstruction (includes Data Moves)What manipulations help me visualize, reduce, orotherwise transform the data in needed ways?Does the dataset reveal patternsI’d like to learn more about?Given my knowledge of this system,is the dataset valid and trustworthy?Can I make the transformations easily and reliably?Figure 1. Data transformation includes determining the relevance, context, and required manipulations of data.MethodsData Science Games (IIS-1530578) seeks to develop students’ data transformation skills through games aboutcore science and engineering ideas. Each game, and the data it generates, is embedded within CODAP, whichallows players to visualize, organize, and manipulate their data. The data require some degree of transformationbefore they are useful for making decisions or understanding the game’s underlying principles. In this study,Stebbins (Figure 2, left) is designed to engage learners with basic ideas underlying natural selection throughanalyzing the convergence of data toward a favorable trait. BARTy (Figure 2, right) is designed to engage learnersin optimizing engineering solutions for a large transit system (Bay Area Rapid Transit, or BART), by exploringICLS 2018 Proceedings1383© ISLSpatterns in nested data structures.We conducted guided cognitive interviews with 14 public high school and community college studentsas they played Data Science Games. We captured synchronized video of students’ computer screen activity andaudio-video records of their comments and interactions with one another and the interviewers. Several teammembers engaged in co-viewing and interpretive coding of each interview video (Jordan & Henderson, 1995).After several rounds of analysis, we focused specifically on moments in the interviews at which the need for datamoves arose (for example, a student suggests data should be represented or structured differently), or when datamoves were actually executed by participants within the CODAP environment.Figure 2. Stebbins (left) focuses on natural selection; BARTy (right) focuses on public transit ridership data.ResultsAcross all interviews, participants only engaged in data reconstruction once they identified the relevance of thedata for addressing some need, and had made enough sense of the data context. This led to vastly differenttreatments of data across interviews: data rejected as irrelevant, data for inquiry about gameplay, and data forinquiry about phenomenon. Participants also reconstructed data in different ways. Re-representing data wascommon; fewer engaged in re-structuring or re-scoping data. For example, Figure 3 demonstrates the back-andforth nature of data transformation with a focus on re-representation. Here, a participant (Pam) chose to explorethe relationship between color and score (3, 4). A mismatch between the data and her experience (6) led her torecognize the dataset as inappropriate (7); she then answered her question with a more appropriate dataset (8).Figure 3. Summary analysis of Pam’s engagement with data; classified as data for inquiry about gameplay.The analyses demonstrate how particular data moves are deeply situated within specific goals, and are shaped bylearners’ consideration of data context. It is important for learners to recognize data as a resource for inquiry, anddata transformation is an important part of this process. This project represents an initial step toward understandingthe contexts in which students learn to manipulate large datasets.ReferencesDuschl, R. (2008). Science education in three-part harmony: Balancing conceptual, epistemic, and social learninggoals. Review of Research in Education, 32(1), 268-291.Hug, B., & McNeill, K. L. (2008). Use of first-hand and second-hand data in science: Does data type influenceclassroom conversations? International Journal of Science Education, 30(13), 1725-1751.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39-103.Kelly, G. J., Regev, J., & Prothero, W. (2007). Analysis of lines of reasoning in written argumentation. In S.Erduran & M. P. Jimenez-Aleixandrae (Eds.), Argumentation in Science Education (pp. 137–158).Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.Konold, C., & Pollatsek, A. (2002). Data analysis as the search for signals in noisy processes. Journal for Researchin Mathematics Education, 33(4), 259-289.Wickham, H. (2014). Tidy data. Journal of Statistical Software, 59(10), 1-23.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant IIS-1530578.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1384© ISLS