Relating Social Network Structure to Uncertainty and SocialInteraction in an Engineering Design ChallengeChristiana Bruchok, Arizona State University, christiana.bruchok@gmail.comNicole Bowers, Arizona State University, nbowers1@asu.eduMichelle Jordan, Arizona State University, michelle.e.jordan@asu.eduWendy Wakefield, Arizona State University, wwakefi1@asu.eduBernard P. Ricca, St. John Fisher College, bricca@sjfc.eduIntroductionThe open-ended nature of engineering design problems implies uncertainty; there is no one, correct solution andno best path to take to achieve a viable solution (Sullivan, 2008). Moreover, engineers must learn tocommunicate effectively in diverse, cross-disciplinary teams (Roy, 2009), and communication is a primary toolfor navigating uncertainty (Babrow, 2001). From a communication perspective, sources of uncertainty can beclustered into identity, relational, and instrumental meanings (Jordan & Babrow, 2013). Jordan and McDaniel(2014) defined uncertainty as a “subjective experience of doubting, being unsure, or wondering” (p. 492), anddescribed how young learners experienced and responded to uncertainty from various sources in a collaborativeengineering design project. These authors found peer social support to be critical for individuals working inhomogenous groups (wrt: experience, and goals) to manage uncertainty and to forward design work.However, working on engineering design problems in heterogeneous groups may increase the diversityof uncertainty sources and responses, provide different opportunities for expressing uncertainty, and morestrategies for managing uncertainty. Therefore, the present study featured a diverse cohort of engineeringdesign participants, working in small collaborative sub-groups, structured for heterogeneity. Each type ofparticipant brought a different set of skills, background, and experience to a summer engineering researchexperience; the combined value of their diverse “tools” was theorized to enrich both the learning process and thepotential outcomes of a modeling design activity (Page, 2007).These understandings of using social interaction to manage uncertainty, coupled with scholarship onsocial networks for learning (Wasserman, & Faust, 1994; Yoon, 2011) led to the following research questions:RQ1: What is the structure of the social network with respect to who is recognized as influential tolearning?RQ2: What uncertainty did participants report, how was uncertainty managed, and how did these sources ofand responses to uncertainty relate to the structure of the network?RQ3: How did the social network influence the outcome of the collaborative, engineering design task?MethodThe diverse cohort of 27 participants (13 female; 14 white) included 15 undergraduates from across the U.S.,seven local teachers, two local high school students, and three international students. This analysis focuses onthe first two weeks of the eight-week summer engineering research program when participants were assigned tonine heterogeneous three-member groups to accomplish two tasks: fabricate a solar cell and model the labprocesses digitally using PC1D (PVEducation, 2017) software. The modeling objective was to maximize thesolar cell efficiency by modifying parameters such as pyramid height. Although participants received an initiallecture on the modeling software and activity, the activity itself was an ill-structured design challenge. Groupswere able to collaborate with other groups and access mentors for guidance.Primary data sources included daily reflection responses (open-ended; Likert) regarding participants’uncertainty and management of uncertainty, audio-video recordings and field notes of program activities, andeach group’s presented maximum cell efficiency. Additionally, participants completed a post-survey at theconclusion of the two-week challenge; for this, each participant rated all cohort members (5-pt Likert) as to howinfluential each participant was to their learning.Following Jordan and McDaniel’s (2014) framework, two researchers independently coded andreconciled open-ended survey responses regarding uncertainty about (a) fundamental scientific content, (b)engineering identity, (c) the PC1D software operability, and (d) relationships with other program participants.The frequencies of each uncertainty source and management technique reported by each participant as well asparticipants’ demographics, position (e.g. REU), project grouping, and dorm residency, in addition to theefficiency of each group’s optimal simulated solar cell modeled in PC1D were culled into an attributelist. Finally, a social network analysis (Scott, 2017) was conducted using R from a weighted adjacency matrixICLS 2018 Proceedings1725© ISLSdeveloped from the post-survey sociogram items. Bivariate correlations using Pearson’s r between clusterformation, sources of uncertainty, and management of uncertainty were conducted in SPSS.Results and discussionThe network formation was not random. Four participant clusters emerged (RQ1), one of which contained all ofthe teachers as well as the other two members of one teacher’s group. A correlation analysis indicated thatgroup assignment most related to cluster formation (r=.833, p<.001), followed by dorm lodging (r=-.502,p= .009), which differentiated another two clusters. The fourth cluster contained the two groups without ateacher. This clustering reflects tendency towards homophily.Participants reported managing relationship uncertainty with avoidance (RQ2; r=.343, p= .087), andmanaging knowledge uncertainty by seeking out peers (r=-.373, p= .060) or relying on oneself (r=-.337,p=.092). Although with this small sample we don’t quite see significance, this may explain why the teacherclustering; perhaps they recognized other teachers as their peers, sought to manage knowledge uncertainty, andavoided their other groupmates due to relationship uncertainty. Uncertainty about knowledge (r=-.350, p=.080)and relationships (r=-.367, p=.065) correlated with the formation of the dorm-dwelling cluster formation, shy ofsignificance. Perhaps within this cluster, participants felt comfortable acknowledging their uncertainty.The three clusters containing the seven teacher-member groups all produced similar cell efficiencyresults in their modeling task (RQ3). One group in the fourth cluster, which lacked teachers, took a differentapproach to the design task: they eliminated any factor, even the unavoidable, that reduced cell efficiency. Thisapproach yielded more than twice the cell efficiency of the other groups and was lauded by the expert engineersas the best approach to the problem, but was not disseminated through the network with the other clusters.According to a pagerank analysis, the five most influential participants include the four most advancedengineering students and a novice community college student who was highly interactive. Observations andfield notes indicate that this novice student frequently sought and shared knowledge, acting as an arbiter for thehighly knowledgeable international graduate student in his group. This seems to suggest that participantsprimarily valued knowledge, but a participant acting as a “social glue” may be equally valuable.SignificanceThe results suggest that identities (e.g. teacher) and relationships (e.g. dorm-mates) developed outside of thelearning arena are a bigger indicator of learning influence that formally imposed group structures, and thereforemay offer unique opportunities to help novice engineers manage uncertainty through social interaction. Bypurposefully dispersing known identities (e.g. teachers) across formal groups, cross-group communicationchannels appear to form, allowing knowledge and ideas to disseminate more broadly. On the other hand, socialclusters lacking connections to such broadly disseminated identities may develop alternative solutions inisolation. These preliminary findings may have implications for designing project groups for engineering designprojects and other ill-structured tasks. Finally, socially recognized influence on learning typically highlights themost knowledgeabl /experienced participants as primary; however, high levels of interactivity and bi-directionalengagement of the social network by a participant may be valued as equally influential to others’ learning.ReferencesBabrow, A. S. (2001). Uncertainty, value, communication, and problematic integration. J. of Comm., 51, 553–573.Jordan, M. E., & Babrow, A. S. (2013). Communication in creative collaborations: The challenges ofuncertainty and desire related to task, identity, and relational goals. Comm. Education, 210–232.Jordan, M. E. & McDaniel, R. (2014). Managing uncertainty during collaborative problem solving inelementary school teams: The role of peer influence in robotics engineering activity. JLS, 23, 490-536.Page, S. E. (2007). Making the difference: Applying a logic of diversity. Acad. of Management Persp., 21, 6-20.PC1D, PVEducation (2017) [Online]. Available: http://www.pveducation.org/pvcdrom/characterisation/pc1dRoy, R. (2009). Engineering education: Perspectives, issues and concerns. Shakarpur, Delhi: Shipra.Scott, J. (2017). Social network analysis. Sage.Sullivan, F. R. (2008). Robotics and science literacy: Thinking skills, science process skills and systemunderstanding. J. of Research in Science Teaching, 45, 373-394.Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social network analysis: Methods and applications. Cambridge, England:Cambridge University Press.Yoon, S. A. (2011). Using social network graphs as visualization tools to influence peer selection decisionmaking strategies to access information about complex socioscientific issues. JLS, 20, 549-588.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1726© ISLS