Design of a Virtual Internship to Develop TechnologicalPedagogical Content KnowledgeDiler Oner, Bogazici University, diler.oner@boun.edu.trAbstract: The purpose of this study is to design a new virtual internship (an epistemic game)for preservice teachers to develop their technological pedagogical content knowledge(TPACK). Virtual internships are learning environments in which participants can developcomplex knowledge that make up the epistemic frame of a profession. The virtual internshipdesigned for preservice teachers considers the components of TPACK as epistemic frameelements. As a subsequent step, this study also aims to evaluate preservice teachers’ TPACKdevelopment using Epistemic Network Analysis (ENA). Adapted from social network analysis,ENA is an innovative data analysis method that affords investigation of dynamic interactionamong frame elements. In this study, the “dynamic interplay” among TPACK components willbe analyzed using ENA. Thus, this study proposes two novel approaches to the challenge ofsupporting and evaluating preservice teachers’ TPACK development, which is consideredessential to teach effectively with technology.The purpose of this study is to design a new virtual internship (an epistemic game) for preservice teachers todevelop their technological pedagogical content knowledge (TPACK). Extending Shulman’s (1986, 1987) wellknown pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) concept, TPACK aims to capture the essential qualities of teacherknowledge needed for technology integration in teaching (Mishra & Koehler, 2006). A virtual internship is acomputer-based professional practicum simulation where participants assume the role of a professional, work onauthentic tasks collaboratively, interact with mentors, and cultivate complex professional thinking. Thetheoretical background of virtual internships is the Epistemic Frame Theory (EFT) (Shaffer, 2004, 2006, 2007,2012), which argues that it is not merely the amount of knowledge that makes up expertise in any given profession.It is the connections and configurations among different knowledge bases. Virtual internships are learningenvironments in which participants can develop complex knowledge that make up the epistemic frame of aprofession. The virtual internship designed for preservice teachers considers the components of TPACK asepistemic frame elements. As a subsequent step, this study also aims to evaluate preservice teachers’ TPACKdevelopment using Epistemic Network Analysis (ENA). Adapted from social network analysis, ENA is aninnovative data analysis method that affords investigation of dynamic interaction among frame elements (Shafferet al. 2009). In this study, the “dynamic interplay” among TPACK components will be analyzed using ENA.Thus, this study proposes two novel approaches to the challenge of supporting and evaluating preserviceteachers’ TPACK development, which is considered essential to teach effectively with technology. First, it buildsa new virtual internship, a computer-based professional practicum simulation that aims to cultivate TPACK.Secondly, it suggests employing ENA to assess preservice teachers’ development of TPACK, for which portrayof dynamic relationships among its constituent elements has been a challenge for researchers.One novel approach to support TPACK development of preservice teachers is the use of a virtualinternship (or epistemic game). Informed by Epistemic Frame Theory (EFT), virtual internships are computerbased games and professional practicum simulations where participants can develop the epistemic frame of aprofessional practice (Shaffer, 2004, 2006, 2007, 2012). Virtual internships are simulations of professionalworkplaces, and as such they provide authentic contexts in which learners work on complex design projectscollaboratively.In this study, the author designed a new virtual internship (epistemic game), namely the School of theFuture (STF), to support the development of preservice teachers’ TPACK. The design of this new virtualinternship simulation is consistent with the general structure of the virtual internships that the Epistemic GamesGroup has been developing (Chesler, Arastoopour, D’angelo, Bagley, & Shaffer, 2013). However, it extends theuse of this approach to a new area (developing complex teacher knowledge compared to STEM thinking) andtargets a new population (preservice teachers compared to K-12 and undergraduate engineering students).In the game, preservice teachers take the role of teacher interns at a fictitious school, the School of theFuture (STF). The school’s program coordinator personally welcomes them, explains the purpose of theinternship, and informs about their team assignment. The game is composed of eight sessions, called rooms. Atthe beginning of each session, participants receive an email from their program coordinator that details the tasksthey are expected to complete. Each task is built on the previous one and designed to support the teams’completion of the final task: developing instruction that integrates technology (based on participants’ majors) toICLS 2018 Proceedings1353© ISLSbe used at the STF in the upcoming semester. Students engage in individual research, team discussion, andreflection to complete their tasks while interacting with their mentors (portrayed as mentor teachers) who will beonline within the game.The core data to be analyzed will come from preservice teachers’ work at the virtual internshipapplication and their interaction with peers and mentors that will be saved at the online platform. These data willbe analyzed using Epistemic Network Analysis (ENA). Adapted from social network analysis, ENA is a dataanalysis method for quantifying and analyzing an epistemic frame (Shaffer et al., 2009). Built on the idea thatsimple collection of knowledge structures is not sufficient to characterize expertise, ENA enables to visualize theco-occurrences of frame elements in discourse (Shaffer & Ruis, in press). Thus, with ENA, one can analyze theco-occurrence of frame elements (i.e., the seven components of the TPACK framework) in discourse. It providesa picture of epistemic frames over time showing how they change character between individuals and in differentinteractional contexts (Nash & Shaffer, 2010). ENA, therefore, allows a new approach to assess TPACKdevelopment addressing the interconnected nature of technology, pedagogy, content knowledge. Applying ENAto TPACK development, one could treat each component of the TPACK framework as different frame elements,which become nodes, and the patterns of connections among them constitute the links between these nodes (Orrill& Shaffer, 2012). Using this method then, one could assess TPACK development in a unique way by capturingthe complex interplay between TPACK components.ReferencesChesler, N., Arastoopour, G., D’Angelo, C., Bagley, E., & Shaffer, D.W. (2013). Design of a professional practicesimulator for educating and motivating first-year engineering students. Advances in EngineeringEducation 3(3), 1-29.Mishra, P., & Koehler, M. J. (2006). Technological pedagogical content knowledge: A framework for teacherknowledge. Teachers College Record, 108, 1017–1054.Nash, P. & Shaffer, D.W. (2010). Mentor modeling: The internalization of modeled professional thinking in anepistemic game. Paper presented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences. Chicago, IL.Orrill, C.H. & Shaffer, D.W. (2012). Exploring connectedness: Applying ENA to teacher knowledge. Paperpresented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences. Sydney, Australia.Shaffer, D. W. (2004). Epistemic frames and islands of expertise: Learning from infusion experiences.International Conference of the Learning Sciences. Santa Monica, CA.Shaffer, D. W. (2006). Epistemic frames for epistemic games. Computers and Education, 46(3), 223–234.Shaffer, D. W. (2007). How computer games help children learn. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.Shaffer, D. W. (2012). Models of situated action: Computer games and the problem of transfer. In C. Steinkuehler,K. D. Squire, & S. A. Barab (Eds.), Games, learning, and society: Learning and meaning in the digitalage (pp. 403–431). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Shaffer, D.W. & Ruis, A.R. (in press). Epistemic network analysis: A worked example of theory-based learninganalytics. Handbook of Learning Analytics and Educational Data Mining.Shulman, L. S. (1896). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational Researcher, 15(2),4-14. (AERA Presidential Address).Shulman, L. S. (1987). Knowledge and teaching: Foundations of the new reform. Harvard Educational Review,57(1), 61-77.AcknowledgmentsThis research was funded by Research Grant Award No. 17D02P1 from BAP, Bogazici University ScientificResearch Projects Fund. It was also supported in part by the National Science Foundation (DRL-0918409, DRL0946372, DRL-1247262, DRL-1418288, DRL-1661036, DRL-1713110, DUE-0919347, DUE-1225885, EEC1232656, EEC-1340402, REC-0347000), the MacArthur Foundation, the Spencer Foundation, the WisconsinAlumni Research Foundation, and the Office of the Vice Chancellor for Research and Graduate Education at theUniversity of Wisconsin-Madison. The opinions, findings, and conclusions do not reflect the views of the fundingagencies, cooperating institutions, or other individuals.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1354© ISLS