Disruptions to Practice: Understanding Suspensions of Youths’Interest-related ActivitiesKatie Van Horne, University of Colorado Boulder, katie.vanhorne@colorado.eduErica Van Steenis, University of Colorado Boulder, erica.vansteenis@colorado.eduWilliam R. Penuel, University of Colorado Boulder, william.penuel@colorado.eduDaniela DiGiacomo, University of Colorado Boulder, daniela.digiacomo@colorado.eduAbstract. An emerging line of research in the learning sciences focuses on generating a betterunderstanding of how youth develop and sustain in interest-related pursuits. In this paper, wefocus not on what sustains engagement in interest-related activities but on what disrupts it.Disruptions have largely been a neglected object of theorizing, even though they areacknowledged in models of interest development, such as the four phase model (Hidi &Renninger, 2006). We build upon Azevedo’s (2011, 2013) lines of practice theory by drawingon conceptions of social practice from German-Danish critical psychology to expand andcomplicate the notion of “conditions of practice” for the youth in our study. We examined youthin our interview study who reported experiencing disruptions to their interest-related pursuits.We found that some youth suspended their participation due to loss of access to necessaryresources, and other youth suspended pursuits due to competing educational commitments andfuture desires.Keywords: interests, learning across settings, social practice, conditions of practice, youth pathways,desired futuresIntroductionAn emerging line of research in the learning sciences focuses on generating a more robust understanding of howyouth develop and sustain interest-related pursuits (e.g., Azevedo, 2006; 2011; Barron, 2006; Greeno, 2006). Aninterest-related pursuit as we define it here is one that youth enjoy doing, believe they are getting better at orlearning from over time, and seek out when they have the opportunity. A focus on such pursuits is importantbecause engagement in interest-related pursuits can catalyze learning, open up future learning opportunities andpossible careers (Ito et al., 2013; Barron, 2006).In this paper, we focus not on what sustains engagement in interest-related activities, but on what disruptsit. Disruptions have largely been a neglected object of theorizing, even though they are acknowledged in modelsof interest development, such as the four phase model (Hidi & Renninger, 2006). Interest does not develop ineither continuous or linear pathways (Azevedo, 2011; 2013). Sometimes pathways are interrupted or changecourse. Here, we attend closely to and theorize changes to conditions and opportunities that disrupt or lead youthto suspend their participation in interest-related activities.We conjecture that a key source of disruption is a change to the conditions supporting participationrelated to material resources and time. Many of youths’ interest-related pursuits are supported by settings andresources outside of school. These opportunities often require additional financial resources and supports. Youngpeople who are dependent on in-school opportunities or resources from public institutions have differentialsupports and access to out-of-school learning opportunities for engagement in interest-related pursuits than youthwho have ready access to these opportunities (Ito et al., 2013). For these youth, it can be difficult to turn interestrelated pursuits into desired future careers or into desired resources. For youth for whom limited financialresources are less of a concern, interest-related pursuits and commitments out-of-school also compete withpersonal, local, and societal goals related to education and career pathways. Youth have to attend to the competinggoals of school activities and future educational commitments and desires. For these youth, time is a scarceresource, and changing availability of time for pursuits can lead to youth suspending those pursuits. Becauseinterest-related “lines of practice” (Azevedo, 2011) are often mangled by shifts in opportunity and competingengagements and because of the increasing recognition of the importance of interest for long-term learningoutcomes, more attention is needed to understanding the disruptions in interest-related to pursuits.Theoretical frameworkWe draw in part on Azevedo’s (2011; 2013) “lines of practice” theory of individual preferences and conditions ofpractice that encourage persistence in interest-related participation over time. Azevedo (2013) argues that thereICLS 2016 Proceedings482© ISLSare four features of interest-related practices that encourage persistence in lines of practice over time by affordingparticipants the ability to tailor their participation. The features of conditions include: “an extensive and variedmaterial infrastructure,” opportunity to pursue the interest in multiple communities or sites, ways in which youthcan participate in interest-related activities of various short and long durations, and space for collaboration andsharing of ideas (p. 1). We characterize young people’s lines of practice as influenced by both their preferencesand the conditions of practice in which youth participate across contexts and over time. Within one hobby orinterest-related activity an individual might participate in multiple lines of practice that change throughout thevarious contexts of their lives thus looking different than it did before.However, not all youth have equitable opportunities for participation within the conditions of theirinterest-related activities and some youth experience disruptions and competition within their lines of practice.We build upon Azevedo’s lines of practice theory by drawing on conceptions of social practice from GermanDanish critical psychology (Dreier, 1997; Mørck & Huniche, 2006; Nissen, 2005) to expand and complicate thenotion of “conditions of practice” for the youth in our study. As we analyze the ways in which youth distributetheir interest-related pursuits across settings, we argue for the need to pay attention to the contexts in of youths’lives in relative to one another. In any given social context, youths’ “personal engagements and stakes in contextdepend on its status in relation to other contexts in their trajectories of participation” (p. 42). Youth havedifferential access to contexts and may lack access to positions within those contexts which can lead to inequitablescopes of possibility (Dreier, 2009).We argue differential success pursuing interest-related pursuits is dependent on youths’ access to androles in and across the many contexts of their lives. This is in contrast to dominant discourses that name interestdevelopment as a personal psychological attribute that operates in or out of formal learning environments (seeBathgate, Schunn, & Correnti, 2014). Using personal attributions (e.g., motivation, ability, grit) as justificationof success or failure do not address the ways in which youth must organize their lives across the contexts in whichthey are participating. Holzkamp (2015) argues, “such personalizing attributions close off further questioning asto the possible disruptions and contradictions in the way students organize their lives that arise from shortages ofspecific resources but also from many other more or less unknown circumstances” (p. 66). We utilize thisframework to investigate youths’ interest-related practices and the nuances of those more or less unknowncircumstances. Our analysis seeks to understand how those conditions of practice affect their participation nowand their ideas about desired futures.MethodsIn order to explore the conditions of practice that lead to youth suspension of interest-related pursuits, we askedtwo research questions:1. Why do youth suspend interest-related pursuits?2. What are the effects of suspension on youths’ future desires and career goals?These questions informed how we methodologically carried out our study and investigated our data. Our largerproject attended to youths’ engagement with interest-related pursuits and how those interests changed over timeand across contexts. In an initial survey, youth answered several questions related to their experience of aninterest-related pursuit, that is, a pursuit that youth said they enjoyed doing, believed they are getting better at orlearning from over time, and sought out whenever they had the opportunity. For this study, we relied on an analysisof interviews with youth to learn about the nature of why youth suspended or experienced disruptions to theirparticipation with those interest related pursuits. Using interviews allowed us to pay particular attention to howyouth described the barriers and obstacles they faced when participating in interest driven activities. We elicitedand attended to ways that youths’ engagement and persistence with activities is informed and influenced by theirspecific life circumstances (Azevedo, 2011, 2013; Mørck & Huniche, 2006). These in-depth discussions withyouth via our interviews were particularly relevant to us developing an understanding of why and under whatconditions youth suspended participation in activities.ParticipantsYouth aged 13-17 years old representing 19 different youth programs across the United States and Canadaparticipated in this study. In the initial waves of data collection, 266 youth completed surveys about their interestrelated pursuits in both 2013 and 2014. Fifty-four youth from this group agreed to participate in an interview inwave three. Each youth participated in an interest-related activity such as video gaming, digital journalism, musicproduction, writing, and illustrating.We selected nine students to highlight in this study through a multistage process aimed at identifyingrepresentative cases of young people who reported experiencing disruptions in their interest related pursuits. First,ICLS 2016 Proceedings483© ISLSwe created a representative data display for all 54 youth in the larger study; the data display included youth’sdemographic information as well as characteristics we identified as important to understanding youth’sarticulations of disruptions and activity suspension. These included the youth’s articulations of their history ofparticipation in their chosen activity, the type of disruption they experienced, their future goals, and the outcomeof the experienced disruption. From this table we identified youth who we experienced a disruption that led to asuspension of their interest related activity. The data display allowed us to identify two broad categories ofdisruptions that the youth experienced. These included a loss of material or financial resources or the prioritizationof formal schooling. From the list of youth who suspended their interest related pursuits because of these types ofdisruptions, we selected nine representative case studies. There are five females and four males, and collectively,they represent a number of ethnicities, including African American, Mexican American, Puerto Rican, Asian, andwhite. In this paper we present these case studies as representative of themes we found emerging from our largercorpus of data.Initial survey resultsWe report on results from the initial surveys to provide context on youths’ suspension of activities for thisinterview study. In Wave 1, we asked each young person to answer the question, “What is something you do thatyou enjoy and get better at, the more you do it?” Youth filled in an interest-related activity. In Wave 2, we represented that same activity to the youth and we asked them if they still engaged in the activity or not. A majorityof youth with responses, 180 (71%), reported that they were still doing an activity while a minority, 74 (29%)reported changing their activity. Twelve youth did not respond to that question. All 74 youth provided somewritten explanation of why they stopped participating in their Wave 1 activity. By far the most common reasonyouth cited for stopping the activity was a conflict in their schedule or lack of time (n = 26). The next mostfrequent reason was a change in priorities or level of interest (n=20). We seek to provide depth to theseexplanations of suspension in this interview study.Sources of dataWe analyzed the data over a 7-month period which included constructing, administering, and analyzing interviewspaying close attention to the ways youth talked about their interests and the influence of the greater world aroundthem. Our interview protocol was informed by Dreier (2008), who argues that while people are usually studiedwithin one context, researchers need to attend to how persons’ participation unfolds in time and across contextsas they socially act in multiple settings. The protocol was constructed with the goal of collecting articulations ofyouth’s experiences with interest related pursuits. Questions elicited youth’s descriptions of their activities andpurposes for participation, their current involvement in their activity, the networks (e.g. linkages and supports)they drew upon when participating in their activity, obstacles they experienced, and how they perceived the futureas related to their participation. The interviews also elicited youths’ perspectives on how their participationchanged over time. This change over time, as youth described it, was influenced by disruptions and subsequentfrustrations related to the various constraints youth faced when pursuing their chosen interest related activity.ProcedureOur team interviewed the 54 youth who agreed to participate throughout summer 2015. The interviews wereconducted over the phone and lasted between 45 minutes and one hour. Interviews were recorded, transcribed byan outside transcription service, and uploaded and analyzed in the software program Dedoose. During six codecreation summits members of the research team participated in reading interviews and organizing codes intothematic patterns we saw across the data. Once these thematic patterns were established, we developed codeconstructs including parent and sub codes. Following the completion of the coding scheme, the coding of thecorpus of data was divided amongst the research team. We established inter-rater reliability for all codes, withresulting Cohen’s kappa ranging from 0.63 to 1.00. In this analysis, we used the codes designed to capture youths’experiences during their initial engagement with the activity and subsequent engagements with the activity. These“temporal participation” codes had inter-rater reliability measured with Cohen’s kappa ranging from 0.73 to 0.84.Approach to data analysisBecause we were interested in how young people experience disruptions in their interest related pursuits that leadthem to suspending participation, we conducted analysis through a multistage process.First we coded the 54 youthinterviews for the youth’s relationship to their activity, their length of participation in the interest related pursuit,their duration of participation, how their participation changed and was affected over time, and how they imaginedtheir possible future. Compiling these coded transcripts and coded data, we developed youth profile’s that aimedICLS 2016 Proceedings484© ISLSto trace the youth’s relationship to their interest related pursuit over time. This level of analysis allowed us to seethe ways in which their participation in the activity changed and was affected over time. We then created datadisplays for each student of initial activity, history of involvement in activity, youth articulations of disruptions,type of disruption, future goals, outcomes, and the program setting. These data displays allowed us to identifythemes regarding (1) each youth’s relationship to their interest related pursuit, (2) how this relationship changedover time, and (3) how their participation in the activity was disrupted by varying life circumstances andconditions. After discussing and finding agreement regarding youth’s experience of disruptions and theirsubsequent suspension of activity, we then looked for types of disruptions occurring across the data. We thengenerated claims regarding these data and interrogated for other explanations.FindingsDespite noting connections between their interest-related pursuits and their desired futures, some youthexperienced disruptions in engagement or chose to suspend interest-related activities. Table 1 displays the typesof disruptions youth in this study (n=54) reported experiencing. The top two disruptions youth mentioned werecounted and are displayed in the table, for a total of 73 disruptions.Table 1: Frequency of DisruptionsType of DisruptionFrequency Count (Percent of Total)School24(33%)Material/Financial13(18%)Geographical1(1%)Social Support8(11%)Career Feasibility4(6%)Change of interest/new hobby6(8%)Time5(7%)No Disruption Mentioned12 (16%)Table 2 displays the case study youth (n = 9) who suspended their interest-related pursuits (column 2) along withfrequency of participation at the time of the interview and the reported duration of engagement in the pursuit. Thetable also characterizes the types of conditions of practice that youth reported experiencing. These nine youthrepresent the top two types of disruptions experienced by the youth in our study: disruptions because offinancial/materials conditions or disruptions because of educational commitments. Material or financialconditions denote instances in which youth could not participate because the material infrastructure was notavailable to them or financially, they did not have opportunity to participate. Educational conditions denote thosein which youth reported having competing responsibilities related to formal schooling that led to limited orsuspended engagement in the interest-related pursuit. Next, we examine each these conditions in depth.Table 2: Youth and reasons for suspensionYouthDemographicsInterestrelatedPursuitFrequency ofParticipation;DurationReasons for SuspensionMaterial orFinancialICLS 2016 Proceedings485DesiredFutureEducational© ISLSCaila, female, age18, AfricanAmericanFilm Editing,Film MakingDabbling;3 yearsXFilm MakerCedric, male, age17, AfricanAmericanMusicProductionDaily; 9 yearsXRap Artist andMusicProducerGabe, male, age18, MexicanAmericanMC orRappingAbout two timesper week; 5 yearsXMC or Rapperor TVProducerIke, age 18, maleIllustratingDaily, 11 yearsXGraphic novelillustratorEmilia, age 19,female, AfricanAmericanVolunteeringWeekly; 1 yearXDentistTalia, age 17,female, AmericanIndian, AfricanAmerican, PuertoRicanWriting scriptsfor mediaA couple of timesper year; 2 yearsXCreativeWriting; stillexploringoptionsClaudia, age 17,female, AsianPlayingStarcraftOccasionally; 10yearsXPhysician orMedical fieldAngie, age 18,female, whiteDrawingNot often, as ahobby; 7 YearsXTattoo Artistor Psychologyrelated careerDanny, age 19,maleClubs atschoolVariable; 4 yearsXPediatrician orpersonworking withspecial needschildrenLoss of access to necessary material and financial resourcesMany interest-related pursuits require material or financial resources to engage in them. For instance, youth mayneed access to a car to drive where public transportation does not go or access to pursuit-specific training ormaterials, such as video editing software. Youth in our study reported both types of barriers to participation intheir interest-related pursuits. Youth who experienced financial and material barriers to participation namedspecific circumstances of their lives that led them to suspend their participation. Emilia, for example, while inhigh school enjoyed volunteering but was unable to pursue it more seriously because she lacked access totransportation. She emphasized this point when she explained that once in she was in college, she volunteeredmore frequently because her sister attended the same college and had a car that she offered to ease Emilia’s issueswith transportation to the homeless shelter.Suspension of interest-related activities also occurred for youth in our study when life conditionsstemming from family income required youth to take on extra responsibilities to support their parents or youngersiblings. Gabe reported suspending his rapping activities whenever he needed to take care of his little brother andsister. He told us, “sometimes my parents work a lot so sometimes I need to help. I feel like chores too [get in theway]. I’m the oldest one, in a way I have to put in more work.” Gabe suspended his participation in his interestrelated activity because he prioritized providing support for his family at home.Related, youth reported instances where they suspended their activities because they no longer had accessto the material resources necessary for that specific pursuit. Often these pursuits -- related to new media arts ordigital arts -- required computers and other technical equipment. Cedric, an aspiring rapper and music producerfrom Los Angeles, made beats and wrote and recorded raps to go with them. He started making beats in elementaryschool when his school allowed him to bring home a computer to work on. A desire to record rap music droveCedric and he lacked funds to buy beats made by other producers so he made the beats himself. Sometimes heICLS 2016 Proceedings486© ISLSsold or licensed his produced beats to other rap artists, but when we talked to him, he was working on his ownalbum for the first time. He stored all his beats on his computer but then he lent his computer to his little brotherwho broke the machine. They were not able to recover the files. He lost all the beats for his album and suspendedhis practice. Eventually he was able to negotiate with his mother to borrow her computer to start anew on hisalbum. Cedric’s suspension of activity was relatively short because he was able to share material resources withinhis family to restart the work.When we interviewed youth, we asked them what barriers they expected to encounter as they pursuedtheir future goals. Some youth who wanted to pursue their interest-related activities in the future imagined theywould face financial barriers to participation. For example, Caila, described her future goal of becoming afilmmaker:The money aspect of it is a lot. Like you do have to buy a lot of your own supplies in order toset up that portfolio that do. You do have to buy a lot high technology and have large supportfrom family, probably most likely your Mamma who's going to be buying the software for you.Then there's no guarantee that you might be a professional in the field or you may actually begood at what you do.Calia was actively looking for universities where she could apply to a reputable film making program but she wasnot spending time film making at the time because she was no longer eligible to participate in her afterschoolprogram where she primarily worked on films due to her age. Even though Caila did not stop pursuing a career infilm production, available resources are a worry for her as she prepares for her future, signaling their salience asa key condition for pursuing an interest toward a career. Other youth described how expectations for futureearnings led other people to expect them to suspend interest-related pursuits because “you need money to live”.Ike, a graphic illustrator, reported that people in his life were not supportive of his time spent on illustratingbecause they expected him to make money, asking him “why work after something when you don’t really getpaid for it?” While this did not cause Ike to suspend his illustration work, he expected to encounter this tension inthe future as he pursued his goal of publishing graphic novels.Prioritizing formal schoolIn addition to the material and financial barriers and obstacles experienced by some youth, we found that otheryouth in our study suspended participation in an activity because of education-related responsibilities. Schoolcommitments like taking AP and honors classes, homework responsibilities, and college applications manifestedin a lack of time for additional pursuits and often drove youth to suspend their interest-related activities. Weunderstand this suspension of activity as being connected to the necessary attention youth felt they had to pay toschool as a means to work toward their imagined future to attend college and become successful in context oftheir communities and greater world.Talia, a youth who participated in a New Media Arts program that taught her to write scripts for newproductions and supported her skill development, described homework as getting in the way of her ability toattend the program and write scripts. She told us: “I had to choose either homework or [going to the program].”When we pushed further, Talia explained that it was AP English specifically that took time away from writingscripts. For Claudia, a youth in our study who played the videogame Starcraft told us that exams got in the wayof her game play, as well as “big projects that teachers give, and the homework that, most of the time, could getinto the way.” At one point Starcraft was a large part of Claudia’s life but like Talia she suspended herparticipation because it took “time away that [she] could be more productive” and do her work that was integrallyrelated to her desire to become a physician.Angie, a youth interested in drawing, described similar sentiments to Talia and Will:What's different is that I kind of dropped doing it because I'm more focused on school rightnow. I wish I had more time to be able to do it, so I can get better. I always thought I would geta career in art, but that dream has died off. I didn't really know it was worth it anymore, so Ikind of pushed it back, and I guess that's the only difference.In the case of Angie, we also see the way in which her focusing on school intersects with her commitment todrawing as a worthy future pursuit in terms of a career. When asked what sort of future careers illustrating preparedAngie for she described:ICLS 2016 Proceedings487© ISLSI honestly don't even know. I thought I was going to have a career with drawing; I just neverwent that way. Other interests and schooling got in the way. I never really branched out becauseI really don't know where I could go with it and what I could have from drawing other than anice hobby to have.Angie’s lack of seeing a pathway to pursue illustrating as a future career in addition to her school commitmentsare significant. This example demonstrates the ways in which doing well in school or attending to schooling isdriven by seeing a clear pathway into a future a career.Discussion: Conditions of practice and desired possible futuresThe conditions of practice that youth experienced – lack of access to material or financial resources or conditionscharacterized by commitments to schooling – varied among the youth in our study and affected their interestrelated pursuit trajectories in different ways. For the first five youth in Table 1, interest-related pursuits wereintegral to their desired futures. For example, both Gabe and Cedric spent time working on rapping and musicproduction and told us about the work they were doing to pursue music production as a career after college. Thesecond set of youth shown on the bottom half of the table (n=4) described desired futures and careers differentfrom or loosely related to their desired possible futures. Talia, for example, pursued script writing for digital mediaproduction in her afterschool program and she was still exploring options for her future. She was consideringsomething related to creative writing -- a transformation of her previous line of practice. In general, youth whoexperienced suspension of interest-related pursuits due to loss of access to material or financial resources tendedto pursue lines of practice toward possible futures directly related to their interest-related pursuit. In contrast,youth who experienced suspension of pursuits for educational careers saw their interest-related pursuits as moreof a hobby than a possible future.Contributions and implicationsInterest-related pursuits are ever-changing and re-locating as youth navigate the circumstances of their lives.Azevedo (2013) describes this navigation as something people must organize in order to pursue an interest, “beinginterested in a practice requires weaving it with many other concerns, domains, values, goals, and practices inone’s life space, which makes the practice of interest meaningful in the short and long hauls” (p.44). We areconcerned with the circumstances that are out of youths’ control and where this weaving or organization disruptsinterest-related pursuits. We find in this study some circumstances that disrupt youths’ pursuits that are related tothe pursuit of alternate, socially valued goals such as advancing one’s schooling. But in other circumstances,restricted access may be limiting possible future opportunities.What does those mean in the long haul for youth who are working toward better socioeconomic outcomesand desirable resources? We need to elevate in a theory of interest-related pursuits the conditions of practice thatenable and constrain those pursuits and that disrupt them. We argue German-Danish critical psychology lends thisperspective to describe the key conditions of practice for youth persistence or suspension of interest-relatedpursuits and how these conditions lead to shifting engagement in youths’ pursuits of desired futures and resources.This lens allowed us to theorize the connection between youths’ interests and their future careers. People whodesign for and support youth in their interest-related pursuits need to attend to the key conditions that lead todisruptions in youths’ practices as well as recognize and mitigate the ways in which life circumstances affectparticipation across contexts of youths’ lives.ReferencesAzevedo, F. S. (2006). Personal excursions: Investigating the dynamics of student engagement. InternationalJournal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 11, 57–98.Azevedo, F. S. (2011). Lines of practice: A practice-centered theory of interest relationships. Cognition &Instruction, 29, 147–184.Azevedo, F. S. (2013). The tailored practice of hobbies and its implication for the design of interest-drivenlearning environments. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 22(3), 462-510.Bathgate, M., Schunn, C. D., & Correnti, R. J. (2014). Children’s motivation towards science across contexts,manner-of-interaction, and topic. Science Education, 98(2), 189-215.Barron, B. (2006). Interest and self-sustained learning as catalysts of development: A learning ecologyperspective. Human Development, 49, 193–224.ICLS 2016 Proceedings488© ISLSBrown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1996). Psychological theory and the design of innovative learningenvironments: On procedures, principles and systems. In L. Schauble & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovations inlearning: New environments for education (pp. 289–325). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Dreier, O. (1997). Subjectivity and social practice. Aarhus, Denmark: Center for Health, Humanity, and Culture.Dreier, O. (2008). Psychotherapy in everyday life. New York: Cambridge University Press.Dreier, O. (2009). Persons in Structures of Social Practice. Theory & Psychology, 19(2), 193–212.Greeno, J. G. (2006). Learning in activity. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the LearningSciences (pp. 79–96). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Hidi, S., & Renninger, K. A. (2006). The four-phase model of interest development. Educational Psychologist,4(2), 111–127.Holzkamp, K. (2015). Conduct of everyday life as a basic concept of critical psychology. In E. Schrauble & C.Højholt (Eds.), Psychology and the conduct of everyday life (66-99). London: Routledge.Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., Schor, J., Sefton- Green, J., & Watkins,S.C. (2013). Connected Learning: An Agenda for Research and Design. Irvine, CA: Digital Media andLearning Research Hub.Mørck, L.L. & Huniche, L. (2006). Critical psychology in a Danish context. Annual Review of CriticalPsychology, 5.Nissen, M. (2005). The subjectivity of participation: Sketch of a theory. International Journal of CriticalPsychology, 15, 151-179.ICLS 2016 Proceedings489© ISLS