Frictional Patterns in the Design of Games for LearningAdam Mechtley, University of Wisconsin–Madison, mechtley@wisc.eduMatthew Berland, University of Wisconsin–Madison, mberland@wisc.eduAbstract: This work presents a case study of a game-based learning prototype to definefrictional design patterns – design decisions that knowingly impede some specific userinteraction – as a type of pattern to support learning with games. We evaluate frictional designpatterns by applying the concept to a game focused on scientific argumentation in order toexamine the balance between data collection requirements and players' access to informationrequired for certain in-game epistemic performances.In this paper, we advance the concept of frictional design patterns. A pattern in general is a reusable solution toa common design problem, whereas a frictional one, as we define it here, is one that knowingly and necessarilymakes some specific user interaction more cumbersome. Frictional patterns may be seen as one way to designdesirable difficulties – challenging circumstances that "trigger encoding and retrieval processes that supportlearning…" (Bjork & Bjork, 2011, p. 58). The goal of using frictional patterns is to explicitly document designdecisions made to facilitate or detect learning outcomes, yet which also negatively impact users' experiences insome way, ideally so these impacts can be mitigated elsewhere or accounted for in analyses of players' behavior.Defining frictional patternsMany fields of design, such as software and interaction design, distinguish between design principles and designpatterns to communicate different forms of design knowledge (Gamma, Helm, Johnson, & Vlissides, 1995). Inthis scheme, principles are abstract rules presumed to be useful across most contexts. Patterns, on the otherhand are reusable solutions to frequent, concrete design problems (e.g., creating an adapter to let two ordinarilyincompatible components interface with one another). Respectively, designers may also refer to anti-patterns, orcommon solutions to design problems that may seem appealing at face value, but which are actuallycounterproductive or detrimental. User interaction designers have also recently classified dark patterns, whichare those that are "used intentionally by a game creator to cause negative experiences for players which areagainst their best interests" (Zagal, Björk, & Lewis, 2013, p. 45). The design requirements of games for learningsuggest a need for a special class of patterns, which we call frictional patterns, that serve to reconcile competingaims that arise from educational and game design best practices, and which serve as explicit reminders of designcompromises selected. We define a frictional pattern as a pattern that is used in a designed experience whichresembles a typical user-centered experience, where fulfilling a design requirement necessitates holding someproximate user interest in abeyance. This definition acknowledges that users have a set of expectations on thebasis of their prior experiences with other similar designs; we generalize the field of applicability beyond digitalgames, however, as frictional patterns may be used in traditional games, as well as in non-game-basedcomputerized learning environments. This definition furthermore differentiates frictional patterns from darkpatterns. While both types of patterns advance designers' interests in favor of users' interests, a frictional patternis at worst a minor or temporary setback in users' goals and does not violate their long-term aims or autonomy.Frictional patterns in practiceResearchers working in the sub-field of epistemic cognition have identified a need for designs that elicitevidence of learners' knowledge and justifications (e.g., Sandoval, 2012). Moreover, Chinn, Rinehart, andBuckland (2014) have argued that scholars must find evidence of learners' aims in order to interpret theirepistemic practices. Consequently, a constraint adopted for the present work was to design interactions thatwould render changes in players' attention more directly observable during the course of play without requiringspecialized hardware or clinical testing environments. This general technique was used by Danielak andcolleagues (2014) in an early prototype of a museum-based game focused on engineering, where players had toexplicitly open a modal window in the interface in order to review their progress. This action was logged onplayers' devices, allowing the study's authors to make inferences about players' goal orientations during play. Itwas therefore conjectured that using a similar pattern for actions that are performed frequently could provideone source of data regarding the trajectory and cadence of players' epistemic aims in a game.The game used in this case study is a hybrid digital/tabletop game focused on paleobiology, where twoplayers cooperate to uncover features of a specimen and are rewarded for using these features to makeinferences about other features the specimen might have. Players use a companion app on touchscreen devicesICLS 2018 Proceedings1487© ISLSto create mathematical models relating these features, and they can use these models to warrant arguments theymake about the specimen. The app also serves as a personal reference, where players can inspect technical termson-demand. While good game design traditionally calls for providing explicit information just-in-time (Gee,2003), information essential for model evaluation was intentionally obfuscated behind interface elements inorder to generate more unambiguous data regarding what players are looking at, how much time they spendlooking at it, and so on. As such, the app's model browser displays confidence ranges for a predictedcharacteristic under different input conditions, but players must touch and hold on affordances in the interface toview detailed descriptions of the confidence ranges, as well as to see the strength values the model confers (thelatter of which is the only piece of mechanically relevant information in the context of the game).The data in the pilot test covered here come from two adults who regularly play games with oneanother. Data collected include audio and video recordings of the participants, video recording of the gameboard, as well as screen recordings and log data from players' touch screen devices. Neither the sample nor thisstudy is intended to be representative of a broader population. Rather, we provide an example of how africtional design pattern can impact players' learning and activity in a game.At the beginning of the game, Player 1's utterances focused primarily on victory points and strengthvalues, indicating a proximate aim of advancing her state in the game. The log and video data revealed that herreading of model descriptions in the app was fairly cursory during this period, focused on skimming to findstrength values. However, when she created an argument with zero strength (a move not explicitly disallowed inthe rules), there was some disagreement regarding how to interpret her model. For example, Player 1 suggestedthat the model indicated that "the likelihood of these two features leading to a predator is not...strong." to whichPlayer 2 replied "the way I interpreted what it said was that it just doesn't have enough evidence to make thecase that it is strong or not." Player 1 puzzled through this interpretation aloud, tentatively agreeing that "there'snot enough evidence to, to predict one or the other." After this exchange, Player 1 spent longer periods offocused time interpreting descriptions in the app when creating new models. This shift, as evidenced byidentifiable jumps in her cumulative time spent reading model descriptions following this event, reflectedchanges in her play strategy and hence her orientation from simply how to score points in accordance with therules to how to make a coherent argument. The culmination of this effort occurred three turns later when sheproduced an argument to her satisfaction, exclaiming "Finally! I did something right."ConclusionsThe example discussed here shows how one low-level interface decision can explicitly deviate from traditionalusability standards while generating evidence required to understand player activity. Characterizing thisdecision as a frictional pattern allows us to clearly document the expected impacts on usability and usercomprehension. By explicitly defining frictional patterns in design work, it becomes possible to better qualifythe positive value of specific impairments to usability in design-based research.ReferencesBjork, E. L., & Bjork, R. (2011). Making things hard on yourself, but in a good way: Creating desirabledifficulties to enhance learning. In M. A. Gernsbacher, R. W. Pew, L. M. Hough, & J. R. Pomerantz(Eds.), Psychology and the real world: Essays illustrating fundamental contributions to society (1sted., pp. 55–64). New York, New York: Worth Publishers.Chinn, C. A., Rinehart, R. W., & Buckland, L. A. (2014). Epistemic cognition and evaluating information:Applying the AIR model of epistemic cognition. In D. N. Rapp & J. L. G. Braasch (Eds.), Processinginaccurate information: Theoretical and applied perspectives from cognitive science and theeducational sciences (pp. 425–453). Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.Danielak, B. A., Mechtley, A., Berland, M., Lyons, L., & Eydt, R. (2014). MakeScape Lite: A prototypelearning environment for making and design. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on InteractionDesign and Children - IDC ’14 (pp. 229–232). Aarhus, Denmark.Gamma, E., Helm, R., Johnson, R., & Vlissides, J. (1995). Design patterns: Elements of reusable objectoriented software. Boston, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley.Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York, New York:Palgrave Macmillan.Sandoval, W. A. (2012). Situating epistemological development. In The future of learning: Proceedings of the10th international conference of the learning sciences (Vol. 1, pp. 347–354). Sydney, Australia:International Society of the Learning Sciences.Zagal, J. P., Björk, S., & Lewis, C. (2013). Dark patterns in the design of games. FDG 2013 - 8th InternationalConference on the Foundations of Digital Games, 1(312), 39–46.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1488© ISLS