Collaborative Gesture as a Case of Distributed MathematicalCognitionCandace Walkington, Geoffrey Chelule, and Dawn Woods,cwalkington@smu.edu, nchelule@smu.edu, dwoods@smu.eduSouthern Methodist UniversityMitchell J. Nathan, University of Wisconsin-Madison, mnathan@wisc.eduAbstract: Gestures have been shown to play a key role in mathematical reasoning and be anindicator that mathematical reasoning is embodied – inexorably linked to action, perception,and the physical body. Theories of extended cognition accentuate looking beyond the bodyand mind of an individual, thus here we examine how gestural embodied actions becomedistributed over multiple learners confronting mathematical tasks. We identify several ways inwhich gesture can be used collaboratively and explore patterns in how collaborative gesturesseem to arise in a learning environment involving a motion capture game for geometry.Learners use collaborative gestures to extend mathematical ideas over multiple bodies as theyexplore, refine, and extend each other’s reasoning.IntroductionGestures – movements that accompany speech – have been found to be a powerful component of reasoning in avariety of domains (Alibali, Spencer, Knox, & Kita, 2011; Beilock & Goldin-Meadow, 2010; Glenberg,Gutierrez, Levin, Japuntich, & Kaschak, 2004), including mathematics. The gestures learners formulate canreveal information not expressed in speech (Church & Goldin-Meadow, 1986), can show an association withconceptual performance (Goldin-Meadow, 2005; Cook & Goldin-Meadow, 2006), can be manipulated to givestudents new actionable ideas (Goldin-Meadow, Cook, & Mitchell, 2009; Nathan et al., 2014; Novack,Congdon, Hemani-Lopez, & Goldin-Meadow, 2014), and, when prevented, can impair reasoning (Hostetter,Alibali, & Kita, 2007; Nathan & Martinez, 2015). In addition, teachers use gestures to communicate ideas tostudents in a multimodal manner (Alibali & Nathan, 2012; Valenzeno, Alibali, & Klatzky, 2003), which may beparticularly important in mathematics classrooms where gestures can make spatial and relational aspects ofmathematical concepts come alive (Nathan et al., 2011).While considerable research has been conducted on how teachers and learners use gestures duringmathematical reasoning (see Alibali & Nathan, 2012 for a review), less work has looked at gesturing as acollaborative activity that is part of mathematical discussion and argumentation between different learners. Herewe define collaborative gestures as gestures that physically encompass multiple learners. We propose thatlearners engaging in mathematical reasoning can use their bodies, particularly their hands, in collaborative waysto reinforce, extend, and redirect the mathematical ideas of others, which were also expressed through physicalmovement. Theories of embodied cognition (e.g., Wilson, 2002) posit that learners process and understand ideasthrough their bodies and their senses, and that the mind and body, rather than being separate entities, have a bidirectional relationship. A complementary theory, extended cognition (Clark & Chalmers, 1998), accentuatesthe idea that a student’s cognitive system extends beyond their own minds and bodies, into their environmentand those around them. Collaborative gestures are a fascinating area of study for the learning sciences, becausethey show how cognitive processes become extended over the embodied experiences of multiple learners. Inaddition, collaborative gestures provide a window into understanding how the body can be leveraged to helpstudents understand mathematical ideas as they work jointly on challenging tasks. In the present paper, weexamine collaborative gestural activity that groups engage in while proving geometry conjectures.Theoretical frameworkGesture as Simulation ActionThe theory of Gesture as Simulated Action (GSA; Hostetter & Alibali, 2008) provides an empirical, embodiedcognition account of how the multimodal production of gestures comes about. Gestures in the GSA frameworkarise during speaking when pre-motor activation, formed in response to motor or perceptual imagery, isactivated beyond a speaker’s current gesture threshold. The threshold is the level of motor activation needed fora simulation to be expressed in overt gesture; this threshold can vary depending on factors such as the currenttask demands (e.g., strength of motor activation when processing spatial imagery), individual differences (e.g.,ICLS 2018 Proceedings552© ISLSlevel of spatial skills), and situational considerations (e.g., social contexts). Nathan (2017) proposed anextension of GSA to account for the influences of motor activity the learner is induced to perform (e.g., directedactions) on cognition. In this reciprocating model, learners’ actions and movements serve as inputs capable ofdriving the cognition-action system toward associated cognitive states through a bi-directional process. In otherwords, in addition to cognitive states giving rise to actions, directing learners to engage in physical motions maygive them new ideas and insights relevant to understanding and solving tasks. While Nathan’s (2017) extensionto GSA accentuates how directing the learner to motion in particular ways can trigger new cognitive andembodied states, here we emphasize how observing and embodying the actions and gestures of others, throughcollaborative activity and joint sense-making, can trigger new cognitive and gestural states in learners. We takethis to be an important case of distributed cognition, which we discuss next.Distributed cognition and collaborative gestureProfessional practice involves the coordination of many different inscriptions and representational technologiesby differently-positioned actors whose actions occur across a range of social and physical spaces (Goodwin,1995; Hutchins, 1995). Through joint, coordinated activity, cognition becomes distributed over a patchwork ofdiscontinuous spaces and representational media. Lave (1988) describes how “‘Cognition’ observed in everydaypractice is distributed—stretched over, not divided among—mind, body, activity and culturally organizedsettings (which include other actors)” (p. 1). Theories of extended cognition further argue that the social andphysical environment of learners is actually constituent of their cognitive system (Clark & Chalmers, 1998). Theimplication is that cognition, rather than existing in the head of an individual, is distributed over the bodies ofmultiple learners and the environment around them as they interact. One way cognition can be extended acrosslearners is through the use of gestures that extend over multiple persons.Prior research on learning origami has identified collaborative gestures as gestures through which alearner interacts with the gestures of a communicative partner (Funiyama, 2000). In the context of this pastresearch, these gestures often involved a student pointing to or manipulating a teacher’s gestures about origamifolds. Here we reimagine the idea of collaborative gestures to be relevant to learner-learner interactions aroundmathematical sense-making and take such gestures to be a case of extended cognition. We next turn to adiscussion of how gestures and actions have been studied in the context of mathematical reasoning.Gesture, embodiment, and mathematical proofOne type of gesture that has been identified as important to mathematical reasoning is dynamic gestures(Göksun et al., 2013; Uttal et al., 2012). These are gestures where learners use their bodies to physicallyformulate and then transform or manipulate mathematical objects. For example, a learner might make a trianglewith their thumbs and forefingers, and then make that triangle grow, shrink, rotate, flip, etc. These kinds ofgestures might be particularly important and revealing when learners are engaging in mathematical proving or“the process employed by an individual to remove or create doubts about the truth of an observation” (Harel &Sowder, 1998, p. 241). When learners successfully justify mathematical arguments, their reasoning can betransformational in nature, where they perform valid mathematical operations on objects in order to build alogical deductive chain of reasoning that transcends particular cases and applies to all mathematical objectsunder consideration. This kind of transformational proof scheme (Harel & Sowder, 1998) may be closelycoupled with both mentally simulated and physically enacted gesture and action (Nathan et al., 2014).Research has shown that dynamic gestures arise during the mathematical reasoning of experts(Marghetis, Edwards, & Núñez, 2014) and that dynamic gestures have a strong association with studentsformulating valid proofs to geometrical conjectures (Nathan et al., 2014; Nathan & Walkington, 2017). Theprofessional practice of proof itself has been described as “a richly embodied practice that involves inscribingand manipulating notations, interacting with those notations through speech and gesture, and using the body toenact the meanings of mathematical ideas” (Marghetis, Edwards, & Núñez, 2014, p. 243). The multimodalnature of proof is also evident for novice students in classrooms, as proofs often take on verbal and gesturalforms, as opposed to formal, written ones (Healy & Hoyles, 2000), and teachers and students use gestures totrack the development of ideas when exploring conjectures (Nathan et al., 2011; Nathan & Walkington, 2017).Research questionsPrior work has identified how gestures arise, why gestures are important, the close connection betweenembodied action and mathematical proof, and the centrality of gestures that show dynamic transformations.Here we extend this work by looking at how these embodied actions are used as part of a distributed cognitivesystem through collaborative activity across multiple learners. We address the following research questions:1) How are gestures used collaboratively during geometric proof activities?ICLS 2018 Proceedings553© ISLS2) How often were collaborative gestures used, and how did this vary by expertise and type of gesture?3) How were learners engaging differently with collaborative gestures across individuals and groups?MethodsParticipantsParticipants included 20 pre-service and 34 in-service teachers, enrolled in one of five different courses at aprivate university. They were either enrolled in an undergraduate elementary math methods course for preservice teachers, a graduate elementary math methods course for pre-service teachers, a graduate course for inservice middle school math teachers in their first year, a graduate class for high school math teachers in theirfirst year, or a graduate master math teacher course for in-service teachers who are generalists interested inmathematics or who are secondary mathematics teachers. A total of 64 students across the five classes wererecruited to participate, however 3 were absent on the day of the study and 7 did not consent to participate, forthe final sample of 54. Forty-six participants were female, while 8 were male; 38 identified as Caucasian, 6 asAfrican-American, 5 as Asian, 3 as Hispanic/Latin@, and 2 as Other race/ethnicity.ProcedureParticipants were placed in groups of 3 to 6 to play a Kinect-based video game for learning geometry, calledThe Hidden Village (Nathan & Walkington, 2017). The game included 8 tasks where players perform directedmotions with their arms and then prove or disprove related geometric conjectures (Table 1). Participants weredirected to take turns of the person controlling the game for each task such that everyone in the group controlledthe game at least once. Due to technical issues, some groups only experienced six of the eight game conjectures.Participants were instructed to not use pencil or paper to assist them in proving the conjectures, and were told towork together. Although the body movements they had been directed to perform in the game were intended togive them insights about the proofs (e.g., for a conjecture about similar triangles they were directed to makegrowing triangles with their arms), the directed movements were somewhat rarely explicitly re-enacted inparticipants’ discussions. Here our focus is on the gestures that these learners formulated themselves to helpthem understand, reason through, and collaborate around the proof to each conjecture.Table 1: Conjectures participant groups proved1. The sum of the lengths of any two sides of a triangle must be greater than the length of the remaining side.2. Given that you know the measure of all 3 angles of a triangle, there is only one unique triangle that can be formed withthese 3 angle measurements. (False)3. The area of a parallelogram is the same as the area of a rectangle with the same base and height.4. Diagonals of a rectangle are always congruent.5. If one angle of a triangle is larger than a second angle, than the side opposite the first angle is longer than the sideopposite the second angle.6. The measure of the central angle of a circle is twice the measure of any inscribed angle intersecting the same twoendpoints on the circumference of the circle.7. Reflecting a point over the x-axis is the same as rotating the point 90 degrees about the origin. (False)8. If you double the length and width of a rectangle, the area is exactly doubled. (False)AnalysisVideo was captured of groups playing the game, and was transcribed in the Transana software (Woods &Fassnacht, 2012). Videos were clipped such that one clip was one group proving one conjecture. Each clip wascoded for each gesture sequence that arose – a gesture sequence was defined as all of the hand gestures made bya single person from the time their hands rose until the time their hands returned to rest. Gesture sequences werecoded as being individual if the gesturer was making a gesture that was not triggered by or related to thegestures of others, and collaborative if they were. For individual gestures, gesturers could still be building off ofthe speech of other learners – gesture were only coded as collaborative if learners were gesturing in response tothe gestures of other learners. Collaborative gesture sequences were coded for both the learner that wasperforming them and the learner the performer was responding to or collaborating with. Collaborative gestureswere then separated into different categories using a grounded, bottom-up approach of constant comparisons(Glaser & Strauss, 1976). As new collaborative gesture categories emerged, prior clips were revisited andrecoded. Two coders completed all gesture sequence coding. Fort-four percent of the corpus was double-codedby both coders, with discrepancies, issues, and ideas discussed as coding was compared and new categorieswere formulated. A total of 87 clips of 12 groups across the five classes were coded for gesture sequences.ICLS 2018 Proceedings554© ISLSResults and discussionRQ1: In what ways were gestures used collaboratively?Results revealed five categories of collaborative gestures (Table 2). In the example of mirroring gestures inFigure 1, two learners are making the same triangle gesture at the same time when proving Conjecture 5 inTable 1. In the example of echoing gestures in Figure 1, one learner scales her hands in and out to make similartriangles for Conjecture 2 in Table 1, and then another learner takes up her explanation while repeating hergesture. These gestures reveal how learners can reflect on and adopt each other’s mathematical reasoning.Table 2: Categories of collaborative gesturesGesture TypeMirrorEchoEcho & BuildAlternateJointDescriptionLearners make same gesture at same time, while purposefully following each other’s movement.One learner purposefully repeats the gesture made by another learner.One learner repeats all or part of another learners’ gesture, but then modifies it or builds on it in someway to show a progression of reasoning.One learner gestures their understanding, another learner responds with a different gesture showingtheir understanding, either building or redirecting from the original gesture.Two or more learners make a single gestural representation together.Figure 1. Mirroring (left) and echoing (right) gestures.In the extended example in Figure 2, participants are discussing their reasoning for Conjecture 4 inTable 1. Tanya and Karen initially represent their understanding, with Tanya gesturing horizontal sides with herhands and Karen gesturing crossed diagonals. In their speech, Tanya focuses on the two sides being equal (Line1), while Karen focuses on the diagonal’s opposing relationship to each other (Line 2). Lisa performs analternating gesture to redirect the conversation to another idea – that the sides are parallel (Line 3). She thenintegrates Tanya’s equality gesture into her explanation by echoing it and saying “So they’re the same” (Line 5).Karen then echoes both Tanya’s equality gesture and Lisa’s parallel gesture, and builds by adding on hercrossed arms gesture at the end of the sequence (Lines 6 and 8). Lisa assists her in formulating this explanationby repeating her own parallel line gesture, then echoing Karen’s crossed arm gesture (Line 7). Lisa then sweepsher diagonal hands in and out to accentuate the idea of congruency, building upon Karen’s gesture (Line 7).This transcript demonstrates how different aspects of understanding the same problem become embodiedthrough different gestures, and how learners take up and build upon each other’s’ gestures to extend theirunderstanding. Karen is able to adopt the gestures of Lisa and Tanya in order to create a mathematical argumentthat brings in all three of their ideas – parallel sides, congruent sides, and diagonals.The second extended example in Figure 4 shows an example of joint gestures. Participants arediscussing Conjecture 6 in Table 2, “The measure of the central angle of a circle is twice the measure of anyinscribed angle intersecting the same two endpoints on the circumference of the circle.” Diana has beenexplaining her understanding using a gesture of two angles, one formed with her two index fingers (theinscribed angle) and one formed with her thumbs (the central angle – see Figure 3). Kyla has been somewhatremoved from the conversation, and brings herself in by posing the question to Diana “Where is the circle?”(Line 1). Since it would be physically impossible for Diana to represent both angles and a circle with her handsalone, Diana responds “You have to visualize it” (Line 2). In the meantime, Kyla walks over to Diana andtraces a circle around the outside of her angles, and then points to the vertex of the inscribed angle, which shebelieves is the outside of the circle. A third group member, Sophie, responds to the need to represent the circlein a more permanent manner by offering her hands to represent the circle, placing them under Diana’s hands(Line 3). Kyla and the fourth group member, Carl, then proceed to discuss and point to various parts of theembodied diagram that Sophie and Diana have formed (Lines 5-10). This transcript demonstrates how gesturalactivity can become distributed over multiple learners as they represent a single, shared mathematical systemICLS 2018 Proceedings555© ISLSthat is jointly embodied and that they can collaboratively refer to and discuss. The cognitive work of themathematical system is distributed over all four of their bodies, and the gestures and speech they engage in.Figure 2. Alternating and Echo & Build Gestures.Overall, we found a variety of ways in which gestures could be used collaboratively in the sense thatgestures became distributed over multiple learners. This was an initially surprising and unexpected phenomenonto arise as these students engaged in mathematical reasoning. Mirroring and echoing gestures showed onelearner taking up the mathematical reasoning of another, while echo & build gestures and alternate gesturesshowed learners extending and refuting each other’s reasoning using embodied action. Joint gestures allowedmultiple learners to use their bodies in concert to build and transform an embodied mathematical systemtogether. These gestures did not simply accompany their mathematical arguments or their collaborativeactivities – they were an inexorable part of their reasoning processes.Figure 3. (Left) Inscribed and central angles of a circle (Right) Diana’s initial gesture showing these angles.RQ2: How often were collaborative gestures used?A total of 443 gesture sequences were coded across the corpus, of which 218 (49.2%) were collaborative. Thiscame to approximately 2.6 collaborative gestures per student group proof attempt. However, the number ofcollaborative gestures used by different groups varied widely – from 0.67 collaborative gestures per proof forone group, to 5.9 collaborative gestures per proof for another group. The use of collaborative gestures seemed tovary by teacher expertise level – teachers from the two pre-service classes used an average of 1.5 collaborativeICLS 2018 Proceedings556© ISLSgestures per conjecture, while teachers from the two first-year in-service classes used an average of 3.5, andteachers from the master teacher class used an average of 2.8.Figure 4. Joint Gestures.Of the 218 collaborative gestures, 110 (50.5%) were echoing gestures, 56 (25.7%) were alternatinggestures, 28 (12.8%) were mirroring gestures, and 27 (12.4%) were joint gestures. Of the 110 echoing gestures,81 (73.6%) were simple echoes while 29 (26.4%) were echo and build gestures. In terms of the types ofcollaborative gestures the three categories of teachers tended to make, for all three teacher groups, echoinggestures made up approximately 50% of the group’s collaborative gestures (pre-service: 54.7%; novice inservice: 47.3%; master: 50.7%). Master teachers were most likely to use mirroring gestures (pre-service: 11.9%;novice in-service: 9.8%; master: 17.9%), while novice first year teachers were most likely to use alternating andjoint gestures (alternating: pre-service: 23.8%; novice in-service: 28.6%; master: 20.9%; joint: pre-service:9.5%; novice in-service: 14.3%; master: 10.4%). Overall there did not seem to be compelling differencesbetween categories in the types of collaborative gestures made – although the sample size is small.RQ3: How were learners engaging differently with collaborative gestures?Figure 5 shows how often students initiated versus received collaborative gestures. Each gray box representsone group, and each pill-shape inside of a gray box represents one student. The left side of the pill shows howmany collaborative gestures per conjecture the student performed (e.g., when they echoed or mirrored anotherlearner). The right side of the pill shows how many collaborative gestures per conjecture were directed at thestudent (e.g., someone echoing or mirroring them). Red indicates 0 collaborative gestures by the learner, yellowindicates less than 1 but more than 0 collaborative gestures given/received per conjecture by the learner, greenindicates greater than one but less than two collaborative gestures given/received per conjecture. The top row ofthe figure is the pre-service classes, the middle row is the in-service first year classes, and the bottom row is themaster teacher class.ICLS 2018 Proceedings557© ISLSFigure 5. Distribution of collaborative gesture giving/receiving across 11 student groups. One group is omittedbecause technical problems caused them to join another student group part way through the study.As can be seen from Figure 5, across levels of expertise, there were yellow and red students who stayedon the fringes of collaborative gesture activity. There were groups of highly collaborative green students aswell. Some students tended to do a lot of individual gestures, but had group members who would echo or mirroror alternate with them regularly. This, however, was somewhat rare – most students tended to give and receive asimilar number of collaborative gestures. In other cases, group members would give quite a few collaborativegestures that would get little attention from their group in terms of being considered or built upon. This figuredemonstrates how cognition was embodied and distributed across student groups, and how certain learnersseemed to be more central to these processes than others.SignificanceWhile the importance of gestures to student learning has been established in a variety of studies, less work hasbeen done detailing how gestures allow for cognition to be physically distributed over multiple learners.Documenting this process and how it comes about with different groups of learners in different learningenvironments is a first step in understanding how learners can engage in joint, embodied reasoning to solve andlearn from complex tasks. A variety of questions were raised by this study, some of which we’ve addressed butwere beyond the scope of this paper, while others are ripe for further investigation. These include: (1) How arecollaborative gestures paired with speech processes implicating different argumentation moves? (2) How arecollaborative gestures associated with learners successfully overcoming trouble spots and formulating validmathematical arguments? Are certain types or sequences of collaborative gesture more effective than others? (3)What are the tradeoffs of using gestures as a collaboration tool rather than, for instance, a shared written ordigital workspace? and, (4) Can collaborative gestures be directed or taught, particularly using motion capturetechnologies that can detect multiple bodies in motion? This study was exploratory and thus raises morequestions than it answers, but here we identify a phenomenon that seems both powerful and important tounderstanding and intervening upon students’ mathematical learning. This phenomenon has the potential to beleveraged in digital learning environments as motion-based technologies become more feasible in classrooms.ReferencesAlibali, M., & Nathan, M. (2012). Embodiment in mathematics teaching and learning: Evidence from students’and teachers’ gestures. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(2), 247–286.Alibali, M. W., Spencer, R. C., Knox, L., & Kita, S. (2011). Spontaneous gestures influence strategy choices inproblem solving. Psychological Science, 22(9), 1138-1144.Beilock, S. L., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2010). Gesture changes thought by grounding it in action. PsychologicalScience, 21(11), 1605–1610.Church, R. B., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (1986). The mismatch between gesture and speech as an index oftransitional knowledge. Cognition, 23, 43-71.Clark, A., & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind. Analysis, 7-19.ICLS 2018 Proceedings558© ISLSCook, S. W., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2006). The role of gesture in learning: Do children use their hands tochange their minds?. Journal of cognition and development, 7(2), 211-232.Funiyama, N. (2000). Gestural interaction between the instructor and the learner in origami instruction. In D.McNeill Language and gesture, pp. 99-117.Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1967). The Discovery of Grounded Theory. New Brunswick: Aldine.Glenberg, A. M., Gutierrez, T., Levin, J. R., Japuntich, S., & Kaschak, M. P. (2004). Activity and imaginedactivity can enhance young children’s reading comprehension. Journal of Educational Psychology,96(3), 424–436.Goldin-Meadow, S. (2005). Hearing gesture: How our hands help us think. Cambridge, MA: HarvardUniversity Press.Goldin-Meadow, S., Cook, S. W., & Mitchell, Z. A. (2009). Gesturing gives children new ideas about math.Psychological Science, 20(3), 267–272.Göksun, T., Goldin-Meadow, S., Newcombe, N., & Shipley, T. (2013). Individual differences in mentalrotation: What does gesture tell us? Cognitive processing, 14(2), 153–162.Goodwin, C. (1995). Seeing in depth. Social Studies of Science, 25, 237–274.Harel, G., & Sowder, L. (1998). Students’ proof schemes. In E. Dubinsky, A. Schoenfeld, & J. Kaput (Eds.),Research on collegiate mathematics education (Vol. III, pp. 234–283). Providence, RI: AmericanMathematical Society.Healy, L., & Hoyles, C. (2000). A study of proof conceptions in algebra. Journal for Research in MathematicsEducation, 31(4), 396–428.Hostetter, A. B., & Alibali, M. W. (2008). Visible embodiment: Gestures as simulated action. Psychonomicbulletin & review, 15(3), 495–514.Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice: Mind, mathematics and culture in everyday life. Cambridge Univ. Press.Marghetis, T., Edwards, L. D., & Núñez, R. (2014). More than mere handwaving: Gesture and embodiment inexpert mathematical proof. In L.D. Edwards, F. Ferrara, & D. Moore-Russo (Eds.), Emergingperspectives on gesture and embodiment in mathematics (pp. 227–246). Charlotte, NC: InformationAge Publishing.Nathan, M. J. (2017). One function of gesture is to make new ideas: Evidence for reciprocity between actionand cognition. In R. B. Church, M. W. Alibali, & S. D. Kelly, (Eds.), Why gesture? How the handsfunction in speaking, thinking and communicating (pp. 175-196). John Benjamins Publishing.Nathan, M. J., & Martinez, C. V. (2015). Gesture as model enactment: the role of gesture in mental modelconstruction and inference making when learning from text. Learning: Research and Practice, 1, 4–37.Nathan, M. & Walkington, C. (2017). Grounded and Embodied Mathematical Cognition: PromotingMathematical Insight and Proof Using Action and Language. Cognitive Research: Principles andImplications, 2(1), 9.Nathan, M. J., Walkington, C., Boncoddo, R., Pier, E. L., Williams, C. C., & Alibali, M. W. (2014). Actionsspeak louder with words: The roles of action and pedagogical language for grounding mathematicalproof. Learning and Instruction, 33, 182–193.Nathan, M., Walkington, C., Srisurichan, R., & Alibali, M. (2011). Modal Engagements in Pre-CollegeEngineering: Tracking Math and Science Concepts Across Symbols, Sketches, Software, Silicon, andWood. In Proceedings of the 118th American Society of Engineering Education Annual Conference andExposition (pp. 22.1070.1 - 22.1070.32). Vancouver, CA.Uttal, D. H., Meadow, N. G., Tipton, E., Hand, L. L., Alden, A. R., Warren, C., & Newcombe, N. S. (2012).The malleability of spatial skills: A meta-analysis of training studies. Psychological Bulletin, 13(2),352–402.Valenzeno, L., Alibali, M. W., & Klatzky, R. (2003). Teachers’ gestures facilitate students’ learning: A lessonin symmetry. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 28(2), 187–204.Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 9, 625–636.Woods, D., & Fassnacht, C. (2012). Transana v2.52. http://transana.org. Madison, WI: The Board of Regents ofThe University of Wisconsin System.AcknowledgmentsThe research reported here was supported by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education,through Grant R305A160020 to University of Wisconsin – Madison. The opinions expressed are those of theauthors and do not represent views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Education.ICLS 2018 Proceedings559© ISLS