Collaborative, Multi-perspective Historical Writing: The ExplanatoryPower of a Dialogical FrameworkYifat Ben-David Kolikant, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Yifat.kolikant@mail.huji.ac.ilSarah Pollack, Davidson institute of Science Education, Sarah.Pollack@weizmann.ac.ilAbstract: When introducing students to the multi-perspective and interpretative nature ofhistory within collaborative contexts, what are the relationships of individuals fromconflicting groups with historical accounts that they produced as a group? How does the jointwriting influence their historical understanding? We analyzed the joint accounts produced bypost-primary Israeli students, Jews and Arabs, who collaboratively e-investigated eventsrelated to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Employing a thematic analysis and a Bakhtinianinspired discourse analysis, we found that the joint texts were constructed of themes from bothin-groups’ perspectives. Students constructed a dialogic relationship between these themes,which enabled them to legitimize the other’s voice, yet keep the voices unmerged. These textsreflect a new historical meaning and a better understanding of the nature of history.IntroductionWithin the history education community, interest in introducing students to the multi-perspective andinterpretative nature of history is growing (Stradling, 2003). When these educational goals are pursued withincollaborative contexts, what are the relationships of individuals from conflicting groups with historical accountsthat they produced as a group? Wertsch’s theoretical framework is often used to articulate the interaction ofagents with historical presentations. According to Wertsch, our interaction with a historical presentation is bidimensional: (a) a cognitive dimension, or the mastering of a presentation; and (b) an affective dimensionrelated to one’s identity and sense of belonging, which promotes either the appropriation or resistance of apresentation. This framework is powerful in explaining situations in which a bias exists in students’ interactionswith historical presentations, caused by their appropriation and resistance of the in- and out-group narratives,respectively, e.g., why individuals often accept whatever supports their beliefs but meticulously examine andcritique anything that contradicts them (Wertsch, 2000).In a previous work, we investigated the interactions within 26 foursomes of Israeli post-primarystudents, Jews and Arabs/Palestinians who collaboratively investigated events related to the Israeli-Palestinianconflict. As expected, most discussions were disputatious. Yet, 15 disputatious groups produced a groupaccount with a historical presentation agreed upon all group members. What historical perspective is manifestedin the joint essay? What is the relationships between the historical perspective manifested in the joint text andthe participants’ perspectives on the event?The experimentThe historical event was Britain’s issuance of the Churchill White Paper in 1922. The British explained thatthey wanted to settle “[t]he tension which [had] prevailed from time to time in Palestine”. One assignment wasHow did both sides (Arabs and Jews) respond to this document, and why? In phase1, students worked inethnically homogenous pairs. They read all the sources and uploaded their answers to the assignment questions.In phase2, they work in bi-ethnic foursomes. They read and commented on each other’s answers, and thenconduct a synchronous textual e-discussion, aimed at producing a joint written summary of the event.We analyzed the essays produced in phase1 and phase2 of all 15 groups who produced a joint essay.We employed a historical content analysis (Peck et al, 2011) in order to identify the students’ perceptions of thethree major historical agents: British, Arab (i.e., Palestinian), and Jewish. We employed the Bakhtin-inspired(1981; 1984) method of discourse analysis in order to identify the voices that the students integrated into theirutterances and the interactions between them (Kamberelis & Scott, 1992). One interaction type is hiddenpolemic, which refers to cases when users’ use of words (previously used by another voice) influences theoriginal goal of the original speaker, thereby expressing the user’s disagreement or it introduces tension with theoriginal goal of the utterance.Results and discussionWertsch’s (1998) two-dimensional framework of mastery and appropriation/resistance was forceful inarticulating the interaction of students with their in- and out- group narratives when producing the pairs' essays.In line with the vast empirical work conducted on students' interactions with multiple historical representationsICLS 2018 Proceedings1535© ISLS(e.g., Wertsch, 2000), the pairs chose to integrate into their essays those themes that aligned with their in-groupnarrative and ignore those that aligned with the Other-group narrative. In fact, we observed a dichotomy in thefrequencies of the themes in the essays of the Arab/Palestinian pairs (APs) and the Jewish pairs.The discourse analysis revealed that in all the joint essays share several characteristics: (a) they arecomposed of bits of pre-existing (pairs’) perspectives; (b) they are compatible with both the Zionist andPalestinian historical narratives; and yet (c) they create a whole new meaning regarding the historical agents'actions and the complex interests and constraints, in which they played a role. The two contrasting perspectivesneither disintegrated nor fuses into one. These characteristics are demonstrated in the following example. Table1 presents text segments from one group essay and the matching segments from the pair’s essays.Table 1: The response of the Arab historical agent to the issuance of the White paper in 1922The AP’s essayThe response of the Arab sidewas negative. They were angrybecause their lands were takenfrom them.The JP’s essayThe Arab population did not agree withthe White Paper because they interpretedin an exaggerated way the promises madeto the Jews in the White Paper.The group essayThe Arab population did not agree withthe White Paper because it was perceivedas the beginning of a process wherebytheir lands would be taken [from them].Both JP’s and AP’s original voices are evident in the group utterance, that the AP “perceived it as thebeginning of the process of taking their lands”. The idea regarding taking lands resembles the AP’s essay.However, it is altered, from past tense (‘were taken’) to future tense (‘would be taken’). This phrase isconcatenated to “the beginning of a process”. The change of the original AP’s text allows the JP to maintain ahidden polemic interaction with AP’s original idea. “The beginning of the process” means that this agent stillhad time to change its destiny, which is compatible with the Zionist perspective that this agent was nonpragmatic. Putting the issue of taking land in the Arab historical agent’s perception also helps the JP to expresstheir disagreement with this idea. Therefore, this text is compatible with both the Zionist and the Palestinianperspectives. It is unlikely to assume that these students did not understand that the text can be read differently.The AP choose not to mention anything about the end of the process as they did in the pair essay and JP did notmention the Jews’ right to the land. The hidden polemic enabled the students to live peacefully with the text,although while being aware of the other’s possible interpretation of it. Hence, students’ interaction with thedifferent narratives is beyond merely mastery or appropriation/resistance.Nevertheless, the joint text reflects an improvement in students’ historical understanding of the event.The combination of voices brings about a new reason for the Arabs’ disagreement with the White paper,different from what was claimed by both AP and JP in their pair essays. Moreover, in the joint essayparticipants describe a historical process and avoid emotional empathy (as in AP’s text) and moral judgment (asin JP’s text) vis-à-vis the historical agent. In conclusion, students’ interaction with their in- and out-groupvoices in the joint texts is more dialogical than is their interaction with these voices in the pair essays. This is inline with Humanities education’s goal of humanizing students, i.e. assisting them in re-examining how theyperceive themselves and others, and the limitations of their understanding of the world (Wineburg, 2001).ReferencesBakhtin, M. (1981). The dialogical imagination: Four essays. (C. Emerson and M. Holquist, Trans.). Austin:University of Texas Press.Bakhtin, M. M. (1984). Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics. Edited and translated by Caryl Emerson.Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.Kamberelis, G., & Scott, K. D. (1992). Other people's voices: The coarticulation of texts andsubjectivities. Linguistics and Education, 4(3-4), 359-403.Peck, C., Poyntz, S. R., & Seixas, P. (2011). ‘Agency’ in students’ narratives of Canadian history. In D. Shemilt& L. Perikleous (Eds.), What does it mean to think historically? Nicosia, Cyprus: Association forHistorical Dialogue and Research.Stradling R. (2003). Multiperspectivity in history teaching: a guide for teachers, Strasbourg:Council of Europe.Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. NewYork NY: Oxford University Press.Wertsch, J. (2000). Is it possible to teach beliefs, as well as knowledge about history? In P. Stearns, P. Seixas, &S. Wineburg (Eds.), Knowing, teaching, and learning history (pp. 38–50). New York: New YorkUniversity Press.Wineburg, S. (2001). Historical thinking and other unnatural acts: Charting the future of teaching the past.Philadelphia: Temple University Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1536© ISLS