The Effect of Inhibiting Hand Gestures on Mathematical ReasoningCandace Walkington, Southern Methodist University, cwalkington@smu.eduDawn Woods, Southern Methodist University, dwoods@smu.eduMitchell J. Nathan, University of Wisconsin-Madison, mnathan@wisc.eduGeoffrey Chelule, Southern Methodist University, nchelule@smu.eduMin Wang, Southern Methodist University, minwang@smu.eduAbstract: Gestures are associated with powerful forms of mathematical understanding.However, determining the causative role of gestures has been more elusive. In the presentstudy, we inhibit students’ gestures by restraining their hands, and examine how this impactstheir problem-solving when presented with geometric conjectures to prove. We find no effectfor gesture inhibition across a variety of measures.BackgroundEmbodied views of cognition posit that mental processes are rooted in perceptual and motor systems (Wilson,2002). One way in which mathematical reasoning is embodied is through gesture. Learners’ tendency to gesturepredicts learning and performance in mathematics (Cook & Goldin-Meadow, 2006), and recent studies ingeometry specifically have suggested that students who gesture more and who gesture in specific ways tend tocommunicate more accurate geometry proofs (Nathan et al., 2014; Nathan & Walkington, 2017). However, it isunclear from such prior work on gestures whether gestures are simply a byproduct of valid mathematicalreasoning, or a causative factor. One way to experimentally manipulate gesture is through gesture inhibition.Inhibiting gestures by having learners tap in patterns while solving problems leads to weakerperformance (Hegarty et al., 2005). Inhibition methods where the hands are restrained have been found toimpair simple recall (Frick-Horbury & Guttentag, 1998; Goldin-Meadow et al., 2001; Wagner et al., 2004) andfluency of speech with spatial content (Rauscher et al., 1996). Prior research has not examined how gestureinhibition impacts mathematical reasoning, which has important visual, spatial, and motoric properties.Research has also not examined whether effects vary based on learner characteristics. Here we examine howinhibiting gesture impacts mathematical reasoning and speech. Our research questions are:1) How do speech patterns and recall vary when learners are inhibited or not inhibited from gesturing?2) How does gesture inhibition impact performance on geometry proof tasks?MethodsUndergraduate and graduate students (n = 107, 48 male and 59 female, 50 STEM majors) from a privateuniversity were recruited to participate. After pre-measures (geometry pre-test, spatial visualization test,phonemic fluency test), they were presented with 8 geometry conjectures to prove (e.g., the triangle inequality)while standing in an empty room. For 4 of the 8 conjectures, they were inhibited from gesturing by putting theirhands in oven mitts attached to bottles attached to a music stand. When they completed all 8 conjectures,participants were asked to, while uninhibited, recall as many of the conjectures as possible.Participants were video recorded and their speech was transcribed in Transana. Participants’ oral proofsfor each conjecture were scored 0/1 in terms of correct or incorrect using a codebook developed from the criteriafor valid mathematical proofs given by Harel and Sowder (2005). Valid proofs involve (1) operational thought,where provers perform valid operations on mathematical objects and observe their results, (2) logical inference,where provers progress through a deductive structure, and (3) generality, where provers show the conjectureholds for all cases. Inter-rater reliability (kappa) of .80 was achieved. The transcripts of participant speech wereentered into Coh-metrix (McNamara, Louwerse, Cai, & Graesser, 2013) and LIWC (Pennebaker et al. 2007).Data were analyzed using mixed effects logistic regression models. Random effects includedparticipant, conjecture, and order. Controls included gender, language status, and highest prior math course.Expertise variables included geometry pretest score, spatial visualization score, STEM/non-STEM major, andphonemic fluency score. Whether the participant was inhibited or not inhibited for the trial was the treatmentvariable of interest. Speech predictors were not tested in regression models, due to screening t-tests of 155different language measures all showing null results for the difference between inhibited and uninhibited trials.ResultsAnalyses showed that gesture inhibition had no impact on any of the 155 speech categories measured by thetext-mining tools. Gesture inhibition had no effect on either conjecture recall or on participants’ ability toICLS 2018 Proceedings1591© ISLSformulate a valid intuition (defined as a correct true/false judgment), insight (defined as a partially correctproof), or proof for a geometry conjecture. These results run counter to other gesture inhibition studies in otherdomains. There were no significant interactions between inhibition and student expertise or control variables.Discussion and significancePrior research has suggested relatively uniform, detrimental effects for gesture inhibition on language and recalltasks, but few studies have examined how being prevented from gesturing impacts complex problem solving ina domain like secondary mathematics. In addition, prior research has shown that gesturing is generallyassociated with formulating valid geometric proofs (Nathan et al., 2014), but here we directly manipulategesture to make inferential claims. We discovered that gesture inhibition has no effect on a variety of outcomemeasures – including speech patterns when justifying geometric conjectures, tendency to be able to recall aconjecture, and giving valid intuitions, insights, and proofs for conjectures. Analyses of interaction effectssuggested gesture inhibition had no effect regardless of gender, language status, geometry knowledge, spatialskills, phonemic fluency, college major, or math course-taking history. However, we did find that even whentheir hands were inhibited, participants still made mathematical gestures with their heads, eyes, shoulders, etc.,suggesting that the utility of gesture inhibition through hand restraint may be somewhat limited.One explanation for this set of findings is that gesture is merely a byproduct of – rather than a causativefactor in – valid geometric reasoning. In other analyses, we found that students who tended to do better at thesegeometry tasks also tended to gesture more. But these results suggest their gestures were not influencing orcausing their valid reasoning. Thus, promoting completely unstructured, undirected gesture may not be an idealapproach to support embodied reasoning. Instead, gestural interventions should consider carefully how studentscan be instructed to or encouraged to gesture in particular, productive ways.ReferencesAlibali, M. W., Kita, S., & Young, A. J. (2000). Gesture and the process of speech production: We think,therefore we gesture. Language and cognitive processes, 15(6), 593–613.Cook, S. W., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2006). The role of gesture in learning: Do children use their hands tochange their minds?. Journal of cognition and development, 7(2), 211-232.Frick-Horbury, Donna & Robert E. Guttentag (1998). The effects of restricting hand gesture production onlexical retrieval and free recall. American Journal of Psychology, 111, 43–62.Goldin-Meadow, S., Nusbaum, H., Kelly, S., & Wagner, S. (2001). Explaining math: Gesturing lightens theload. Psychological Science, 12, 516–522.Harel, G., & Sowder, L. (2005). Toward comprehensive perspectives on the learning and teaching of proof. InF. Lester (Ed.), Second handbook of research on mathematics teaching and learning, Reston, VA:National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.Hegarty, M., Mayer, S., Kriz, S., & Keehner, M. (2005). The role of gestures in mental animation. SpatialCognition and Computation, 5(4), 333-356.McNamara, D. S., Louwerse, M. M., Cai, Z., & Graesser, A. (2013). Coh-Metrix (Version 3.0) [Software].Available from http://cohmetrix.com/Nathan, M. & Walkington, C. (2017). Grounded and Embodied Mathematical Cognition: PromotingMathematical Insight and Proof Using Action and Language. Cognitive Research: Principles andImplications, 2(1), 9.Nathan, M. J., Walkington, C., Boncoddo, R., Pier, E. L., Williams, C. C., & Alibali, M. W. (2014). Actionsspeak louder with words: The roles of action and pedagogical language for grounding mathematicalproof. Learning and Instruction, 33, 182–193.Pennebaker, J. W., Booth, R. J., Boyd, R. L., & Francis, M. E. (2015). Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count(LIWC2015) [Software]. Available from http://www.LIWC.net/Wagner, S., Nusbaum, H., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2004). Probing the mental representation of gesture: Ishandwaving spatial? Journal of Memory and Language, 50, 395–407.Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 9, 625–636.AcknowledgmentsThe research reported here was supported by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education,through Grant R305A160020 to University of Wisconsin – Madison. The opinions expressed are those of theauthors and do not represent views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Education.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1592© ISLS