Developing Theory-Practice Understanding Through OnlineDiscourse Among Pre-Service TeachersCarol Chan, Kennedy Chan, and Ka Lok Chengckkchan@hku.hk, kennedyckh@hku.hk, chengkla@hku.hkFaculty of Education, The University of Hong KongAbstract: This study examined how pre-service teachers developed an integrated theorypractice understanding through online discourses in the context of a teacher education course.Twenty pre-service teachers from a university-based course “Educational Inquiry” thatincluded a component of school experience participated in the study. It included studentsengaging in online discussion to help them reflect on their school experience and tocollaborate with their peers in linking theory and practice. Through an analysis of their onlinediscourses, we identified a range of reflective and collaborative strategies that the participantsused to deepen their understanding and extend their learning space. We also examined thestudents’ discourse through the lens of theory-practice dialectics to show how pre-serviceteachers practicalize theories and theorize practical experience. We also discussed theimplications of designing online discussion and the use of strategies to scaffold pre-serviceteacher learning in theory-practice integration.Keywords: CSCL, online discussion, theory-practice dialectics, pre-service teacher educationIntroductionIt is important to conceptualize, integrate, and examine the relationship between theory and practice indesigning learning in teacher education (Korthagan & Kessels, 1999; Zeichner, 2010). Traditionally, the weaklinks between university courses and field experience may have discouraged a closer examination of thisrelationship. An important notion of merging theory and practice considers learning as developing reflectivethinking and practice. From this perspective, pre-service teachers need to reflect on their own experience, andtheir observations in the field, in light of principles of why one does what (Loughran, 2002). Differentapproaches have been developed to make meaningful connections between university and classroom experience,and to engage pre-service teachers to examine their personal theories of teaching and learning (Orland-Barak &Yinnon, 2007). The relationship between theory and practice has also been examined in terms of practicalizingtheoretical knowledge and theorizing practical experience (Cheng, Tang & Cheng, 2012; Tsui, 2009). Thispostulation focuses on the dialectics of adapting strategies to contexts in relation to theories, and thedevelopment of deeper meanings and personal theories based on practical experience.Contemporary theories from the learning sciences highlight how learning emerges through socialinteraction (Sawyer, 2014). Groups of learners can come together to articulate, reflect, and grapple with ideas todevelop new understanding. Research in the learning sciences and teacher learning has emphasized communitiesof practice (Fishman, Davis & Chan, 2014) for practice-based teaching and how technology-enhanced learningcan support teacher education. Studies in knowledge building using Knowledge Forum have shown howcollective online discourse can help pre-service teachers develop more sophisticated conceptions of teaching(Hong, 2011). There is now increased interest in online discussion in higher education and teacher education(Szabo & Schwartz, 2011). However, relatively little attention has been given to how it can support pre-serviceteachers making salient observations and reasoned interpretation of their observations by linking to the theoryand principles of teaching and learning (van Es & Sherin, 2002). This reflection is central in teacher education(Orland-Barak, 2007) and can be enhanced by shifting from individual reflection to collective reflection. In thissense, online reflective discourse can help illuminate students’ learning experience, which is not easily capturedwhen they work in different field settings. Accordingly, this study examined teacher learning in the context of aPostgraduate Diploma of Education (PGDE) program, which includes a School Experience component.Specifically, we explored how pre-service teachers engage in theory-practice connections and how onlinediscussions could support their co-construction of ideas and enhance theory-practice understanding.Results and analysesData were drawn from 20 pre-service teachers’ online writing and discussion in a required course “EducationalInquiry” with a component called School Experience conducted over the year. Students in Group A and B wroteICLS 2018 Proceedings1173© ISLSan average of 18.3 notes and 15.5 notes, and viewed the discussions 121.2 and 41.3 times respectively. Bothgroups went beyond the required number of notes in the assignments. The students’ writings were analyzed interms of how they connected theory and practice as they worked collaboratively in making sense of theirexperience during their time at the schools.Reflective and collaborative strategies for theory-practice connectionsWe identified different kinds of responses that illustrated how pre-service teachers reflected on their experienceand connected theory with practice in university and school settings (Table 1).Table 1: Reflective strategies linking theory and practiceCategoriesDescribe observation withno reference to principlesName teaching incidentsin relation to principlesInterpret teachingincidents linking toprinciplesConsider principles indifferent contextsNote the gaps andtensions betweenexpectation and realityConnect and interpretobservations withtheoretical notionsRestructure/deepenunderstanding emergingfrom theory-practicetensions and informingfuture actionsExamplesThe school set a strict rule about sleeping in class. When a teacher found that a student fellasleep, other students reminded the student …and asked the teacher to punish him…[WT]In my class, formative assessment was carried out in classroom exercises, such as ‘writeyour answers on the whiteboard and share with the class.’[KA]From observing Mr. C’s class, I noticed he asked very close-ended questions. Incomparison, Ms. C asked open-ended questions. Mr. C’s students seemed less motivatedand others more motivated. This seems to be same as ..readings [RH].I observed two classes and I saw the same teacher using intrinsic motivation strategies indifferent ways. The two classes had different reactions. [WT]My mentor said that her class loved the traditional didactic way, rather than theconstructivist approach. What should we do as student teachers...try out the constructivistapproach or use the didactic approach to satisfy our students? [KW]One of the lessons that fascinates me is the school’s ‘Editorial Reading,’ which makes useof newspaper articles... Ss need to pose two questions on current news events to developtheir analytic skills. I think these activities illustrate qualitative learning. They had toconstruct their own understanding of the world, formulate their own opinion. The teacherswere there to facilitate and to scaffold students’ learning. [NW]I think the biggest theory-practice gap was that we are encouraged to use students’ priorknowledge. However, in this case, their prior knowledge was misused… They should useevidence from the lab not from their pre-conceptions of what a plant looks like… I see thatconstructivism’s prior knowledge can be good and bad... I encouraged students todraw/write what they saw. If possible, I would talk to them about collecting evidence andhow to utilize evidence… Scientists cannot rely on preconceptions, but on evidence. [TC]These identified strategies ranged from just describing what they saw, to making interpretations, toworking on the dialectics for restructuring knowledge; and they reflect students’ attempts to practicalize theoryand theorize practice. Some were using just naming, and others linking and interpreting the experience inrelation to principles as they try to make sense of what they learnt. In the last example, the responses suggestedhow the student’s reflection helped him to develop a richer understanding of the role of prior knowledge inconstructivism, as he theorized his practice, showing how theory-practice gaps provide new meanings to enrichknowledge and practice. In the following, students writing were analyzed to identify collaborative strategies inonline discussion that support them to make meanings (Table 2)Table 2: Collaborative discourse strategies in online discussionStrategiesBuild on and elaborateEnrichment of experienceand identification of strategyShare similar experienceCoordinate and synthesizeAsking questions andbrainstorming responsesSpringboard for questionsICLS 2018 ProceedingsExamplesI agree with you about setting criteria.. Besides, I have 2 more examples to add [TY].Thanks for sharing your experience in your school and it really benefits us reading yournote. I particularly like two points…one is the strategy...the teacher used… [HW]Something very similar happened in my class. When you talked about this, I thought of theexperience before. [NW]What I am thinking is in line with what I read from NW and FA. Like the two of you, Ialso think that. [BH]What do you think? Do you think the school’s approach was the best choice? Or do youthink there could be a better approach? [NW]NW, I think your mentor did a great job using some already understood concepts forstudents to address their misconceptions. But I am curious how your teacher found out themisconception or whether he just assumed that [CH]1174© ISLSProviding explanation andelaborationDiversity, contrasts, anddifferent contextsI think it’s very important that students (and everyone for that matter) understands thedifferences between ad hominem and ad rem arguments. Ad Hominem is...Ad Remmeans… If students are making valid arguments (ad rem) let them continue. [RS]To contrast the discipline in WT’s school and mine, my school does not focus ondiscipline, but teaching is still highly effective. I think this is a question of school culture.Maybe firm discipline is appropriate for some, but not others. This is a big factor that weas student-teachers need to consider [RS]…We identified different patterns of collaborative strategies that included elaborating and building onothers’ responses, asking questions, providing explanations, and extending the space of learning throughconsidering others’ experience and examples. Reflection on their school experience put in a collaborative spaceis now enhanced with students supporting others using collaborative discourse strategies.Productive discourse and theory-practice dialecticsWe also examined how students developed deeper ideas through building on others’ posts. We emphasized coconstruction of ideas for idea improvement and also from the lens of theory-practice dialectics (Tsui, 2009).Excerpt 1: Practicalize theoretical ideasHW:My mentor said that her class likes the traditional didactic way, rather than theconstructivist approach. What should we do, try out the constructivist approach orkeep the didactic approach?HY:I think students like the didactic approach because they are used to it. Anotherpossible reason is that the didactic approach allows them to be withdrawn, but aconstructivist approach asks them to be engaged in learning. I think the teacher has tofind out more about what students like and use their interests to design the lessons. Ifthey find constructivist learning fun, they may start to enjoy it.The exchange suggests a common tension between the theories and demands of a practice situation.HY’s response did not just provide the answers, but analyzed the problems and provided alternatives and herattention was shifting to student learning. As the discourse continues later, another student raised anotherproblem related to student ability (“my mentor said constructivism cannot work for low achievers?”) HYresponded by elaborating her understanding and providing practical strategies of how constructivism may workin school contexts (“weaker ones may be able to do that…perhaps it is the teacher’s questioning that influenceshow constructivist learning is practical or not?”) In dealing with these issues, they were working together topracticalize theories learnt in university classes.Excerpt 2: Theorizing practical experienceWT:When the teacher tried to use formative assessment asking Ss questions to check theirunderstanding,often she could not ask all students... But answers by the individualstudents may not show the picture of the whole class. Sometimes Ms. C gave theanswers soon when students did the worksheets? Students knew she would give themthe answers.NW:Hi WT, I agree with your point that questioning may not be very effective formativelyto assess all students. Something similar happened to classes I have observed…therewere either no responses or always the same ones who answered the questions...Another way to get a better chance of the whole class’ learning is to use other formsof formative assessment, such as in-class quizzes or worksheets, which require allstudents to participate.TC:That is a great question about formative assessment. I think your concern is why weneed to use different types of formative assessment not just questioning/worksheets.Asking students to work on the board, voting, traffic light, and mini-whiteboard mayprovide a clearer picture of what the class thinks. I would also like to put scaffoldinginto practice..My mentor encouraged me to use guiding questions to find out whyICLS 2018 Proceedings1175© ISLSstudents have questions/problems in the first place…I think it’s a great way to engagestudents in meaningful learning, rather than just giving answers for rote learning.This discussion started with a practical problem where the teacher did not use questioning effectivelyto assess students. NW shared her similar experience and suggested other practical solutions. TC deepened thisdiscourse by turning the practical problem of classroom questioning into an exploration of the nature offormative assessment by asking ‘why’ different types of formative assessment were used. They were not justdiscussing what to do, but why to do certain thing. TC continued to conceptualize by linking to theories helearnt on ‘scaffolding’ and examining the crux of the problem of assessment relating to meaningful and rotelearning. The practical question on classroom questioning was deepened through collaborative discussion usingexperience to elucidate theory as they explained the nature of formative assessment for meaningful learning.ImplicationsThis paper reports on the findings of an ongoing study that examined how pre-service teachers attempted tomake theory-practice connections for professional learning through an analysis of their online discourse. Theanalysis not only illuminated different patterns of reflective and collaborative strategies, but examinedproductive discussion from the perspective of theory-practice dialectics. For instance, they sought differentways to practicalize principles, used theory to inform observation, and adapted theory to particular contexts.They also theorized their experience, used their experience to elucidate, and enriched theory to inform theiraction. The online learning environment made it possible for the pre-service teachers to make their questionsand ideas explicit. It also facilitated student peers to provide support and resources to scaffold thinking byasking questions, providing explanations, allowing tensions to surface, and collaboratively grappling withissues. Theoretically, the study extends current work on the reflection of theory-practice integration in teachereducation by shifting from individual to collective reflection. It also enriches research on CSCL/online discourseby examining theory-practice dialectics and developing professional learning for pre-service teachers. From adesign perspective, it is important to investigate how to design such environments to provide opportunities fornovice teachers to interpret and test theories, which allow for the surfacing and revision of errors collectively.The identified reflective and collaborative strategies could provide useful scaffolds and pointers for thedevelopment of a scheme to help pre-service teachers reflect on and discuss the theory-practice connection.Issues including the developmental trajectory of productive discourse and how pre-service teachers change overtime through their participation in online discourse need to be further investigated.ReferencesCheng, M.M.H., Tang, S.Y.F., & Cheng, A. (2012). Practicalizing theoretical knowledge in student teachers’professional learning in initial teacher education. Teaching and Teacher Education, 28, 781-790.Fishman, B., Davis, E. & Chan, C.K.K. (2014). Learning sciences perspectives on teacher learning research. InR.K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of Learning Sciences, 2nd Edition (pp.707-725). NY:Cambridge University Press.Hong, H. Y., Chen, F. C., Chai, C. S., & Chan, W. C. (2011). Teacher education students’ views aboutknowledge building theory and practice. Instructional Science, 39(4), 467-482.Korthagen, F., & Kessels, J. A. (1999) Linking theory and practice: Changing the pedagogy of teachereducation. Educational Researcher, 28(4), 4-17.Loughran, J. J. (2002). Effective reflective practice: In search of meaning in learning about teaching. Journal ofTeacher Education, 53(1), 33-43.Orland-Barak, L., & Yinnon, H. (2007). When theory meets practice: What student teachers learn from guidedreflection in their own classroom discourse. Teaching and Teacher Education, 23(6), 957-969.Sawyer, R. K. (2014). Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (2nd ed., pp. 726-746). New York:Cambridge.Szabo, Z., & Schwartz, J. (2011). Learning methods for teacher education: The use of online discussions toimprove critical thinking. Technology, Pedagogy and Education, 20(1), 79-94.Tsui, A. B. M. (2009). Distinctive qualities of expert teachers. Teachers and Teaching: Theory and Practice,15(4), 421-439.van Es, E. A., & Sherin, M. G. (2002). Learning to notice: Scaffolding new teachers’ interpretations ofclassroom interactions. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 10(4), 571-596.Zeichner, K. (2010). Rethinking the connection between campus courses and field experiences in college anduniversity-based teacher education. Journal of Teacher Education, 61(1-2), 89-99.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1176© ISLS