Finding the Community in Online Education:It’s in the Instructors’ EyesNa Sun, Pennsylvania State University, nzs162@psu.eduMary Beth Rosson, Pennsylvania State University, mrosson@ist.psu.eduAbstract: An instructor’s teaching presence affects students’ feelings of social presence andconnectivity in distance education, pointing to an opportunity for intentional orchestrations ofclass members’ social experience. To explore such opportunities, we interviewed instructorsabout what and how they see community from their online teaching experiences. In this paper,we characterize the presence and nature of the community that instructors see in their distanceeducation classes. We highlighted the strategies instructors used in an online environment thatsupport both synchronous and asynchronous collaborative learning. Design implications forsociable learning environments are discussed.IntroductionWith advances in technology and broadened access to educational resources, university degree programs provided via online delivery have drawn considerable attention and effort, and have been rewarded with regularincreases in enrollment (Kena et al., 2015) and comparable achievements in terms of learning outcomes(Shachar & Neumann, 2003). However, distance education continues to suffer from the mere fact of distance:separation of instructors and students in terms of time and space leads to feelings of being socially removedfrom the situation (Guo, Tan, & Cheung, 2010). This social isolation is a major contributor to the retentionproblems common in online education (Carr, 2000; Tinto, 1975). Ashar and Skenes (1993) suggest that learninggoals attract adults to an online program, but it is the presence of a social environment that makes them persist.Meanwhile, productive social interaction is also necessary for collaborative learning (Clegg et al., 2013), whereas finding communities leads to fuller engagement with the class and dialogue (Brown, 2001).As a step in a larger project studying community-building in distance education, this study investigatedwhether and how distance education instructors see evidence of community amongst their students. We startedwith the experiences and views of teachers because they are central agents in orchestrating online collaborativelearning experiences. In the following we discuss how instructors perceive student connections with respect toboth their class settings and the host institution, and what this might mean for building community online.Sociality in online educationSocial presence and social interaction are strong predictors of students’ learning performance in CSCL (Xing,Kim, & Goggins, 2015). For example, online learners who report higher social belonging also report betterlearning outcomes (Kizilcec & Halawa, 2015). Furthermore, learners with higher social skills exhibit greatersocial interaction, which in turn mediates the impact of system functionality on learning (Xing et al., 2015).Researchers investigating the nature and impacts of social behaviors in CSCL have studied students’perceptions (Shelley, 2008), communication artifacts (Oliver Ferschke, Iris Howley, Gaurav Tomar, Diyi Yang,2015) and activity logs (Soller, Wiebe, & Lesgold, 2002). For example, discussion posts and chat interactionsare often used to enact social behaviors, such as lurking (Mustafaraj & Bu, 2015) and peer support (AppiahKubi & Rowland, 2016). To some extent, however, studies of discourse capture only part of the collaboration inan online environment, because the analysis of utterances ignores the larger social context within which a specific interaction takes place. In addition, class-based discourse lasts for only one course, whereas computermediated interpersonal connections would typically emerge over longer periods of time (Joseph B Walther,2002). We seek to add further insight to the question of social behavior in CSCL by first asking what onlineinstructors are observing about student interconnections as well as how they might be promoting this.As the central coordinators of class-wide activities, online course instructors have the opportunity topromote exchanges among class members, for instance through synchronous or asynchronous interaction duringlectures or question and answer, over a considerable period of time, and even across multiple semesters. However, little attention has been paid to whether and how instructor-led activities might affect the sociality of distance education. One counterexample is the reflections of two online professors (Mcelrath & Mcdowell, 2008)who offered suggestions about how to create a supportive environment, including course chats, interactive introductions, and student stories as the examples to illustrate the core concepts. Their work was leveragingBrown’s framework for community-building in distance education (Brown, 2001); this work suggests a processof making online acquaintances, gaining community acceptance and experiencing camaraderie. However, thisCSCL 2017 Proceedings303© ISLSstrand of work focused on text-based asynchronous learning in graduate teaching contexts that involved onlyexperienced online instructors who attended to community building carefully. Along with the general expansionof online technology, we are working toward a more expansive view of how instructors with varying experiences and disciplinary background may be doing to enrich online learners’ social experience.Instructors’ beliefs and attitudes about social construction of online learningBandura (1993) describes college as a place where teachers’ interpretations of students’ needs and actions affectthe social construction of what is happening in the learning community, including how students perceive theirown performance, sense of belonging and expected behaviors. Schools are complex social environments wherestudents share beliefs, fears, values and norms (Hofman, Adriaan Hofman, & Guldemond, 2001), but many ofthese experiences are guided by the instruction team. For instance, research on distance education has shownthat instructors’ attitudes towards technology, teaching styles, and technology control will affect what studentsreport about learning outcomes (Sun, Tsai, Finger, Chen, & Yeh, 2008; Webster & Hackley, 1997).Meanwhile, one pitfall of CSCL environments may be that students’ social experiences are taken forgranted (Kreijns, Kirschner, & Jochems, 2003). MOOC instructors report that they attend most to performance(Stephens-Martinez, Hearst, & Fox, 2014) and content interaction; social data are of little interest to them (Zinn& Scheuer, 2006). One study of novice online instructors suggests that they overlook the presence or level ofcommunity in their classes (Conrad, 2004). Underscoring the inclination to overlook the social psychologicalaspects of CSCL, Kreijns et al. (2003) argue that possible benefits of social but non-task interaction in onlinelearning have been ignored. Thus we see a gap between the expected benefits of social interchange in onlinelearning and the tendency for instructors to ignore such behaviors. This leads us to the following questions:1. What sorts of social connections do instructors perceive among their distance learners?2. What techniques do online instructors use to promote such connections among students?3. What implications do such findings have for design – both of online pedagogy and technology support?MethodWe conducted an exploratory interview study aimed at unearthing patterns for further research and discussion,not to test or generalize differences among courses or instructors. The semi-structured interviews were carriedout at a large northeastern university (MyUni). We recruited the distance instructors through convenience sampling and personal connections within an iSchool at MyUni, while also seeking a relatively diverse sample withrespect to online teaching experience, subject areas and teaching styles. We analyzed the interviews throughinductive thematic analysis (Braun & Clarke, 2006; Strauss & Corbin, 1998). During the data collection, bothauthors took notes and discussed emerging themes after each interview. Once we did not discover new themes,we concluded that we had reached the point of theoretical saturation and stopped recruiting instructors (n=11).ParticipantsWe interviewed 11 instructors in the spring of 2016; all teach both in residence and online at MyUni, with arange of prior teaching experience (Table 1). Eight are American; two are from outside the United States. Fiveare females. The courses taught online by these instructors mirror what they teach in residence; our organizationwithin MyUni has an interdisciplinary education mission, so the courses intermix a wide range of disciplinesrelated to the information sciences, including computer programming, application and database design, securitypolicies and laws, and enterprise architecture. Most of the online courses were for undergraduates; a few instructors teach both graduate (e.g., professional masters) and undergraduate courses.Interview processWe began each interview with questions about prior teaching experience (e.g. courses, class size, how longonline). We next asked for general reflections about connections among online students in three different socialcontexts: a) among students in the class; b) between the students and the instructor; and c) with MyUni. Wefocused primarily on online teaching, but at the end asked for a comparison of online and residential teaching.In the process of gathering data, instructors often interleaved comments about their own connections to studentswith those that the students have with each other, without explicitly placing themselves as “outsiders” to thestudent milieu; this is not surprising given that we were asking for personal impressions. Therefore, there is considerable overlap in the first two contexts with respect to the presence of communities. However, perceivedconnections at the level of MyUni or the overall distance education program were viewed as more distinct; theseconnections are inherently more abstract, diffuse and to a great extent invisible.CSCL 2017 Proceedings304© ISLSTable 1: Instructors' Teaching ProfilesPseudonymLilyKyleMatthewTeaching years(online/general)3/263/243/22RebeccaGeorge2/207/16Eric3/15ScottKristenAmyMax1/153/61/53/4Julie1/1Recent Online Class(es)Class sizeUndergraduate intermediate course in human-centered designUndergraduate intermediate course in programmingUndergraduate introductory course & senior technical course in information securityGraduate project course in enterprise architectureUndergraduate intermediate course in databases, project management,and human-centered design classUndergrad introductory class in information security; graduate capstoneclass35~57N/A50Undergraduate introductory course on programmingIntermediate undergraduate classes in statistical methodsUndergraduate intermediate course in information securityUndergraduate introductory and senior-level courses in informationsecurity concepts and cyber lawUndergraduate introductory course in information security; graduatecourse in social network analysis445050 undergrads, 20graduates35~5550~605050~6050 undergrads, 20graduatesPseudonyms are chosen to signify gender; instructor profiles are ordered roughly by teaching experience.We recognize that the instructors’ comments about student community serve only as indirect evidence,but no instructors found the questions odd and were quite able to answer, often in considerable detail. We alsoinquired about strategies and technology being used; student data they can access or would like to access; comparison between online and residential instruction; and visions or suggestions to improve sense of community.We interviewed 10 instructors in person; the other participated via a Google Hangout video call. We recorded9.6 hours of audio data, with an average of 52 minutes per interview session.Data analysisWe first used open coding to obtain categories related to our research questions. The first author organized thesecodes into a table that consisted of code names, code memos defining the codes, and sample quotes. We asked aresearcher outside the project to review this table using the method of constant comparison (Hallberg, 2006).Coding issues were resolved by discussion with the first author, with changes to categories as needed. The firstand second authors then searched for semantic themes and examined similarities and differences, followed by apruning of codes seen as irrelevant to the central issue of social connections. We organized the remaining highlevel themes — indicators of perceived connections and techniques to foster connection — into a thematic map.Each theme was articulated into the subthemes that form our primary findings. This analytic approach is notintended to yield conclusive arguments, but to provide exploratory insights that can guide further in-depth investigations and inform design thinking.What connections do instructors see?All instructors reported social connections among students, though some offered more examples than others. Inthis exploratory study, we cannot be certain whether this is due to personal characteristics of the instructor,course design or content, or other course-specific variables. Thus we report a mix of general patterns and specific illustrative examples, in an effort to shed light on whether and how instructors find the presence and degree ofstudents’ connections. Instructors shared a wide range of “evidence” when they discussed how their studentsfelt connected to one another. In the discussion of their comments we focus primarily on positive examples, asthese help to paint a broad picture of what instructors notice about how their students interact with each other.One type of evidence cited regarding student community was students’ real-time engagement. Instructors who reported strong connections among students tended to see their students as highly engaged, for example participating in class-wide online chats. Rebecca once attracted ~40 students to a single evening chat andestimates that a large percentage of her students regularly attend her live sessions (e.g. 27 out of 28). Georgereported a similar success: “I invite them to come. Of course, I record everything so that they can watch it at alater time, but a significant number of them do come. That’s part of building some of this community, too.”CSCL 2017 Proceedings305© ISLSInstructors also reported that students’ real-time engagement with one another could enrich the livesession because their shared discussion might uncover some hidden knowledge gap that instructors would nototherwise know to address. The result is a benefit for a broader audience that includes not only the witnesses,but also the students who may not have been there but viewed the recorded session later.Someone asked one question about the next assignment... It was an interesting question, and Iexplained it. The other student said, “thank you, Nelson, for asking this question. It was verygood and helped me understand it.” It is hard to know what students want to know, but thelive session is an opportunity for real students asking real questions...It is not just my presentation; it has the student's question. I think it enriched the session a lot. (Kyle)Participating regularly in synchronous sessions gives students a chance to find out more about one another and feel more connection. Rebecca offers many such sessions in her online teaching, and in once classstudents displayed a strong attachment to the class at the end of the semester as evidenced by reluctance to endtheir semester together: “I have students that say: ‘It’s Tuesday night and there’s no class, I really looked forward to class’. There was real camaraderie... I think they really bonded. I think there are some good connections that... some good networking connections that have been made.” (Rebecca)In contrast, Scott shared negative results for attempts to engage online students in real-time sessions.Reacting to low attendance rates (less than 5%) at “live with the professor” events, he questioned the need forfostering community, wondering whether people prefer to focus on connections in their real life settings:I provide some fairly rudimentary mechanisms to be more connected, you know discussion forums, online live sessions, and they, and both have been, um very sparsely attended. So, that'smy first reaction is that maybe the whole nature of, of at least some online learning is, ‘youknow I have enough community, at work. I have enough community with my family. Um, Idon't want any more community with my online courses’ (Scott)Some instructors reported students’ efforts in sustaining or strengthening interpersonal ties as evidenceof student connectivity. Examples of such efforts for continued collaboration included requests to join a teamwith someone; calling one another by name in a post; or referencing previous shared experiences. They alsoobserved that students inquired about upcoming classes and anticipated future interactions: “I’ve noticed thatthere can be almost cliques among students, where students that know each other very well and tend to taketheir classes in the same order, take them the same semester. They know each other already.” (Lily)Interwoven within the normal rhythm of classwork, instructors observed evidence of mutual supportgroups, where student ties include emotional connections. Sometimes these social ties are born of team-basedcollaborations, but they seem to go beyond assigned projects: team members cover for others who may be suffering from personal issues at the cost of doing more than their own share of the work. At a broader scope,online students root for one another through hardships from their encounters in an online class setting, sendingencouragement that addresses worries expressed in someone else’s message. For example, Julie shared thisheartening support offered in response to a self-deprecating post: “A lot of people were rooting for him, ‘I thinkyou’ll do good, I hope you’ll get a lot out of this degree.’”Beyond the context of a class, students also seem to bond around and benefit from ties to a host university (Zhang, Jiang, & Carroll, 2012). We asked instructors whether and how their students feel connected withMyUni. A majority (9 of 11) held a positive impression of students’ feelings of connection to MyUni, althoughnot all offered evidence. When it comes to institutional bonds, some instructors felt that online students mayeven feel more institutional pride than their residential counterparts. Eric said that his online students use Reddit (a popular forum) to publicize useful online offerings from MyUni; other students use the university mascotas a profile picture, conveying a tie with MyUni; still others drive over one thousand miles to visit the physicalcampus or attend commencement, suggesting that “they are very proud of” the institution (Eric).Finally, George shared his own piece of evidence for connections among students at the university level: some of his online students have taken the initiative to create student clubs, reflecting an urge to experiencesocial ties that extend beyond a class and are similar to those built by residential student populations: “I'm alsoinvolved with the MyUni Online Ed club. I'm just an adviser, so once again…I let them have their club. I'm justan adviser. They have a lot of pride in being MyUni students. Overall, I get a sense of that”. (George)What techniques may help to build community?After asking the instructors about their perceptions of how student connections are present in their online classes, we asked what they do that may contribute to a sense of community. Not surprisingly, public introductionsCSCL 2017 Proceedings306© ISLSare a common technique for increasing the visibility of information about online peers (Mcelrath & Mcdowell,2008); some of our participants appropriated this as a socializing activity to find compatible team members.When used in combination with self-organizing their teams, students are encouraged to purposefully read information about their peers to select ideal collaborators. The self-organizing orientation instigates a social process in which students glean knowledge about their peers, find commonality and other implicit ties, and maythus build feelings of trust and community more quickly: “As part of the discussion that takes place in this classintroduction, I do suggest that they talk about their expectations for teammates and their general idea of theiravailability to meet as a team, if they're available in the evenings or weekends or whatever. That's a very important part of any {deleted} class, is having a good team.” (Lily)Some instructors award points for replies to peers’ introductions, but students also exhibit voluntary interest in engaging this way. As one instructor explained, social exchanges that are oriented towards knowingmore about each other seem to evoke reciprocal sharing, perhaps making them feel good about themselves andothers: “I require them to comment on each other’s posts, but you could just see that they enjoyed it, that theywere curious about what others were doing ... When they see the benefits of getting comments, there’s somegenerosity in the way that they are giving them out. It’s this culture of giving and receiving….” (Julie).Another technique for raising students’ visibility within the class relates to the work that they produce.For example, Rebecca publicizes bits of student assignments in the shared forum, inviting responses from theothers. Later, she reviews the responses and generates themes as fuel for a live session, where a high percentageof students attend and discuss the topics. This reuse of content promotes attention to peer contributions; studentsregularly follow up on others’ thoughts and experiences, often voicing gratitude that they are learning new solutions from peers who are working in different corporate settings. Similar strategies are employed by Kyle, whouses bits of student programs to demonstrate effective and ineffective coding techniques. Publicizing students’work products not only makes the online peers more socially visible (i.e. as seen in their work products) but alsoinvites students to make comparisons to and reflect on their own work products.Some instructors told us that they work to maintain a teaching presence to promote feelings of connection throughout their classes. For example, they hold one-to-many broadcast sessions to gather and attend tostudents’ needs, or just offer general availability: “I think the first thing to make sure that they understand thatyou’re a real person ... I don't like doing pre-recording stuff. I like the live thing. I went to the live things more. Ithink that's the teacher connection, the teaching presence that helps students to relate to me.” (George)We found two related approaches for enhancing one’s teaching presence. Lily wants to make studentsbelieve that she is real, so she deliberately communicates using a rich modality (e.g. video camera); Max offersto take phone calls at any time, implying a real-time availability. Another approach is for instructors to providepersonal cues about themselves. For instance, Rebecca injects chit-chat about ongoing university activities orher own life at the start of her live sessions (e.g., while students are “arriving”). This sets up a sort of casualsocializing and can evoke student social chit-chat in return: “… Oh gosh, hold on. Or the cat. Well, they lovethis. Then they’ll say, “say nighty nighty to kitty,” or “how is your dog”? “Is your son on the Xbox”? (Rebecca)Another technique that may enhance an instructor’s presence is the personalization of their communications to students. George regularly sends out custom messages to individual students: he keeps a student rosterand mines information from ongoing class activities to write a personal email for five students he chooses atrandom each week. His goal is to nurture connection with them:What I try to do, and I don't do this all the time, it depends on my workload, my availability, Itry to pick out about five students a week that I will send a personalized email by getting personal, but I know a little bit about them and I'll ask them, especially if they're working professionals, I try to connect with them. Actually, that's some of my success has been being able todo that, connecting with some of these adult learners.” (George)Personalized communication might be experienced as a social overture that makes students feel caredfor and embraced. Regarding student-instructor interaction, one instructor with expertise in sociology shared herhappy surprise about reactions to simply asking “How’s everything else going” in a class-wide email. Most students dismissed it, but some saw it as an opportunity to “unload”; they appreciated this gesture so much that thisinstructor was subsequently rated as a student’s best professor ever:… for some students apparently, a couple of small emails meant a lot. … Some person reads itas being very casual, another person reads it as in I really care about their life and the way itwas going. They write a long email and they start like, "Thank you so much for asking. I havethis thing going on. I had another thing going on with this ...(Julie)CSCL 2017 Proceedings307© ISLSDiscussionOur study of online instructors’ perceptions on building and sustaining community fills a research gap betweenthe expected benefits of enhancing learners’ social experience (Kreijns et al., 2003), and the tendency for it to beneglected in distance education practice (Stephens-Martinez et al., 2014).Toward more sociable CSCL environmentsInstructors demonstrated their capability to perceive and infer the presence of community based on their directexperiences and observation. In particular, for relationships between instructors and learners, they affirmed students’ appreciation for interpersonal outreach though they also conceded that such outreach often comes with asubstantial amount of extra time and coordinating efforts. For student interconnections, their one-to-one connections may grow during a class together, as evidenced by the emotional supports they offer or simply calling oneanother by name. However, even if strong ties are built there are not obvious channels for continuing these relationships, short of starting an extra curricular organization or trying to schedule courses together. At the institution level of community, ties are difficult to discern or celebrate due to the absence of institution-wide activitiesand interactions, which also partly accounts for why social connections are hard to maintain once a class sessionis over. Looking across these findings, it is important to support the desires for interpersonal communicationinitiated and managed by students on their own, instead of depending on what an instructor can organize or lead.We suggest that more “sociable” CSCL environments for distance education might store a history ofstudents’ social interactions or online encounters (e.g. attending the same online activity in the same class), reinforcing students’ inclination to strengthen and maintain well-developed interpersonal connections that grow outof their interactions as classmates (we recognize that such histories and resulting access would raise many issuesof privacy, but the general concept is valuable nonetheless). More persistent social venues, such as cross-courseor cross-program forums or chat rooms, could be used to reinforce and sustain the relationships developedthrough the camaraderie of shared coursework, which otherwise would dissipate at the end of a course. The continuation of relationships that originate from (virtual) classroom encounters has been proved to be possible overchat even in MOOC settings, in which alumni in programming classes linger as part of an extended learningcommunity to both contribute and learn from others (Nelimarkka & Vihavainen, 2015).Helping instructors nurture student engagementWe found that instructors may be promoting feelings of community by publicizing bits of students’ work, byinjecting more of their “real” selves into their communications and by personalizing the communications theyuse. Class-level connections seemed to be most strongly created and reinforced through real-time activities thatattracted good attendance and high engagement. In particular, instructors can enhance the visibility of implicitsocial content by publicizing cognitive and socio-emotional knowledge in a larger context. For example, organizing a discussion about someone’s submitted project not only brings social attention to that student at that moment, but also invites peer-based evaluation, reflection, and learning. In this sense, instructors may shift interactional resources across different levels of connected learning group units, assembling isolated individual learning processes towards collective knowledge construction at a community level (Stahl & Öner, 2013). Whether itis students’ knowledge artifacts (e.g. assignments) or personal background, instructors’ public sharing actionserves as a social overture that may provoke synthetic discussions or other collaborative learning opportunities.With respect to CSCL design implications, our interviewees’ practices suggest specific enhancementsof technology support to attract students socially into the learning subject and with one another. For instance, asynchronous meeting room might include channels to convey contextual cues on what is happening on the otherend to make it feel real, such as status updates on specific activities. Text-mining techniques can be applied toself-introductions or other coursework for instructors or students to customize communications with socioemotional background and predictions. Another design option is to increase the visibility of individual contribution based on instructors’ endorsement or teaching assistants’ grading outcomes.Shooting in the dark?Taking another perspective, we heard concerns from some instructors about students who are “silent” online orfail to even show up for online activities. As a result, these teachers questioned the benefits of organizing classwide activities in the sense “if we built it, will they come?” Researchers know that heavy reliance on remotecommunication may encourage students to filter out the cues that indicate presence or attention (J B Walther &Parks, 2002). Just as there will always be students who “take a back seat” in residential courses, similar studentswill enroll in online courses. At the same time, computer-mediated communications often leave a historical record so that students who do not attend a live session can engage later on. Nonetheless, lurking behaviors inCSCL 2017 Proceedings308© ISLSonline courses are even less visible than sitting in the back of a resident course; they require extra efforts byother students and instructors to assess and respond (Tynan, Ryan, & Lamont-Mills, 2015).Interestingly, the time over which computer-mediated interactions take place, and the visibility of personal cues within those records may contribute to the growth of social schemas about others (Liebman & Gergle,2016); these then can be used to draw inferences about affinity (Joseph B. Walther, 1993). Without records ofstudents’ time investment and social presence, instructors and peer learners are less able to respond to individualneeds. An individual’s silence (e.g. not attending a real-time session) may be due to time constraints or otherreasons, but attendees at the session are left in the dark about these factors. We suggest that CSCL design enhancements are needed to convey online students’ real-time constraints and subsequent activities (e.g., viewingor commenting a recorded session) in ways that make their presence visible and accountable (Erickson &Kellogg, 2000). As an example of a specific design direction, the sharing of explicit declarations about timeavailability may help both instructors and peers adopt a more nuanced set of participation expectations.Limitations and future workBecause we are part of an interdisciplinary college, our instructor-participants represent a range of course topics,teaching experiences and approaches; even so, this exploratory study was conducted within one college atMyUni, and we call for future research to generalize and extend our exploratory analysis. We also recognizethat ours was a descriptive study that relied extensively on instructors’ opinions and our own interpretation ofthe same; we cannot draw firm conclusions about causal factors or mechanisms in building community in onlinecourses. We are now analyzing data from students’ reflections about community to triangulate our findings, aswell as iteratively designing online tools for evoking and enhancing student community.ReferencesAppiah-Kubi, K., & Rowland, D. (2016). PEER Support In MOOCs: The Role Of Social Presence. InProceedings of the Third (2016) ACM Conference on Learning@ Scale (pp. 237–240). CONF, ACM.http://doi.org/10.1145/2876034.2893423Ashar, H., & Skenes, R. (1993). Can Tinto’s student departure model be applied to nontraditional students?Adult Education Quarterly, 43(2), 90–100. JOUR.Bandura, A. (1993). Perceived Self-Efficacy in Cognitive Development and Functioning. EducationalPsychologist. http://doi.org/10.1207/s15326985ep2802_3Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology,3(2), 77–101. JOUR.Brown, R. E. (2001). The process of community-building in distance learning classes. Journal of AsynchronousLearning Network, 5(2), 18–35.Carr, S. (2000). As distance education comes of age, the challenge is keeping the students. Chronicle of HigherEducation, A39–A41.Clegg, T., Yip, J. C., Ahn, J., Bonsignore, E., Gubbels, M., Lewittes, B., & Rhodes, E. (2013). When face-toface fails: Opportunities for social media to foster collaborative learning. In Tenth internationalconference on computer supported collaborative learning. CONF, Citeseer.Conrad, D. (2004). University instructors’ reflections on their first online teaching experiences. Journal ofAsynchronous Learning Network, 8(2), 31–44.Erickson, T., & Kellogg, W. A. (2000). Social translucence: an approach to designing systems that supportsocial processes. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI), 7(1), 59–83. JOUR.Guo, Z., Tan, F. B., & Cheung, K. (2010). Students ’ Uses and Gratifications for Using Computer-MediatedCommunication Media in Learning Contexts Students ’ Uses and Gratifications for Using Computer Mediated Communication Media in Learning Contexts Students ’ Uses and Gratifications for Using C.Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 27(20), 339–378.Hallberg, L. R. M. (2006). The “core category” of grounded theory: Making constant comparisons.International Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health and Well-Being, 1(3), 141–148.http://doi.org/10.1080/17482620600858399Hofman, R. H., Adriaan Hofman, W. H., & Guldemond, H. (2001). Social context effects on pupils’ perceptionof school. Learning and Instruction, 11(3), 171–194. http://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-4752(00)00016-5Kena, G., Musu-Gillette, L., Robinson, J., Wang, X., Rathbun, A., Zhang, J., … Velez, E. D. V. (2015). TheCondition of Education 2015. NCES 2015-144. National Center for Education Statistics. JOUR.Kizilcec, R. F., & Halawa, S. (2015). Attrition and Achievement Gaps in Online Learning. Proceedings of theSecond (2015) ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale - L@S ’15, 57–66.Kreijns, K., Kirschner, P. A., & Jochems, W. (2003). Identifying the pitfalls for social interaction in computer-CSCL 2017 Proceedings309© ISLSsupported collaborative learning environments: A review of the research. Computers in HumanBehavior, 19(3), 335–353. http://doi.org/10.1016/S0747-5632(02)00057-2Liebman, N., & Gergle, D. (2016). It’s (Not) Simply a Matter of Time: The Relationship Between CMC Cuesand Interpersonal Affinity. Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer-SupportedCooperative Work & Social Computing, 570–581. http://doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819945Mcelrath, E., & Mcdowell, K. (2008). Pedagogical Strategies for Building Community in Graduate LevelDistance Education Courses. Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, 4(1), 117–127.Mustafaraj, E., & Bu, J. (2015). The Visible and Invisible in a MOOC Discussion Forum. Proceedings of theSecond (2015) ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale - L@S ’15, 351–354.Nelimarkka, M., & Vihavainen, A. (2015). Alumni & Tenured Participants in MOOCs. Proceedings of theSecond (2015) ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale - L@S ’15, 85–93.http://doi.org/10.1145/2724660.2724671Oliver Ferschke, Iris Howley, Gaurav Tomar, Diyi Yang, C. R. (2015). Fostering Discussion acrossCommunication Media in Massive Open Online Courses. Proceedings of the 11th InternationalConference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, in review.Shachar, M., & Neumann, Y. (2003). Differences Between Traditional and Distance Education AcademicPerformances : A meta- analytic approach. International Review of Research in Open and DistanceLearning, 4(2).Shelley, M. (2008). Considering Students ’ Perceptions : The Distance Education Student Satisfaction ModelIsmail Sahin. Educational Technology & Society, 11, 216–223.Soller, A., Wiebe, J., & Lesgold, A. (2002). A machine learning approach to assessing knowledge sharingduring collaborative learning activities. Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Support forCollaborative Learning Foundations for a CSCL Community - CSCL ’02, (1), 128.http://doi.org/10.3115/1658616.1658635Stephens-Martinez, K., Hearst, M. a., & Fox, A. (2014). Monitoring MOOCs. Proceedings of the First ACMConference on Learning @ Scale Conference - L@S ’14, 79–88.Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developinggrounded theory . BOOK, Sage Publications, Inc.Sun, P. C., Tsai, R. J., Finger, G., Chen, Y. Y., & Yeh, D. (2008). What drives a successful e-Learning? Anempirical investigation of the critical factors influencing learner satisfaction. Computers andEducation, 50(4), 1183–1202. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2006.11.007Tinto, V. (1975). Dropout from Higher Education: A Theoretical Synthesis of Recent Research. Review ofEducational Research Winter, 45(1), 89–125.Tynan, B., Ryan, Y., & Lamont-Mills, A. (2015). Examining workload models in online and blended teaching.British Journal of Educational Technology, 46(1), 5–15.Walther, J. B. (1993). Impression development in computer‐mediated interaction. Western Journal ofCommunication, 57(Fall), 381–398.Walther, J. B. (2002). Time effects in computer-mediated groups: Past, present, and future. Distributed Work,235–257. JOUR.Walther, J. B., & Parks, M. R. (2002). Cues filtered out, cues filter in: computer mediated communication andrelationships. The Handbook of Interpersonal Communication, (January 2002), 529–563.Webster, J., & Hackley, P. (1997). Teaching effectiveness in technology-mediated distance learning. Academyof Management Journal, 40(6), 1282–1309. JOUR.Xing, W., Kim, S., & Goggins, S. (2015). Modeling performance in asynchronous CSCL: an exploration ofsocial ability, collective efficacy and social interaction. Exploring the Material Conditions of Learning:Proceedings of the Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL 2015), International Society ofthe Learning Sciences, 276–283.Zhang, S., Jiang, H., & Carroll, J. M. (2012). Babel or Great Wall: Social Media Use Among Chinese Studentsin the United States. Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Design ofCommunication - SIGDOC ’12, 37.Zinn, C., & Scheuer, O. (2006). Getting to know your student in distance learning contexts. EuropeanConference on Technology Enhanced Learning: Innovative Approaches for Learning and KnowledgeSharing, 437--451.CSCL 2017 Proceedings310© ISLS