Conceptual Patterns of Changes in University Students’Explanations During DC-Circuit TasksTerhi Mäntylä, University of Tampere, terhi.mantyla@uta.fiTommi Kokkonen, University of Helsinki, tommi.kokkonen@helsinki.fiAbstract: At the advanced level of learning, the ability to use relational knowledge becomesessential. In this study, the changes in the use of scientific concepts in the university students’explanations were examined in the context of direct current (DC) circuits. The studentsparticipated in three small group sessions with several predict-test-explain-tasks. The use ofscientific concepts and their relations were analysed from session transcripts using contentanalysis and categories of explanatory power were formed. Then, the changes in explanatorypower during DC-tasks were analysed and three categories of conceptual patterns wereformed. In first category, no conceptual development occurred, students used simpleexplanations and were not able to apply relational knowledge. In second category, conceptualdevelopment occurred: students explanations became more scientific and their explanatorypower increased. In third category, the students have learned to use relational knowledge andthe conceptual pattern shows flexibility in providing explanations.Keywords: concept learning, relational knowledge, explanatory power, cognitive utility, scienceeducationIntroductionOne difficulty in learning advanced scientific concepts are that students often have idiosyncratic, intuitiveknowledge about the target concepts that can be wrong from the scientific point of view. Hence, learning entailsthat learner modifies his or her prior knowledge, which is difficult and can take a long time. Furthermore,learning physics, for example, entails learning a complex knowledge system (i.e. theory), which consists ofconcepts and information about the concepts’ covariation, which is embedded in laws and models of physics.Learning of scientific concepts differs from learning everyday concepts (such as “a dog”) typically examined incognitive science in that scientific concepts (or nomic concepts in Kuhn’s terms) are out of reach of directinspection; instead complex situations of applying laws and theories (relational knowledge) are used, whichmeans that several scientific concepts are used at the same time (Andersen, Barker & Chen, 2006; HoyningenHuene, 1993). Concept learning also typically involves solving gradually more challenging problem situations,which involve the application of the nomic concepts and the related laws (Hoyningen-Huene, 1993). Thelearning has occurred, when the concept is used correctly, i.e. in the way of the scientific community(Hoyningen-Huene, 1993). An important aspect in this is that the correct use of the concept requires also thecorrect use of the related concepts, because a concept is always a part of a conceptual network, a “lexicon” of adomain (Hoyningen-Huene, 1993). Here the learning of scientific concepts are examined in the contexts of DCcircuits, where university students solve gradually more challenging tasks, where they have to predict andexplain the brightnesses of the bulbs. The research interest is to see how scientific concepts and their relationschange in university students’ explanations during solving the tasks and how it relates to their developingunderstanding of DC-circuits.BackgroundWithin science education, recent research about students’ concept learning and understanding has paid attentionto students’ understanding of the various relational patterns that connect the concepts together. It has been foundthat students’ are often inclined towards simple linear causality and chain-like relational patterns (A causes Bwhich causes C and so forth) instead of more complex patterns needed to learn the concepts (Kokkonen &Mäntylä, 2017; Perkins & Grotzer, 2005). In analyzing university students’ explanations concerning conceptsrelated to DC circuits, we identified three generic relational patterns and used these to analyse students’explanations and the concept learning process. It seems that in the university context, the key element inlearning the concepts and constructing successful explanations is flexibility in using and modifying differentrelational patterns (Kokkonen & Mäntylä, 2017).Furthermore, recent research in cognitive science has focused on the role of relational knowledge inconcept learning. It has been suggested that relations and relational knowledge form a fundamental part of ourunderstanding of the world and underlie many of our higher cognitive competences, such as categorization,ICLS 2018 Proceedings1117© ISLSreasoning and planning (Goldwater & Schalk, 2016; Halford et al, 2010). So-called relational concepts areconcepts whose meaning is based on the relational structure of the concept or on the relations the concept bearsto other concepts (Gentner, 2005). Goldwater and Schalk (2016) have proposed that research on relationalconcepts offers a fruitful way to examine concept learning especially in STEM context. For example, in physics,it possible to design authentic problem solving contexts, that are rich and complex regarding the amount ofconcepts and their relations and at the same time restricted and controllable (only certain concepts can beapplied and there are clear results to the problems).Recent research has only begun to shed light on the cognitive processes related to learning of advancedconcepts in science (Authors, 2017). One important open question concerns how the connected, coherent andabstract knowledge structure that is the hallmark of expert knowledge is learned (Goldwater & Schalk, 2016;Kokkonen, 2017). Towards this end we examine learning of concepts regarding DC circuits, which can be takenas an instance of learning a simple theory. In this kind of context, which entails learning multiple concepts andtheir interrelations, using the whole “lexicon” in explanations is not always effective. Instead, the simplerexplanation could work better. This means that at the certain level of learning, the cognitive utility (Ohlsson,2009) plays a part. Cognitive utility can be described as a trade-off measure between the complexity and theexplanatory power of a concept or an explanation model (Ohlsson, 2009). The underlying idea is that in simplesituations, simple explanations are adequate and more complex ones are deemed necessary only in contexts thatare sufficiently complex. Complexity of a concept (or an explanation) is here thought to arise from its relationalcomplexity (Halford et al, 2010).MethodologyThe research question is: What are the conceptual patterns of students’ explanations during the DC-circuittasks?The context of the study was a course called “Physics concept formation” aimed at pre-service physicsteachers at the physics department. The participants were 2nd to 4th year university students who already hadstudied the introductory physics courses. The students participated in three small group sessions consistingpredict-observe-explain-tasks about the brightnesses of the bulbs in DC-circuits. There was a week betweeneach session. First two sessions consisted of gradually more challenging tasks (e.g. unindentical bulbs instead ofidentical bulbs). The third session consisted of two repetition tasks and one task in new context, where theconnections of batteries were varied instead of the connections of bulbs. The reason for repeating the previoustasks was to make possible the evaluation of the stability of the changes emerged in the explanations during thefirst sessions.The sessions were videoed and transcribed. The transcripts were analysed using content analysis,which concentrated on the use of different scientific concepts and their relations in students’ explanations. Thescientific concepts in this study refers to the relevant quantities related to the DC-circuits: electric current,voltage, resistance and electric power. The analysed data consists of three student groups (two 3 member groupsand one 4 member group), altogether 10 students. The three sessions from the four-member group were crosschecked (approximately one-third of the material). Inter-rater agreement of 73 % was considered adequate. Theexplanations were categorized regarding their explanatory power as it is presented in Table 1. Here theexplanatory power is determined by the number of scientific concepts and the relations between the concepts.The explanatory power describes how many different situations can be explained using a certain explanation.The explanatory power is also tied to the complexity of explanation, usually the simpler the explanation (fewerconcepts, less relations), the less situations can be explained. In addition, it is also less scientific. Theexplanation in category of explanatory power at the level 1 does not use a scientific concept and therefore, it hasa very limited explanatory power. At the level 5, the explanation contains four concepts, it is the most complexexplanation. However, it is also the most scientific one and it explains all tasks. The students’ explanationsthrough the different tasks in sessions were presented according to their explanatory power. Further, theserepresentations were categorized through different conceptual patterns of changes that occurred during the tasks.Table 1: The categories of explanatory power of explanations. The number or letter in the parentheses refers tocategory of explanationICLS 2018 Proceedings1118© ISLSFindingsIn Figure 1, explanations of two students from the same group are presented as examples of results of analysis.As can be seen, in case of student S7, the amount of explanations decreased when the tasks became morechallenging. On the other hand, student S8 provided more explanations and in various levels of explanatorypower. The emerging overall conceptual patters of changes in explanations were identified and categorized onthe bases of the individual analysis such as presented in Figure 1.Figure 1. Students S7’s (a.) and S8’s (b.) explanations (S, 1-11) during the DC-tasks categorized by theirexplanatory power. w refers to false prediction or explanation. Few examples of explanations were given inTable 1 (S, 1, 2, 7 and 11).There were three different categories of conceptual patterns of changes students’ explanations according to theexplanatory power and their schematic features are presented in Figure 2. The categories are:1. No development (3 students). Although the explanations vary in different tasks, they are at the samelevel of explanatory power (1-3). The explanations are (rather) simple. Therefore, no conceptualdevelopment occurs. The students were not able to apply the relational knowledge to theirexplanations. An example of this is student S7 presented in Figure 1a.2. Conceptual development (5 students). The explanatory power of students’ explanations increases whenthey solve gradually more challenging tasks. The explanations become more complex and scientific,students learn to apply relational knowledge to their explanations and conceptual development occurs.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1119© ISLS3.Conceptual mastery (2 students). Students use explanations with varying levels of explanatory poweralready from the first tasks. The pattern reveals the flexibility to adjust the explanations: sometimes itis easier to use simpler explanation instead of more complex and scientific explanation. This is seen asa sign of cognitive utility and thereby, it is concluded that these students already master the topic. Anexample of this is student S8 presented in Figure 1b.The explaining and understanding the given tasks requires use of relational knowledge. However, the students infirst category are still in the early stage of learning to use the relational knowledge. The students in secondcategory are learning during the tasks to apply the relational knowledge, nevertheless, they are still in the stageof learning compared to the conceptual pattern of students who already master the topic.Figure 2. Schematic features of conceptual patterns of changes in students’ explanations.ConclusionsAt the advanced level of learning, the key issue is to learn to use relational knowledge, which means the use ofscientific concepts relations with each other in form of models, laws and more broadly theories. The findingsshow, that the gradually more challenging DC-circuit tasks can help students to develop their theoreticalunderstanding. At the level of mastering the use of relational knowledge, new phenomena, such as cognitiveutility emerge and there is flexibility of providing explanations at different levels of complexity. The initialfindings of this study suggest that more effort should be put in the role of relational knowledge in the advancedlevel of learning. However, the research is still in progress and further data analysis is still ongoing. There couldbe cases, were students only uses simpler explanations although they master more scientific explanations. Onechallenge in analysis is that some students are rather inactive during the group sessions and the analysis relieson students’ discussion.ReferencesAndersen, H., Barker, P., & Chen, X. (2006). The cognitive structure of scientific revolutions. New York:Cambridge University Press.Gentner, D. (2005). The development of relational category knowledge. In L.Gershgoff-Stowe, & D. Rakison(Eds.), Building object categories in developmental time (pp. 245-275). Hillsdale, NJ: LawrenceErlbaum.Goldwater, M. B., & Schalk, L. (2016). Relational categories as a bridge between cognitive and educationalresearch. Psychological Bulletin, 142(7), 729-757.Halford, G. S., Wilson, W. H., & Phillips, S. (2010). Relational knowledge: The foundation of higher cognition.Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14(11), 497-505.Hoyningen-Huene, P. (1993). Reconstructing scientific revolutions: Thomas S. Kuhn’s philosophy of science.Chicago: The University of Chigago Press.Kokkonen, T. (2017). Models as Relational Categories. Science & Education. doi: 10.1007/s11191-017-9928-9Kokkonen, T., & Mäntylä, T. (2017). Changes in University Students’ Explanation Models of DC Circuits.Research in Science Education. doi: 10.1007/s11165-016-9586-yOhlsson, S. (2009). Resubsumption: A possible Mechanism for Conceptual Change and Belief Revision.Educational Psychologist, 44(1), 20-40.Perkins, D. N., & Grotzer, T. A. (2005). Dimensions of causal understanding: The role of complex causalmodels in students' understanding of science. Studies in Science Education, 41(1), 117-165.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by the Academy of Finland through grant SA311449.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1120© ISLS