Scientists Expand Professional Vision Through Outreach WithPeople Underrepresented in ScienceShelley Goldman, Tanner Vea, and Megan R. Lucesgoldman@stanford.edu, tvea@stanford.edu, mluce@stanford.eduStanford UniversityAbstract: Scientists have commitments to impact the public’s perceptions of science. How dothey learn how to accomplish successful outreach in different communities? The researchexamined a multi-faceted engagement program between scientists and communitiesunderrepresented in science. Research examined the practices forged, finding that scientistsevolved their professional vision to adapt practices such as developing reciprocity ofperspectives, building from empathy, adapting language, and changing teaching practices.IntroductionMany in society could benefit from interactions with scientists, yet they have little or no access. While formaland informal science institutions do a great amount of science engagement, science experiences remain out ofreach for many. They include people who have little or no access to science in their daily lives such as theelderly, those incarcerated, the homebound, and those who are unable to access science facilities. Access can belimited by physical distance and social barriers, such as for refugees and those from communities underservedby educating institutions. Yet, interactions with scientists show positive outcomes.The STEM Ambassador Program (STEMAP) is a public engagement project that integrates features ofthree informal science education models: Research Ambassador Program (Nadkarni & Stasch, 2013), Portal tothe Public (Storksdieck et al., 2017), and Design Thinking (Goldman, 2017). These models combine, aiming tofacilitate multi-level connections between the scientific community and the public. Participating scientistsundergo training and continued support for accessing and understanding communities and for tailoring scienceengagements. Scientists participate to foster curiosity, generate excitement, make the case for science to thepublic, and improve their outreach skills. We also see them add skills in translation and adaptation as they tailorpublic engagements to the needs and interests of specific communities. Forty scientists at an R1 university in theUnited States, from doctoral students to Associate Professors, were in the program in 2016 and 2017,completing 84 events for 1600 pople at venues such as jails and senior centers.MethodsResearch focused on how, if at all, scientists’ identities and professional vision were expanded. Professionalvision entails the “socially organized ways of seeing and understanding events that are answerable to thedistinctive interests of a particular social group” (Goodwin, 1994, p. 606). Through training in and uptake ofpractices related to public engagement in STEM, scientists experienced opportunities to understand the objectsof their professional practice in expanded terms, with implications for the conception and enactment of theiridentities as scientists. We illustrate and discuss several cases (Stake, 1995; Yin, 1989) developed from datacollected on a subset of 17 scientists. The case studies analyzed scientists’ responses on pre and post surveysand interviews, field notes from observations of their community engagements, and evaluations fromcommunity participants in events. Coding of interviews proceeded from open coding to a more refined set ofcodes. Codes focused on identity addressed evaluations of self-change (e.g., becoming more empathic orimproving as a science communicator) and new ways of thinking (about, for example, public engagement ortheir future careers and research endeavors). Surveys in year two of the project addressed identity by askingparticipants to rate a number of practices according to the extent to which they enact them, how important theythink they are, and how confident they are to enact them. Example practices included “Seek out opportunitiesfor public engagement experiences with people or communities who may not engage actively in STEM” and“Make public engagement in STEM part of your research projects or the classes you teach.” In these ways, ourapproach to identity included not only one’s ideas about oneself, but also connection to practices and socialrelations (Nasir & Cooks, 2009).Results and significanceThrough case studies we saw scientists expand their professional vision while making connections to newcommunities. They found ways to adapt their inscriptions, share science topics and practices, and translate theirICLS 2018 Proceedings1659© ISLSwork for understanding, without “dummying down”, while relating to the concerns of the people they engaged.For example, one scientist met with the head of university facilities to propose an engagement. She thendesigned the interaction to learn how the electricians conceptualize circuitry and use terminology to solveproblems in their work. In a lunch meeting with over 20 staff in facilities, she asked questions and there wasmuch discussion about how cancer cells and electrical circuits work. This was a mutually beneficial bordercrossing engagement made possible through efforts to understand across communities of practice. Anotherscientist who met with senior citizens showed examples of how the study of deadly poisionous snails leads tonew diabetes drugs. This engagement was designed based on the direct concerns of seniors. Results indicate thatno versions of professional vision shifts were alike, yet archetypes of adapting professional practices wererevealed as scientists foregrounded certain aspects of their work in community settings. The case studiesrevealed defining adapted practices that scientists took as they transacted science beyond their labs and peerpublications and with people in a variety of community settings (see Table 1).Table 1: Practicess of scientists emerged showing professional vision adaptationsVision ExpansionReciprocityDefinitionBoth scientist and community membersadvance their learningEmpathyScientist develops empathy insights about theneeds and abilities of people for learningscienceScientist establishes ways for people tocontribute to dataScientist sheds reliance on lectures, createshands-on/interactive activitiesScientists team with colleagues to meet theneeds of a community, even when off-topicScientist uses local and context cues withflexibility en passantScientist plans to incorporate programapproaches and ideals in courses they teachCitizen ScienceMultimodalCommunicatorCollaborativeConsociatesAdaptive ExpertiseTeachingExampleScientist meets with electrical systems operators tolearn terms & whether circuits work like cancercellsScientist visits youth treatment center to observeand talks with gatekeepers before planningWebsite can take entries of species seen by hikersin local foothillsScientist brings beautiful shells of deadly snails topresentationThree scientists team up to support garden scienceat local jailScientist finds fossils to examine while on a hikewith childrenNew faculty will incorporate outreach whileteachingThe archetypes of practices in scientist expansion and adaptation of their professional visions are informative forthose who work to increase public engagement. The scientists expressed the importance of bringing science tothe larger underrepresented public as a professional goal, even when it meant crossing borders and the comfortof existing professional vision. With science becoming a national debate rather than a given national priority,the ability for scientists to help the public understand science through expanded vision may be crucial.ReferencesGoldman, S. (2017). Design thinking. In K. Peppler (Ed.), The SAGE encyclopedia of out-of-school learning.Los Angeles: Sage Publishing.Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.Nadkarni, N. M., & Stasch, A. E. (2013). How broad are our impacts? An analysis of the National ScienceFoundation’s Ecosystem Studies Program and the Broader Impacts Requirement. Frontiers in Ecologyand the Environment, 11(1), 13-19.Nasir, N. S., & Cooks, J. (2009). Becoming a hurdler: How learning settings afford identities. Anthropology &Education Quarterly, 40(1), 41–61.Sherin, M. G., Russ, R. S., Sherin, B. L., & Colestock, A. (2008). Professional vision in action: An exploratorystudy. Issues in Teacher Education, 17(2), 27.Stake, R. (1995). The art of case study research. Illinois: SAGE Publications, Inc.Storksdieck, M., Stylinski, C. & Canzoneri, N. (2017). The Impact of Portal to the Public: Creating aninfrastructure for engaging scientists in ISL. Corvallis, OR: Oregon State University.Yin, R. (1989). Case study research: Design and methods. New York: SAGE Publications IncICLS 2018 Proceedings1660© ISLS