How a 6th Grade Classroom Develops Epistemologies for BuildingScientific KnowledgeChristina Krist, Northwestern University, ckrist@u.northwestern.eduAbstract: Current reforms in science education emphasize scientific practices as the means bywhich students develop and use scientific ideas. However, supporting students in engagingmeaningfully in scientific practices is challenging because we do not know much about whatstudents learn about the process of engaging in scientific practices, or the epistemic criteriaguiding their work. In this paper, I characterize how classroom communities develop sets ofepistemic heuristics by engaging in scientific practices over time. Specifically, I present howone classroom community’s implicit answers to “What kind of answer are we working to build?”and to “How does the idea we are trying to build relate to other phenomena and ideas?” shiftedthroughout a unit. I argue that these shifts were designed into the curriculum, but requiredstrategic work on the teacher’s part; and that these shifts reflect epistemic learning.Keywords: scientific practices, knowledge building, epistemology, communities of practiceIntroductionCurrent reforms in science education emphasize scientific practices as the means by which students develop anduse scientific ideas (NRC, 2012). These reforms draw upon a situated perspective of learning in which studentslearn through participating in a community of practice to make progress towards a shared goal (e.g., Brown &Campione, 1996). In science classrooms, this shared goal is to build scientific knowledge that is useful forexplaining the natural world. Scientific practices, then, are the ways that students engage to build that knowledge.Supporting students in engaging meaningfully in scientific practices is challenging because we do notknow much about what students learn about the process of engaging in scientific practices. Careful research hasbegun to characterize what student engagement in specific practices looks like over time (e.g., Schwarz, et al.,2009). However, students can still engage in the “doings” of the practices without an understanding of how andwhy those practices are useful for building knowledge (i.e., by rote). In addition to “doing” the practices, studentsshould come to understand the “hows and whys” undergirding those practices: both the practical heuristics forhow to build knowledge (Berland et al., 2015), and why those epistemic heuristics are useful (Manz, 2014).In this paper, I aim to characterize how a classroom community develops sets of epistemic heuristics(i.e., epistemologies for scientific knowledge building) by engaging in scientific practices over time. Specifically,I examine how middle school students’ consideration and use of two specific epistemic heuristics changes overthe course of one content-area unit, and how those changes are supported by the teacher and the curricular context.By providing empirical evidence for students’ knowledge-building work in practice, this study contributes to ourgrowing understanding of how to support students’ meaningful engagement in scientific practices.Developing situated epistemologies-in-practice for scientific knowledgebuildingFrom a situated perspective, learning involves shifting how one participates in a community of practice. Thecommunity is characterized by their “joint enterprise,” or their collective set of goals that gives the community asense of what they are all about (Lave & Wenger, 1991). Applying a situated view of learning to schooling meansthat students should be learning disciplinary content in a context in which their tasks are guided by and shapingtheir understanding of the “joint enterprise” of the discipline. In science classrooms, that joint enterprise isbuilding explanatory understandings of the natural world (Louca et al., 2004). When working to explain thosenatural phenomena, students are engaged in practices that help them make progress towards building explanations.Their engagement in these practices and the knowledge they develop both is guided by and shapes theirunderstanding of their community’s joint enterprise, or what it means and what it takes to build scientific ideas.In this paper, I focus on understanding what students learn about what it means to build scientific ideasin science learning contexts that are organized to engage students meaningfully in science practices. Because whatthey are learning is epistemic—related to the nature of scientific knowledge and the work of building thatknowledge—I turn to theories of epistemology to further focus my investigation.Often, the epistemologies relevant for scientific work are phrased as unitary statements, such as“scientific knowledge is tentative.” However, knowing these declarative statements has little effect on the natureof students’ work. Instead, “practical epistemologies,” or smaller pieces of epistemic knowledge that areICLS 2016 Proceedings306© ISLScombinations of idea and action, guide the actual work that students do (Sandoval, 2005). These practicalepistemologies consist of sets of “epistemological resources,” or “cognitive resources for understandingknowledge” (Louca et al., 2004, p.58) that are differentially activated depending on the context. For example, astudent who thinks the goal of a task is to get the right answers on a worksheet may quickly scan through a book,looking for key terms. His activity is guided by notions that the ideas he is working to produce are already knownand simply need to be stated. In contrast, the same student may carefully think through what is happening to makea cookie odor travel around a corner if he thinks the goal is to draw from what he knows about how matter behavesto work out an explanation. Thus, students always have an implicit answer to how they build science ideas, thoughtheir answer may not align with a disciplinary one. Learning how to build science ideas in disciplinarily authenticways requires that students gradually, over time, engage in knowledge-building work that entails continualactivation, or consideration, negotiation, and use, of the sets of epistemic criteria valued by disciplinary science.The disciplinary answers for how to build scientific ideas take the form of epistemic criteria, or specificrules of thumb for how to construct and evaluate knowledge (Chinn, Buckland, & Samarapungavan, 2011). I focuson how students draw on resources for two criteria: the notion that scientific answers should provide mechanisms,and that they are working to build general models that explain multiple phenomena. Ideally, through engaging inwork that entails continual activation of these criteria, students come to see how and why these disciplinary criteriaare useful and productive for building scientific knowledge. This study aims to characterize this epistemic learningprocess, or how students’ use of various epistemic resources for these criteria changes over time.To characterize students’ use of disciplinary criteria, I utilize Berland et al.’s (2015) Epistemologies-inPractice framework. This framework identifies four epistemic criteria that are generative for both scientists’ andstudents’ knowledge-building, including the two that I focus on here: accounts should be mechanistic and accountsshould be generalizable but built from specific phenomena and cases. The framework then broadens those criteriato the questions, or epistemic considerations (ECs) that those criteria—and many other non-disciplinary ones—serve as an answer to: What kind of answer are we working to build? and How does the idea we are working tobuild relate to other scientific phenomena and ideas? Thus, students tacitly consider and respond to thesequestions in making decisions throughout their knowledge-building process. Consequently, students’ implicitanswers to these ECs, and therefore the epistemic resources guiding their work, are visible in classroom discourseand interaction organized around building scientific knowledge.This study identifies and characterizes students’ epistemic work during their knowledge buildingactivities over the course of one 6th-grade unit. My study focuses on a classroom with an expert teacher, Ms. L.,who is using curriculum materials designed to engage students meaningfully in scientific practices (Krajcik,McNeill, & Reiser, 2008). I examine how Mrs. L’s classroom community develops epistemologies for buildingscientific knowledge by investigating the following research questions:1. How do the classroom community’s consideration and use of two epistemic criteria for building scientificideas shift over the course of one 12-week unit?2. How are these shifts supported by (a) the curriculum design and (b) the teacher? In what ways do theseshifts indicate epistemic learning?MethodsTo investigate these questions, I conducted an instrumental case study to develop and empirically articulate theconstruct of interest—epistemic considerations in practice—and to provide a rich description of how thisclassroom community develops knowledge-building practices and norms. The primary data source for the studyis a collection of video recordings of selected classroom lessons from one unit during the January-April 2013.The curriculum for the unit organizes students’ work around a driving question: how can I smell thingsfrom a distance? This question sets the specific “joint enterprise” for the unit, the overarching question that theyare working to explain. I selected lessons from this unit where the (intended) design of the curriculum providedopportunities for explicit knowledge-building work around the main scientific principles that the class wasworking to develop (e.g., lessons in which students were drawing and presenting models, or “jigsawing”interpretations from evidence to explain a phenomenon). In total, I selected 7 class periods, or approximately oneevery two weeks of the unit. The unrecorded class periods involved activities such as conducting investigationsand interpreting data to answer sub-questions; reviewing readings; and taking quizzes or tests.In order to see how the classroom community’s consideration and use of epistemic criteria changed overthe course of the unit, I selected epistemically rich episodes, or moments in which the classroom discourseprovided evidence of the students’ and teacher’s implicit answers to what kind of knowledge they were workingto provide and how the idea they were working to understand related to other scientific phenomena and ideas. Toselect these episodes, I and a team of researchers content-logged the video according to activity types basedloosely on the 8 scientific practices described in NGSS (e.g., “Developing and Using Models”; “Designing andICLS 2016 Proceedings307© ISLSCarrying out Investigations”) as well as codes for general classroom activities such as “Free Time/Logistics.” Wethen “tagged” the video for any potential evidence of epistemic considerations (ECs) in student and teacherdiscourse. For example, when “tagging” for evidence of someone considering how the idea they were working tobuild related to other scientific phenomena and ideas, a coder marked any time a student or the teacher brought inanother example (e.g., “It’s like Jello”) or used a generalization (e.g., “Well, there’s always dust in the air”). Aftercontent-logging and tagging, the research team used the distribution of tags as “sensitizing indicators” to selectepisodes for more in-depth analysis. We selected chunks of time that included a cluster of several EC tags withina single segment of activity. Episodes averaged 2:28 in length. The research team transcribed each episode byturn of talk. I then coded each turn for the two ECs of interest, Nature and Generality, as described next.To characterize Nature, or the classroom community’s answer to “What kind of answer are we workingto provide?”, I first coded each turn of talk within each episode for the elements of explanatory and other typesof accounts. Elements of an explanatory account included describing the phenomenon, identifying factors (suchas air particles) and unpacking factors (such as playing out the behavior of the air particles). Elements of othertypes of accounts included providing known-answer information, giving an illustrative example, describing detailsfrom personal experiences or a class activity, and imagining a hypothetical scenario. I then categorized eachepisode based on whether the majority of talk turns contained explanatory or other elements. If the majority ofturns of talk contained explanatory elements, I characterized the episode as building an explanatory account. Ifthe majority of turns contained other elements, I characterized the episode as building an other type of account.To characterize Generality, or the classroom community’s answer to “How does the idea we are tryingto understand relate to other phenomena and ideas?”, I first coded each turn of talk for whether the speaker wastalking about a specific phenomenon, such as litmus paper changing colors; a general idea or generalization, suchas the fact that all matter can exist in three states; or a representation, such as a model, that abstracted from thespecific case somewhat. I then coded whether the discussion made connections between specific, represented, orgeneral ideas, or if it simply focused on characterizing one type. If there were connections made, I coded thenature of the connections as either a connection between ideas that were both known, such as using a specificexample like ice melting into water to illustrate the general principle about matter existing in three states; or aconnection between ideas where one of the ideas was unknown and built during the course of the episode. Forexample, students drawing models to explain how and why balloons shrink in liquid nitrogen are building theirexplanation for that phenomenon.In addition to coding for evidence of each of the ECs in discourse, I coded for teacher prompts forconsideration in one of these epistemic areas. For example, a teacher could prompt for a particular type of account(coded as a prompt for Nature) by saying, “But why? Why can some people smell better than others?”Findings and discussionFrom the analysis of the selected knowledge-building episodes from one unit, I present how the classroomcommunity’s answers to the two ECs of focus (Nature and Generality) shifted over the course of the unit. Takentogether, these shifts demonstrate how the classroom community’s answer to the question, “How do we buildideas?” changed over the course of one unit. The shifts are: 1. Classroom talk increasingly contained elements ofexplanatory accounts and they increasingly constructed coherent explanatory accounts as the unit progressed; and2. Almost all episodes contained connections between general and specific ideas. Early in the unit, thoseconnections were between known ideas. As the unit progressed, students increasingly built ideas, primarily bymaking and comparing representations (models) and articulating general principles from those representations. Ipresent each change in more detail and interpret them in the context of the curricular and teacher supports.Design of the curriculum and distribution of epistemically-rich episodesThe unit of focus for this study was organized around the driving question, How can I smell things from adistance? Through cycles of observing phenomena, generating questions, developing initial models orexplanations, conducting investigations, revising those models or explanations, and generating additionalquestions, students build explanations to three sub-questions that together answer the driving question. Thesequestions, and the principles that students develop over the course of several lessons to answer them, are:1. How does an odor get from the source to my nose? (Lessons 1-5). Principles: Substances are made ofparticles; in gases there is empty space between the particles; particles are moving constantly.2. What makes one odor different from another? (Lessons 6-9) Principles: Every substance has uniqueproperties; varying molecular arrangements of atoms give substances their properties, including odor.3. How can a material change so you can smell it? (Lessons 10-16). Principles: The particle model explainsstates and phases of matter in terms of particle distance, movement, speed, and arrangement.ICLS 2016 Proceedings308© ISLSThe lessons that I selected for observations were ones where students explicitly worked to build one of theseprinciples. Though all of the activities in the unit were designed to help students work towards these ideas, therewere various points at which they used an activity to begin pulling some of those pieces together. Table 1represents the duration of various activity types present during each lesson and indicates the number ofepistemically-rich episodes during each activity type (including time that was coded for multiple activity types).Note that a variety of activity types occurred throughout the observed lessons, but the activities during which mostof the epistemically-rich episodes occurred varied and was not necessarily proportional to the amount of timespent on that activity.Table 1. Distribution of activities during each class period.Activity TypesL1MinL3EpEp3Asking questions, makingpredictionsConstructing explanationsDoing an experimentDiscussing an experimentDiscussing a phenomenonDrawing or presenting modelsLogistics or independent work0:0011:168:067:364:367:068:4716:100:000:000:0011:157:4414:29Total*39:5922L4Min40:06429MinL6EpMinL11EpMinL12EpEp6:0413:0021:1815:074:5016:081:5513:142:4872414:429:0018:000:0051312:013:2611:330:538:400:003:017:00514:00217:1319:18641:2471:0037:011Min11:405*Sum of activities and episodes may be more than the represented total due to double-coding of activity types.39:552:1213:14139:466Nature: Shifts in “What kind of answer are we working to provide?” over timeOf the 30 epistemically-rich episodes, only six were characterized as episodes where the classroom communitywas providing other types of accounts. These six episodes occurred during the first three observed lessons, asillustrated in Figure 1a. During these six episodes providing Other accounts, students were primarily recallingdetails from their personal experiences and providing known-answer information, as shown in Figure 1b.(a)(b)Figure 1. “Nature” characterization of episodes by lesson (a) and of student talk by episode type (b).During the other 24 episodes, the classroom community was working to provide explanatory accounts.Student turns of talk contained all three elements of explanatory accounts, though they most often identifiedfactors. Importantly, the turns of talk containing explanatory elements were not isolated student turns in responseto a teacher question (e.g., T: What is air made of? S: Air particles). Instead, multiple turns of subsequent studenttalk worked to explain a phenomenon, often by weaving together both explanatory elements and elements of otheraccount types. For example, in Lesson 3, Ms. L asked if all substances needed to be cold to “freeze.” Studentsresponded, “No,” and then Ms. L asked them to recall the example from last night’s reading about candle wax.Stefanie responded by describing her personal experience with candle wax: “Once stuck my finger in some meltedwax…I just waited for a bit, and then it started to dry up and turn hard.” After describing that experience, Noelledescribed a similar phenomenon: wax hardening after you blow out birthday candles. Megan and Peter thenidentified two important factors within the description of that phenomenon: “[The wax] hardens pretty quickly,”“Especially when it touches the cake.” Although not what Ms. L had hoped to identify (that temperature changeICLS 2016 Proceedings309© ISLSrather than absolute temperature mattered), they identified two factors relevant to room-temperature “freezing”:time, and contact with another substance (in this case, cake).However, neither the number of turns of talk containing explanatory elements nor the types ofexplanatory elements they contained shifted much over the course of the unit. Students began describingphenomena, identifying factors, and unpacking those factors in Lesson 3 and they continued to do so in similarproportions through Lesson 12. Instead, what shifted were the number of elements within each individual turn oftalk. In Lessons 1-6, each turn of student talk contained an average of between 1.1 and 1.2 elements. In the episodeabout the candle wax above, Stefanie, Noelle, Megan, and Peter’s turns would each be coded for one element. Incontrast, the turns of student talk in Lessons 11 and 12 contained on average 2 and 1.5 elements, respectively. Inother words, students provided more complex pieces of an account within a single turn of talk later in the unit.To illustrate this difference, compare the individual turns in the episode about wax hardening to thisexchange about squirrels finding nuts. After spending almost an entire class period tinkering with a computermodel that visualized particle motion and temperature, Niral spontaneously identified another phenomenon forwhich temperature is a relevant factor: “Isn't one of the reasons why squirrels look for their nuts before winter isbecause when the ground freezes it's harder to smell nuts?” Katerina agreed with him, unpacking and coordinatingthe implications of that factor on particle motion: “Because when the nuts freeze, the molecules, you can’t smellthem as easily […] because when it’s warmer the molecules speed up and then it has more energy and can get to[the squirrel] faster, but in winter it can’t.” Each student provided multiple elements of the explanatory account.Over the course of this unit, the types of accounts that the classroom community built during duringepistemically-rich episodes shifted to become entirely explanatory. In addition, students gradually beganincorporating multiple explanatory elements (e.g., identifying factors and unpacking them) in a single turn of talk.Taken together, these shifts suggest that the classroom community’s answer to “What kind of answer are weworking to provide?” shifted from “definitions and facts” to “coherent mechanistic explanations of phenomena”that became more complex over time.Generality: Shifts in “How does the idea we are trying to understand relate to otherphenomena and ideas?” over timeIn addition to identifying the type of account that the classroom community was working to build, I characterizedhow they were going about building that account with respect to the connections between general and specificideas they were using to do so. As shown in Figure 2a, most episodes contained connections between general,represented, and/or specific ideas. In the six episodes that did not contain connections (in L3, L4, and L6), theclass was characterizing a specific phenomenon while doing or discussing an experiment.(a)(b)Figure 2. Number of episodes with connections (a) and connection accomplishments (b).The nature of the connections that the classroom community made between general and specific ideasshifted over the course of the unit, as shown in Figure 2b. In about half of the episodes during the first threelessons, the classroom community made known connections, such as using specific examples to illustrate generalprinciples. Interestingly, however, four of the six known-connection episodes treated the connection as a critiqueof either the example of the general principle. For example, during Lesson 3 while reviewing an idea from theirreading, a student stated the principle that “All matter can exist as a liquid, a solid, and a gas.” Rather thanaccepting the principle as a correct and indisputable answer, though, Ms. L intentionally challenged it: “That iscrazy to think about. So all matter can exist as a solid and a liquid and a gas. So I'm thinking of like, what wouldbe hard to think about, like maybe rocks. A rock is a solid. I can’t—can I get that [points to the word “liquid”]?”In the discussion that followed, students brought in classes of examples that show that rock can melt: cement hasICLS 2016 Proceedings310© ISLSa liquid form, and lava is melted rock. They decided that a rock could become liquid, and possibly even gas, withenough heat.These critiques of known-answer information often led to episodes where the class built or modified ageneral principle from their examples. Immediately following the rock discussion, Patrick asked about a pencil:“How can a pencil be gas?” The class talked through what would happen when you add heat to a pencil, and theydecided it would probably start on fire before it would melt. They concluded by modifying their principle aboutthe states of matter to say that maybe some things can go straight from a solid to a gas! Although burning istechnically a chemical reaction and not a phase change, Ms. L’s framing of the principle as something that theycould question opened the discussion for counterexamples. When a student provided one (pencils), their workthrough what would happen when heating it up led them to construct a sub-principle or boundary condition.Towards the end of the unit, the majority of the episodes involved students building ideas: creatingrepresentations, comparing those representations, and articulating general principles from them. The discussionof students’ models for how a balloon shrank and grew back in different temperatures in Lesson 12 illustratesthese patterns. After discussing the specific mechanisms portrayed in several individual balloon models, Ms. Lasked the class, “What are we agreeing on? I mean like, what is it that we agree on?” Though there are severalways one could interpret this question, Ramona interpreted it as a call for generalizing across the models:Ramona:Um. That, uh, when the balloon gets smaller, like, it's usually because that the moleculesand particles are like, kind of compact, they're compacted together.Ms. L:Mm-hmm.Ramona:It kind of like, allows its space to like, like, kind of like, let loose in the balloon, and whenit gets warmer, it kind of like, lets molecules kind of like split out.Although she is using the context of the balloon, she gives several indications that she is talking about balloonsshrinking in general: she uses the term usually, and she then speaks about what happens in present tense, indicatingwhat happens in general rather than what happened during the specific instance they were modeling. Ramonaidentified the general idea that all the students (based on their models displayed on the board) seem to be inagreement that the cold balloon gets smaller because the air molecules are “compacted together,” unlike whenmolecules are warm and allow the empty space to “let loose” and the molecules to spread apart. This generalpattern was built from their collective explorations of a specific phenomenon.Overall, the shift to exclusively building connections between general and specific ideas by the end ofthe unit suggests that the classroom community’s answer to “How does the idea we are trying to understand relateto other phenomena and ideas?” shifted as well. From the beginning the classroom community demonstrated thatthe ideas they were trying to understand needed to make sense with other ideas and experiences. However, thenature of those connections between ideas and experiences shifted from, “We connect phenomena and principlesto critique known information” to “We connect phenomena and representations to build general principles.”How did features of the learning environment support these shifts?In many ways, the curriculum was designed to support students in doing what they did: constructing generalmechanistic accounts that were built from exploring and modeling several specific phenomena. This isencouraging, both that students are learning the content and that they are finding that content useful for buildingexplanatory accounts. And undoubtedly, learning the content supported them in expressing complex mechanismsand articulating general principles from those mechanisms. Other curricular features also supported these shifts.First, the familiarity of the initial phenomenon—smelling something that was cooking before you could even seeit—and the accessibility of phenomena used throughout the curriculum supported students’ identification ofmechanistic elements. For example, by bringing in familiar examples such as wax hardening, students identifiedtemperature and time as factors relevant to phase changes during Lesson 3, even though this “content” was notbrought in explicitly until Lesson 10. These accessible contexts, along with Ms. L’s affirmation of students’ useof their experiences as both examples and counterexamples, made students’ everyday ideas productive resourcesfor providing mechanistic accounts, making critical connections (such as questioning whether pencils melt), andapplying principles to novel phenomena (such as squirrels smelling nuts). Importantly, students drew on everydayideas throughout the unit, suggesting they were an integral part of their knowledge building practice.In addition, the use of diagrammatic models supported students’ construction of mechanistic accounts,especially unpacking factors, as well as deep thinking about the specifics of a given phenomenon. By repeatedlydrawing models for similar types of phenomenon (e.g., odor moving across a room; air compressed in a syringe;air in a balloon as it warms up and cools down), students’ models highlighted what was general across thoseICLS 2016 Proceedings311© ISLSphenomena and they began using these general ideas (e.g., how molecules “usually” behave rather than how thespecific air molecules in the cold balloon were behaving) to build explanations.Finally, Ms. L worked very hard to gently problematize the kinds of ideas that she did not want them tobe working to build. Early on, when students provided generalizations as known-answer accounts, such as, “Somepeople can smell better than others,” or “All matter exists as a solid, a liquid, and a gas,” she would affirm thoseanswers, but was not satisfied with them. She would problematize a claim by calling into question the mechanism- “Oh, interesting! So say more, How does that work?”—or by calling into question the reaches of its generality:“Excellent. That is crazy to think about. So I’m thinking like, what would be hard to think about. Like mayberocks.” These affirmative problematizations, highlighting the “interestingness” and “craziness” of science ideas,gently led students away from known-answer accounts and stand-alone generalizations and towards constructingmechanistic accounts built across multiple phenomena.How do we know this is learning (and not just a response to framing)?These shifts are interesting, and appear supported by the context. However, the sets of epistemic ideas that studentsimplicitly choose to apply when approaching a task depend on context and shift in response to teacher framing.So what counts as epistemic learning rather than a response to framing? One form of evidence of learning wouldinvolve seeing students respond to the same types of teacher prompts in different ways over time. That is, if ateacher is consistently prompting for mechanistic accounts throughout the unit and students eventually come torespond to those prompts with mechanistic accounts, they have learned something about what kind of answer theyare working to build. Or, more convincingly, if a teacher is consistently prompting for other types of accounts(definitions, known-answer facts, stories, etc.) but over time students respond to those prompts with mechanisticaccounts, they have learned something about the kind of answer they are trying to build.Ms. L’s prompts for account type remained relatively consistent over the course of the unit, as shown inFigure 3. Her prompts for other types of accounts did decrease (with the exception of L11), though she was stillprompting for other types of accounts more frequently than students were providing other types of accounts. Inaddition, about 50% of her utterances were prompts for mechanistic accounts throughout the unit, while theproportion of students’ utterances that provided mechanistic accounts steadily increased until they were providingmechanistic accounts in almost every utterance. This suggests that not only did students learn that they were tryingto build mechanistic accounts, they found those types of accounts to be useful enough to continue providing themeven when the teacher was prompting for other types of accounts.(a)(b)Figure 3. Proportion of teacher prompts for types of accounts (a) and proportions of student turns of talkcontaining evidence of account type (b) over the course of the unit.Figure 4. Distribution of generality work within each episode.For evidence of learning about Generality, I noted who was doing the bulk of the work that led to thecharacterization of the episode. For example, did students begin using representations or general ideas after theteacher prompts them or does so herself? Or did they spontaneously do so, without teacher prompts or modeling?ICLS 2016 Proceedings312© ISLSAs shown in Figure 4, the bulk of the work was shared between the teacher and the students during episodes inthe early lessons. In these shared episodes, the teacher’s influence tended to be towards the beginning of theepisode: she would prompt for or model a connection between ideas, such as whether one can melt rock. Studentsthen made substantive comments for the duration of the episode. In these early lessons, Ms. L was framing thetype of generality work she wanted her students to do. In contrast, by Lessons 11 and 12, the students drove theepisodes: they independently represented and compared ideas and spontaneously articulated principles and relatedphenomena. This suggests that students learned that they were trying to build general ideas from understandingspecific phenomena, and that they found building ideas to be useful enough that they did it independently.Conclusions and implicationsI presented how, over the course of a 12-week unit, the classroom community’s answer to “What kind of answerare we working to provide?” shifted from “definitions and facts” to “coherent mechanistic explanations ofphenomena” that became more complex over time. In addition, students’ answer to “How does the idea we aretrying to understand relate to other phenomena and ideas?” shifted from “We connect phenomena and principlesto critique known information” to “We connect phenomena and representations to build general principles.” Theseshifts were designed into the curriculum, but required strategic work on the teacher’s part; and these shifts reflectepistemic learning rather than in-the-moment responses to a specific framing.This epistemic learning is key for students’ deep understanding of what scientific knowledge is, what itcan do, and how it came to be. Here, students learned to draw more consistently upon sets of epistemic resourcesthat undergirded their engagement in knowledge building activities, which were often driven by the studentsthemselves. Namely, this study provides empirical support for how students implicitly came to understandheuristics for how to go about building knowledge. In doing so, this study expands upon the Berland et al. (2015)framework by characterizing the range of the classroom community’s answers to the Nature and Generalizationconsiderations in greater detail; by demonstrating how, and at what grain size, a classroom community’s answersshift; and by connecting the shifts in their answers to those considerations to specific features of the learningenvironment. This characterization of the development of a classroom community’s epistemologies for science isa critical step in supporting teachers in engaging students in meaningful versions of scientific practices that engagestudents in authentic ways of knowing and doing science as members of a knowledge-building community.ReferencesBerland, L.K., Schwarz, C., Kenyon, L., Lo, A., Krist, C., & Reiser, B.J. (2015). Epistemologies in practice:Making scientific practices meaningful for students. Journal of Research in Science Teaching. E-view.Brown, A.L., & Campione, J.C. (1996). Psychological theory and the design of innovative learning environments:On procedures, principles, and systems. In L. Schauble & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovations in learning: Newenvironments for education (pp. 289-325). Mahway, NJ: Erlbaum.Chinn, C.A., Buckland, L.A., & Samarapungavan, A.L.A. (2011). Expanding the dimensions of epistemiccognition: Arguments from philosophy and psychology. Educational Psychologist, 46(3), 141-167.Krajcik, J., McNeill, K. L., & Reiser, B. J. (2008). Learning-goals-driven design model: Developing curriculummaterials that align with national standards and incorporate project-based pedagogy. Science Education,92(1), 1–32.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge Univ. Press.Louca, L., Elby, A., Hammer, D., & Kagey, T. (2004). Epistemological resources: Applying a newepistemological framework to science instruction. Educational Psychologist, 39(1), 57–68.Manz, E. (2014). Representing student argumentation as functionally emergent from scientific activity. Review ofEducational Research, 0034654314558490.National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Sandoval, W. A. (2005). Understanding students' practical epistemologies and their influence on learning throughinquiry. Science Education, 89(4), 634-656.Schwarz, C.V., Reiser, B.J., Davis, E.A., Kenyon, L., Achér, A., Fortus, D., & Krajcik, J. (2009). Developing alearning progression for scientific modeling: Making scientific modeling accessible and meaningful forlearners. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(6), 632-654.AcknowledgementsThanks to Kelsey Edwards, Dan Voss, Brian Reiser, and Henry Suarez for their helpful contributions. Thisresearch was supported by NSF ESI-1020316 and the NAEd/Spencer Dissertation Fellowship Program. Contentsare the responsibility of the author and do not represent the official views of the above organizations.ICLS 2016 Proceedings313© ISLS