Interdependence as a Treatment Effect:An Example From Group Awareness ResearchLenka Schnaubert, University of Duisburg-Essen, lenka.schnaubert@uni-due.deDaniel Bodemer, University of Duisburg-Essen, bodemer@uni-due.deAbstract: Interdependence of data within collaborative learning is often viewed as a merestatistical phenomenon. However, interdependence may provide valuable information aboutthe collaboration process. Thus, we report data of an exemplary study (N = 82) about theimpact of metacognitive group awareness information on collaborative learning to illustratehow this information may add to data interpretation. Our analyses indicate thatinterdependencies after collaboration may be part of the treatment effect and point towardsdifferential collaboration strategies.IntroductionOne great challenge for quantitative research in CSCL is the interdependence of individual data when learnersinteract in dyads or groups. Usually, dealing with hierarchical data is done in a stepwise procedure: first, theactual data is tested for statistical interdependence and – depending on the outcome – the data is analyzedaccounting for interdependence if necessary (Cress, 2008). If there is no interdependence, independence may beassumed, and corresponding statistical analyses can be used. However, collaboration processes usually relyheavily on interaction between group members and should thus foster non-independence on some levels.Additionally, treatments varied experimentally are often specifically designed to foster collaboration and thusexplicitly target interaction between subjects. Thus, we cannot assume interdependence to be a mere effect ofthe overall collaboration task, but it might be part of the treatment effect and thus more heavily apply to groupsof learners within one experimental condition. In this paper, we will describe exemplary data to show how atreatment targeting interaction between individuals learning in a dyadic setting may affect interdependencedifferently and how this information can enrich our analyses.Empirical study: Group awareness tools to foster collaborationGroup awareness tools are designed to inform learners about aspects of group members or the group in order toimplicitly guide their learning processes (Bodemer, Janssen, & Schnaubert, in press). Thus, they affectcollaboration in a way that is thought to be beneficial for individual learning. Empirical research uses a greatvariety of target concepts of such tools, and especially tools providing cognitive group awareness informationmay support relevant learning processes (cf. Janssen & Bodemer, 2013). For example, they may visualizeindividual needs or conflicting assumptions, thus fostering partner modelling central for collaboration processes(Dillenbourg, 1999). Thereby they may help learners to structure and coordinate joint learning processes (Clark& Brennan, 1991) and to tail their conversation to the needs of the individuals (Clark & Murphy, 1982). In ourstudy, we aimed at investigating whether metacognitive group awareness information has an additional benefitto cognitive group awareness information. We hypothesized that learners receiving information onmetacognitive confidence regarding specific assumptions learn more during collaboration than learners who donot receive this information due to improved collaboration processes and that they gain more confidence in theprocess, since insecurities signaling individual need for clarification may explicitly be addressed duringcollaboration.To test our hypotheses, we evaluated data of an experimental study with 41 dyads of learners randomlyassigned to two (between-dyad) research conditions varying the availability of metacognitive confidenceinformation during collaboration (MC+ vs. MC-). Dependent variables were assessed pre and post collaboration(within-subject). All participants each read a text on diabetes mellitus and answered questions regarding thetopic individually, and then came together in dyads to discuss the topic guided by the questions on a multi-touchtabletop. Afterwards, they answered the questions again individually. They gave a confidence rating with eachanswer, but the display of this information during collaboration depended on experimental condition. Ourdependent variables were (a) the number of learning tasks each individual solved correctly pre and postcollaboration to assess knowledge gain (performance) and (b) the number of confidently solved items per personpre and post collaboration to assess changes in confidence levels (confidence). While the treatment wasimplemented on dyad level during collaboration, outcome measures were assessed individually. Because weworked with partially-dependent data for our analyses on learning outcomes (individuals nested within dyads),we computed intra-class-correlation coefficients (ICC; Shrout & Fleiss, 1979) for each experimental condition.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1457© ISLSTo analyze the data, we conducted two-factorial MANOVAs with repeated measures on one factorwith dyads and individuals as units of analyses, and additionally analyzed the data via a dyadic multi-levelmodel using linear mixed modeling with restricted maximum likelihood estimation. We found a multivariatemain effect of time and an interaction effect. Univariate ANOVAs confirmed main effects of time withperformance and confidence levels rising significantly from pre to post and a significant interaction effect withMC+ learners’ performance increasing more from pre to post than the performance of learners in MC-.While these results largely corresponded with our expectations, taking a closer look at ICC valuesproduced some unexpected results: We found that after collaboration, the two conditions (MC+ vs. MC-)differed considerably in their statistical interdependence, leading us to assume different collaboration processes.While learners within dyads in MC+ were more interdependent with regard to resulting confidence levels(ICC = .56) than learners in MC- (ICC = .26, n.s.), the latter were more similar regarding performance levels(ICC = .67) than learners in MC+ (ICC = .31, n.s.). Thus, providing metacognitive information may have shiftedattention to different aspects of the learning processes and may have resulted in different collaboration efforts.While it was assumed that learners gain from metacognitive information performance-wise, the assumption wasbased on improved collaboration processes where learners more efficiently exchange information or coconstruct knowledge (Dillenbourg, 1999). However, this should have resulted in higher dependencies regardingperformance, which was not the case. Rather, it could be that visualizing metacognitive information may havegiven the learners less need to negotiate their understanding of the content, since displayed uncertainties mightbe a way to maintain differences while reducing cognitive conflict.ConclusionWhile statistical interdependence is often seen as a nuisance due to constrains they put on the usage of standardstatistical analyses, it is worth noting that various collaborative learning scenarios explicitly target dependenciesof learners who interact whilst influencing the learning partners’ cognitive processes (Dillenbourg, 1999).Hence, the focus of this paper was to exemplarily show how ICCs may add valuable information that may easilybe lost when merely compensating for interdependence rather than interpreting it. Interdependence is not a merestatistical phenomenon, but a result of common exposure to situational factors (shared experiences) or ofreciprocal influence and thus interaction (Cress, 2008). Especially the latter is in the core of collaborativelearning, where peers interact while pursuing a learning goal (Suthers, 2012) and thus, low ICCs may often notbe in line with the (more or less explicit) theoretical assumptions made about collaborative processes. It is thusnot surprising, that treatments designed to foster collaborative learning processes may differentially influenceinterdependence, since they affect the interaction processes between learners within a learning group.ReferencesBodemer, D., Janssen, J., & Schnaubert, L. (in press). Group awareness tools for computer-supportedcollaborative learning. In F. Fischer, C. E. Hmelo-Silver, S. R. Goldman, & P. Reimann (Eds.),International Handbook of the Learning Sciences. New York, NY: Routledge/Taylor & Francis.Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine, & S. D.Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 127–149). Washington, DC: AmericanPsychological Association.Clark, H. H., & Murphy, G. L. (1982). Audience design in meaning and reference. Advances in Psychology,9(C), 287–299. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0166-4115(09)60059-5Cress, U. (2008). The need for considering multilevel analysis in CSCL research—An appeal for the use ofmore advanced statistical methods. International Journal of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning, 3(1), 69–84. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-007-9032-2Dillenbourg, P. (1999). What do you mean by “collaborative learning”? In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.), Collaborativelearning: Cognitive and computational approaches (pp. 1–19). Oxford, UK: Elsevier.Janssen, J., & Bodemer, D. (2013). Coordinated computer-supported collaborative learning: Awareness andawarenesstools.EducationalPsychologist,48(1),40–55.https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2012.749153Shrout, P. E., & Fleiss, J. L. (1979). Intraclass correlations: Uses in assessing rater reliability. PsychologicalBulletin, 86(2), 420–428. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.86.2.420Suthers, D. D. (2012). Computer-supported collaborative learning. In N. M. Seel (Ed.), Encyclopedia of thesciences of learning. New York, NY: Springer.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1458© ISLS