Environmental Learning Through the Lens of Affinity Spaces:Transforming Community Members Into a Community ForceTamara Clegg, Jennifer Preece, Daniel Pauw, Elizabeth Warrick, and Carol Bostontclegg@umd.edu, preece@umd.edu, dpauw@umd.edu, ewarrick@umd.edu, cboston@umd.eduUniversity of Maryland, College ParkAbstract: In this paper we use affinity spaces as a lens to understand how adult communitybased learning happens in an environmental education program. Participants take a series ofclasses and undertake guided experiential activities related to watershed issues and then carryout capstone projects in their own communities that address stormwater management issues.Within the context of the Watershed Stewards Academy, we aim to understand how participantsbring diverse perspectives and experiences, interact with one another, and engage inenvironmental learning and action. Our analysis traces learners’ development from becomingaware of the importance of stormwater management to the watershed’s health to takingleadership roles in their communities. Our findings point to the potential of new face-to-facestrategies and technology that can aid learners in interacting and learning together.Keywords: informal learning, environmental education, adult learning, affinity spaces, technologyIntroductionLearning about the environment has become increasingly important for addressing society’s most pressing issuesof the 21st century—including energy consumption, climate change, and water pollution—particularly becausemany people are largely uninformed about the scientific processes underlying environmental phenomena andactions that could be taken to address problems. For example, Robelia & Murphy (2012) found that in a nationalsurvey, 59% of respondents could not accurately describe a watershed, and they did not know that variouspractices within watersheds contribute to water pollution or that preserving wetlands reduces runoff and thusimproves water quality.We draw upon affinity spaces as a lens to understand how adult learning happens within a mid-AtlanticWatershed Stewards Academy (WSA), one of a network of stewardship programs focused on training citizens toserve as community resources on local watershed issues and solutions. The WSA includes classes, experientiallearning, and capstone projects that address some aspect of stormwater management and includes a communityeducation component. We aim to understand how participants with diverse perspectives and experiences interactwith one another as they engage in environmental learning and action through the WSA. Developing a nuancedperspective of how learning happens within this context informs our broader understanding of how to design andsupport adult community-based environmental learning through face-to-face strategies and technology asappropriate.Aspects of environmental learningEnvironmental studies researchers have pointed to three key aspects of environmental learning. First, and mostobvious, is content knowledge, which includes understanding the scientific phenomena behind an environmentalissue (e.g., the cycle of rainwater washing pollutants from parking lots, drains, and sidewalks into rivers, streams,and bays) (Robelia & Murphy, 2012; Walter, 2009) and what actions to take. Second, Clover (2002, 2013)advocates for learners to move beyond emphasizing content knowledge and individual action to develop criticalreflection skills so that they can evaluate macro-level issues and policies that affect the environment. Ignoring thelarger issues that form the core of local, state, national, and international policy decisions can have profoundlydetrimental impacts. For example, Clover (2002) describes a neighborhood movement to recycle in which,unbeknownst to the community, the city was dumping its recycling out with the regular trash to cut down on costs,thus pointing out that individual actions alone may not be enough to create change. Clover (2002) calls this typeof understanding “concientización”. The third aspect of environmental learning involves expanding fromindividual actions to systemic community-wide endeavors that stem from a deep understanding of the impact ofpolicy and infrastructure on the environment. These actions often require a collective effort by people from diversebackgrounds (Clover, 2013).While these characterizations of different learning approaches provide useful overviews, they are oftennot explicit about how learning happens and how we might best promote it. For example, they do not focus onICLS 2016 Proceedings851© ISLScommunity-driven learning among adults, the topic of this study. To fill these gaps, we turn to affinity spaces asa lens for gaining a deeper understanding of learning within the context of the WSA, and for exploring the kindsof scaffolding –human and technical – that might help the WSA and similar adult learning communities.Affinity spaces: A lens for examining environmental learning among adultsGee (2005) uses the term affinity spaces to describe locations in the real or virtual world in which people interactaround a common passion or interest with others who have different expertise and who take on different roles,sharing their knowledge, tools, and technologies. Example studies have typically included gaming communitiesand enthusiast clubs (e.g., Star Wars online fan groups) – spaces that are usually informal learning contexts whereinteraction occurs virtually or in physical environments, and often both. These affinity spaces offer opportunitiesfor community members to engage in science deeply connected to their interests and values, and they providelow-risk opportunities for them to explore potential roles they might take in science, especially when the scienceis directly relevant to their own lives (Clegg et al., 2014). Gee (2015) describes how affinity spaces consist of arich problem solving context and interest-driven sites. This framework is particularly well-suited forunderstanding learning in the WSA in which a rich problem-solving context entails learning how to solve awatershed problem and culminates in a capstone project; the interest-driven site is the WSA program and the localcommunity in which learning occurs. Gee advocates that the two should be studied as a unit because participants’experiences are integrally developed as they navigate both. During this development, there is often a rich interplayof diverse ideas as community members make suggestions influenced by their own experiences. We concur withthis suggestion, which we believe applies to adult learners in the WSA context.Gee proposes three types of diversity that may facilitate sustained learning experiences for participants.First, affinity spaces should bring together people with different orientations to, and expertise in, the domain ofinterest. Second, affinity spaces need to promote diverse modes of engagement among participants. Third, distinctroles and multiple ways of contributing support the need for diverse ways of learning. Therefore, in order to applyGee’s theory of affinity spaces to our AWS context we need to understand the ways participants interact withinthese spaces and how their roles come together to support learning. This understanding is important for informinghow we might design learning environments and associated tools (e.g., technologies) to systematically supportclasses and community-driven environmental projects that facilitate adult learning.Study context: Watershed Stewards AcademyThe Watershed Stewards Academy (WSA) is a volunteer training program designed to equip individuals with theresources, tools, and knowledge to serve as leaders in their communities on watershed issues. Stewards participatein a 12-session course, and then have up to a year to develop and complete a capstone project in their owncommunities that has to do with stormwater management and community education. Upon course and projectcompletion, they become Master Watershed Stewards. According to a 2014 survey, those who participate inWSAs in this mid-Atlantic state tend to be predominantly female (64% female; 36% male), white (78% white;22% non-white), highly educated (89% reported at least a college degree), and older (mean age of 51.5 and medianage of 53.5) (Fisher, Yagatich, & Galli, 2015). The WSA studied is working to increase diversity amongparticipants by partnering with local faith-based organizations and expanding outreach efforts.MethodsIn a 4-month period between June and September 2015, we conducted 4 individual interviews and two focusgroups with a total of 15 past and current WSA participants, who were at different stages in the WSA course.Some participants were beginning their classes, others were starting their capstone projects, and some hadcompleted their projects. The first focus group was conducted as part of a WSA class with seven stewards; thesecond was a special session with four past WSA participants. Questions for the focus groups addressedmotivation for joining the class, capstone projects, and the use of technology to accomplish their project goals.Additionally, two researchers observed the capstone project proposal presentations of a cohort of stewards at theend of their 12-week class and recorded field notes. One of the researchers was also a participant in the class.Data analysisThree researchers collaboratively developed a codebook consisting of 17 codes based on the conceptualframework and the concepts discussed in the interviews and reports of observations, paying special attention toparticipants’ descriptions of aspects of the WSA program, such as the 12-week class experience, ideating capstoneprojects, collaborating on projects, and use of technology. Codes were also developed for tracing participants’learning experiences (i.e., learning developments) and instances of steward collaboration. Data was analyzed in aICLS 2016 Proceedings852© ISLSdeductive process and using the simultaneous coding system on Dedoose, a qualitative analysis software tool.Two researchers coded subsets of the focus groups and interviews using the codebook. Analytic memos were usedthroughout the coding process. Tables were applied to codes to illustrate overlapping ideas in order to capture thefull learning experience and the development of participants’ learning. In this way we could infer the learner’sexperience from the data (Miles et al., 2013). A third researcher then conducted a second coding pass across thedata to inductively develop patterns within the codes for learning developments, steward collaboration, andchallenges stewards faced.Findings: How learning happensDeveloping Awareness and Understanding in the 12-Week Class. The patterns we observed from the data suggestthat during the 12 weeks of class, participants became aware of the impact of stormwater pollution on theenvironment. They also began to consider community and policy issues as they learned to assess stormwatermanagement practices, toured green sites and interacted with their WSA facilitator and other stewards, which theybegan to take to their own homes, neighborhoods, and work places. For example, Ian1 described doing site auditsin the program: “It was really low tech … we went around to houses, and that really gave you a perspective ofhow little people think about water issues around their home” (focus group 2). Another participant said: “I didn'tknow that half of the water in our [religious facility] is not being treated before it hits the river. And I had no ideathat we are dumping about 12 million gallons of water into the river every year” (interview).Fueling Passion with Capstone Project Work. These inquiries into their own contexts fueled participants’ideas for their capstone projects as many chose projects rooted in their own interests, neighborhoods, andprofessions. For example, Liz chose to focus her capstone project on the religious facility that she managed. Asparticipants began to implement their projects, they reported common learning needs, e.g., to understand effectiveways to manage stormwater (e.g., rain barrels, rain gardens), ways to build and create management systems (e.g.,what types of plants to put in a rain garden) and how to handle problems that arise.Becoming a Community Force. As participants carried out their projects, they reported taking on moreleadership roles in their communities and changing how they viewed themselves and the local river. For example,Barbara reported that she began to educate her father about runoff principles and encouraged him to question hispractices. Pattie discussed the importance of engaging in larger scale projects for increased impact: “I think areally, really big benefit to the [WSA] program would be to connect with either the county planning boards oreven the state planning boards” ( interview). Another steward suggested scaling up capstone project effortsthrough “mega projects” that integrated multiple capstone projects (focus group 2).As stewards carried out their projects, they reported running into many challenges, including workingwith large communities, developing connections with the community, motivating community members to takecontinued action required for the upkeep of completed projects, dealing with changes in community leadership,and understanding the competing priorities of community members. Other kinds of challenges included scopingtheir capstone ideas into feasible projects, needing to invest significant time and energy to complete projects,obtaining funding for materials associated with their projects, and accessing appropriate technology forconducting site audits and recording other data. One interesting theme that emerged from our data was thestewards’ dynamic interactions with each other. This theme may tell us more about creating “interest-driven sites”for supporting learners in this affinity space, such as by facilitating discussion of ways to address their challengesthrough leveraging their own social capital, culture, expertise, and past experiences.Discussion, conclusions, and implicationsOur analysis reveals stewards’ progression from first developing awareness and understanding of stormwaterissues in the 12 weeks of classes, to then becoming passionate about stormwater management as a result of theircapstone projects, and (for some) ultimately becoming community leaders through their continued efforts. Thisprogression suggests that community-driven environmental projects are a context in which learners can begin todevelop concientización (Clover, 2002, 2013) in which they begin to progress from individual action andawareness to broader community action and leadership. Though some were able to make this leap, they expresseda desire for more support such as help with linking to additional learning resources and opportunities. Thesefindings support Gee’s call for problem solving within interest-driven sites (Gee, 2015).Considering the challenges and interactions stewards faced from an affinity spaces perspective suggeststhat stewards of community-driven environmental projected may benefit from more diverse “interest-drivensites,” specifically online spaces, social media, and other types of technology (Lammers et al., 2012; Gee, 2015).Of the 120 past and current WSA participants we invited to meet with us, only 11 were able to attend the face-toface events. Online forums may thus offer additional opportunities for collaboration and engagement that fitwithin the contexts of their busy lives. Such interest-driven sites are spaces in which learners can articulate andICLS 2016 Proceedings853© ISLSorganize their knowledge, interact around a problem-solving context to develop new possibilities for solvingproblems, mentor and learn from one another, and specialize in specific aspects of the context (Gee, 2015). Ouranalysis suggests that interest-driven sites for community-driven environmental projects need to support stewardsat two levels: first, for awareness and understanding of stormwater management principles and practices; andsecond, for communication and interaction, particularly during their capstone projects as they engage with theircommunities. Integrating face-to-face and online support for these conversations would enable diverse modes ofparticipating over time as called for by affinity spaces researchers (Lammers, et al., 2012). The kinds of tools thatare needed in interest-driven sites include project management, communications, and mapping tools, which willmost likely be technological in nature.Drawing on an affinity spaces perspective, we conclude that a framework that extends beyond traditionalteaching perspectives is needed in this context. A framework that emphasizes prompting, supporting, andsustaining learner-driven environmental experiences would extend those already offered (e.g., by Clover, 2002,2013; Walter, 2009), by highlighting the importance of helping learners find the right learning experiences andresources (e.g., funding sources, lectures, hands-on experiences) at opportune times to support and empower themin their own local and larger-scale contexts. This approach must balance the structure needed to promote learningwith freedom for learners to direct their own learning so that they develop their own personal value for theenvironmental contexts in which they are working. We advocate for a framework that takes a variety ofperspectives and that helps learners to link to new learning opportunities and to take on leadership roles in theirown local and global environmental contexts. More work is needed to develop such a framework and to understandhow interest-driven sites, especially those that provide rich technology support, can be integrated with face-toface experiences in this and similar contexts to support learning, empowerment, and leadership in communitydriven environmental projects.ReferencesClegg, T., Bonsignore, E., Ahn, J., Yip, J., Pauw, D., Gubbels, M., Lewittes, B., & Rhodes, E. (2014). CapturingPersonal and Social Science: Technology for Integrating the Building Blocks of Disposition. Paperpresented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences. Boulder, CO.Clover, D. (2002). Traversing the gap: Concientización, educative-activism in environmental adulteducation. Environmental Education Research, 8(3), 315-323.Clover, D. E. (2013). The art of environmental adult education: Creative responses to a contemporary ecologicalimperative. International Journal for Talent Development and Creativity, 1(2), 53-64.Fisher, D. R., Yagatich, W., and Galli, A. M. (2015). Who Engages in Environmental Stewardship? Participationin the Maryland Watershed Stewards Academies. Program for Society & the Environment, Universityof Maryland. http://www.cse.umd.edu/uploads /1/7/9/4/ 17940149/ fisher_etal._wsa_whitepaper.pdfGee, J. P. (2015). Accountable talk and learning in popular culture: The game/affinity paradigm. In L. B. Resnick,C. Asterhan, & S. N. Clarke (Eds.) (in press). Socializing intelligence through academic talk anddialogue (pp. 197–204). Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.Gee, J. P. (2005). Semiotic social spaces and affinity spaces: From the age of mythology to today's schools. In D.Barton & K. Tusting (Eds.), Beyond communities of practice: Language, power and social context(pp. 214–232). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Gee, J. P. (2004). Situated language and learning: A critique of traditional schooling. New York: Routledge.Lammers, J. C., Curwood, J. S., & Magnifico, A. M. (2012). Toward an affinity space methodology:Considerations for literacy research. English Teaching: Practice and Critique, 11(2), 44-58.Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldana, J. M. (2013). Qualitative data analysis: A methods sourcebook, 3rded. Washington, DC: Sage Publications.Robelia, B. & Murphy, T. (2012). What do people know about key environmental issues? A review ofenvironmental knowledge surveys. Environmental Education Research, 18(3), 299-321.Walter, P. (2009). Philosophies of adult environmental education. Adult Education Quarterly, 60(1), 3-25.AcknowledgmentsWe thank all the WSA participants, whose names have been changed for privacy purposes, as well as VaughnPerry, manager of adult education, Anacostia Watershed Society. This material is based upon work supported bythe National Science Foundation under grant no. 1423207.ICLS 2016 Proceedings854© ISLS