Cueing Gestures in a Seasons Simulation: Outcomes of anEmbodied Learning Approach to Supporting ExplanationsRobert C. Wallon and Robb Lindgren,rwallon2@illinois.edu, robblind@illinois.eduUniversity of Illinois at Urbana-ChampaignAbstract: This study involved middle school students using a gesture-augmented computersimulation to construct causal explanations. In individual interviews, students were promptedto explain what causes seasons before, during, and after using the simulation. We found strongevidence that students improved their explanations, and although students frequently usedgestures in their post-simulation explanations, they infrequently used the specific gesturesprompted by the interface.Keywords: embodied learning, explanation, gesture-augmented simulations, science educationIntroductionResearch on gesturing has suggested that there are deep connections between the ways we move our bodies andcognitive processes including how we reason and learn (Clark, 2013; McNeill, 2008; Roth, 2001). Emergingdigital technologies are making it possible to integrate student gesturing with computer simulations that modelcritical science processes and phenomena. Devices can transform natural body movement such as gestures,performed in real time, into input that simulations can interpret as expressions of students’ understanding.The design of the gesture-augmented simulation environment used in this study draws from theories ofembodied cognition (Shapiro, 2010; Wilson, 2002) and corresponding principles for creating effective embodiedlearning designs (Abrahamson & Lindgren, 2014). In particular, these simulations attempt to “cue” theperformance of gestures shown to be productive for developing new understandings.The focus of the current study is a gesture-augmented simulation of seasons and how the cued gesturesinteract with students’ explanations. Crowder and Newman (1993) have shown that gestures play a pivotal rolenot only in the communication of scientific insights, but also in their construction. The construction ofexplanations in this work is viewed as involving the development of imagistic mental models that visualizeunobservable causes for observable effects (Clement, 1989). The particular ways of configuring cued gestureswith visualizations, and their interplay with explanations, is ripe for exploration. In this study, we investigated thefollowing questions: (1) To what extent do students' explanations of seasons change after using a gestureaugmented simulation? (2) Does using a gesture-augmented simulation elicit gesturing in post-simulationexplanations of seasons? (3) To what extent do students use cued gestures in their explanations of seasons afterusing the simulation?MethodsThe initial design conjecture (Sandoval, 2014) guiding this cycle of research from a broader project was thatcueing gestures that are congruent with key explanatory elements of the system would support learners inconstructing more sophisticated explanations of the seasons. We posited that students would subsequently drawupon the cued gestures as resources for explanation even after they were done using the simulation.A total of 26 students from multiple middle schools located in a small urban community participated inthis study. There were 20 males and 6 females, and participants’ ages ranged from 12-15 years old (average 12.8years old). Students were recruited to participate in the study during study hall periods and after school programs,and they were compensated ten dollars for their participation.The seasons simulation in this project afforded embodied interaction using three gestures cued by thesystem and embodying different aspects of the phenomena: (1) angle of light rays, (2) concentration of light rays,and (3) angle of earth relative to the sun. Students used the simulation on a laptop computer with a Leap Motiondevice plugged in via USB that can track hand movement with infrared cameras.Interviews on the topic of seasons were conducted individually and lasted approximately thirty minutes.During interviews, students were asked for their ideas about what causes the seasons before using the gestureaugmented simulation. While using the simulation students were presented with several explanatory challenges,which involved making something happen in the simulation and explaining how that action affected the seasons.After using the simulation, students were asked again about their explanation of the causes of seasons, and thenthey were asked to explain a second time with an explicit request that they use their hands.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1363© ISLSThis study uses mixed methods, with quantitative analyses to compare the quality of pre-simulationexplanations and post-simulation explanations and to identify instances of the cued gestures, and qualitativeanalyses to examine how students used cued gestures in their explanations. To address RQ1, explanations werecoded for the presence of two normative explanatory elements (tilt and intensity of light rays) and one nonnormative explanatory element (distance). These data were transformed to ordinal data for analysis. An iterativeapproach was used to address RQ2-3, in which the researchers began with closed coding, using an initial set oftop-down codes, and then used open coding to expand and refine these codes (Saldaña, 2012).FindingsResearch Question 1: A Wilcoxon signed ranks test was calculated, and it indicated that students' post-simulationexplanation scores were statistically significantly higher than pre-simulation explanation scores, Z = 153.000, p <.001. Kendall’s W was calculated as a measure of effect size, and W = 0.654, indicating a large effect.Research Questions 2 and 3: Twenty students used representational gestures post-simulation when theywere initially asked for their explanations and were not prompted to gesture, and 24 students used representationalgestures when they were asked to use their hands to help show their explanations. However, very few students (1student unprompted and 3 students when prompted) used the gestures cued by the simulation.Discussion and ConclusionsThe results showed that after using a simulation that cued their gestures, students improved their explanations ofcauses of the seasons (RQ1) and often used gestures in their final explanations (RQ2). This indicates that gestureaugmented simulations can be effective for creating a space where students can more adeptly integrate physicalrepresentations into their explanations. However, students rarely used the specifically cued gestures in their finalexplanations (RQ3). It is possible that while these simulation-cued gestures encouraged embodied interactiongenerally, they did not afford specific explanatory power for students on this topic.A simulation that cued gestures led to subsequent student explanations that were rich with gestures andwere assessed to be more sophisticated compared to the explanations given prior to using the simulation. Thesefindings suggest a genuine affordance of these designs for integrating verbal and spatial representations.Additional research on the effects of embodied cueing, and how these cues intersect with specific learning content,is needed to fully understand the applications of gesture-augmented simulations.ReferencesAbrahamson, D., & Lindgren, R. (2014). Embodiment and embodied design. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), TheCambridge handbook of the learning sciences (2nd edition) (pp. 358-376). New York, NY: CambridgeUniversity Press.Clark, A. (2013). Gesture as thought. In Z. Radman (Ed.), The hand, an organ of the mind: What the manual tellsthe mental (pp. 255-268). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Clement, J. J. (1989). Learning via model construction and criticism: Protocol evidence on sources of creativityin science. In J. A. Glover, R. R. Ronning, & C. R. Reynolds (Eds.), Handbook of creativity: Assessment,theory and research (pp. 341–381). New York, NY: Plenum Press.Crowder, E. M., & Newman, D. (1993). Telling what they know: The role of gesture and language in children'sscience explanations. Pragmatics & Cognition, 1, 341-376.McNeill, D. (2008). Gesture and thought. University of Chicago Press.Roth, W. M. (2001). Gestures: Their role in teaching and learning. Review of Educational Research, 71, 365-392.Saldaña, J. (2012). The coding manual for qualitative researchers (2nd ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Sage.Sandoval, W. (2014). Conjecture mapping: An approach to systematic educational design research. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 23, 18-36.Shapiro, L. (2010). Embodied cognition. Routledge.Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 625-636.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No.DUE-1432424.Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authorsand do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1364© ISLS