Empirical Evidence for Evaluation Anxiety and ExpectancyValue Theory for Help SourcesIris Howley, Williams College, iris@cs.williams.eduCarolyn Penstein Rosé, Carnegie Mellon University, cprose@cs.cmu.eduAbstract: Expectancy-Value Theory for Help Sources (EVT-HS) states that whether or notstudents seek help from a particular source is determined by their perceived expectation that therewill be help available, and the perceived value for the help from that source. This paper providesinitial empirical validation for EVT-HS, while also introducing and providing support for costs ofseeking help from a particular help source impacting intention to seek help. Our surveyexperiment shows that raising perceived expectancies and values for a help source significantlypredicts a student’s intention to seek help. Our results also show that evaluation anxiety, as apotential negative value, inversely predicts intentions to seek help from a particular source.IntroductionAppropriate help seeking is a necessary skill in becoming a successful self-regulated learner and it is highlycorrelated with student achievement in the classroom (Magnusson & Perry, 1992). Students who do not seekhelp with difficult concepts, or who fail to consult with instructors, or who request inappropriate help are not aslikely to experience success as students who seek help effectively (Magnusson & Perry, 1992). Seeking helpwhen necessary assists students in understanding complex concepts that they do not understand (Magnusson &Perry, 1992). However, the process of identifying a help need to actually pursuing that help is a complex path.Not all students successfully find their way.In this article, we provide initial empirical evidence in support of Expectancy-Value Theory for HelpSources (Makara & Karabenick, 2013) as a lens for understanding what perceptions impact from whom studentsseek help. This theory encompasses many social and non-social factors that influence student decisions to seekhelp. With an understanding of the theory of help-seeking from help sources, designers of learning experiencescan better support student help seeking. We designed a survey experiment to link perceived expectancies,values, and costs with intention to seek help from potential peer helpers. While the experimental context isintended to inform the future design of an online peer help support system, the experimental methodology isdesigned to allow for a broader interpretation of results.Prior workIn this article, we focus on three steps of the help seeking process to investigate how learning science theory canbe leveraged to improve learning environments. These three steps include: “decide to seek help from an externalsource”, “identify potential helpers”, and “implement strategies for engaging the helper” (Nelson-Le Gall,1981). We focus on these three steps as the potential for immediate impact to reduce obstacles to effectiveparticipation is tremendous. These three steps also lend themselves well to a lens of Expectancy Value Theoryfor understanding how student beliefs impact their help seeking while we us a different theory, ExpectancyValue Theory for Help Sources (EVT-HS), to explain whether learners pursue potential helpers. EVT-HS is amore constrained interpretation of Expectancy Value Theory for learning, but instead of focusing on larger selfconcept tasks, such as learning a concept, its focus is on the decision to seek help from a particular help source.Help seeking in learning contextsNelson-Le Gall (1981) proposes one model of help seeking in which the student must:(1) first become aware of a help need,(2) decide to seek help from an external source,(3) identify potential helpers,(4) implement strategies for engaging the helper, and(5) reflect upon the help seeking attempt.The first step toward help seeking revealed by Nelson-Le Gall’s task analysis is identifying a help need. Ifstudents have the metacognitive capabilities to monitor their progress and can detect when they encounter aproblem, then it is possible for them to proceed to the next step in the help seeking model. However, if studentsare not aware that they have encountered an obstacle, then they will not seek help when necessary (Nelson-LeICLS 2018 Proceedings472© ISLSGall, 1981). Research shows that this metacognitive ability to identify a help need is developed throughmaturation and experience (Markman, 1977).In order to make the decision to seek help, a person must first weigh the costs and benefits of doing so.Asking for assistance can help a student complete a task, but it can come with social and personal costs such asfeeling less competent or receiving less credit (Nelson-Le Gall, 1981). Not everyone is equally as sensitive oraware of these costs and benefits. A student’s disposition and goals may also affect the choice.Once a decision has been made to seek help, one must next select a helper. In this step, the decision isinfluenced by the student’s perceptions and knowledge of potential helpers as well as the social situation. Theseperceptions and situational factors include the sex and age of both the help-seeker and the helper, the rolerelationship and status of both parties, perceived willingness to help, perceived competence of the helper, andsocioeconomic status (Nelson-Le Gall, 1981). These perceptions and situational factors are of particular interestbecause they can often be intentionally designed, especially within interactive learning environments in whichthe system connects students to the help they require.Once the learner has decided to seek help, and decided on a helper, there are a variety of outcomes toexpect, dependent upon the student’s goals in seeking help. Help-avoidance, executive (or expedient) helpseeking, or instrumental help seeking (Nelson-Le Gall, 1981) are also similar to avoidant, autonomous, anddependent help seeking behaviors (Nadler, 1997). One can either ask for help or not, but one can also ask forhelp simply to complete a task quicker or to learn more. There is also a distinction to be made among helpseeking, information-seeking, feedback-seeking, answer requests, or error checks (Puustinen et al.,2011).Beyond general categories, one can also examine help seeking based upon linguistic features such as thedirectness and politeness of the help being sought (Puustinen et al., 2011).If the desired help is not acquired, students are then forced to reevaluate their strategies for obtaininghelp and may repeat the previous steps until help is achieved (Nelson-Le Gall, 1981).Expectancy Value TheoryStudents’ decisions to pursue learning goals are determined by their expectancies for success, and the valuesthey place on the outcomes that come from that success. Eccles & Wigfield (2002)’s Expectancy Value Theoryprovides a larger model that includes these expectancies and values, but also incorporates students’ beliefs andself-schemata. This model can be applied to a wide range of learning-oriented behaviors, including helpseeking. We will be focusing on the direct antecedents that determine students’ achievement-related choices andperformance: the expectation of success and subjective task value. We apply Expectancy Value Theory at thehelp seeking process level, and later introduce Expectancy Value Theory for Help Sources for understandingstudent behavior when selecting a help source.Expectancy Value Theory for Help Sources is derived from Expectancy Value Theory, although due toits more targeted focus there are some differences. Both beliefs about the help source and more general beliefsabout help seeking expectancies and values are important factors in the process of deciding to seek help. In thissection we describe and distinguish Expectancy Value Theory from EVT-HS.Modern Expectancy Value TheoryThe Expectancy Value Theory (EVT) of modern educational psychology incorporates students’ ability beliefs,expectancies for success on a particular task, and four different task values (i.e., intrinsic, utility, attainment, andcost) (Eccles et al., 1983). More recent work on Expectancy-Value Theory has pointed toward expectancy forsuccess being more predictive of performance and value beliefs being more predictive of achievement-relatedchoice and effort (Trautwein et al., 2012).Trautwein et al. (2012) provides evidence for the relationship between expectancy and value for a taskto be enhancing. That is, in their model, both expectancy and value positively predicted performance and theirinteraction produced a stronger than additive effect on performance. These results held true in bothmathematics and English language learning domains, which suggests that the interaction of expectancy forsuccess and task values should be included as a term in Expectancy Value Theory analyses and models.Trautwein et al. (2012) also included costs of performing a task alongside intrinsic, utility, and attainmentvalues which is similar to other work incorporating costs into Expectancy Value Theory (Eccles & Wigfield,2002). While “low cost” was significantly correlated with the other values, the correlation between utility valuesand low cost were generally strongest. The authors hypothesized that low cost and utility values representextrinsic values, while the attainment and intrinsic values were considered more intrinsic. However, thisexplanation assumed a particular definition of costs, largely focused on the amount of time required of thestudent to pursue that avenue of help.ICLS 2018 Proceedings473© ISLSExpectancy of success also has multiple dimensions in modern Expectancy Value Theory. Thesedimensions consist of broad ability beliefs about competence in a particular domain, and a more narrowexpectancy of success on a specific upcoming task. Research has shown that these two dimensions are highlycorrelated, and in many real-world achievement situations they are empirically indistinguishable (Eccles &Wigfield, 2002). Trautwein et al. (2012) measured expectancy for success in math and English with a selfconcept instrument with items such as “I am good at mathematics/English.” It is a common practice of modernresearch on Expectancy Value Theory to use similar self-concept items rather than expectancy for success itemsfor a specific upcoming task. While Expectancy Value Theory has directed expectancies for success to bemeasured more generally at the self-concept level, it is important to include expectancies for success on aspecific upcoming task into initial investigations of Expectancy Value Theory for help seeking.Expectancy Value Theory of help sourcesThe process of pursuing help, from Nelson-Le Gall’s (1981) model, once the student has decided to seek helprequires (3) selecting a source from which to seek help and then (4) to follow through with the help request.While the actual pursuing of the help can be understood through the Eccles & Wigfield Expectancy ValueTheory model as previously described, the selection of a help source can be better examined through Makara &Karabenick’s (2013) Expectancy Value model of help seeking for help sources, below:Figure 1. Makara & Karabenick Expectancy Value Theory (2013) for help sources model.Expectations for help from a particular help source are based on beliefs about whether that source willbe available to provide help, whether that source is accessible, and a basic belief that there will be obtainablehelp from that particular source. Values for a help source originate from whether that help source will be able toprovide the expected type of help such as the expected quality and accuracy. This model functions as an initialtheoretical explanation for how students select and seek help from a particular resource, but empirical supportfor this framing of expectancies for success and values is not yet empirically validated.Makara & Karabenick (2013) define expectations for success from the help source as the belief therewill be help which is more about the help source rather than student self-concept. A student might have generalself-concept beliefs about their past successes in help seeking in general, but also self-concept beliefs for thepursuit of help from a particular help source. It is currently unknown how these two levels of expectations forsuccess in help seeking combine to influence help seeking from a particular source.Expectancy Value Theory for Help Sources also largely focuses on utility value for the values for thehelp source. This is likely due to the other, more intrinsically-related value types being less relevant in a helpseeking concept. Intrinsic value was measured by items in Trautwein et al. (2012) such as, “I enjoy puzzlingover mathematics/English problems.” It seems unlikely that students would enjoy seeking help and considerattaining help as a personal value. However, Makara & Karabenick (2013) could certainly have included costitems in their model of Expectancy Value Theory for Help Sources. While cost can be measured as an amountof time required to achieve the task as in Trautwein et al. (2012), it can also be measured as public and privatethreats to self-esteem, and inconveniencing a particular help source. Students can perceive costs at the helpseeking level (i.e., “Others would think I was dumb if I ask for help in this class”, Wolters et al., 2003), but alsoat the help source level (i.e., “This helper would think I was dumb if I asked them for help in this class.”). Whilecosts were not explicitly included in Makara & Karabenick (2013), an examination of costs’ function in seekinghelp from a particular source is an additional purpose of this article.In determining from whom/where to seek help and whether to actually pursue that help, we mustconsider student expectations and values for the help from a help source. This examination should incorporatecosts for seeking help as part of gaining a wider understanding of beliefs for a help source. Better understandingthe relationship between expectancies and values for a help source and student self-concept beliefs about theirhelp seeking is an additional goal.Costs of seeking helpThis section introduces costs of seeking help with a particular focus on social costs of seeking help. Costs aretypically considered one of many possible values (alongside attainment, intrinsic, and utility values). But thereICLS 2018 Proceedings474© ISLSare also many different types of costs. Costly outcomes can include private threats to self-esteem (i.e., “If I askfor help, it means I’m not competent”), public threats to self-esteem (i.e., “If I ask for help the teacher will thinkI’m not competent”), face threatening acts (i.e., “It will inconvenience the teacher to help me”), among others.Costs were not included in the Expectancy Value for Help Sources Theory explicitly, but certainly one helpsource could induce more costs than another.Evaluation anxiety, often referred to as evaluation apprehension, or a person’s concern about beingevaluated (Guerin, 1986), can be impacted by numerous contextual factors and is also similar to perceivedpublic threats to self-esteem (Shapiro, 1983). Both of these factors are related to impression managementstrategies to prevent others from perceiving one as incompetent. In this section, we focus on the effect ofevaluation anxiety in learning contexts.Anxiety related to the potential to be evaluated, whether implied or explicitly stated, is known asevaluation anxiety (Cottrell et al., 1968). Learning often requires evaluation, either from others such as theteacher or from within when self-monitoring one’s progress, and so the issue of anxiety around evaluationpotential is relevant to learners. However, a review of the literature does not appear to reveal evaluation anxietysystematically studied with regards to its effects on help seeking. Evaluation anxiety is referred to, specificallyin reference to its relationship with threats to public self-esteem, as in Nadler (1997) in which the author positsthat threat to public self-esteem is an explanatory concept for participants avoiding seeking help on ego-centraltasks, and that this “suggests that one avoids the seeking of help because of evaluation anxiety concerns.”Modern methods to measure evaluation anxiety look not only at experienced evaluation anxiety, butalso the cause of the evaluation anxiety (Leary et al., 1986; Bagley, 2007). To measure experienced evaluationanxiety, a subset of items used to measure negative affect are used as a scale. These items include negativeaffects specifically related to anxiety: nervous, worried, calm, tense, and relaxed (Leary et al., 1986).Empirical evidence for Expectancy Value Theory for help sourcesAs an initial step toward understanding how evaluation anxiety and EVT-HS impacts student help seeking, wedevised an online experiment testing the EVT-HS with evaluation anxiety model. This initial survey connectspotential help source manipulations to items measuring expectancy value beliefs toward the help source,evaluation anxiety, and intention to seek help. The purpose of this experiment is to serve as initial empiricalevidence for the relationships between expectancy for the help source, values for the help source, and helpseeking outcomes as proposed in Makara & Karabenick (2013). This experiment also provides initial empiricalevidence for including evaluation anxiety as a social concern in help seeking from a particular source.Expectancies, values, and costs for the help source can be manipulated through the presentation ofpotential help sources. We are grounding the context of the help sources in a peer helper support system that ourresearch group is in the process of designing and testing. Potential helper screenshots should directly manipulateperceptions of expectancy and value for help sources. The helper screenshot, as shown in Figure 2, is on a bluebackground with an anonymized profile image and username, and one of four possible sentences that representour experimental manipulation:(1) “This person is a fellow student” (control)(2) “This person is available to give help” (expectancy)(3) “This person offers high quality help” (value)(4) “This person will evaluate the quality of your question” (cost)By deriving these sentences directly from Makara & Karabenick’s (2013) EVT-HS, we intend to test whetherthe theory has the hypothesized effect on help seeking attitudes towards the help sources.Figure 2. A Helper screenshot with the 'values for help source' manipulation sentence. Other sentences wereused for the other three conditions.ICLS 2018 Proceedings475© ISLSResearch hypothesesOur research hypotheses are derived from the direct relationship between the EVT-HS theory, and ourmanipulations. There is a set of hypotheses dedicated to the relationship between the manipulations and thebeliefs, and an additional set of hypotheses related to the beliefs and the help seeking outcome. Figure 3presents our tested hypotheses and the associated significant relationships.Figure 3. The hypotheses results model for the EVT Helper Survey Experiment. Black solid lines indicatesupported hypotheses, grey solid lines are unsupported hypotheses, and black dotted lines are un-hypothesizedrelationships. Arrow-less lines indicate correlations.Connecting manipulations to beliefs1. The Expectancy Sentence (“This person is available to give help”) will increase self-reportedexpectations for the help source, more than the Control Sentence (and other sentence conditions).– (Partial Support) The Value Sentence and Expectancy Sentence resulted in significantly moreself-reported Expectancy Beliefs for the help source, than the Cost and Control Sentences,F(3,159)=13.68, p <0.001, R2 = 0.68.2. The Value Sentence (“This person offers high quality help”) will increase self-reported values of thehelp source, more than the Control Sentence (and other sentence conditions).– (Supported) The Value Sentence predicts significantly more self-reported Value Beliefs thanthe Expectancy and Control Sentences which predict more than the Cost Sentence,F(3,159)=35.35, p<0.0001, R2=0.64.3. The Cost Sentence (“This person will evaluate the quality of your question”) will increase self-reportedcosts for the help source, more than the Control Sentence (and other sentence conditions).– (Supported) The Cost Sentence significantly predicts more Cost Beliefs (i.e., evaluationanxiety) than the Expectancy and Value Sentences, with the Control Sentence beingstatistically indistinguishable from the Cost and Expectancy conditions, F(3,159)= 2.80, p =0.04, R2=0.75.Connecting beliefs to intention to seek help4. The EVT-HS beliefs should connect to help seeking outcomes.a) Expectancy for Help Sources Beliefs should significantly positively predict intentions to seekhelp, Supported: F(1,165)=401.11, p<0.0001, R2=0.79.b) Value for Help Sources Beliefs should significantly positively predict intentions to seek help,Supported: F(1,213)=245.77, p<0.0001, R2=0.77.c) Cost beliefs (i.e., evaluation anxiety) should significantly negatively predict intentions to seekhelp, Supported: F(1,212)=25.83, p<0.0001, R2=0.69.d) Expectancies and Values for the Help Source should interact as an enhancing model on theprediction of intention to seek help, Partially Supported: β = -0.03, t(200) = -1.69, p = 0.09,R2=0.86.Study design and methodology54 participants were recruited from a private American university’s participant pool. 7% of respondentsexperienced no college education, 20% received some college education, 43% obtained a bachelor’s degree, and30% had a graduate degree. 61% of respondents were from the United States, 11% from East Asia, 24% fromICLS 2018 Proceedings476© ISLSIndia, and 4% from Eastern Europe. Respondents had a mean age of µ=28.7 years, σ = 9.8 and 63% of surveyrespondents were female. Each participant visited the online survey, read the instructions, viewed a helperscreenshot, and then completed survey items measuring our constructs of interest. Each participant saw all fourhelp source sentences randomized in this within-subjects survey experiment.Survey itemsDependent measures were evaluation anxiety items from Leary et al. (1986), intention to seek and avoid helpfrom the self-regulated learning literature in Wolters et al. (2005), and newly designed items we derived fromthe Expectancy Value Theory for Help Sources, shown in Table 1.Table 1. Survey items derived from EVT-HS to measure perceived expectancies and values for a help source.Expectancy Beliefs for the Help Source1) <This person> is available to give me help.2) If I ask for help from <this person>, they will give me help.3) If I have a question for <this person> they will answer me.Value Beliefs for the Help Source4) The help from <this person> will be what I need to answer my question.5) <This person> will provide me answers of high quality.6) <This person> can give me accurate help.Cronbach’s α for our developed measures of Expectancy Beliefs for Help Sources items was 0.93 andfor Value Beliefs for Help Sources, α = 0.96, indicating excellent internal consistency. Survey items for eachexperimental instance were combined into a single scale item representing evaluation anxiety, expectancies,values, and intention to seek help from the particular help source. Figure 4 shows the median and quartile valuesof the response scales as a boxplot.The above survey items were preceded by a Helper Screenshot, as in Figure 2, which were in turnpreceded by the following hypothetical framing: “You are enrolled in an online course and are having difficultywith one of the assignments. You decide to seek assistance from some of your peers. You submit your questionto the online course website and the course system recommends you ask the following fellow student:”Statistical approachAll analyses connecting categorical experimental manipulations to numerical beliefs scales were performed asan ANOVA with RespondentID as a random effect to account for the within-subjects experimental design.Since each participant saw all four of the sentence manipulations (control, expectancy, value, and cost), thecategorical condition variable had three degrees of freedom. Analyses connecting the theory beliefs scales tointention to seek help were performed as a linear regression with RespondentID as a random effect as well.Post-hoc analyses connecting levels of variables to outcomes were performed via Student’s t-tests.Figure 4. On the left, a box plot showing aggregate median responses and quartiles for survey scales.Figure 5. On the right, a line of fit with confidence of fit shading showing a significant interaction betweenvalues for the help source and evaluation anxiety on intention to seek help.ICLS 2018 Proceedings477© ISLSResultsIn general, as shown in Figure 3, our hypotheses were mostly supported, except the Value Sentencemanipulation impacted expectancy for the help source beliefs, just as much as the Expectancy Sentencemanipulation did. Statistical relationships are reported underneath the hypotheses in the Research Hypotheses.There was also a significant interaction between the evaluation anxiety and [positive] values for thehelp source variables on intention to seek help, β = .12, t(210) = 2.47, p = 0.01, as shown in Figure 5. As thevalues for the help source rise, the perceived evaluation anxiety caused by that help source decreases, althoughless steeply. This suggests that when students believe a helper will provide good quality help, they are alsoslightly less afraid of being evaluated by that helper, therefore evaluation anxiety for the help source may verywell be functioning as a negative value belief.Trautwein et al. (2012) suggests that expectancies and values in a domain-centric Expectancy ValueTheory model should contain an interaction between expectancy and value with an enhancing effect. A marginalinteraction between expectancies and values for the help source was found, β = -0.03, t(200) = -1.69, p = 0.09,R2=0.86. However, if the interaction term had an enhancing effect, the lines in Figure 6 would fan outwards.Instead, only some of the lines fan. It appears that the value beliefs for the help source hit a 1.73 standarddeviation maximum, and a ceiling effect occurred, preventing a clear enhancing interaction from occurring.Figure 6. Expectancy and Value predicting Help Seeking shown as standard deviations from the mean.LimitationsThis survey experiment employed the use of a hypothetical online classroom and assumed the participant had ahypothetical question to ask in order to provide context for selecting a helper. While our results provide someconfidence in the environmental validity of this method, the ecological validity might be questionable.Furthermore, each manipulation only had one sentence, and so respondent beliefs might be in response to thephrasing of the question and not the larger theory manipulation the sentence was designed to represent.Response bias is also a possibility in survey experiments, and so future work includes replicating our results.We were unable to manipulate Value Beliefs for the Help Source separately from Expectancy Beliefsfor the Help Source. A few possible explanations consist of: (1) the Expectancy Beliefs items could beinaccurately constructed, (2) the value manipulation sentence was inaccurately constructed, or (3) theExpectancy Value Theory for Help Sources requires refinement. It may not be possible to realisticallymanipulate value beliefs separately from expectancy beliefs for the help source. Future work should investigatethe design of manipulatives that can impact values for the help source beliefs separately from expectancies.While an enhancing interaction between expectancies and values for the help source was expected, themarginal interaction did not fulfill this enhancing relationship. A ceiling effect is likely a partial explanation.Future workWhile this survey experiment provided strong evidence in support of EVT-HS and evaluation anxiety asimpacting intention to seek help, next steps involve a second survey experiment using a different help seekingcontext to provide for more generalizability. Also, investigating these constructs in a live learning environmentcould reveal EVT-HS’s environmental validity. We have a peer helper suggestion system for online courses towhich we plan to apply this newfound understanding of help seeking. Future work should also include thedevelopment of more sentence manipulatives to better operationalize the effect on EVT-HS beliefs.ICLS 2018 Proceedings478© ISLSConclusionFrom our results, we see that the Expectancy-Value Theory for Help Sources impacts self-reported help seekingoutcomes. Our survey experiment shows that raising perceived expectancies and values for a help sourcesignificantly predicts a student’s intention to seek help. Our results also show that evaluation anxiety, as apotential negative value, inversely predicts intentions to seek help from a particular source. This initial evidencesupports Expectancy Value Theory for Help Sources in its proposed form.However, value beliefs for the help source are difficult to manipulate separately from expectancybeliefs. A student could believe that if resource A gives good quality help, then they probably are available togive help. From a practical standpoint, this is less of an issue, as course designers and instructors can focus oncreating a learning environment that raise either (or both) expectancies or value beliefs for the help source togarner a positive impact on help seeking. From a theoretical standpoint, the fact that values cannot be easilymanipulated separately from expectancy beliefs for the help sources suggests that Expectancy Value Theory forHelp Sources might require some refinement to be more useful in explaining the specifics of seeking help froma particular source. The hypothesized relationship between our measures of expectancies, values, and costs tointention to seek help was supported, which implies that it is not purely a question of theory, but a matter ofmanipulating the theory beliefs in a real-world setting.Overall, in this paper, we have provided initial evidence in support of expectancies, values, andevaluation anxiety beliefs as influencing whether people seek help from a particular helper. Our results alsoemphasize that learning experience designers incorporate awareness of student evaluation anxieties into theircourses, as it can impact help seeking as well.ReferencesBagley, P. L. (2007). Evaluation Apprehension: An Examination of Affect in the Audit Environment (Doctoraldissertation, University of Georgia).Cottrell, N. B., Wack, D. L., Sekerak, G. J., & Rittle, R. H. (1968). Social facilitation of dominant responses bythe presence of an audience and the mere presence of others. Journal of personality and socialpsychology, 9(3), 245.Eccles, J., Adler, T. F., Futterman, R., Goff, S. B., Kaczala, C. M., Meece, J. I., & Midgley, C. (1983).Expectancies, values, and academic behaviors. In J. T. Spence (Ed.), Achievement and achievementmotives:Psychological and sociological approaches, 75–145. San Francisco, CA: W. H. Freeman.Eccles, J. S. & Wigfield, A. (2002). Motivational beliefs, values, and goals, Annual Review of Psychology, 53,109-132.Guerin, B. (1986). Mere presence effects in humans. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 22, 38-77.Leary, M. R., Barnes, B. D., & Griebel, C. (1986). Cognitive, affective, and attributional effects of potentialthreats to self-esteem. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 4(4), 461-474.Magnusson, J. L., & Perry, R. P. (1992). Academic help seeking in the university setting: The effects ofmotivational set, attributional style, and help source characteristics. Research in HigherEducation, 33(2), 227-245.Makara, K.A. & Karabenick, S. A. (2013). Characterizing sources of academic help in the age of expandingeducational technology. . In S.A. Karabenick M. Puustinen (Eds.) Advances in Help seeking Researchand Applications: The Role of Emerging Technologies. Charlotte, NC: Info Age Publishing, 37-72.Markman, E. (1977). Realizing that you don’t understand: A preliminary investigation. Child Development, 48,986-992.Nadler, A. (1997). Personality and Help Seeking. In Sourcebook of social support and personality, 379-407.Springer US.Nelson-Le Gall, S. (1981). Help seeking: An understudied problem-solving skill in children. DevelopmentalReview, 1(3), 224-246.Puustinen, M., Bernicot, J., & Bert-Erboul, A. (2011). Written computer-mediated requests for help by Frenchspeaking students: an analysis of their forms and functions. Learning and Instructionm 21(2), 281-289.Shapiro, E. G. (1983). Embarrassment and help seeking. New directions in helping, 2, 143-163.Trautwein, U., Marsh, H. W., Nagengast, B., Lüdtke, O., Nagy, G., & Jonkmann, K. (2012). Probing for themultiplicative term in modern expectancy–value theory: A latent interaction modeling study. Journal ofEducational Psychology, 104(3), 763.Wolters, C. A., Pintrich, P. R., & Karabenick, S. A. (2005). Assessing academic self-regulated learning. In WhatDo Children Need to Flourish? Springer US, 251-270.ICLS 2018 Proceedings479© ISLS