Making Energy Easy: Interacting with the Forces UnderlyingChemical Bonding Using the ELI-Chem SimulationAsnat R. Zohar and Sharona T. Levyasnat3@gmail.com, stlevy@edu.haifa.ac.ilUniversity of HaifaIntroductionThis study seeks to develop and explore high-school chemistry students' conceptual understanding regardingforces and energy involved in chemical bonding. Having no access to the molecular world and lacking the forcebased explanation of chemical bonding, students rely on incorrect interpretations and intuitive heuristics, such asthe 'octet-rule', i.e. eight electrons in the outer energy level (Taber, 2002). Most of them view chemical bondsincorrectly as attached solid spheres for which energy is needed to bring them together, or as coiled springs thatrelease energy when relaxed (Boo, 1998).We designed and developed an Embodied Learning Interactive environment - ELI-Chem, to alleviatethese difficulties: (1) ELI-Chem removes the abstraction by providing bodily experience with the molecular levelas proposed by embodied learning theory (Barsalou, 1999); and (2) ELI-Chem is based on a mathematicalsimulation of attraction-repulsion forces between atoms, supporting a force-based teaching approach (NahumLevy et al., 2007; Taber, 2002).The working hypothesis is that more intense (in terms of force and distance moved) physical experiencewith the underlying electrical forces provides a stronger foundation for understanding energy changes duringchemical bonding, and related concepts such as chemical stability or bond strength.The learning environmentThe base of the learning environment is a chemical bonding computer simulation displaying the attractive andrepulsive forces between two atoms and the resulted potential-energy diagram. Using a mouse, students interactas an atom with another atom, exploring changes of forces and energy.The users’ interactions as an atom within the system were varied in the required motions, in terms of thedistance along which the hand moves and the force necessary to move the atom. By connecting a joy-stick and ahaptic device to the simulation, the ELI-Chem system offers sensory-motor experiences of the attractive andrepulsive forces at four increasing degrees of embodiment (Figure 1): (1) observing videos that involve no action;(2) using a mouse to move an atom in the simulation; (3) using a joy-stick that moves a greater distance than themouse, but similar force; and (4) using a haptic device with which motion takes place at a greater distance andgreater force than the other devices.(a)(b)(c)(d)Figure 1. ELI-Chem degrees of embodiment. (a) No motion (video), (b) mouse interaction, (c) Joy-stickinteraction and (d) Haptic device.MethodsA DBR-mixed methods approach was used. Participants were high-school students majoring in chemistry. Study1 focused on forces (N=23). Study 2 focused on energy (N=6). The Main Study included four conditions: video,mouse, joy-stick and haptic device with identical activities (N= 48). Multiple-choice questionnaires, interviewprotocols, worksheets and screen-capture of their activities were used to generate the corpus of data. All studieshad a pretest-intervention-posttest design, with the Main Study including four parallel groups.FindingsWe present the results of study 1 and study 2 that we conducted with students using a mouse (the base of thelearning environment), followed by the results of the Main Study - the four degrees of embodiment.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1355© ISLSSimulation-based reasoning with mouse interactionStudy 1: Forces involved in chemical bonding. Students were asked to describe chemical bond, why it is formedand what a stable bond means. Findings show that before the intervention, students did not consider repulsionforces when reasoning about the chemical bond, leading to an incorrect mental model of static "touching" balls.Learning with the ELI-Chem simulation helped students shift to consider the role of repulsion forces and perceivethe chemical bond as a dynamic balance between attractive and repulsive forces.Study 2: Energy involved in chemical bonding. Students were asked to describe the energy changesduring bonding. Findings show that before the intervention students did not refer to forces when asked aboutenergy; their responses were confused and inconsistent. In the post-interviews however, they described the correctenergy changes using the force-base explanation.Simulation-based reasoning with increasing degrees of embodimentIn both pre- and post-questionnaires students were asked about forces and energy involved in chemical bonding;questions were based on interviews and questionnaires of study 1 and study 2. Findings show that there was anincrease in students' conceptual understanding in all four groups. Three groups - video, mouse and joystick - wereindistinguishable in their learning effects. Using the haptic device showed nearly double learning gain.Mean score (%)100.080.0Videos60.0MouseJoy-stick40.020.0HapticPre-testPost-testFigure 2. Change in students' understanding of conceptual knowledge.ConclusionsLearning with the ELI-Chem environment provided students the vocabulary, concepts, principles and analogicalsensorimotor schemes that are required to shift from an octet-based explanation to a force-based explanation.From inconsistency and rote articulations students moved to coherent explanation-based reasoning. Theyexplained chemical stability as a dynamic balance between attraction and repulsion forces, they describedcorrectly that bond formation is due to attraction forces and is associated with release of energy, and that bondbreaking requires energy in order to overcome the balance between attraction and repulsion forces. Adding hapticinformation to create a multimodal experience of chemical bonding resulted with increased learning gain,indicating on the use of sensorimotor schemes in the building of a more accurate mental models andrepresentations. Having the words, sensorimotor schemes, and powerful tools for explanatory force-basedreasoning, students constructed a more scientific understanding of the forces and energy that are involved inchemical bonding.ReferencesBarsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptions of perceptual symbols. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22(04), 637–660.Boo, H. K. (1998). Students’ understandings of chemical bonds and the energetics of chemical reactions. Journalof Research in Science Teaching, 35(5), 569-581.Nahum-Levy, T., Mamlok-Naaman, R., Hofstein, A., & Krajcik, J. (2007). Developing a new teaching approachfor the chemical bonding concept aligned with current scientific and pedagogical knowledge. ScienceEducation, 91(4), 579-603.Taber, K., & Coll, R. K. (2002). Bonding. In J. K. Gilbert, O. De Jong, R. Justi, D. F. Treagust, & J. H. Van Driel(eds.). Chemical Education: Towards Research-based Practice (pp. 213-234). Kluwer AcademicPublishers.AcknowledgementsThis research was supported by the Ministry of Science, Technology and Space, Israel.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1356© ISLS