GenEvo - An Emergent Systems Microworld For Model-BasedScientific Inquiry in the Context of Genetics and EvolutionSugat Dabholkar, Gabriella Anton, and Uri Wilenskysugat@u.northwestern.edu, gabby.anton@gmail.com, uri@northwestern.eduNorthwestern UniversityAbstract: In this poster, we discuss GenEvo, a learning environment that we have designed toengage students in scientific inquiry practices in the context of genetics and evolution. GenEvobelongs to a class of constructionist learning environments that we call Emergent SystemsMicroworlds (ESM) which combine two design approaches: agent-based modeling of emergentsystems and constructionism. An increased emphasis on learning scientific inquiry practicesthrough the use of models has created demand for model-based curricula that incorporateauthentic disciplinary inquiry practices. We argue that the design of GenEvo allows students toengage with disciplinary ideas central to modern biology, as well as complex systems thinkingthat is crucial in contemporary biological research. We also demonstrate that GenEvo makesadvanced disciplinary ideas accessible to students in two very different global research settings.IntroductionThere is a huge disparity between high school biology instruction and the research practices of modern biologists(Wilensky & Reisman, 2006). Our work seeks to address this gap by combining two powerful design approachesin learning sciences, namely, agent-based modeling of emergent systems and constructionism (Wilensky & Rand,2015; Kafai, 2006). We call our design approach Emergent Systems Microworlds (ESM).We use this approachto make cutting-edge ideas in modern biology such as molecular genetics and genetic regulation ideas accessibleto middle and high school students in different global settings (India and the United States), by engaging them inthe research practices of computational modeling and complex systems thinking.Emergent Systems MicroworldsIn this paper, we are coining the term Emergent Systems Microworlds (ESM) to describe the learningenvironments that are designed by combining two design approaches, agent-based modeling of emergent systemsand constructionism. In agent-based modeling environments, an agent is a computational object with particularproperties and actions. An ‘emergent’ phenomenon, is modelled in terms of agents and their interactions(Wilensky & Rand, 2015). Prior research has demonstrated agent-based modeling to be a powerful approach forexplaining and understanding emergent phenomena across a wide range of domains, including the natural sciences(e.g., Blikstein & Wilensky, 2004; Levy & Wilensky, 2006). In order for students to explore and learn aboutemergent phenomena, we use computational models that are designed in the form of a microworld. Microworldsare encapsulated open-ended computational exploratory environments in which a set of concepts can be explored,through interactions that lead to knowledge construction (Papert, 1980). In the use of a microworld, a learner isexpected to manipulate the objects and execute specific operations instantiated in the microworld, in order toinduce or discover their properties and the functioning of the system as a whole (Edwards, 1995). ESMs are aspecifically designed to support students in creating, exploring, and sharing virtual models of dynamic systemsthat exhibit emergent phenomena. ESM-based curricula engage students in personally meaningful modelconstruction and debugging processes. In addition, these curricula are also designed for students to share theirconstructions with their classmates and benefit from interacting with each other.The GenEvo curriculum as an ESM-based curriculumOur ESM-based curriculum GenEvo uses NetLogo to model emergent phenomena (Wilensky, 1999), an agentbased modeling platform which is intentionally designed to foreground emergent systems modeling foreducational and research purposes (see Wilensky & Reisman, 2006). This curriculum focuses on making explicitconnections between three organizational levels in biology, namely the cellular, the organismic, and thepopulation level. Interactions between agents, like DNA and proteins at the molecular (micro) level result in anemergent phenotype at the cellular or organismic (macro) level. Competition between organisms (micro) resultsin the emergence of fitter traits at the population (macro) level. We have designed computational models in theform of microworlds that allow students to explore emergent systems across these three levels. Studentsinvestigate these models through a series of scaffolded, playful explorations. When students set initial conditionsby changing the values of sliders and run the simulation, they observe agent level behaviors in the environment.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1617© ISLSThe computational interface also contains several plots where students can observe changes at the system levelsuch as changes in energy of the cell over time. As students design and conduct computational experiments in theESM learning environment, they collectively build the ideas about emergent properties in the ESM.Research design and resultsGiven the relative novelty of ESMs and their effectiveness in supporting learners, we became interested in howthese tools and curricular materials that use these tools work differently across global settings. In pursuit of thisgoal, we partnered with two institutions, one in the US and one in India. The data presented in this paper is froma Computational Modeling in Biology course taught atboth institutions. Participating students in these programsranged from 11 to 14 years of age and were intellectuallyadvanced based on their academic performance. In theUnited States cohort, there were 14 students (6 female, 8male) of mixed racial and ethnic backgrounds (6 Whitenon-Hispanics, 4 Asians, 1 White Hispanic, 1 AmericanIndian or Alaskan Native, 2 identifying as Other). In thesummer residential program in India, 15 studentsparticipated (8 female, 7 male), all of Asian Indian origin.We used mixed-methods analysis to investigate whetherstudents learned disciplinary core ideas through theirparticipation in ESM-based curricula and how studentsengaged in scientific inquiry practices. In this poster wepresent the qualitative analysis of learning gains.Figure 1. Pre- and post- tests comparisonWe performed quantitative analysis to investigate learning ofshowing that both the courses showeddisciplinary core ideas (DCIs) in Genetics and Evolution. Allsignificant learning gains.the students who consented to participate in the research studytook both a pre- and a post-test. These tests were a series of randomly assigned multiple choice questions thattested students’ understanding of the DCIs. We find significant learning gains (p < 0.005) comparing pre-postscores in both the US (n = 14) as well as in India (n = 15) (See Figure 1). These gains establish the effectivenessof the ESM-based GenEvo curriculum in teaching advanced biological core ideas in both the settings.In this paper, we have discussed the design and effectiveness of GenEvo as an ESM-based constructionistcurriculum. We are in process of conducting qualitative analysis to characterize student learning and participationto develop insights into how an ESM-based curriculum supports learning of scientific and complex systemsthinking.ReferencesBlikstein, P., & Wilensky, U. (2010). MaterialSim: A constructionist agent-based modeling approach toengineering education. In Designs for learning environments of the future (pp. 17-60). Springer US.Dabholkar,S.&Wilensky,U.(2016).GenEvoSystemsBiologycurriculum.http://ccl.northwestern.edu/curriculum/genevo/. Center for Connected Learning and Computer-BasedModeling, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.Edwards, L. D. (1995). Microworlds as representations. Computers and exploratory learning, 127-154.Kafai, Y. B. (2006). Constructionism. The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. Cambridge UniversityPress, New York.Levy, S. T., & Wilensky, U. (2006, April). Emerging knowledge through an emergent perspective: High-schoolstudents’ inquiry, exploration and learning in Connected Chemistry. In annual meeting of the AmericanEducational Research Association, San Francisco, CA (Vol. 11).Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. Basic Books, Inc.Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo [computer software]. Evanston, IL: Center for Connected Learning and ComputerBased Modeling, Northwestern University. http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo.Wilensky, U., & Reisman, K. (2006). Thinking like a wolf, a sheep, or a firefly: Learning biology throughconstructing and testing computational theories—an embodied modeling approach. Cognition andinstruction, 24(2), 171-209.Wilensky, U., & Rand, W. (2015). An introduction to agent-based modeling: modeling natural, social, andengineered complex systems with NetLogo. MIT Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1618© ISLS