Defining Alternative as More Than At-Risk: Youth DefinedOutcomes and Emerging Identities in Alternative SchoolsGavin Tierney, University of Washington Bothell, gtierney@u.washington.eduAbstract: In tackling the challenge of re-engaging youth in school, youth are often ascribeddeficit labels, such as “at-risk”. This poster explores ways to redefine youth on the margins ofeducation by looking at why youth enrolled in the alternative high schools and definitions ofsuccess in those schools. Findings include that youth sought and found opportunities toexplore their identities and have an authentic impact on others.Major issues addressedIn tackling major challenges, such as dropout rates or student disengagement and disaffiliation in school(Rumberger, 2011), students are often ascribed deficit narratives, labeling them as “at-risk”, “unmotivated”, or“lacking skills” (Lee, 2009; te Riele, 2007). Doing so positions youth in relation to conventional schooling anddefinitions of success in those institutions (Eckert, 1989). Historically, alternative schools have been developedas an intervention or option for youth who are designated “at-risk” of dropping out (Tierney, in press). Whilemany alternative schools cater to youth designated “at-risk”, this is not always the case and never a simple story.Because of the complicated history many youths have with schooling and the labels that have been assigned tothem, the work of alternative schools is equal parts academics and identity development (Tierney, in press). Assuch, it is important to understand a) the reasons that youth are leaving conventional schools and enrolling inalternative schools and b) how success is defined and supported in alternative schools.Potential significanceIn thinking about the ways that public scholarship can help educate diverse democracies, it is important to a)learn from the stories of those on the margins of education, both the youth and the schools, b) to critique the,often unintended, negative labels and narratives that are given to youth who do not fit into the normativedefinitions of success, and c) to create new narratives of success within public education. While this submissiondoes not focus on technology or the digital age, it looks specifically at how the learning sciences can continue torethink learning and definitions of education. This paper focused squarely on expanding definitions of learningand education to include youth and contexts on the margins of public education.Theoretical and methodological approachesIn this study, identity development is viewed as a dynamic process that is social in nature, developing in andacross contexts and communities (Dreier, 2009; Nasir, 2012; Wenger, 1998). Additionally, I consider howeducational structures help produce youth identities, defining and framing success and failure for students, andpromoting certain practices and identities and marginalizing others (McDermott, Goldman, and Varenne, 2006).These studies show how the definitions of success and identity development are embedded in the contexts,structures, and communities of the schools in which they exist.Data for this analysis was taken from a larger ethnographic longitudinal study of youth attending twoalternative high schools over the course of one academic year. All incoming transfer (10th-12th grade) studentswere invited to participate in the study. All consented youth participated in surveys and initial interviews(N=31). Case study youth were selected by observing their participation during orientation, their responses on asurvey, and their initial interview. Cases were chosen because they were representative of the youth in the studyin terms of survey responses and class participation. Case study youth were observed and interviewed inmultiple classes, school activities, and out-of-school contexts. Additional relevant participants (e.g., teachers,mentors, other students) were also interviewed in each context. To explore youth processes of identitydevelopment and resources for identity development in the alternative schools, analysis consisted of qualitativecoding of 50 hours of interviews and 70 hours of observational notes.Major findingsResults from this study indicate that students choose to attend alternative schools for multiple, complex, andinterwoven and often included aspects unseen by adults in their former schools. One youth, DJ (all names arepseudonyms), discussed that, while he was a good student in school, after school hours he was getting introuble, drinking, and smoking marijuana on a daily basis. He chose to enroll in the alternative school toICLS 2018 Proceedings1613© ISLSdistance himself from his friends at his former school. Another youth, Penelope, described how she felt bothinvisible and anxious at her former school – that the anxiety and social pressures of the school made herphysically sick. However, she still earned high grades and did not arouse the concerns of adults at the school. Inaddition, contrary to narratives of at-risk youth, most of the youth in the study connected to one or moreteachers in their former school. Further, a number of the youth had adult mentors outside of school. However,despite these adult connections, youth in the study felt constrained and unsuccessful in the structure of theirformer schools. For example, Penelope discussed her former school, saying: “It was very hard to feel individualwhen you're just mushed into this area with thousands of other students” (Penelope Interview, 10/8/14). In herinterviews, Penelope made a connection between the lack of choices and her perceived lack of individuality. Inthis way, the school confined the space in which Penelope could explore her identity. These narratives seem toindicate that re-engagement in school may require more than adults who care, but that youth also needopportunities for agency, individuality, and to explore their identities.In contrast to their former schools, where nearly every youth in the study defined by high grades,success within the alternative school included academic achievement, but focused primarily on personaldevelopment, personal expression, and community membership and participation. These definitions of successwere framed by the teachers at the school and reified by students. At one of the alternative programs, youthreflected on their leadership style and identity as a leader as they mentored sixth graders. At the other school,most school projects were creative acts, where older students modeled that practice and possibilities for newerstudents. These definitions of success were bi-directional – not just given to student, such as earning grades – inthe alternative schools, youth success impacted the youth, but also impacted the schools. DJ described his goalsa leader, “What I really want from my kids is I want to inspire them so that they become leaders of themselvesand their schools or whatever they want to do… I'm not here for myself.” (DJ Interview, 2/2/15). Interwovenwith the definitions of success, both alternative schools provided youth agency in the valued practices of theschool. This extends the concept of putting oneself into practice (Nasir, 2012), since youth not only had theagency for self-expression, but they felt their personalized actions had actual impact and significance.At both school sites, youth left their former schools to have new and greater opportunities to exploreand redefine their identities. Connected with these motivations were desires to attend a school where theirindividual presence mattered. By broadening definitions of success and providing youth with agency of choiceand impact, the alternative schools support youth to positively develop their academic identities. This workcontributes to literature on dropout prevention (Rumberger, 2011), by examining the ways in which normativedefinitions of success may constrain opportunities for identity development, contributing to disengagement inschool. In addition, this study adds to literature on identity development, by examining the interplay of schoolcommunities (Wenger, 1998), definitions of success (McDermott et al., 2006), and authentic youth roles (Nasir,2012) linked to those definitions of success. Finally, this work contributes to the design of alternative schoollearning environments by a) identifying practices that support youth re-engagement, identity development, andacademic success and b) disrupting the stereotypical narratives of youth in alternative schools (te Riele, 2007).ReferencesDreier, O. (2009). Persons in structures of social practice. Theory & Psychology, 19(2), 193- 212.Eckert, P. (1989). Jocks and burnouts: Social categories and identity in the high school. New York: TeachersCollege Press.Lee, Carol D. (2009). Historical Evolution of Risk and Equity: Interdisciplinary Issues and Critiques. Review ofResearch in Education, 33(1), 63-100.McDermott, R., Goldman, S., & Varenne, H. (2006). The cultural work of learning disabilities. EducationalResearcher, 35(6), 12-17.Nasir, N. S. (2012). Racialized identities: Race and achievement among African American youth. Stanford,California: Stanford University Press.Rumberger, R. W. (2011). Dropping out: Why students drop out of high school and what can be done about it.Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.te Riele, K. (2007). Educational alternatives for marginalised youth. The Australian Educational Researcher,34(3), 53-68.Tierney, G. (in press). Alternative Schools in the United States: How History, Policy, and Definitions of SuccessDefine Alternative Schools and the Youth Who Attend Them. In McCluskey, G. & Mills, M. (Eds.)International perspectives on alternative education: Policy and practice. To be published by Instituteof Education (IOE) Press, London.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge, U.K.; New York,N.Y.: Cambridge University Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1614© ISLS