Evaluating Innovative Collaborative Learning Practice:An ‘Innovative’ Delphi ApproachMutlu Cukurova and Rose LuckinUCL Knowledge Lab, University College Londonm.cukurova@ucl.ac.uk, r.luckin@ucl.ac.ukTeachers need to know what aspects of any proposed innovative practice are supported byevidence and are likely to be effective. However, when there is insufficient time or money toconduct a detailed trial of each proposed innovation, are there other less resource intensivemethods that can be used? Here, we present a study conducted with thirty-six learningsciences experts and practitioners who were asked to judge the potential effectiveness ofeighty collaborative learning activities using an adaptive comparative judgment (ACJ)approach. The results of the ACJ process show that the most innovative and effectivecollaborative learning activities are those that are monitored but not formally assessed. Inaddition, the use of technology and explicit support of students’ social and problem-solvingskills are identified as important features of innovative collaborative learning activities thatare likely to be effective. The contribution of this paper is twofold. First, it presents features ofinnovative collaborative learning practice that are considered to be important for effectivenessby experts. Second, it provides an ‘innovative’ research approach to assess educationalpractice when teaching is considered as a design science rather than a theoretical science.IntroductionCollaborative learning is a teaching approach in which small groups of students work actively to achieve theircommon goals. It provides students with opportunities to augment each other’s learning experience throughmeaningful interactions. The meta-analyses and best evidence syntheses demonstrate that, when implementedappropriately, collaborative learning approaches do produce positive effects on pupil learning, motivation andattitudes. Meta-analyses show that classroom-based studies of collaborative learning consistently showadvantages for collaborative group-based learning in classrooms, especially in comparison to ‘control’ classeswhere the pupils study the same curriculum topics but under ‘traditional, teacher-directed’ or individual learningpractices (See for instance Johnson & Johnson, 2002; Kyndt et al., 2013). Indeed, the Education EndowmentFoundation in the UK equates the impact of collaborative learning approaches on attainment to an additionalfive months of schooling (EEF, 2017).In addition to evidence about the positive impact of collaborative learning on achievement and attitude,there is also evidence that collaborative learning approaches lead to higher motivation than other traditionalapproaches to instruction (Johnson, Johnson, Roseth, & Seob Shin, 2014), and to encourage students to beactive participants in their own learning (Webb, Troper, & Fall, 1995). However, although this evidence ofeffectiveness exists, there appears to be highly variable practice in the nature and quality of the implementationof collaborative learning (Abrami, Poulsen, & Chambers, 2004). Very few teachers have appropriate training toimplement collaborative learning activities and most teachers have virtually no time to design effectivecollaborative learning activities and support the learners as they would like. This was true, even among thetrained teachers studied by Antil, Jenkins, Wayne, and Vadasy (1998), estimates of the long-term effective useof collaborative learning vary broadly from 10% to 93%. Collaborative learning is an effective way of learningwhen it is implemented well. However, much of what happens as group learning is not effective as collaborativelearning. As observed by researchers in the UK, (Galton et al., 1999), in the majority of classrooms, students sitin groups, but very rarely work as groups to complete collaborative learning activities. This besg the question asto why practitioners do not implement collaborative learning activities in their classrooms, even though there isgood evidence about their effectiveness.Implementation of an educational innovation is very often challenging and meets with limited success.It is therefore not very surprising that practitioners do not often implement this approach. Nonetheless, it isimportant to boost the application of innovative practices, such as this, that have been shown to be effective inEducation. The extent to which practitioners implement an educational innovation is a complex topic withfactors from multiple levels influencing the teachers’ decisions. Prior studies have investigated some of theseaspects. For example, Briscoe (1991) identified the association between the innovation and the teachers’philosophy of education as an important factor; Ohlhausen, Meyerson, and Sexton (1992) identified theimportance of teachers’ self-efficacy in the adoption of educational innovations, whereas Fullan (1997)ICLS 2018 Proceedings681© ISLSdiscussed the significance of the school culture and the influence of principals. In addition, to these practicalconstraints including the availability of materials, time and space requirements are identified as significantfactors (Sleeter, 1992). With the purpose of studying these factors in their study Abrami et al. (2004) devised aquestionnaire with the aspects of value (how highly a teacher values an innovation), effectiveness (howsuccessful a teacher expects an innovation to be), and the cost (how high a teacher perceives the costs of aninnovation implementation to be). This research identified that the expectancy of success was the mostimportant factor in differentiating teachers who implement the educational innovation and those who do not. Inorder to increase the likelihood of widespread implementation of an educational innovation, including thoseinvolving collaborative learning, what features of existing practice meets the teachers’ and experts’ expectationsof success should be addressed. Therefore, in this study, the main research question we are investigating is:what are the common features of innovative collaborative learning practice that is likely to be effective forlearning from experts and practitioners’ perspectives?A working definition of educational innovationIn this paper, we refer to the collaborative learning activities that we investigated as educational innovations.Innovation is defined as “a new method or idea or product” in dictionaries as a term. However, innovation as afundamental cognitive schema underpinning various ideas that relate to this newness is notoriously hard todefine. In their review of the literature Edison, Bin Ali, and Torkar (2013) found 41 different definitions ofinnovation as a concept. The authors identify certain key aspects of innovation including those relate to theimpact of innovation, types of innovation, degree of novelty, innovation activities and the nature of the processof innovation. The key message given regarding innovation is that innovation is not only about the generation ofnew ideas but, as importantly, about the effective implementation of new ideas. Innovation does not necessarilyrefer to the change of the things that we do and in the ways we do them, yet it explicitly refers to improving thethings that we do and the ways we do them. Hence, for a practice to be innovative it is not enough for it to benew and exciting, in addition it has to be promising for successful implementation. While a novel device isoften described as an innovation, in economics, management science, and other fields of practice and analysis,innovation is generally considered to be the result of a process that brings together various novel ideas in a waythat they affect society (Luckin et al., 2012). In this paper, all collaborative learning practice examples we haveinvestigated were considered as promising to be successful in terms of its implementation in actual classrooms.Therefore, they are defined as educational innovations.Literature review on the common features of effective collaborative learningIt is extremely difficult to isolate the precise nature of the key factors that in general impact on the effectivenessof collaborative learning. Of course, it is possible to identify factors within particular individual studies forwhich there is evidence of their impact on the collaborative learning process and output, but once one looksbeyond individual studies, the situation is far more complicated. However, it is still important to briefly mentionthe emerging features from discussions regarding the evidence of effective collaborative learning. Looking atthe existing literature on collaborative learning, we find that researchers have examined a wide range ofcharacteristics that may make collaboration more likely to take place (Blatchford, Kutnick, Baines, & Galton,2003). These include elements that concern the:•Environment in which collaborative learning takes place;•Composition, stability and size of the group;•Knowledge, attributes, skills and attitudes of group members;•Social, communicative and group based skills of members;•Nature and structure of the task and how it relates to what has come before;•Educational systems and framework in force;•Role of adults in strategically planning for and setting up collaborative activities and how theyengage with and facilitate groups aiming to collaborate.ICLS 2018 Proceedings682© ISLSFigure 1. Key Elements of Collaborative Learning.Early research by Deutsch (1949) highlights positive interdependence and promotive interaction ascentral aspects for successful collaborative learning. Over the years, additional elements have been suggested toform a set of 5 features considered as essential for successful collaborative learning (Luckin et al., 2017). All ofthese features are studied in the literature and have been shown to have impact on the effectiveness of thecollaborative learning activities. Similarly, most of these features are also studied at meta-review levels.1. Group members must be positively interdependent. This means that the task cannot be successfullycompleted by one person alone, but all group members must recognise that they all need to synchronisetheir efforts;2. Group members must engage in promotive interaction and show a willingness to support each other intheir joint efforts to complete the task and achieve the goal;3. Group members must be individually accountable – they must make sure that they undertake theirshare of the work and feel personally responsible for the group’s success in completing the task.4. Interpersonal and group skills need to be developed. We cannot assume that people, children inparticular, naturally have the skills to participate in collaborative learning and promotive interaction –thus these skills need to be developed such that they are of a high quality.5. Groups participate in group processing. This involves members reflecting on the quality of theirworking relationship and seeking to improve this through personal and joint effort.Effective collaborative learning when considering teaching as a designscienceIn the theoretical sciences, evidence regarding the effectiveness of interventions, including educationalinnovations, often comes from meta-analyses of research. However, these meta-analyses present what is a rathersimplistic view that we can isolate particular variables and thus, potentially discover the ‘key’ factors that workor serve to enhance achievement. However, more recent views about teaching stresses on the value ofconsidering teaching practices as part of a design science similar to engineering, computer science, orarchitecture rather than considering it a theoretical science such as natural sciences (Laurillard, 2013).Considering teaching practices such as collaborative learning activities as a design science highlights theimportance of a multidimensional and complex view of teaching, and in our case the practice of orchestratingstudents’ learning together (Blatchford et al., 2003). Most factors that have an impact on the effectiveness of aneducational innovation are interconnected and need to be considered in a strategic manner by teachers toidentify the most relevant combination for the particular persons and circumstances at that time.Similarly, the success of working together also depends on how teachers and other adults strategicallyorganize these activities, how they set up the tasks, and how they engage with and support groups engaged incollaborative learning. If a teacher adopts an approach that is directive or that undermines the value of the groupwork, then the group is less likely to function in the desired way. This emphasizes on the value of consideringteaching as a design science rather than a theoretical science. As argued by Laurillard (2013, p.1) “Teaching isnot a theoretical science that describes and explains some aspect of the natural or social world. (It’s)…imperative is to make the world a better place: a design science.” Clearly as other design sciences, teachingleverages and contributes to theoretical science. However, when research has particular focus on supportingpractitioners, considering teaching practice as a design science might generate more meaningful results. One ofthe main reasons behind this improvement in value for practitioners is that in design sciences processevaluations are often strongly emphasized. This does not mean that the outcome assessment is not appreciated,however, the more holistic evaluation of the design process regardless of the outcome produced is equallyappreciated. Similar to the arguments relate to assessment of and for learning (Stiggins, 2005), the approach ofprocess evaluation is often argued to be more meritorious in design sciences (Simon, 1969). This is mainly dueto the arguments that the value of design activities is in autonomy, the context, the synthesis of relevantICLS 2018 Proceedings683© ISLSmultidisciplinary knowledge with social and cognitive skills (Seery, Canty, & Phelan, 2012). However,measuring such a complex and iterative process is very challenging with rigid assessments and abstract criteria.Rather, it requires a flexible model of assessment that relies on holistic judgement and professional experience.In the context of judging students’ design work, Kimbell (2012) outlines a new approach based on theLaw of Comparative Judgement (Pollitt, 2012). The approach uses an adaptive comparative judgement (ACJ)model of assessment where comparisons of students design work with overarching criteria and professionaljudgement of assessors. In this paper, we use ACJ to assess collaborative learning practice examples with thepurpose of identifying the most common features of those teaching practices that are considered effectivecollaborative learning innovations by experienced academics and practitioners. These ‘judges’ are considered tohave an understanding of what is better or worse in terms of the required capability to implement an effectivecollaborative learning practice based on their expert knowledge and experience.Preparation of the collaborative learning practice examples for ACJIn order to help us describe and classify different types and examples of collaborative learning in a systematiclevel, we used a taxonomy approach to the concept (Cukurova, Luckin, Baines, 2017). This taxonomy wascreated for collaborative problem-solving and is informed by research and practice reviews of collaborativelearning. The taxonomy has six non-hierarchical, inter-connected domains Technology, Characteristics of thecollaborative problem-solving, Abilities of the participants, Group Features, Problem Features, The contextualfactors. Further information about the taxonomy and its each taxonomic unit can be found in Cukurova, Luckin,& Baines, (2017). Here, we used the taxonomy to describe our 80 practice examples of collaborative learning.The taxonomy was broad enough to accommodate all the examples we have identified. Each practice examplewas described by a brief narrative and an ID card that summarised the example with reference to the taxonomy(illustrated in table 1). Then, these examples were used as in the adaptive comparative judgement process(ACJ).Collaborative learning activity ID1:Students in pairs attempt to solve what a fictitious animal species would look like after evolution had occurredusing a computer simulation. Students are assigned random features of the alien planet that could putevolutionary pressure on the alien. Then, they are asked to draw what they think the animal would look like.Students work in mixed age groups, and are not provided specific instructions on how to collaborate, or how toproblem-solve.Table 1: Collaborative learning practice example and its taxonomic representation adaptive comparativejudgment of collaborative problem-solving practiceCharacteristics of CL••Group composition•••Problem characteristics••••••Contextual characteristics••Use of technologyOne-off activityDevelopment of participants’ skills are notexplicitly targetedPairs of mixed agedMixed gender groupsParticipants act synchronously in mediumacquaintance groupsSTEM domainMedium complexity, authenticity, andoutcome of the problemLow social interdependence of participantsTertiary educationSchool laboratoriesParticipants in the same physical space andtaking actions in a digital environmentParticipants are monitored individuallyComputer simulationTable 2 illustrates that most examples used in the study were one-off activities and only 1 of the examples couldbe identified as being part of a programme of collaborative learning (CL) activities. In almost half of theexamples the CL process itself was not evaluated, although it was monitored. There was more evidence of CLbeing evaluated with the group as the unit of analysis (37.5%) than with the individual learner as the unit ofanalysis (15%), and more evidence of skills in the social domain being the focus of development could beICLS 2018 Proceedings684© ISLSidentified (26.25%) than examples where the problem solving itself was the focus for development (13.75%).The teacher was identified as the leader of reflection in 31.25% of examples and the group was identified as theleader of reflection in only 10% of examples, illustrating the significant role that teachers play in CL practice.Table 2: Frequency of innovative CL practice examples’ taxonomic characteristicsCategory NameOne-off activityCL not evaluated but monitoredCL evaluated as a groupTeacher-led reflectionDevelopment of skills explicitly targeted in socialdomainTechnology is employed for CLDevelopment of skills explicitly targeted in both socialand problem-solving domainCross curricular CL activityGroup roles are allocatedCL evaluated individuallyDevelopment of skills explicitly targeted in problemsolving domainGroup-led reflectionSingle gender groupingProgramme of activities of CLGroup ethos addressed part of the CL activityPractice Example TotalNumber in thisCategory7939302521% of PracticeExample in thisCategory98.7548.7537.531.2526.25191623.7520161412112017.51513.758111101.251.251.25Adaptive Comparative Judgment of collaborative learning practice examplesThe narrative descriptions and ID cards for all 80 collaborative learning practice examples were used for theACJ process with members of our expert panel. The software used for the process was online and it presentedtwo practice examples simultaneously and asked experts to pick one of them. The aggregation of thesejudgements across collaborative learning activities produced an order of the activities from what was judged asthe most likely to be effective innovative practice example to the least likely. The precise instructions given tothe experts were:“Please read the examples and compare each of the two examples of collaborative learningactivity that are presented to you and decide which of them is the best exampleof innovative practice that is likely to be effective for learning.”Thirty-six experts completed the online ACJ task. The first five rounds of the comparisons were non-adaptive“Swiss Tournament” rounds to create a rough sort. After the fifth round, the algorithm of the online softwarebecomes adaptive and starts presenting those examples, which are closely ranked at the previous round in orderto increase the reliability coefficient.Figure 2. Parameter value error plot.ICLS 2018 Proceedings685© ISLSResults of the ACJThe ACJ process was completed by 36 members of our expert panel (11 experienced teachers and 25experienced academics from the learning sciences). The top 3 examples along with associated expert commentsare illustrated in Table 3 and one can see that all three explicitly targeted the development of social skills. Twoof the top three examples were from secondary schools and the other one was from a primary school. All threetook place in classrooms and involved mixed gender groups of mixed ability.Using the parameter values of each practice example of CL in the ranking list emerged as the result ofACJ process, we created the table 3 below. It shows the relative importance size of the categories of practiceexamples based on parameter values of the practice examples. These values were calculated by adding theparameter values of the practice examples’ taxonomic unit features. As can be seen, the most important featuresof innovative and likely to be effective for learning CL practice examples for expert opinion were: monitoringof the CL practice rather than evaluation of it, technology used in the practice activity, whether the activitytargets to develop skills in both social and problem solving space and whether the activity provides opportunityfor reflection (see table 3).Table 3: The Importance of Particular Categories of Example for Experts' EvaluationCategories relative importance order1234567891011121314CL activity is monitored not evaluatedTechnology is used to facilitate CLDevelopment of skills targeted in both social and PS spaceTeacher-led reflectionGroup-led reflectionCL is evaluated individuallyGroup ethos are addressedDevelopment of skills targeted in social domainProgramme of activitiesSingle gender groupingDevelopment of skills targeted in problem-solving domainGroup roles are allocatedCL evaluated as a groupCross curricular activity used in CLRelative importancesize56.432.72825.523.719.373.52.71.4-0.6-2.7-2.8-19.9Table 3 was created using the sum of parameter values of each CL practice example. On the other hand, Table 4illustrates the importance of key categories in the ACJ process and it provides information about the languagethat most frequently graced expert feedback. The feedback from experts indicates the aspects of the CLexamples that experts focused upon in making their judgements. Although there is no particular mention of theevaluation aspect of in experts’ qualitative feedback, the other characteristics of CL practice and their relativeimportance rankings show great amount of overlap.Table 4: Experts' Most Frequent FeedbackThe most frequently mentioned aspects in feedbackTechnologyContribution to students’ discussionContribution to students’ reflectionAuthenticity of Problem or TaskInterdependence of ParticipantsAppropriate feedback provided for studentsContribution to CL skill developmentNumber of mentions16161514121111The last three activities in rankings of the CL practice were all STEM activities in secondary or tertiaryeducation. In contrast to the positive feedback from experts, the reasons experts gave for deciding these practiceexamples as neither being innovative nor effective were often about the lack of interdependence of students,lack of support provided to students for their development of social and problem solving skills, and the type ofthe problem tasks provided to students not being appropriate for providing opportunities for interactions amongstudents and discussions.ICLS 2018 Proceedings686© ISLSDiscussion and conclusionsThe expectancy of success is an important factor in differentiating between those practitioners who doimplement an educational innovation and those who do not (Abrami et al., 2004). Therefore, all educationalinnovations must justify their existence with some type of evidence of their effectiveness. As presented in theintroduction and literature review sections, there is substantial evidence on the positive impact of collaborativelearning on achievement and attitude, and that it can be more motivating than more traditional approaches toinstruction. However, there is also evidence that collaborative learning is often poorly implemented. This maybe because neither collaborative learning is something that students are naturally familiar with and good atcompleting, nor teachers are appropriately equipped to implement it. Research literature provides practitionerswith some elements that are found to be present when effective collaborative learning happens, yet inevitablysuch reviews of meta-analyses present a rather simplistic view which encourages practitioners to think thatparticular variables can always be isolated and implemented. This approach to effectiveness is highlyappropriate for theoretical sciences, yet their value for design sciences, in which implementations are consideredas dynamic and flexible rather than as ready-made solutions, may not be equally pertinent.There is no question that collaborative learning is anything other than complex, with multiple factorsinteracting and impacting upon the manner in which the collaborative process takes place. Therefore, adoptionand implementation of collaborative learning approaches in teaching practice may be better supported ifteaching is regarded as a design science (Laurillard, 2013) through which teachers paid attention to the design ofthe collaborative learning process in a systematic manner. This is not to say that evidence generated regardingthe effectiveness of educational innovations from different methodologies is not valuable. However, thesuitability of the proposed evaluation methods and the types of evidence should be the focus of attention oninnovation evaluations (Cukurova, & Luckin, 2018). If judged by the criterion of usefulness to the practitioners,considering teaching as a design science may have greater advantages.In this paper, we discuss a research-informed taxonomy of collaborative learning (Cukurova, Luckin,Baines, 2017). This taxonomy was used to categorise eighty proposed innovations in collaborative learning.These eighty innovations were then judged by a panel of thirty-six learning sciences experts drawn fromacademia and educational practice. A software, which is designed to adjust presented examples based on judges’responses, was used to present each judge with a selection of innovations each of which had to be judgedagainst another. The experts were asked to select from each pair, the innovation that they thought most likely tobe effective. Most examples judged were one-off activities and only one of the examples could be identified asbeing part of a programme of collaborative learning activities. In almost half of the cases, the collaborativelearning process was not evaluated, and when a potential innovation has been evaluated there is a tendency forthis to have been conducted at the group level, rather than interns of each individual learner. As we havecompleted our crowdsourcing of the practices broadly in the UK and included some from other Englishspeaking countries (USA, Australia, and Canada), we expect that this landscape reflects the general practice.The results of the ACJ process show that the most innovative and expected to be effective collaborativelearning activities are those that are monitored but not formally assessed. The use of technology was a featurethat was often present within innovations that are judged to be potentially effective. Moreover, the extent towhich an innovation included an activity that was targeted at developing both problem-solving and social skillsof students, was also considered as a significant feature for innovative collaborative learning activities that arelikely to be effective. An analysis of the feedback provided from members of our expert panel revealed aconsistency. Experts valued innovations that require students to discuss and reflect upon authentic problems andtasks, and to receive appropriate feedback about their progress.This paper presents the ACJ process combined with a taxonomy to categorize across a range ofpotential collaborative learning innovations, as an alternative way to evaluate the common features ofeducational innovations that are expected to be effective. Although, we address collaborative learninginnovations here, we hope that the approach exemplifies an alternative for evaluating educational innovationsmore broadly. We argue that the approach might be particularly appropriate when it is not practical to conductempirical evaluations of the innovations under consideration.ReferencesAbrami, P. C., Poulsen, C., & Chambers, B. (2004). Teacher motivation to implement an educationalinnovation: Factors differentiating users and non-users of cooperative learning. EducationalPsychology, 24(2), 201-216.Antil, L. R., Jenkins, J. R., Wayne, S. K., & Vadasy, P. F. (1998). Cooperative learning: Prevalence,conceptualizations, and the relation between research and practice. American Educational ResearchJournal, 35(3), 419-454.ICLS 2018 Proceedings687© ISLSBlatchford, P., Kutnick, P., Baines, E., & Galton, M. (2003). Toward a social pedagogy of classroom groupwork. International Journal of Educational Research, 39, 153-172.Briscoe, C. (1991). The dynamic interactions among beliefs, role metaphors, and teaching practices: A casestudy of teacher change. Science Education, 75(2), 185-199.Cukurova, M., Luckin, R., & Baines, E. (2017). The significance of context for the emergence andimplementation of research evidence: the case of collaborative problem-solving. Oxford Review ofEducation, 1-16.Cukurova, M., & Luckin, R. (2018). Measuring the impact of emerging technologies in education: A pragmaticapproach. In International handbook of information technology in primary and secondary education(2nd Edition). Springer, Boston, MA.Deutsch, M. (1949). An experimental study of the effects of cooperation and competition upon group process.Human relations, 2(3), 199-231.Edison, H., Bin Ali, N., & Torkar, R. (2013). Towards innovation measurement in the software industry.Journal of Systems and Software, 86(5), 1390-1407.EEF. (2017). Education Endownment Foundation: Teaching & Learning Toolkit: Collaborative learning.Fullan, M. (1997). What's Worth Fighting For in the Principalship? 2nd edn. Toronto: Ontario Public SchoolTeachers' Association: New York: Teachers College Press.Galton, M.J., Hargreaves, L., Comber, C., Wall, D. & Pell, A. (1999) Inside the primary classroom: 20 yearson. London: Routledge.Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (2002). Learning together and alone: Overview and metaanalysis. AsiaPacific Journal of Education, 22(95-105).Johnson, D. W., Johnson, R. T., Roseth, C. J., & Seob Shin, T. (2014). The relationship between motivation andachievement in interdependent situations. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 44(9), 622-633.Kimbell, R. (2012). Evolving project e-scape for national assessment. International Journal of Technology andDesign Education, 22(2), 135-155.Kyndt, E., Raes, E., Lismont, B., Timmers, F., Cascallar, E., & Dochy, F. (2013). A meta-analysis of the effectsof face-to-face cooperative learning: Do recent students verify or falsify earlier findings? EducationalResearch Review, 10, 133-149.Laurillard, D. (2013). Teaching as a design science: Building pedagogical patterns for learning and technology.Routledge.Luckin, R., Bligh, B., Manches, A., Ainsworth, S., Crook, C., & Noss, R. (2012). Decoding learning: The proof,promise and potential of digital education: Nesta.Luckin, R., Baines, E., Cukurova, M., Holmes, W. Mann, M. (2017). Solved!Making the case for collaborativeproblem solving. Nesta:UK.Ohlhausen, M. M., Meyerson, M. J., & Sexton, T. (1992). Viewing innovations through the efficacy-basedchange model: A whole language application. Journal of reading, 35(7), 536-541.Pollitt, A. (2012). The method of adaptive comparative judgement. Assessment in Education: principles, policy& practice, 19(3), 281-300.Seery, N., Canty, D., & Phelan, P. (2012). The validity and value of peer assessment using adaptive comparativejudgement in design driven practical education. International Journal of Technology and DesignEducation, 22(2), 205-226.Sleeter, C. E. (1992). Restructuring schools for multicultural education. Journal of Teacher Education, 43(2),141-148.Stiggins, R. J. (2005). Student-involved assessment for learning. Prentice Hall.Simon, H. A. (1969). The Sciences of the Artificial. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Webb, N., Troper, J. D., & Fall, R. (1995). Constructive activity and learning in collaborative small groups.Journal of Educational Psychology, 87(3), 406.AcknowledgementsThis work was partially funded by NESTA innovation foundation, UK. We would like to thank the expert panelof judges, TES Global, the SPRinG programme, and the following colleagues: Ed Baines, Manolis Mavrikis,Katerina Avramides, Peter Blatchford, and Wayne Holmes for their support and colleagueship.ICLS 2018 Proceedings688© ISLS