Dropping in to Game Design: Iterations of a Skatepark PhysicsGame for a Children’s Museum ExhibitBenjamin DeVane, University of Iowa, benjamin-devane@uiowa.eduJeremy Dietmeier, University of Iowa, Jeremy-dietmeier@uiowa.eduBen J. Miller, University of Iowa, ben-j-miller@uiowa.eduKristen Missall, University of Washington, kmissall@uw.eduSalloni Nanda, University of Washington, salloni@uw.eduAbstract: This poster paper describes how findings from playability tests of adult-child dyadschanged our design approach for a design-and-play skatepark physics game. Played on amultitouch interactive tabletop, the game, which will be sited in a skatepark-themed children’smuseum exhibit, invites users to design their own skateparks using physics concepts, and thentest out their designs. Less-structured ‘sandbox’ mechanics sometimes caused frustration, andinteraction design issues could interrupt adult-child collaboration.OverviewIn this poster we present our iterative approach to creating a design-and-play skatepark game for a physics exhibitat a children’s museum, and we focus in particular on how our design approach shifted after parent-child dyadstest the game. Played on a 128cm wide multitouch interactive tabletop, the game invites users to design their ownskateparks, explore physics concepts, and then test their designs by playing through them. We aim to create agame-based learning experience that helps: a) children develop interest in science-related design activities byseeing their relevance to the real-world practices; b) families engage in intergenerational learning andcollaborative problem-solving. The larger in-development museum exhibit intends to help visitors ages five toeight, along with accompanying adults, make connections between physics, skateboarding, and design activities.This paper presents an initial design approach embodied in a game prototype, summarizes findings fromplayability tests with adult-child dyads, and explains our subsequent shift in design approach.Initial design approach: Intergenerational tinkering in gameplayOur overarching design goals centered on crafting a virtual space that would: a) invite users to engage in openended ‘tinkering’ with a skatepark environment; and b) foster collaborative play between generations of adult andchild museum visitors. ‘Tinkering’ activities in museums are generally understood as creative exploration,modification and manipulation of materials or representations that are situated in an ill-defined problem space(Gutwill, Hido, & Sindorf, 2015). Exhibit-sited games that employ tabletop user interfaces can provide wellscaffolded tinkering experiences because they provide just-in-time feedback and visual cues for understanding aproblem space, and support collaborative sense-making (Horn et al. 2012).The first game prototype offered players the ability to design skateparks in a two-dimensional ‘sandbox’space. Using an interactive panel along one edge of the screen, players could select skatepark elements likekickers, quarter pipes, and rails from a left-screen menu interface. They could choose to drag however manypieces from this menu into the skatepark, decide how to position said pieces, or delete them. Users could start theskater character wherever they liked, and adjust the mass of the skater using a slider bar. In doing so players hadto make decisions about how skatepark elements were arranged at different heights and locations, and reasonabout how such arrangements might accomplish their endogenous design goals (see Figure 1). Our tentativeconjecture was that interface buttons that were harder for children to reach might elicit parent involvement.Figure 1. Design and play interfaces from the first game prototype.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1349© ISLSMethod: Playability testing and iterative agile developmentThis paper presents a design narrative from the projects’ in-progress playability testing. Other empirical researchon this project looks at the relationship between the design of the game and collaborative learning processes. Thegame development team has chosen to use the iterative framework of agile development for its processes, whichemphasizes incremental and iterative organizational solutions to respond to users’ engagement with early builds(Rajlich, 2006). As the exhibit is under-development, playability tests were conducted in a spare conference rom.Playability test & redesign: Interaction, structure, and looking for ‘learning’While five out of six dyads reported that they enjoyed playing the game, we focus here on observations andfeedback that resulted in changes in the game design. Three major areas for improvement were identified: a)players experienced frustration at trying to navigate interfaces, manage skatepark elements, and align skateparkelements; b) players were unsure how to initially position the skater-character and what goals they should have indesigning the skatepark; and c) parents were uncertain about how they should help their children learn aboutphysics. The interaction design of skatepark creation was a significant problem, as players spent most of theirtime trying to manage up to three dozen skatepark elements on the screen at once and making sure the fineboundaries of skatepark objects aligned so that the character did not collide with protruding edges. Children werefrustrated at their inability to reach distant interface elements, and parents had to interrupt productive interactionswith their child to help with reaching interface buttons or cleaning up skatepark elements. The full poster willpresent these findings in more detail.We addressed these issues by: a) redesigning the interfaces and interactions involved in skateparkcreation; b) giving the players optional exogenous goals in skatepark design and constraining where the skatercould be positioned initially; and c) beginning to address the problem of parent support by displaying visualfeedback about the skater’s change in velocity during play mode (see Figure 2). We worked on smoothing theflow of interaction by limiting the number of virtual skatepark elements that could be on the screen, allowingplayers to change any given element into any other element, and implementing a snap-to-edge algorithm such thatelements would automatically align if close enough together.Figure 2. Design and play interfaces from the second prototype.We have begun trying out implementation of simple optional goals (e.g. going fast, getting air, reaching achallenge) to help orient the players toward possible design challenges. Presently, development is examining waysto make the goals more meaningful, align progressively more-difficult challenges, and give players suggestivefeedback on the design of their skatepark. We are also looking at design representations and signage, both in andout of the game, that suggest to adults how they might scaffold their child’s engagement with design problems. Ifaccepted, the poster will describe the results of these design approaches.ReferencesHorn, M., Atrash Leong, Z., Block, F., Diamond, J., Evans, E. M., Phillips, B., & Shen, C. (2012, May). Of BATsand APEs: an interactive tabletop game for natural history museums. In Proceedings of the SIGCHIConference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 2059-2068). ACM.Gutwill, J. P., Hido, N., & Sindorf, L. (2015). Research to practice: Observing learning in tinkeringactivities. Curator: The Museum Journal, 58(2), 151-168.Rajlich, V. (2006). Changing the paradigm of software engineering. Communications of the ACM, 49(8), 67-70.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1350© ISLS