Developing Pre-Service Teachers’ Professional Vision ThroughCollaborative Multimedia ArtifactsAndi M. Rehak, Andrea S. Gomoll, Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver, and Joshua A. Danishamstrack@indiana.edu, agomoll@indiana.edu, chmelosi@indiana.edu, jdanish@indiana.eduIndiana UniversityAbstract: Effective teachers are constantly adapting their classroom practice to best meetstudents’ needs. However, it is difficult to adapt one’s teaching practices without first noticingthe key features of classroom activity. This kind of noticing—professional vision—is acultivated skill that requires a combination of understanding theory and experience withpractice. When theory-practice connections are not strong, teachers tend to fall back on “whatworks.” Demands to support pre-service teachers in developing stronger theory-practiceconnections are increasing, yet this remains a challenging goal. The qualitative analysispresented in this paper offers insight into how creation of multimedia artifacts can support preservice teachers in connecting theory to practice while developing their professional vision.Findings suggest the process of creating and collaboratively refining multimedia artifacts insmall groups improves pre-service teachers’ ability to make theory-practice connections andprovides opportunity for them to exercise their emerging professional vision.Keywords: pre-service teachers, collaborative learning, professional vision, activity theory, video casestudiesIntroductionEffective teachers need to understand student learning and adapt classroom practice to meet learners’ needs on adaily basis. In the demanding classroom environment, teachers tend to fall back on “what works” approaches ifstrong connections between theory and practice are not made during pre-service experiences (Ball & Forzani,2009). Often, teacher education relies on practicum experiences to establish these connections, yet there is littleevidence to support that pre-service teachers make theory-practice connections during practicums (Allsopp,DeMarie, Alvarez-McHatton, & Doone, 2006). Furthermore, teacher training programs and assessments arebeginning to ask pre-service teachers to observe, describe, and evaluate others’ teaching practices and their ownin order to obtain licensure (e.g., edTPA, 2015). This study explores pre-service teachers’ development of thisability to see the classroom in this expert manner as professional vision—the ability to use a theoretical lens tosupport noticing key features in a learning environment, interpreting them, and then responding (Sherin, 2001).We explored the development of this skill by looking at the ways in which students annotated classroom videoand gave one another feedback. Viewing classroom video provides a unique opportunity for students to explorethe complexities of practice and to see how learning theories apply to the classroom (Van Es & Sherin, 2002).To explore the potential for using shared video resources to support the development of professionalvision, we made use of the RUanalytic tool (see Maher, Palius, Maher, Hmelo-Silver, & Sigley, 2014). TheRUanalytic tool is a video annotation tool that was designed to work with a large video repository, the VideoMosaic Collaborative (VMC). This video repository houses an extensive video collection from a longitudinalstudy of mathematics learning in K-12 classrooms (http://videomosaic.org/). Users of the tool are able to create amultimedia artifact consisting of “events” clipped from VMC videos and written annotations of these events. Thefinal product is a VMCAnalytic, a multimedia artifact that plays the clipped events in sequence, accompaniedwith the author’s text descriptions. This video annotation tool has been developed and used in previous researchto support pre-service and in-service teachers’ development of pedagogical skills, including teacher professionaldevelopment with a focus on mathematics education (Maher et al., 2014).Informed by the parameters of the edTPA assessment (edTPA, 2015) and university guidelines(Kunzman, 2014), two class sessions of activities involving the video annotation tool were collaborativelydesigned by a team of researchers of which the course instructor was a member. Our conjecture was that creatingmultimedia artifacts would provide a unique opportunity for pre-service teachers to observe moments in aclassroom and then connect learning theories to these moments as a means of developing professional vision. Thisstudy was driven by the following research questions: (1) How do these pre-service teachers use learning theorywhen describing episodes of teaching and learning? (2) How do these pre-service teachers’ multimedia artifactschange during class activities with peers? (3) What is the nature of these pre-service teachers’ professional visionas displayed in their multimedia artifacts?ICLS 2016 Proceedings130© ISLSTheoretical perspectivesOur design was guided by activity theory (Engeström, 2014), which is rooted in Vygotsky’s (1978) socioculturaltheory of learning. Activity theory asserts that collective human activity and thus learning, is a process mediatedby both individual and sociocultural factors (Engeström, 2014). Mediators “stand between” a subject and objectof activity; subjects view their objective through the lens of the mediators they are using, and the mediator thustransforms the entire activity. The subject is the individual or group of individuals (e.g., students) engaging inactivity. Object refers to the overarching motivations for the activity as realized by the subject (Cole, 1996).Because the object of activity is constructed by the subject, it may or may not be aligned to what the designer ofactivity intended the object to be (Rajala & Sannino, 2015). From an activity theory perspective, mediatingartifacts are the products and practices of the culture. Although distinct, these mediators cannot, and do not,function independent of one another and thus need to be analyzed as interrelated (Roth, 2007). Here, professionalvision acted as a mediator, shaping student activity and learning. We were interested in the groups’ objects ofactivity, as well as the ways in which the RUanalytic tool mediated students’ articulation of professional vision.A crucial element of teaching is being able to see key features of a learning environment and respond tothem. The development of professional vision involves honing the practice of teaching through attention tonoticing these salient features in the classroom (Borko, 2004). Professional vision involves “socially organizedways of seeing and understanding events that are answerable to the distinctive interests of a particular socialgroup” (Goodwin, 1994, p.606). Goodwin’s definition highlights how cognition and perception are intertwinedwith the social norms of a discipline. Thus, developing expertise within a given discipline requires the ability to“see” the world through the lens of that social group (Stevens & Hall, 1998). In a classroom setting, teachers’professional vision mediates active noticing and the interpretation of key elements of the environment, includingstudent reasoning and features of peer interaction (Maher et al., 2014; Sherin, 2001; 2007). This skill includesidentifying student strategies, inferring student levels of understanding, and developing a response based on theselevels of understanding. Noticing in this capacity is complex and variable (Jacobs, Lamb, & Phillip, 2010). Thereflective use of classroom video over time mediates changes in noticing and interpretations of what was noticed(Sherin & van Es, 2005). As pre-service and in-service teachers develop expertise in the skill of interpretingclassroom situations, they use their understanding of learning theory to isolate the important features of what ishappening. In this process of noticing, they then connect the specific evidence and learning theories to supportconclusions about how to respond. Professional vision mediates their teaching activity and is continually underconstruction. Professional vision develops as students become enculturated into the teaching community.Additionally, we were interested in how the opportunity to engage in activity with a particular divisionof labor informed by collaborative learning (CL; O’Donnell & Hmelo-Silver, 2013) contributed to pre-serviceteachers’ multimedia artifact construction. In CL, group members mutually influence one another and participateequally in knowledge building (O’Donnell & Hmelo-Silver, 2013), making CL valuable for helping students tosee themselves as members of a community (Hakkarainen et al., 2013). This sociocultural perspective of CLframes our work to integrate learners into not only a classroom community, but also into a larger community ofeducators. To explore the impact of peer interactions, we examined pre and post-collaboration versions ofmultimedia artifacts, and analyzed video of two groups of pre-service teachers creating their multimedia artifactsthrough the lens of activity theory to better understand student interactions.MethodsParticipantsThe participants in this study included 27 pre-service teachers enrolled in “Educational Psychology forElementary Teachers,” at a large Midwestern University. The course covers seven core units: behaviorism, socialcognitive theory, information processing theory, constructivism, sociocultural theories, motivation, andassessment. These students intended to teach primary grade students (5-12 year olds). The students in this courseranged from first to third-year undergraduate students; 22 of the 27 were female. They worked in groups of 3-5students that were previously organized by the instructor. In our activity theory driven analysis, the interactionsand multimedia artifacts of two randomly selected groups of three students are examined with the aim ofunderstanding the role of collaboration in the articulation of pre-service teachers’ professional vision.Activity designOur goal was to provide an opportunity for the students to see theory in action (see Gomoll et al, 2016), whilebeginning to recognize how learning, and principles of learning theories, might be experienced in real classrooms.The research team selected short video clips (7-12 minutes long) from the repository that showed both studentsICLS 2016 Proceedings131© ISLSand teachers in action. These were selected with attention to length and connection to several theoreticalframeworks covered in the course (i.e. behaviorism, constructivism, social cognitive theory, informationprocessing, and sociocultural theories).Prior to the first day of activities, students were asked to independently view an assigned video clip andto write down three “interesting” moments. Students in each small group worked from the same video clip, whileeach group had a different video. The open-ended prompt was intended to help the students see the video assomething relevant to them, and to help prepare them for the class session’s activities. In class, students wereasked to examine the same videos again, but to explain their highlighted moments using learning theory. To dothis, students independently created a multimedia artifact where they connected their chosen events and providedaccompanying descriptions, which articulated how learning theories covered within the course would explain thesuccess or failure of selected events. Students were provided with the opportunity to identify new events if theyfelt their initial choices did not support this analysis, but few did. In the following class session, students of thesame group provided feedback on one another’s multimedia artifacts—allowing them to explore the differencesin how they had connected theory to the same videos. Following this feedback, students had the opportunity toedit their work to reflect the feedback they had received. The final product created by students was a multimediaartifact with three “events,” or short clips, selected from the longer video. Each of these events, about thirtyseconds to one minute in duration, was annotated with a description pointing the reader to important episodes ofteaching and learning.Data sourcesAll version histories of multimedia artifacts were archived to track changes in each student’s artifact over time.During the two class periods in which students worked on their multimedia artifacts, three video cameras capturedwhole class activity and two small groups’ interactions (Group A and D). Only two students in group A werepresent on the second day of the intervention, Natalie and Isabella (pseudonyms). Addison, Riley, and Isaaccomprised group D. Students also took notes about their peer feedback during the second day via Etherpad—anonline platform that allows multiple participants to type in a text document at once. Students participated in anin-person whole-class debriefing session at the end of the experience. While prior analysis has addressed themultimedia artifacts created by all students during this intervention (see Gomoll et al., 2016), here we focus onthe multimedia artifacts of two groups, A and D that were randomly chosen to be video recorded. This additionaldata source allowed a more fine-grained examination of group collaboration in the face-to-face classroomenvironment as well as students’ final multimedia artifacts. The last version of the VMCanalytic from day 1 isconsidered the pre-collaboration analytic, and the final version of the VMCanalytic, the one students submittedfor the course assignment was considered the post-collaboration version.AnalysisViewing each small group as an activity system helped us to better understand the nature of students’ professionalvision articulated in their multimedia artifacts. We analyzed student artifacts and video of two groups of preservice teachers’ collaborative work constructing and refining multimedia artifacts—comparing the activitysystems of these two groups to each other and to the activity system envisioned by the instructor. The two groupsshow the curriculum being reinterpreted by the students as they constructed unique group-specific activitysystems, allowing us to construct contrasting cases. Neither of the activity systems was identical to the activitysystem intended by the designers, yet both led to productive outcomes in the form of satisfactory multimediaartifacts. We began with a representation of the intended activity system for small group work as envisioned bythe curriculum designers (see Figure 1). Underlying the object of students articulating their professional visionand revising their multimedia artifacts is the assumption that the assignment requirements students mediateactivity in such a ways that students would utilize learning theory in their description, and therefore find theoryuseful for making sense of classroom interactions. Utilizing theory as a mediator in examining classroominteractions is a precondition for students to enact professional vision. Students were placed into small groupswhere the physical arrangement and shared video were intended to foster collaboration. The first day was largelyindividual work as students constructed the initial version of their artifacts; we focus here on the second day inwhich there was intentional peer collaboration. In the second session, the video annotation tool, instructor prompt,and nature of collaboration mediated students’ activity and revisions in all three activity systems- researchers’intended, group A’s enacted, and group D’s enacted. These mediators did however function in different ways inthe three activity systems. Three key differences stand out across these three activity systems: (a) the constructedobject, (b) the role of the Etherpad document, and (c) the resultant multimedia artifacts.ICLS 2016 Proceedings132© ISLSArtifacts: learning theories, instructor prompts;RUcore tool; course notes, readings, and slides;VMCanalytic guide, etherpadObject: revise multimedia artifactbased on peer feedback to be betteraligned to learning theory;[articulate emerging professionalvision]Subject: studentsRules: use instructor assignedvideo; address instructorprompt; make necessaryrevisions; limit off-taskbehaviorsCommunity: groupmembers; instructor;research teamDivision of labor: students workcollaboratively; each create own,unique multimedia artifact;students provide feedback topeers; instructor/research teamclarifies questionsFigure 1. Intended activity system for class session two.In group A, the students’ object seemed to be to finish their multimedia artifacts and to document reviewof each other’s artifacts in the group Etherpad. The nature of Group A’s collaboration was not as rich andinteractive as the designers had intended, but their activity was neither disruptive nor inappropriate according tonorms of this particular classroom. With the object of completing the task, the group’s key mediators were theinstructor prompt and course slides, and less so learning theory. In group D, the students’ object seemed to be tofinish their multimedia artifact, but also to provide peers with meaningful feedback, and address this feedback inrevisions to their multimedia artifacts. The students in group D were not as attentive to taking notes in theirEtherpad, and instead engaged in conversation debating specifics of theories and concepts. Learning theory wasa key mediator in their activity. Group discussions led two of the students, Isaac and Addison, to refer to theircourse notes and the instructor’s course slides. While the richness of their collaboration was not entirely capturedin their Etherpad, all three students referred back to the notes as they revised their multimedia artifacts. While wesaw that students were not directly oriented to articulating their emerging professional vision, our conjecture thatdue to the assignment requirements, students would apply learning theory and therefore make claims rooted intheory concerning teaching practice providing evidence of their emerging professional vision was supported.Further, we believed that the differing nature of collaboration would have a direct impact on students’ professionalvision in their revised artifacts.In order to gain insight into how the differing activity systems affected students’ revisions to, and finalmultimedia artifacts, a qualitative coding scheme was developed to trace professional vision. The multimediaartifact version histories for the five students were examined to get a sense of the levels at which students wereable to connect theory to practice before and after collaboration. The first and final versions of each event werecoded using a coding scheme adapted from Sherin & van Es’s (2002; 2009) teacher professional vision scoringrubric. Event versions were coded as (a) atheoretical noticing (b) theory-based noticing without interpretation (c)theory-based noticing and interpretation, or (d) theory-based noticing, interpretation, and response. Table 1explains the code criterion and how the codes build on one another. In some events students merely mentioned alearning theory without defining it in any way or articulating a connection between it and the rest of theirannotation. Even though these annotations technically named a theory, such events were classified as atheoreticalnoticing. Examining the multimedia artifacts through the professional vision codes allowed us to better understandhow students’ professional vision and noticing changed (if at all) after collaboration with their peers. By allowingus to trace the impact of collaboration on students’ multimedia artifacts, these professional vision codes supportedour activity theory analysis by providing a means of comparing professional vision across students, events, andrevisions. Together, our activity theory analysis and professional vision coding provide a picture of emergentprofessional vision for two student groups—highlighting improvements in theory-practice connections anddifferences in the groups’ objects of activity and use of mediators.Table 1: Professional vision codesICLS 2016 Proceedings133© ISLSCodeAtheoretical noticingDescriptionAnnotations only explain whathappened in the event, but do notconnect the actions of the studentsand/or teachers to theory.Theory-based (T-b)noticing onlyAnnotations include references tolearned theories and concepts, andprovides explicit support from thevideo for these references.Implications for teaching andlearning are addressed at the levelof description and some evaluation,but do not reach interpretation ofteaching practice.Theory-based (T-b)noticing andinterpretationAnnotations provide a descriptionof the important features of theinteraction, address a learningtheory or concept, ties this theoryto explicit video evidence, andevaluate this evidence as it relatesto teaching practice (i.e. this was“good” because…)Theory-based (T-b)noticing, interpretation,and responseAnnotations include description ofclassroom actions, evaluation, andinterpretation. Authors introduce aconcept or theory, tie it to explicitvideo evidence, and interpret thisevidence to make clear suggestionsabout how it influences their workas future teachers.Example excerpts“In this clip, two students work to solve a fractionproblem. The instructor comes to the table and give(sic) them feedback. The feedback the teacher gives isbad because the students do not seem to understand it.The teacher walks away from the table.”“Meredith is brought in the center of the screen duringthis clip. Interestingly enough, though, she findsherself not raising her hand when the teacher asks ifit’s (sic) okay for two/tenths to be called one/fifth…Itrelates to Information Processing because she ismodeling the information that she believes is true.Although she was the first student to prove thattwo/tenths is equal to one/fifth, when she sees anotherexample she challenges her understanding because theexample given by the two boys before her is not thesame. This can also be Information Processing Theorybecause Meredith may have a schema that there mayonly ever be one correct answer, or way, to show thatsomething is the same.”“Here, the two girls seem to divide themselves intoseparate roles with relatively little communication.[Student name] takes each of the stacks and determinesthe duplicates which she then gives to [Student name]to deconstruct. One of the elements withinSociocultural theory is the Activity Triangle diagram.One of the triangles in this diagram is focused ondivision of labor; who is responsible for what. Due tothe clarity of each students (sic) distinct role, thistheory would confirm that this is a beneficial strategy.”“…The girl in this video has a misconception as towhat 14-5 is because she believes it is 8, but the middleboy believes it is 9 (he is right). Although he is right,he seems to be second guessing himself and modelingafter the girl. They then work together at the end of thisclip, all doing the same thing, using the cubes. Thisrelates to the cognitive theory, and the teacher mustaddress the problem so that Jamie builds correctschema for future math.”As the coding examples show, not all students applied learning theory accurately, despite making theorybased observations and interpretations. Because of this, an additional set of codes was then developed and usedto address how appropriately the learning theories were used in the multimedia artifacts. The first and finalversions of each event were then coded for application of learning theory using four codes: (a) no/unclear use oftheory (b) inaccurate or inappropriate use of theory, (c) approaching appropriate use of theory, and (d) appropriateuse of theory. Finally, the authors noted instances when post-collaboration event versions included new theoreticalconcepts, extended interpretations, or included evaluative statements (i.e. “I think this is bad for learning …”).Together these two coding schemes and our observations of post-collaboration additions allowed us to explorechanges in students’ use of learning theories and articulation of professional vision.ResultsWhile the pre-service teachers did not take up the designed activities exactly as the research team had intended,all students submitted satisfactory multimedia artifacts. The instructor and research group’s intended object ofactivity was to help students further connect learning theories to actual teaching practice, but both groups analyzedwere more oriented towards directly fulfilling assignment requirements than understanding and applying learningtheories. However, only one post-collaboration event was categorized as atheoretical noticing; all other eventsreached at least t-b noticing. Four students’ (Isaac, Riley, Natalie, and Isabella) post-collaboration modificationsresulted in a change in their articulation of professional vision. Isaac and Riley both moved from atheoreticalnoticing to t-b noticing in two of their event descriptions. Because professional vision is develops over time andthrough practice, it is not surprising that few students’ articulation of their professional vision changed throughoutICLS 2016 Proceedings134© ISLSthis one-week intervention. Yet, evidence of post-collaboration changes in students’ multimedia artifactdescriptions suggests that some students benefited more than others from discussing their own and each other’smultimedia artifacts.Four of the six students achieved t-b noticing + interpretation in at least one of their final events. Thisimprovement is meaningful given the brief nature of the intervention. As students prepare for student teachingand the challenges of everyday classroom practice, they must notice, interpret, and respond. In these students’multimedia artifact construction, we see progress towards this long-term objective on a short time-scale. Movingfrom t-b noticing + interpretation to t-b noticing + interpretation + response requires pre-service teachers toarticulate how they would handle this particular episode in their own classrooms or how the teacher in the videocould have improved his/her response. Overall, students’ multimedia artifact descriptions improved postcollaboration for students in both groups. Students increased the number of theories referenced in their finalversions of events and articulated more appropriate uses of learning theory suggesting the RUanalytic tool andthe activity design constructed a useful space for students to practice making theory-practice connections.In both groups, two of the three students improved their articulation of professional vision aftercollaboration in at least one event. These shifts were supported by the detailed feedback provided in the groupEtherpad documents, and suggest that discussing multimedia artifacts with peers typically had a positive impacton articulation of professional vision and use of learning theory. Isaac’s first version of event 3 was categorizedas no/unclear use of theory; he writes, “…Although [Meredith] was one of the students to prove that two-tenthsis equal to one/fifth, when she sees another examples she challenges her understanding because the example givenby the two boys before her is not the same. It’s almost like she is changing her mind, not because she wrong, butbecause she trying to grasp a different understanding.” In reviewing this event description Riley and Addisonwrite, “Clip 3: I didn’t notice this at first but LOVE that you caught it and explained it. Add modeling to the end.Great use of imformation [sic] processing! Misconceptions are also what she is struggling with.” While Isaac didnot state that he was using information processing his two group members assume he is drawing upon somethinghaving to do with this theory. Isaac took up this feedback and revised his event description to explicitly defineand use information processing to articulate Meredith’s struggle as a misconception that there is only one way toshow two fractions are equivalent. Isaac’s final event 3 was classified as appropriate use of learning theory and tb noticing.In collaboration, small groups were able to draw connections from interactions in their video clips tocourse theories, and some students were able to connect these noticings to the kinds of responses they would takeas teachers. While reviewing each other’s multimedia artifacts, groups re-watched certain events repeatedly toreach a consensus on what was occurring in the interaction. Furthermore, they encouraged each other to lookbeyond their first impressions of which theories applied to an event—seeing that multiple theoretical conceptscould be applied to just one interaction. This kind of connection from theory to practice was the primary learningoutcome intended by the research team, and seems to have been reached by all participants in these two groups,though there was room for improvement in how theory was applied by most students. In each of Isabella andAddison’s final event descriptions their use of theory was categorized as either appropriate use or approachingappropriate use of learning theory. This means both pre-service teachers had few, if any, misconceptionsconcerning the learning theories each chose to support her observations and interpretations. While Riley, Isaac,and Natalie made many modifications to their use of learning theory post-collaboration, they each had one finalevent that was categorized as inappropriate or inaccurate use of learning theory.Presenting and discussing their multimedia artifacts in their groups did improve all students’ definitionsof concepts and overall application of learning theory, but some students still struggled to define or apply theoriesaccurately despite discussing them during collaboration. For the students with events classified as inaccurate useof theory post-collaboration, either the Etherpad was not employed as an artifact to guide their revisions, or thenuances of the theory discussed were not taken up by the student or effectively captured in the Etherpad. This isvisible in the changes Isaac made to his event 1 description. An excerpt from Isaac’s first version of this eventread as follows, “…This thought process could be relevant when speaking about the Zone of ProximalDevelopment in Social Cultural Theory. // Meredith is trying to understand the concept of fractions before sharingit with her classmates. This enhances her ZPD because her thoughts go from a personal learning experience to awhole class learning experience.” Upon review of Isaac’s work, Riley and Addison provided him with thefollowing feedback regarding the first event in their Etherpad, “Clip 1: Add modeling to the begining [sic] of theclip where Meredith is modeling her way of figuring out the problem. Add what ZPD means. Did you include theconcepts of building new schemas in clip 1?” Here, Riley and Addison suggested adding additional theoreticalconnections to an event and modifying use of theory to be more articulate. Review of the video recordings of thisgroup’s interactions revealed that Isaac and Addison returned to their class notes to clarify their understanding ofinformation processing. Ideally, Isaac would have also reviewed his notes from the unit on sociocultural theoriesICLS 2016 Proceedings135© ISLSas well and recognized that his use of ZPD was not aligned with how Vygotsky defined it. Examination of Isaac’sfinal event descriptions suggested that he took up the suggestion to define ZPD and ignored the recommendationof adding concepts from other theories. Isaac’s final version had an additional sentence (where the double slashesare in the event description above), which read, “The Zone of Proximal Development is the area and environmentthat a student feels comfortable with.” But because Isaac’s definition of ZPD was not accurate, his application ofthis theoretical concept remained an inappropriate use of theory. While not accurate, Isaac utilizes hisunderstanding of ZPD as some sort of movement from a personal to a social learning experience to understandwhy Meredith first works independently before offering her solution to the rest of the class. Isaac’s event onedescription is an instance of t-b noticing that is based on an inaccurate understanding of learning theory. Thestruggle to appropriately employ learning theory is not surprising considering this is a well-documented challengein teacher education. Further, students’ use of the RUanalytic tool was limited to one week of activities. In futureiterations we intend to integrate the tool throughout the semester to provide greater opportunities for connectingtheory to practice.In analyzing the interactions and artifacts created by the pre-service teachers in this educationalpsychology course, we found that multimedia artifact creation allowed students to (a) parse student-teacher andpeer interactions that are typically overlooked when just watching a video of classroom activity or observing aclassroom in person, (b) relate aspects of different learning theories to concrete moments of teaching and learning,(c) solidify or reify their beliefs on how teaching and learning should unfold, and (d) review course materials andnotes productively. Many students recommended greater integration of the tool into course activities across thesemester because they found it useful in making sense of the learning theories and connecting theory to practice.The course instructor also believed this was a useful tool for similar reasons.SignificanceThrough analysis of two groups of pre-service teachers’ collaborative activity systems and their descriptions ofclassroom videos, we gain insight into how to support future teachers to think differently about theory and theways it can play out in the classroom. Our activity theory analysis reveals that although students did not take upprompts in the way the instructor/research team intended; students constructed activity systems that wereproductive for their own objects of completing the assignment. These results suggest that students may not viewtheory as necessary to interpreting classroom interactions, and therefore did not appropriate the intended objectdue to a lack of relevance. Activity theory was a productive lens for understanding how students take upcurriculum. Although group A’s collaboration was more mechanical than desired, both groups were productivein connecting theory to practice, highlighting the value of integrating video of classrooms into course activities.Teaching is a practice-centered career. As pre-service teachers gain experience refining their ownteaching practice (through student teaching and extensive classroom observation), they fine-tune important skills.When pre-service teachers engage in teaching practice early on, the application of theory is often lost. As firstthrough third year pre-service teachers, it is not surprising that these students’ professional vision did not improvedramatically across one week. What is impressive is that all students made theory-based noticings. The activityof annotating real classroom video allowed students to demonstrate their ability to articulate theory-practiceconnections. Our results show that constructing a multimedia artifact provides the opportunity for pre-serviceteachers to see how theory can be part of their professional vision, but that they may also need to engage incollaborative discussions to make the most out of these opportunities, at least initially.Together, the findings suggest that integrating more multimedia activities in pre-service teachingcoursework has the potential to greatly improve students’ ability to contextualize course concepts and moredirectly support their emerging professional vision. Interacting with the VMC repository and RUanalytic toolthroughout an entire course, rather than in a week-long intervention, may allow students to more closelyappropriate the intended activity system of using a video annotation tool to mediate evidence-based use of theoryand development of professional vision. In future work, we hope to examine how video annotation practices mightbe integrated throughout pre-service teachers’ undergraduate careers—moving from the annotation of VMC videoto the annotation of peer teaching and eventually of their own teaching practice. As pre-service teachers movethrough course and practicum experiences, they must learn to meaningfully observe students and appropriatelyrespond (Ball & Forzani, 2009; Sherin, 2001). Observation in this capacity is a complex skill that involves finetuned attention, disciplinary knowledge, and an applied understanding of theory (Eberbach & Crowley, 2009).Video annotation in general, and the RUanalytic tool in particular, might be leveraged as a form of scaffoldedtraining for pre-service teachers as they develop professional vision.ICLS 2016 Proceedings136© ISLSReferencesAgnew, G., Mills, C. M., & Maher, C. A. (2010, January). VMCAnalytic: Developing a collaborative videoanalysis tool for education faculty and practicing educators. In System Sciences (HICSS), 2010 43rdHawaii International Conference on (pp. 1-10). IEEE.Allsopp, D. H., DeMarie, D., Alvarez-McHatton, P., & Doone, E. (2006). Bridging the gap between theory andpractice: Connecting courses with field experiences. Teacher Education Quarterly, 19–35.Ball, D.L., & Forzani, F.M. (2009). The work of teaching and the challenge for teacher education. Journal ofTeacher Education, 60(5), 497-511.Borko, H. (2004). Professional development and teacher learning: Mapping the terrain. Educational researcher,33(8), 3-15.Cole, M. (1996). Putting culture in the middle. In Cultural Psychology: A once and future discipline (pp. 116145). Cambridge, MA: Blknpa Press of Harvard University Press.Eberbach, C., & Crowley, K. (2009). From everyday to scientific: How children learn to observe the biologicalworld. Review of Educational Research, 79, 39-68.edTPA. (2015). About edTPA: Overview. Retrieved from http://edtpa.aacte.org/about-edtpaEngeström, Y. (1987/2014) Learning by expanding: An activity-theoretical approach to developmental research(2nd ed.). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.Gomoll, A., Rehak, A. M., Novak, W., Andrade, A., Saleh, A., Hmelo-Silver, C., & Danish, J. A. (2016). Paperto be presented at the American Education Research Association National Conference in WashingtonDC.Haikkarainen, K., Paavola, S., Kangas, K., Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P. (2013). Sociocultural perspectives oncollaborative learning: Toward collaborative knowledge creation. In C.E. Hmelo-Silver, C.A. Chinn,C.K. Chan, & A. O’Donnell (Eds.), International handbook of collaborative learning (pp. 57-73). NewYork: Routledge.Jacobs, V. R., Lamb, L. L., & Philipp, R. A. (2010). Professional noticing of children's mathematical thinking.Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 169-202.Kuh, G. D., Kinzie, J., Schuh, J. H., & Whitt, E. J. (2005). Student success in college: Creating conditions thatmatter. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.Kunzman, R. (2014). “It could be so many learning theories”: Multimedia artifacts and professional vision in preservice teachers. IUB teacher education: In pursuit of coherence, consistency, and quality. Bloomington,IN: School of Education, Indiana University.Maher, C. A., Palius, M. F., Maher, J. A., Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Sigley, R. (2014). Teachers can learn to attendto students’ reasoning using videos as a tool. Issues in Teacher Education, 23(1), 31-47.O’Donnell & Hmelo-Silver, (2013). Introduction what is collaborative learning?:An overview. In C.E. HmeloSilver, C.A. Chinn, C.K. Chan, & A. O’Donnell (Eds.), International handbook of collaborative learning(pp. 1-16). New York: Routledge.Rajala, A., & Sannino, A. (2015). Students’ deviations from a learning task: An activity-theoretical analysis.International Journal of Educational Research, 70, 31–46.Roth, W. M. (2007). On mediation: Toward a cultural-historical understanding. Theory Psychology, 20, 641-665.Sherin, M. G. (2001). Developing a professional vision of classroom events. In T.Wood, B. S. Nelson, & J.Warfield (Eds.) Beyond classical pedagogy: Teaching elementary school mathematics (pp. 75-93).Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.Sherin, M. G. (2007). The development of teachers’ professional vision in video clubs. In Goldman, R., Pea, R.,Denny, S. (Eds.) Video research in the learning sciences (pp. 383-395). New York: Routledge.Sherin, M., & van Es, E. (2005). Using video to support teachers’ ability to notice classroom interactions. Journalof technology and teacher education, 13(3), 475-491.Stevens, R., & Hall, R. (1998). Disciplined perception: Learning to see in technoscience. In Lampert, M., Blunk,M. (Eds.) Talking mathematics in school: Studies of teaching and learning (pp. 107-149). Cambridge,UK: Cambridge University Press.van Es, E. A., & Sherin, M. G. (2002). Learning to notice: Scaffolding new teachers’ interpretations of classroominteractions. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 10(4), 571-596.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.ICLS 2016 Proceedings137© ISLS