Appropriating a Climate Science Discourse About Uncertainty inOnline LessonsKenneth Wright, Amy Pallant, and Hee-Sun Leekennethallenwright@gmail.com, apallant@concord.org, hlee@concord.orgThe Concord ConsortiumAbstract: In an online lesson on climate change, pairs of students make claims in the contextof uncertainties, using graphs from authentic scientific publications designed originally forpublic use. As students grapple with describing and delimiting sources of uncertaintydiscerned from these rather sophisticated graphs, they migrate from attributing uncertainty tothemselves to climate-related phenomena. The dialogue between students appears to beinstrumental in the strengthening of uncertainty-based claims and explanations.Discourse about uncertaintySome of the earliest studies on human experience with uncertainty noted the distinction between internalattributions of uncertainty and external ones (Kahneman & Tversky, 1982). To attribute uncertainty internally tothe competence of the self forecloses personal agency to resolve or delimit uncertainties arising from naturalphenomena. To attribute uncertainty externally suggests a disposition to make sense of the indeterminacy ofevents in the world. Science curricula have traditionally downplayed or ignored the essential uncertainty ofscientific practice, discouraging those students otherwise disposed to look externally to not bother trying. Thisinaccurate depiction of science deprives students of agency to formulate and explain claims based on limitedand fallible evidence and thereby diminishes incentives to learn science (Lemke, 1990). Content understandingis enhanced with attention to the scientific practices of constructing and critiquing claims (Ford, 2008). For thisreason, scientific practices have become a central feature of the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSSLead States, 2013). The online lessons described here on the topic of climate science are part of a suite oflessons where public concerns intersect with controversies within specific fields of science. Climate change is acollective problem complicated by, and perhaps even limited by, citizens’ abilities to participate in productiveconversation about it (Corner, 2012). These lessons provide scaffolded instruction around scientific graphicalrepresentations as well as user-friendly simulations so as to facilitate explanations and conversation. Studentsmake claims based on evidence while also reflecting specifically on how certain they are and to which factorsthey attribute any uncertainty.Analyzing screen capturesThe students described here participated in a series of online tasks on climate science in a public high school inthe northeast of the United States. We recorded their work via computer screen capture, a process that alsocaptured their talk. This paper limits itself to two episodes, as the analysis is ongoing and results arepreliminary. The first episode involves a lesson on solar irradiance and the second involves future trends intemperature. In our analysis we transcribe student talk and then search for themes, using methods of interactionanalysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995). Our guiding concern is to determine interactional factors that contributeto the written responses that students provide in these online tasks. Each task sits on a single webpage alongwhich students can scroll and into which they submit a series of responses to prompts. Due to constraints in ourstudy at the time, our data do not include video of the students themselves, only their shared screen. Though thisis not ideal, it is still feasible to inspect their interaction via their speech and, at times, their cursor movements.Appropriating an uncertainty-infused discourseThese lessons discursively position students as competent agents capable of making claims. They orient studentsto features of authentic graphical representations by providing some contextual information. This is necessarybecause interpretation goes beyond merely taking up presented evidence. Interpretation is predicated on ways ofseeing and making things see-able distinctive to a given discipline (e.g., “highlighting”, Goodwin, 1994). Thatis, people have to be taught to see. So, the extent to which students can draw evidence from data dependscrucially on how the data are framed for them. Explicitly addressing uncertainty as part of scientific activityraises questions for students as to how to construe uncertainty in relation to themselves. Typical curricularmaterials rarely elevate or highlight uncertainty as a salient and productive aspect of scientific practice. It isperhaps counterintuitive to dwell on uncertainty when cultivating the making of claims. But concerted reflectionCSCL 2017 Proceedings577© ISLSon the tentative and provisional nature of scientific claims should foster greater confidence in them, not less(Latour, 2004). This is because the means of creating an argument conveys essential information about itsstrength and durability. The students working on these tasks tend to engage in considerable uncertainty-relatedtalk as they prepare written responses to uncertainty-enriched argumentation prompts. In doing so they“appropriate” (Levrini, Fantini, Tasquier, Pecori, & Levin, 2015) climate science discourse in order to deal withwhat for them are novel forms of uncertainty. To appropriate a discourse is a matter in part of identifyingoneself as a legitimate practitioner and of having the resources available to begin to participate successfully.Uncertainties in the solar irradiance task: General imitation versus wavinessIn the Solar Activity Task (see Figure 1), students are told they will make arguments based on evidence. Theyare first prompted to make claims about whether, “Based on the graph, is Earth’s temperature dependent on thelevel of solar activity?” Since this is an original graph from a scientific publication, let us first note the richsenses of uncertainty embedded in it that the general public would encounter. Both the following year’stemperature and solar activity are highly uncertain based on what we know about the present one, as indicatedby the light-colored, erratically-varying lines. This uncertainty in yearly fluctuations is managed somewhat bymeans of a darker, relatively smooth lines described as the “11 yr average” for each quantity. Based on ourknowledge of the 11-year average for a given year, the 11-year average for the next year is comparatively lessuncertain. By taming somewhat the fluctuations in quantities in this way, it becomes more feasible to seebeyond year-to-year variations so as to inspect trends over decades. The original authors’ intent was to show tothe general public that solar activity and temperature run parallel (until about 1960) and then diverge.Figure 1. Cropped Portion of Screenshot of the Solar Activity Webpage for Annie and Betty.The audience for this lesson consists of students rather than the general public. In providing a limitedsynopsis, the webpage for the lesson explains that, “The graph shows Earth's air temperature and solar activity(irradiance) from 1880 to 2009. Solar activity includes sunspots, solar flares, and other solar weather events.The light-colored lines show the yearly measurements, and the darker lines show the average of 11 years oftemperature or solar irradiance data. Earth's temperature is affected by many different factors” (cropped out ofFigure 1). By giving students the task of making claims with only limited additional information, the taskframes the interpretation of this authentic scientific graph as an activity students are capable of doing as well asany other public person. And they can presumably do so without having to attend to the layered meanings ofsome terms (e.g., the unit, W/m2) or deeper reflections on the data processing of measurements (e.g., How theearth comes to have a singular temperature for a given year).Table 1 illustrates the kind of conversation that can transpire with a task of this kind. The left columnincludes the time elapsed in seconds since the beginning of the episode, to provide information on the durationof turns of speech. In the right column, brackets indicate overlapping speech. The two speakers are Annie andBetty (all names are pseudonyms). In Line 1, Annie reads the question out loud and the two students take sometime to think about a response. In Lines 2 and 3, they do not initially agree as to which bullet to select, “yes” or“no.” In Line 3 Annie asks rhetorically whether temperature imitates solar activity, answering her own questionnegatively. In Line 4, Betty signals disagreement, while nevertheless expressing some new doubt in that it mayonly imitate it partially. In Lines 5 and 7 Annie contrasts an imitation that is (merely) general in some way witha waviness that shows lack of (authentic) imitation. In Lines 6 and 8 Betty agrees but it is unclear whether thisagreement is in regard to the general imitation or to the lack of imitation in waviness. In Lines 7-9 Annieelaborates further, characterizing the waviness in terms of some curve being especially “spikey.” She appears toCSCL 2017 Proceedings578© ISLSindicate the Total Solar Irradiance Yearly, since it is the most erratic-looking. In Line 10, Betty at first goesback to her initial pick of, “yes,” despite having just agreed to what Annie had just been saying about thewaviness. But after a pause, she assents to Annie’s preferred answer. In Line 11 Annie follows up by elaboratingon the lack of dependence in terms of not fitting. Later, after Line 11, Annie and Betty wrote, “The temperatureand solar activity do not match in terms of “fitting together” because their graphs are not aligned, thetemperature is not dependent on the solar activity.” Betty appears to initially construe imitation in terms of acorrespondence between the darker lines up to 1960 (“for a little bit”). What is uncertain, then, is thepermanence of this relation between 11-year running means. But Annie construes imitation in terms of howerratic the light lines are. What is uncertain is how well measures remain stable from year to year. By virtue oftheir discussion these competing and complementary notions of imitation and uncertainty become increasinglyvisible to them both.Table 1: Discussion around the claim prompt for the Solar Irradiance taskLine #, seconds, SpeakerLine 1, 0, AnnieLineLineLineLineLineLineLine2, 13.9,3, 14.8,4, 22.3,5, 24.4,6, 26.6,7, 27.1,8, 28.4,BettyAnnieBettyAnnieBettyAnnieBettyLine 9, 28.6, AnnieLine 10, 34.7, BettyLine 11, 43.8, AnnieTalk and Interaction(Hovers cursor over the bullets for "yes" and "no." Reads Question #1 out loud.) Basedon the graph, is Earth's temperature dependent on the level of solar activity? (Pauses,makes mock music sound)Yeah.Yes? Does it like imitate it? It [doesn't imitate it.][A little bit.] A little bit.In terms of like general but like [waves],[Yeah]no. Do you see it?Yeah.It does it really spikey. These are like mmm mmm mmm mmm (Tone rises and falls).So, yes or no?Yes. (Pauses for 6 seconds) No. No, I don't think so.Cause they don't fit.This short episode was selected due to the two senses of imitation and uncertainty students foundwithin the graphs. Their initial opposing responses are due to differing interpretations as to which features of thegraph are most relevant to the question of dependence between quantities. Betty attends to the similarity of thelong-term slopes of the 11-year average lines (dark) whereas Annie attends to the relative noisiness of the yearlydata (light-colored lines). Both take agency for basing arguments in terms of the evidence (as opposed tosearching for a received, normative, correct answer). Uncertainty for them is not akin to doubt (personal) but isrelated to the vicissitudes of the phenomena (external). That said, Annie appears to be more committed to herinitial view and also appears to be more articulate and persuasive. On this reading of events, Betty defers toAnnie in a way that abdicates some agency for attributing uncertainty to natural phenomena.Line 1, 0,CandyLine 2,3.2,DebbiLine 3,21.2Line 4,29.6,CandyOkay, (reading the prompt) Which linebest shows what you think will happenin the future?Okay, it completely depends. It'll dothis or this if we can clean up our act.It will do this if we can't, which I feellike this is more likely. Numeral A.(off topic)I would say actually B (points withcursor), because we're going to cleanup our act.Figure 2. The Temperature Trend Task and Student Talk.Uncertainty in the temperature trend task: Can we clean up our act?This next short episode has been chosen to illustrate an additional sense of uncertainty students may identify.The graph in Figure 2 indicates three potential future trends, all seen in comparison to the (known andCSCL 2017 Proceedings579© ISLSestablished) trend up to 2008. As with the graph from the earlier episode, the uncertainty involved in year-toyear fluctuations is managed by means of a running trend. But there is a new form of uncertainty here aboutthings yet to happen. Prior to Line 1, Debbi had already asserted that outcome A was more likely while Candyexpressed doubt about this. Then, In Line 1, Candy rereads verbatim from the prompt. In Line 2, Debbi indicatestwo possibilities, both involving the intervention of humans, finding the more pessimistic one more likely. Hereshe explicitly mentions likelihood as a feature of her argument. In Line 4, Candy asserts a contrary and moreoptimistic option in response to this likelihood assertion. As they continued with their discussion beyond Line 4,Candy’s more optimistic view prevails. Later, after Line 4 they typed in their written response: “We think thatby then, green technology will be advanced enough to help stabilized temperatures and greenhouse gas levels.”Candy was initially tentative about how to characterize future uncertainty, but eventually adopted Debbi’s sensethat it depends on human actions. Upon doing so, she then convinced Debbi to reverse her view as to howhuman intervention will likely transpire. In making this explanation they grappled with how to manageuncertainties in projections about future events. So, they progressed from discussions of possibilities (A or B) tocriteria for choosing (which is more likely) to some explanation as to why this would be so (green technology).In so doing their attributions of uncertainty became more grounded in explanation of phenomena (external)while the uncertainty itself become progressively delimited.DiscussionUnder ordinary circumstances textual responses are the only traces of activity preserved for teachers or forresearchers. The screencasts help to make visible the various ways students do discursive work towardachieving agreement. This work is largely lost in the textual responses. Student progress in both episodesappears to have been facilitated by the teacher’s organizational decision to assign students to collaborate anddiscuss in pairs—consistent with recommendations of the online lesson providers. The speech we witness occursbecause the two students have been given the task of formulating a consensus before submitting a textualresponse. This underscores the value of having students collaborate as they work on online lessons like these.Previous research has shown that students can engage to some extent in climate change lessons thatmake uncertainty an explicit aspect of scientific practice (Pallant & Lee, 2015). As students grapple withuncertainty they tend to either attribute uncertainty to what Pallant and Lee (2015) describe as “personal”sources or to “scientific” ones. That is, students locate uncertainty either in their own limitations or in aspects ofreal world phenomena, as expressed in data from graphs and model-simulations. Those who attributeuncertainty to scientific sources are much more likely to make “correct” or normative claims about climatechange phenomena. Though preliminary in scope, this analysis sheds some light on the means by which studentscan migrate from an internalized to externalized (scientific) sense of uncertainty.ReferencesCorner, A. (2012). Evaluating Arguments About Climate Change. In M. S. Khine (Ed.), Perspectives onScientific Argumentation: Theory, Practice and Research (pp. 201–220). Dordrecht: SpringerNetherlands. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-2470-9_10Ford, M. (2008). Disciplinary authority and accountability in scientific practice and learning. Science Education,92(3), 404–423. http://doi.org/10.1002/sce.20263Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional Vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606–633.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction Analysis : Foundations and Practice. The Journal of theLearning Sciences, 4(1), 39–103. http://doi.org/10.1207/s15327809jls0401Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1982). Variants of uncertainty. Cognition, 11(2), 143–157.Latour, B. (2004). Why Has Critique Run out of Steam? From Matters of Fact to Matters of Concern. CriticalInquiry, 30(2), 225–248. http://doi.org/10.1086/421123Lemke, J. L. (1990). Talking science: Language, learning, and values. Norwood, N.J: Ablex Pub. Corp.Levrini, O., Fantini, P., Tasquier, G., Pecori, B., & Levin, M. (2015). Defining and Operationalizing“Appropriation” for Science Learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 24(1), 93–136.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, by States. Achieve, Inc. on behalf ofthe twenty-six states and partners that collaborated on the NGSS. Achieve, Inc.Pallant, A., & Lee, H. S. (2015). Constructing Scientific Arguments Using Evidence from DynamicComputational Climate Models. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 24(2–3), 378–395.AcknowledgmentsWork supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. DRL-1220756.CSCL 2017 Proceedings580© ISLS