Science Literacy in Controversial Contexts:An Epistemic Balancing ActAviv J. Sharon, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, a.sharon@technion.ac.ilAyelet Baram-Tsabari, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, ayelet@technion.ac.ilAbstract: "Science literacy" is considered important for thinking and deciding about everydaypersonal and social issues relating to science, including controversial topics, such asanthropogenic climate change. In recent years, science literacy has been conceptualized as theability to access and make sense of scientific expertise in the time and in the context of need.Recently, evidence has shown that when people attempt to make sense of controversial issues,their processing of scientific information is biased by their existing ideologies andworldviews. This is considered the culprit of persistent controversy about scientific findings,such as the findings that indicate anthropogenic climate change. Here, we propose animplication to this evidence: To promote science literacy, educators should promote an"epistemic balancing act" in the science classroom, avoiding both credulity and hyperskepticism. Implications for educational policy are discussed.IntroductionIndividuals and groups often make decisions with scientific components. For example, voters go to the ballotsand consider whether, in fact, the climate is changing, and if so, what should be done to mitigate the changes.For decades, scholars have been discussing what "scientific literacy" (SL) people need to make such decisions.Despite efforts to promote SL through science education, concerns about the usefulness of science education ineveryday life persist (e.g., Aikenhead, 2006).Here, we briefly review theoretical and empirical notions of SL and maintain that people often refuseto accept valid scientific findings that challenge their beliefs, values and interests. e.g., regarding anthropogenicclimate change. We argue that as part of SL, laypeople must be taught to perform an "epistemic balancing act"when interacting with scientific expertise: They must avoid both credulity on one hand and hyper-skepticism inthe other. We relate this "balancing act" to the epistemic virtue of open-mindedness.Theoretical notions of science literacyAlthough the body of literature on SL is immense, there is no general agreement on the definition or constituentparts of this construct. Alongside the diversity, there is some common ground. A committee of the US NationalAcademies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine (2016b) (hereafter NASEM) identified seven commonlyhypothesized aspects of SL on the individual level: (1) foundational literacies, such as numeracy and textualliteracy; (2) content knowledge, such as scientific terms, concepts and facts; (3) understanding of scientificpractices, such as collecting and analyzing data and peer review; (4) identifying and judging appropriatescientific expertise; (5) epistemic knowledge, i.e., understanding how scientific claims are supported byscientific procedures; (6) cultural understanding of science and (7) dispositions and habits of mind, such asinquisitiveness and open-mindedness. Aspects 2, 3 and 5 are found in the PISA 2015 conceptual framework forSL as "content knowledge", "procedural knowledge" and "epistemic knowledge" (OECD, 2016).The competent outsider: An evidence-based notion of SLSeveral studies provide a modest base of evidence about lay reasoning with and about science in everydaysettings, and some preliminary clues into the capabilities this reasoning requires. Feinstein (2011) suggested thatto be considered "science literate," people must be able to identify when science is useful for their own needsand interests and to "interact with sources of scientific expertise in ways that help them achieve their owngoals", or, in other words, be "competent outsiders with respect to science" (p. 180, emphasis by authors). Byanalogy, the "competent outsider" is like a competent water-drawer, who can identify when water might beuseful (e.g., when one is thirsty), and then find an appropriate well. The science literate person can then use thewell's pulley system to draw needed amounts of water, and then brew tea, launder clothes, etc.Open-mindedness and the competent outsiderScientific propositions on socially controversial topics, such as global warming, can threaten beliefs, values andinterests, posing a difficulty to defer to scientific expertise. A recent consensus report on science communicationICLS 2018 Proceedings1467© ISLSemphasized the role of motivated reasoning in interpreting scientific findings, especially when "individuals feeltheir values, identity, or interests are threatened" (National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine,2016a, p. 47).One may expect schooling to help alleviate this problem. However, unfortunately, the availableevidence suggests the opposite: In several contexts, scientific knowledge polarizes attitudes towards scientificfacts. Thus, belief in human-caused climate change interacts with science knowledge and numeracy byindividuals' political affiliations and cultural world-views: Among US adults who subscribe to an egalitarian,communitarian world-view, belief in human-caused climate change grows with scientific knowledge andnumeracy. However, among US adults who subscribe to an individualistic, hierarchical world-view, belief inhuman-caused climate change declines with science knowledge. Science knowledge has been observed tocontribute to polarization about private gun possession and hydraulic fracturing, but not nanotechnology orgenetically modified food. This polarization contributes to persistent controversy on these topics (Kahan, 2017).Building upon Feinstein's notion of the "competent outsider," Hendriks, Kienhues, & Bromme (2016)argued that to establish shared understanding, "trust is critical for 'insiders' as well as 'outsiders'" (p. 144). Theirnotion of "epistemic trust" for "outsiders" entails both willingness to be dependent on appropriate sources ofscientific knowledge and vigilance towards being misinformed. We propose to add a complementary claim: Justas epistemic trust is necessary to rely on scientific knowledge claims, open-mindedness (part of NASEM aspect7) is needed for "outsiders" to begin assessing such claims in the first place.This approach is reflected in Taylor's (2016) conceptualization of open-mindedness as a "virtue that isa mean between the opposing vices of closed-mindedness and credulity" (p. 609). She suggests that this virtuerequires one to have (1) intellectual humility (the ability and willingness to judge one's own fallibility); (2)intellectual courage (the willingness to take risks in the pursuit of knowledge despite threats to one's identity);and (3) intellectual diligence (the willingness to persist in pursuing knowledge and understanding). Thus, wepropose viewing science literacy in controversial contexts as an "epistemic balancing act": Outsiders must beable to avoid erring both on the side of credulity and on the side of closed-mindedness.This claim has important policymaking consequences. The Framework for K-12 Science Educationstates that scientists and citizens must "make evaluative judgments about the validity of science-related mediareports" and have "[t]he knowledge and ability to detect 'bad science'" (National Research Council, 2012, p. 71).The Framework even cites Ben Goldacre's popular book, “Bad Science” (Goldacre, 2009). Although a criticalstance is often appropriate, missing from this part of the document, and others like it, is an apt reference toidentification of "good"– yet counter-attitudinal – scientific knowledge as well.ReferencesAikenhead, G. S. (2006). Science Education for Everyday Life: Evidence-Based Practice. New York: TeachersCollege, Columbia University.Feinstein, N.(2011). Salvagingscience literacy.Science Education, 95(1), 168–185.https://doi.org/10.1002/sce.20414Goldacre, B. (2009). Bad Science. London: Harper Perennial.Hendriks, F., Kienhues, D., & Bromme, R. (2016). Trust in Science and the Science of Trust. In B. Blöbaum(Ed.), Trust and Communication in a Digitalized World: Models and Concepts of Trust Research (pp.143–159). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-28059-2Kahan, D. M. (2017). On the Sources of Ordinary Science Knowledge and Extraordinary Science Ignorance. InK. H. Jamieson, D. M. Kahan, & D. A. Scheufele (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of the Science of ScienceCommunication. New York: Oxford University Press.National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine. (2016a). Communicating Science Effectively.Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/23674National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine. (2016b). Science Literacy: Concepts, Contexts, andConsequences. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/23595National Research Council. (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education. Washington, D.C.: NationalAcademies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/13165OECD. (2016). PISA 2015 Science Framework. In PISA 2015 Assessment and Analytical Framework: Science,Reading, Mathematic and Financial Literacy (pp. 17–46). Paris: OECD Publishing.https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264255425-3-enTaylor, R. M. (2016). Open-Mindedness: An Intellectual Virtue in the Pursuit of Knowledge andUnderstanding. Educational Theory, 66(5), 599–618. https://doi.org/10.1111/edth.12201ICLS 2018 Proceedings1468© ISLS