Life-long Life-wide Learning Within and Beyond the DisciplinesLeslie Rupert Herrenkohl, University of Washington, leslieh@uw.eduKristine Lund, University of Lyon, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, CNRS, Kristine.Lund@univ-lyon2.frJoseph L. Polman, University of Colorado Boulder, joseph.polman@colorado.eduJosh Radinsky, University of Illinois - Chicago, joshuar@uic.eduDan Suthers, University of Hawai’i at Manoa, suthers@hawaii.eduIris Tabak, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, itabak@bgu.ac.ilAdi Kidron (chair and moderator), University of California Berkeley, kidronady@gmail.comAbstract: Does the learning sciences community need to question its epistemic values andreconceptualize its stance on the content and structure of formal schooling? Many researchersin the learning sciences investigate learning environments that center on disciplinary practices.Yet, professional settings often involve the meeting of minds and of expertise that require theability to shift between perspectives. Is a disciplinary focus a good model for preparinglearners for these roles? How well does a disciplinary apprenticeship prepare learners for theireveryday lives? This symposium includes theoretical, methodological and designpresentations that set the stage for engaging the audience in a conversation over a number ofoverarching questions that include: What motivates broadening our gaze beyond thedisciplines? What methods can help us understand the meaning of a beyond the disciplinesperspective? How might subject-matter learning be reconceptualized to adopt a beyond thedisciplines approach? What costs are involved in adopting such an approach?Overall focusIs the existing disciplinary focus of K-12 and Higher Education still an apt model for formal education? In whatways does this focus prepare learners for a multitude of vocations, for the future of work and for their everydaylives? In this symposium, we aim to understand the role that K-12 and Higher Education might play in enablinglearners to pursue both personal and professional goals. Specifically, we examine whether and how disciplinarylearning may need to be reconceptualized. We invite the audience to join us in this process. To this end, weinclude three presentations to set the stage for this discussion, and allocate a large part of the session to astructured and moderated discussion with the audience. One presentation is devoted to a retrospective andprospective framework of research on learning in the disciplines in the learning sciences. A second presentationoffers a novel reflexive methodology for studying mixed expertise that can be used to identify knowledge andskills that are involved in team encounters that transcend disciplines, and that can be used to study learningenvironments that might emulate such encounters. A third presentation proposes design principles for designingdisciplinary curricula that cultivate practices that can serve professional as well as everyday goals. Against thebackdrop of the possible framework, methodology and design offered in these presentations, we will consider,with the audience, how aspects of disciplinarity, inter-, trans- multi-disciplinarity, multivocality andmultiliteracy, which were raised in the presentations, coalesce with changing views on the roles of K-12 andHigher Education.Motivation and major issues addressedCharacterizing the nature of knowledge and practice in a discipline, and designing learning environments thatare sites of apprenticeship into these respective sets of disciplinary practices are hallmarks of research in thelearning sciences (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000; Bransford & Donovan, 2005; Bruer, 1993; Collins &Kapur, 2014; Herrenkohl & Polman, in press; Sawyer, 2014 [Part V]). These foci arose in part as a challenge toformal learning environments in which school subjects seemed to consist of a set of knowledge and proceduresthat learners should master but that bore loose ties to professional values and practices. Regardless of how wellthe knowledge and practices of school subjects cohered with professional practice, the set of underlying valuesand purposes of these practices were rarely shared with learners. The idea was that making these values andpurposes explicit, and orchestrating classroom activities around practices that cohered with these values andpurposes would enable learners to take an intentional stance to their learning that would have both cognitive andaffective learning benefits (Berland & Hammer, 2012; Lampert, 1990). Learning a discipline was seen aslearning about the nature and professional practice of the discipline as much as it was about acquiring specificknowledge and skills.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1290© ISLSThis approach seems most beneficial when there is a clear and continuous trajectory (Wenger, 1998)from formal educational settings to more advanced educational settings or to professional practice (Roberts,2011). However, few learners follow such trajectories. Learners face a multitude of possible paths. In additionto pursuing different career paths, projections concerning the future of work suggest that pursuing any careerpath will involve collaboration with different multi-professional teams, as well as mobility between differentforms and topics of expertise (Gratton, 2010; Malone, 2004). A disciplinary focus may provide opportunities forteam work and argumentation that draws on perspectives within the discipline (Osborne, 2010), but does notrequire communicating underlying assumptions across perspectives, and considering shared information in lightof multiple perspectives. Moreover, K-12’s and Higher Education’s ability to adequately prepare learners notonly for the future of work, but for the knowledge and skill demands of everyday life is increasingly questioned(e.g., Feinstein, Allen, & Jenkins, 2013). For example, the public is unlikely to design and execute a scientificexperiment in order to understand the factors that underlie a natural phenomenon, but is likely to seekinformation online in order to decide whether to get vaccinated (Tabak, 2016). It is not clear whether learningscience from a disciplinary apprenticeship perspective prepares learners for such everyday practices.Working, playing, or learning in groups or teams where participants have different types of expertise,but a common goal begins early in school and continues through adulthood, yet K-12 and Higher Educationrarely specifically teach the skills that are needed for participants to function well in groups. Particular attitudesand skills are needed in order to benefit from being in a team, but there are also challenges, some of which arespecific to context, others which are generalizable (DeHart, 2017; Rosé & Lund, 2013). In addition, the transferof the different types of knowledge gained from working in one group to another group, or from one type ofstakeholder to another is a practical as well as a methodological challenge (Adler, Hirsch Hadorn, Breu,Wiesmann, & Pohl, 2017).Learners should be able to understand why common disciplinary practices such as argumentation areimportant and how this practice might be similar and different across disciplines and problem-based contexts.Learners should also be able to appreciate the different values and stances, or what’s worth knowing or doing,that disciplines bring to shared problems and then learn to select the most vital approaches or synthesize acrossperspectives in order to offer productive solutions or explanations to particular problems. In addition, learnersshould understand that the knowledge they gain rests upon assumptions that are made about what knowledge is,but also about what kinds of evidence are acceptable, and this may depend on the discipline (Stevens,Wineburg, Herrenkohl, & Bell, 2005). And since this is also the case for others with different knowledge andexpertise, it follows that working well in groups entails that collaborators make their assumptions clear. In orderto understand the knowledge of others, one must understand the assumptions others make about the world.Here, moving from multi-disciplinary perspectives and practices to inter- and trans-disciplinary onescan sometimes be productive; Stember (1991) describes multidisciplinary work as involving people fromdifferent disciplines collaborating, with each drawing on their disciplinary knowledge; interdisciplinary work asinvolving knowledge integration and synthesis and methods from different disciplines; and transdisciplinarywork as creating unified frameworks transcending disciplinary perspectives. This approach suggests thatcultivating an anchoring in particular disciplines should be accompanied by opportunities for different forms ofencounters across disciplinary boundaries. Yet, other takes on these constructs carry alternative instructionalimplications. For example, some see inter- and trans-disciplinarity as a new thought style, moving further awayfrom the disciplinary anchors and including elements such as modes of interaction, and a pluralism of actors thatchallenges traditional power structures (such as symmetrical collaborations between scientists and the public) asdefining elements in these constructs (e.g., Darbellay, 2015). Such definitions might carry different instructionalimplications, and might offer greater continuity between preparing for work and preparing for life.Increasingly, different strands of research in the learning sciences (Herrenkohl & Polman, in press;Lund & Suthers, in press) recognize that a disciplinary approach intended to apprentice learners into academicresearch-oriented work in a single discipline does not respond well enough to the full range of current K-12 andundergraduate learning needs. However, it not clear whether abandoning disciplinary foci as a driving curricularstructure is the solution. There are also many open questions concerning the nature of disciplines and of inter-,trans- multi-disciplinarity (Lund & Frandji, 2017). We need to engage with these questions in order toreconceptualize how disciplinary learning is contextualized within a broader scope.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1291© ISLSIn this symposium, we seek to discuss how we may think about learning within and beyond thedisciplines, as well as define and support pedagogical tasks that create conditions that correspond to theseemerging pedagogical visions. We consider:•What motivates broadening our gaze beyond the disciplines?•What methods can help us understand the meaning of a beyond the disciplines perspective?o How is this anchored in differing views on multi- inter-trans-disciplinarity (MITD)?o How can novel ways of studying teams help us converge on pedagogically productive viewsof MITD?•How might subject-matter learning be reconceptualized to adopt a beyond the disciplines approach?o How can we create conditions for learners to gain competence in working together in groupswhere participants have different expertise?o How can we create conditions for learners to be able to connect the underlying values,stances, and professional practices of particular disciplines to purpose-driven action in theworld?•What costs are involved in pursuing these reconceptualizations?Symposium session structureThe session is designed to devote equal time to presentation and to discussion with the audience:•10-minutes introduction and overview of the session. (Session moderator; Adi Kidron).o In addition to presenting the key issues and motivation for the session, each presenter willcontribute questions that arise from their presentation and that concern broader implications orcontroversies. These questions will be presented in the introduction, prior to the presentations,in order to set the stage for the subsequent discussion.•45-minutes individual presentations (12-minute presentation; 3-minute clarifying questions).•The remaining 35 or so minutes will be devoted to a discussion with the audience.o The session chair will present the set of discussion-prompting questions, and the discussionwill follow these questions as well as questions and issues raised by the audience. With theaudience’s permission we will record the discussion, in order to maximize the futureknowledge construction potential of the session. We will also make use of social media toolsin order to incorporate the audiences’ thoughts and considerations, as they arise and are shareddigitally throughout the session, into the discussion.To the disciplines and beyond: Shifting epistemic stances and values inlearning sciences researchLeslie Rupert Herrenkohl, University of Washington, and Joseph L. Polman, University of Colorado BoulderThis presentation briefly explores the history and fruitfulness of learning sciences research on learning in thedisciplines. It also explores how recent and emerging work in both formal and informal settings indicates theimportance and promise of moving beyond strictly disciplinary boundaries. The field has and continues to shifttoward a more human science view (Flyvbjerg, 2001; Penuel & O'Connor, 2010) where the values, purposes,and goals of learning as well as who has the power to decide such matters are critically important to examiningand understanding learning. Borrowing the concept of phronesis, or wise action, from Aristotelian philosophicalthought (Nussbaum,1997; Toulmin, 1992; Flyvbjerg, 2001) and the practice of improvisation from Holland(Holland, Lachicotte, Skinner, & Cain, 1998), we argue that learning scientists are increasingly emphasizing therole of everyday individuals-operating-with-mediational-means (Wertsch, 1998) as a way to understandpersonal learning and development as well as cultural change. This stands in contrast to earlier research in thelearning sciences that emphasized understanding the development of expertise and then applying this knowledgeto create opportunities for non-experts to learn and ultimately approximate expert performances (Bransford etal., 2000; Dreyfus & Dreyfus, 1986; Perkins & Salomon, 1989). We offer examples from our own research injournalism (Polman & Hope, 2014; Polman, Newman, Saul, & Farrar, 2014) and science learning (Herrenkohl& Mertl, 2010) as well as emerging research from scholars in the field (Peppler, 2010, 2013; Shapiro, Kelly,ICLS 2018 Proceedings1292© ISLSAhrens, & Fiebrink, 2016; Taylor, 2017) to surface epistemic values and stances at the heart of contemporaryresearch in the learning sciences.Proposed discussion questions: (1) How do equity-oriented and emancipatory values play intodecisions about designing learning environments "beyond the disciplines"? In other words, what are thepotential advantages and disadvantages to learners of taking a view that emphasizes agency and action overpredefined disciplinary learning goals? (2) How can we as researchers and designers understand enough aboutemerging practices and communities to harness their potential in a rapidly changing world?Integrating aspects of disciplines through multivocal analyses of groupinteractionsKristine Lund, University of Lyon, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, and Dan Suthers, University of Hawai’iat ManoaIn this presentation, we describe a collaborative approach to analysis of interaction in which analysts frommultiple traditions dialogue to achieve not only a richer understanding of the data, but also to understand howtheir methods construct the object of study and provide alternate ways of producing evidence for argumentsabout analytic claims (Suthers, Lund, Rosé, Teplovs, & Law, 2013). We begin with a brief review of a selectionof analytic traditions that offer alternative perspectives on understanding interaction, and that researchers haveused to focus on the study of learning in groups. Illustrating the diversity of traditions allows us to make thecase for countering tendencies towards fragmentation and for working toward some level of coherence acrosstraditions that study group interactions. In doing so, we define what constitutes a discipline, as well as multiinter- and transdisciplinarity (Lund & Frandji, 2017; Darbellay, 2015; Klein, 1990), addressing the debate thatexists around these constructs. We then present the origins and tenets of multivocal analysis, and summarize tenpractical strategies for achieving productive multivocality. Discussion will center on how our own insights(Suthers, Lund, Rosé, Teplovs, & Law, 2013; Rose & Lund, 2013) as well as research from the Science of TeamScience (e.g., Fiore, 2008) can be leveraged to reconceptualize K-12 and undergraduate teaching and learning.Proposed discussion questions (1) As a researcher, what are the benefits in venturing outside ofdisciplinary boundaries? What are the drawbacks to doing so? How is our understanding of the nature ofknowledge influenced if we take a multi- inter, or transdisciplinary stance? (2) How do we go about teaching theskill of making connections between broad areas of inquiry — at different age levels — and why is this viewedas having more or less value than digging deeply into a single area?Multiliteracies within and beyond the disciplinesJosh Radinsky, University of Illinois – Chicago, and Iris Tabak, Ben-Gurion University of the NegevIn this presentation, we broach the tension of learning within or beyond the disciplines from a designperspective. We consider how higher education instructors, charged with teaching a particular discipline, mightredesign their courses to provide functional as well as disciplinary literacy in undergraduate education. In usingthe term functional literacy we refer to the knowledge, skills and dispositions that people might use in theireveryday lives (e.g., Burgess & Hamilton, 2011; Nutbeam, 2008; Ryder, 2001). In using the term disciplinaryliteracy we refer to the knowledge, skills and dispositions that approximate those that are used by professionalsin the discipline (Bransford & Donovan, 2005; Goldman et al., 2016; Herrenkohl & Polman, in press; Moje,2007). We focus in particular on the interpretation and sensemaking of multimodal texts (e.g., prose, images,graphs, and dynamic displays). There seems to be a false assumption that contemporary multimodal networkedresources can be straightforwardly interpreted by individuals with at least rudimentary competence in readingtexts and graphs (for a similar argument see: Wineburg & McGrew, 2016). However, we contend that the publicencounters numerous complex data representations in a variety of everyday information contexts, such asentertainment, real-estate, weather, health and general news reports that have literacy demands that are notreadily addressed through most existing K-12 and undergraduate curricula. Thus, existing curricula mayprivilege disciplinary literacy at the expense of adequate preparation for civic participation. Yet, we suggest thatthere is often an overlap between disciplinary and functional literacy, and that disciplinary learning can beredesigned to cultivate both disciplinary and functional literacy. We propose a set of design principles for suchcurricular redesign. We first present a critique of the presumed facility of contemporary networked resources.We then present our proposed principles, as well as an example illustrating how they can be used to designICLS 2018 Proceedings1293© ISLSactivities within a social science discipline. We conclude with a discussion of the promises and pitfalls of thisapproach.Proposed discussion questions: (1) Delving deeply into a discipline and understanding its values andstandards of evidence can provide broader insights into the nature of knowledge. Is this an important learninggoal and do we run the risk of not meeting this goal if we shift our focus away from disciplinary apprenticeship?(2) Teaching as disciplinary apprenticeship is not a simple feat, and even after much research in this area wehave many open questions. What type of supports will instructors need in order to not only consider disciplinarypractices, but also the points of contact between disciplinary practices and purpose-driven action in the world?ReferencesAdler, C., Hirsch Hadorn, G., Breu, T., Wiesmann, U., & Pohl, C. (2017). Conceptualizing the transfer ofknowledge across cases in transdisciplinary research. Sustainability Science. doi:10.1007/s11625-0170444-2Berland, L. K., & Hammer, D. (2012). Framing for scientific argumentation. Journal of Research in ScienceTeaching, 49(1), 68-94. doi:10.1002/tea.20446Bransford, J. D., Brown, A., & Cocking, R. R. (Eds.). (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience andschools. Washington D.C.: National Academy Press.Bransford, J. D., & Donovan, M. S. (2005). How students learn: History, mathematics, and science in theclassroom. In: Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Bruer, J. T. (1993). Schools for thought: A science of learning in the classroom. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Burgess, A. L., & Hamilton, M. A. (2011). Back to the future? Functional literacy and the new skills agenda.Lancaster University. Lancaster, UK.Collins, A., & Kapur, M. (2014). Cognitive apprenticeship. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The cambridge handbook ofthe learning sciences (2nd edition) (2 ed., pp. 109-127). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Darbellay, F. (2015). Rethinking inter- and transdisciplinarity: Undisciplined knowledge and the emergence of anewthoughtstyle.Futures,65(SupplementC),163-174.doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2014.10.009DeHart, D. (2017). Team science: A qualitative study of benefits, challenges, and lessons learned. The SocialScience Journal, 54(4), 458-467. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soscij.2017.07.009Dreyfus, H., & Dreyfus, S. E. (1986). Mind over machine: The power of human intuition and expertise in theera of the computer. New York, NY: Free Press.Feinstein, N. W., Allen, S., & Jenkins, E. (2013). Outside the pipeline: Reimagining science education fornonscientists. Science, 340(6130), 314-317. doi:10.1126/science.1230855Fiore, S. (2008). Interdisciplinarity as Teamwork: How the Science of Teams Can Inform Team Science. SmallGroup Research, 39 (3), 251-277.Flyvbjerg, B. (2001). Making social science matter: Why social inquiry fails and how it can succeed again. NewYork: Cambridge University Press.Goldman, S. R., Britt, M. A., Brown, W., Cribb, G., George, M., Greenleaf, C., . . . Project, R. (2016).Disciplinary literacies and learning to read for understanding: A conceptual framework for disciplinaryliteracy. Educational Psychologist, 51(2), 219-246. doi:10.1080/00461520.2016.1168741Gratton, L. (2010). The future of work. Business Strategy Review, 21(3), 16-23.Herrenkohl, L. R., & Mertl, V. (2010). How students come to be, know, and do: A case for a broad view oflearning. New York: Cambridge University Press.Herrenkohl, L. R., & Polman, J. L. (in press). Learning within and beyond the disciplines. In F. Fischer, C. E.Hmelo-Silver, S. R. Goldman, & P. Reimann (Eds.), International handbook of the learning sciences.Holland, D., Lachicotte, W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds. Cambridge:Harvard University Press.Klein, J. T. (1990). Interdisciplinarity: History, Theory, and Practice. Detroit, MI: Wayne State University.Lampert, M. (1990). When the problem is not the question and the solution is not the answer: Mathematicalknowing and teaching. American Educational Research Journal, 27, 29-63.Lund, K., & Frandji, D. (2017). Differing views on interdisciplinarity in the human and social sciences. Paperpresented at the Science of Team Science conference “Building the knowledge base for effective teamscience”, June 12-14, Clearwater, FL.Lund, K., & Suthers, D. (in press). Multivocal analysis: Multiple perspectives in analyzing interaction. In F.Fischer, C. E. Hmelo-Silver, S. R. Goldman, & P. Reimann (Eds.), International handbook of thelearning sciences.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1294© ISLSMalone, T. W. (2004). The future of work: How the new order of business will shape your organization, yourmanagement style and your life.Moje, E. B. (2007). Chapter 1 developing socially just subject-matter instruction: A review of the literature ondisciplinary literacy teaching. Review of Research in Education, 31(1), 1-44.doi:10.3102/0091732x07300046001Nutbeam, D. (2008). The evolving concept of health literacy. Social science & medicine, 67(12), 2072-2078.doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2008.09.050Osborne, J. (2010). Arguing to learn in science: The role of collaborative, critical discourse. Science, 328(5977),463-466. doi:10.1126/science.1183944Penuel, W. R., & O'Connor, K. (2010). Learning research as a human science: Old wine in new bottles.National Society for the Study of Education, 109(1), 268-283.Peppler, K. (2010). Media arts: Arts education for a digital age. Teachers College Record, 112(8), 2118-2153.Peppler, K. (2013). Steam-powered computing education: Using e-textiles to integrate the arts and stem. IEEEComputer, 46(9), 38-43. doi:10.1109/MC.2013.257Perkins, D. N., & Salomon, G. (1989). Are cognitive skills context-bound? Educational Researcher, 18(1), 1625.Polman, J. L., & Hope, J. M. G. (2014). Science news stories as boundary objects affecting engagement withscience. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 51(3), 315-341. doi:10.1002/tea.21144Polman, J. L., Newman, A., Saul, E. W., & Farrar, C. (2014). Adapting practices of science journalism to fosterscience literacy. Science Education, 98(5), 766-791. doi:10.1002/sce.21114Roberts, D. A. (2011). Competing visions of scientific literacy: Influence of a science curriculum policy image.In C. Linder, L. Östman, D. A. Roberts, P.-O. Wickman, G. Erickson, & A. MacKinnon (Eds.),Exploring the landscape of scientific literacy (pp. 11–27). New York: Routledge/Taylor and FrancisGroup.Rosé, C. P., & Lund, K. (2013). Methodological pathways for avoiding pitfalls in multivocality. In D. D.Suthers, K. Lund, C. P. Rosé, C. Teplovs, & N. Law (Eds.), Productive multivocality in the analysis ofgroup interactions (pp. 613-637). New York: Springer.Ryder, J. (2001). Identifying science understanding for functional scientific literacy. Studies in ScienceEducation, 36(1), 1-44. doi:10.1080/03057260108560166Sawyer, R. K. (Ed.) (2014). The cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (2nd edition): CambridgeUniversity Press.Stember, M. (1991) Advancing the Social Sciences Through the Interdisciplinary Experience. Social ScienceJournal. 28 (1), 1-14.Shapiro, R. B., Kelly, A., Ahrens, M., & Fiebrink, R. (2016). Blockytalky: A physical and distributed computermusic toolkit for kids. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on New Interfacesfor Musical Expression, Brisbane, Australia.Stevens, R., Wineburg, S., Herrenkohl, L. R., & Bell, P. (2005). Comparative understanding of school subjects:Past, present, and future. Review of Educational Research, 75(2), 125-157.Suthers, D. D., Lund, K., Rosé, C. P., Teplovs, C., & Law, N. (2013). Productive multivocality in the analysis ofgroup interactions (Vol. 15). New York: Springer.Tabak, I. (2016). Functional scientific literacy: Seeing the science within the words and across the web. In L.Corno & E. M. Anderman (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology: 3rd edition (pp. 269-280).London: Routledge.Taylor, H. K. (2017). Learning along lines: Locative literacies for reading and writing the city. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 26(4), 533-574. doi:10.1080/10508406.2017.1307198Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge, UK: CambridgeUniversity Press.Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.Wineburg, S., & McGrew, S. (2016). Why students can’t google their way to the truth. Education Week, 36(11),22.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1295© ISLS