Supporting the Development of Teacher Candidate FormativeAssessment PracticeKate Henson, University of Colorado, Boulder, kate.henson@colorado.eduAbstract: Formative assessment holds great promise as a strategy to support student learning(Black & Wiliam, 1998), however, it proves difficult for teachers to learn to do well (Box etal., 2015). This case study explores how a teacher candidate learned to enact formativeassessment with the support of a community of practice.IntroductionFormative assessment is used in the midst of instruction to draw out student ideas. Once ideas are surfacedteachers can interpret what students know and adapt instruction accordingly with the goal of improving teachingand learning (NRC, 2001). Since the publication of Black and Wiliam’s 1998 review, many empirical studieshave focused on supporting teachers as they learn to use formative assessment (e.g. Box et al., 2015; Furtak,2012). However, few studies have focused on teacher candidates and how they might be supported as they learnabout formative assessment. This case study aims to explore how one teacher candidate learned to enactformative assessment, using the tools and resources of her community, during her student teaching semester.Theoretical and conceptual frameworkI use a communities of practice (Wenger, 1998) framework to understand learning through participation. Incommunities of practice, individuals participate in, adapt and co-construct practices together, shaped byavailable tools and resources (Wenger, 1998).Although research supports the use of formative assessment, studies have found that it can be difficultfor teachers to learn to do well (Box et al., 2015). Some teachers are supported by learning communities (Furtak& Heredia, 2014) that provide a venue for teacher learning about new classroom practices such as formativeassessment. Teacher candidates, just beginning to try the practices of their teacher preparation programs, rarelyhave opportunities to engage with this type of community. Given the established complexities, teachercandidates do not have the support they need to enact formative assessment in their own classrooms. Sustainedsupport during the transition to student teaching and to the first year of teaching is essential to help teacherslearn these practices.To help illuminate how a teacher candidate might further develop knowledge and skills aroundformative assessment during student teaching, this case study investigates the outcome of one teachercandidate’s participation with a community focused on the work of formative assessment in the context of a uniton natural selection. This study aims to respond to the following question:How did a teacher candidate use collaboratively designed formative assessment tasks and classroom practicesto draw out and respond to student ideas?MethodsThis case study is situated within a research project that took place at a large, culturally and socioeconomicallydiverse suburban high school in the western United States. The study focuses on a community of eight biologyteachers and their development of formative assessments linked to a learning progression for natural selection.In the context of the research project, the biology teachers met monthly with university researchers over a twoyear period to develop the learning progression and the associated formative assessments.This case study focuses on Anna, a teacher candidate placed in the school during her student teachingsemester. Anna had previously earned a bachelor’s degree in biology and was enrolled in a post-baccalaureateteacher licensure program. During the spring semester of the second year of the research project, Anna taughttwo biology classes and participated as a member of the established teacher community.The primary sources of data include the formative assessment tasks co-developed by the community ofbiology teachers, as well as video recordings of Anna’s classroom enactments of these tasks. Anna enacted twodifferent formative assessment tasks: What gets passed on? and How did it come to be? Video recordings ofAnna enacting these tasks were made on three different days and total approximately two and a half hours ofclassroom instruction.After viewing all of the classroom enactment video, episodes were identified where students weregiven an opportunity to share their thinking (Gotwals & Birmingham, 2016). This focus on students sharingtheir thinking revealed the connection between teacher questioning and student thinking, leading to a subsequentICLS 2018 Proceedings1597© ISLSanalysis of the different types of questions asked by the teacher. The questions posed by the teacher candidatewere coded by type, as either what or how questions. What questions took the form of simple, recall typequestions such as “What was the selective force acting on the cheetah?” while how questions probed students toexplain a mechanism such as “How did the cheetahs become so fast?”. Following the classification of thequestion each questioning episode was further analyzed to determine how the student(s) responded to thequestioning and how the teacher then responded to the student(s).Findings and implicationsAnna enacted the formative assessment tasks by, first, having students work individually, second, studentsdiscussed and refined their responses in groups and finally, a representative from each group shared their ideas.Anna used both the prompts designed by the community from the formative assessment tasks as well as her ownprompts in questioning sequences with students.During the enactment of What gets passed on? seven separate episodes of questioning sequences wereidentified. Two of these episodes began with questions that asked students what happened and five asked bothwhat and how something happened. In each of the episodes, the students provided what answers and Annaresponded to students by re-voicing, evaluating, explaining, and on one occasion, asking a clarifying question.During the enactment of How did it come to be?, three episodes of questioning sequences wereidentified. One of these episodes began with a what question and two began with how questions. Studentsresponded to the what question with what responses and to the how questions with how responses. Annaresponded to students by re-voicing, evaluating, asking clarifying questions and giving feedback for answerimprovement and explaining.The most striking pattern that emerged during the analysis of the questioning sequences was that all ofthe what questions were asked in-the-moment, and the how questions were questions that had been preparedahead of time by the community. The what questions provided students with an opportunity to demonstrate theirability to recall knowledge. The how questions provided students with an opportunity to share their thinkingabout how a mechanism occurs and thus an opportunity for Anna to surface the students’ conceptualunderstanding of that mechanism.Although Anna provided students with opportunities to share their thinking the students did not alwaystake up that opportunity. In all of the five instances where Anna asked how questions while enacting What getspassed on?, students responded to those how questions with what answers. Further, when the studentsresponded with what answers to how questions Anna did not press them to explain their thinking. In two of theepisodes Anna explained the mechanism for the students rather than asking the students to do the explainingthemselves. This suggests that, while perhaps a necessary first step, having the prepared how questions to drawout student thinking, in itself, is not always enough to get students to share their thinking. Continuedprofessional development to support teacher candidates in learning how to respond to students through theirpractice could be beneficial in taking this next step.ReferencesBlack, P., & Wiliam, D. (1998). Assessment and Classroom Learning. Assessment in Education: Principles,Policy & Practice.Box, C., Skoog, G., & Dabbs, J. M. (2015). A Case Study of Teacher Personal Practice Assessment Theoriesand Complexities of Implementing Formative Assessment. American Educational Research Journal,52(5), 956–983. http://doi.org/10.3102/0002831215587754Furtak, E. M. (2012). Linking a learning progression for natural selection to teachers’ enactment of formativeassessment.JournalofResearchinScienceTeaching,49(9),1181–1210.http://doi.org/10.1002/tea.21054Furtak, E. M., & Heredia, S. C. (2014). Exploring the Influence of Learning Progressions in Two TeacherCommunities. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 51(8), 982–1020.Gotwals, A. W., & Birmingham, D. (2016). Eliciting, Identifying, Interpreting, and Responding to Students’Ideas: Teacher Candidates Growth in Formative Assessment Practices. Research in Science Education,46(3), 365–388. http://doi.org/10.1007/s11165-015-9461-2National Research Council. (2001). Inquiryandthe National Science Education Standards.Washington,DC:NationalAcademyPress.Wenger, E. (1998) Communities of practice: learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge, U.K.; New York,N.Y.: Cambridge University Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1598© ISLS