Visualizations of Community Knowledge for Supporting MiddleSchool Students to Model Phenomena in Scientific InquiryMichelle Lui, Tom Moher, and Brenda Lopez Silvammylui@uic.edu, moher@uic.edu, brendita@uic.eduUniversity of Illinois at ChicagoAbstract: In a design-based research study, 85 middle school students participated in a modelconstruction inquiry activity, where they contributed claims about species relationships. Therelationships were modeled with a food web visualization that captured the classroomcommunity’s understandings. In Year 1, the visualization and knowledge base of claims wereindependent technologies. In Year 2 the visualization was automatically constructed from thedatabase of claims. We examine the design implications of the visualizations for supportingwhole-class discussions.WallCologyResearchers have used a variety of technology solutions to support learners in collecting and sharing theirobservations with peers. This poster examines community knowledge construction of food web models andwhole-class discourse around the food web representation in two iterations of an 8-week WallCology unit. Aspart of the Embedded Phenomena framework, WallCology is a digital simulation that situates students in acomplex virtual ecosystem mapped onto their classroom walls (Moher et al., 2008). Groups of two to four studentsobserve the species through WallScope portals (i.e., computer monitors) and perform investigations on localecosystems. Since local ecosystems are designed to inhabit only a subset of the species, students must worktogether as a community to discover the complete set of relationships in WallCology. The “master food web”(MFW) serves as a public display of the classroom community’s knowledge and is the focus of teacher-led wholeclass discussions. Cycles of group work (making and justifying digital claims) and whole-class discussions(reporting on findings) drive community progress. In Year 1, claims about each species were saved onto tabletslocated in specific places within the classroom (11 species & tablets). The information was aggregated locally andaccessed on these tablets. The MFW was constructed as a class, as informed by the students’ local group work.In Year 2, claims were about relationships, describing the producer-consumer or competition relationshipbetween a pair of species. The MFW was automatically constructed in real-time from the database of claims.Figure 1. Y2 WallCology environment: WallScope (left), master food web (MFW; centre), claims dialog (right).The design-based research study was implemented over two iterations with the same teacher participant. ThreeGrade 6 Science classes participated each year, with 44 students in Year 1 and 41 students in Year 2, aged 11-12.All sessions were video recorded and whole-class discussions reviewed.FindingsY1: Focus of whole-class discussions on procedural tasks in food web constructionIn Year 1, whole-class discussions involving the MFW consisted of the teacher asking each group if they hadanything to contribute to the representation (e.g., “What do you have to add to our master food web?”). StudentICLS 2018 Proceedings1425© ISLSgroups took turns describing what they found, with minimal discussion. Below we present an illustrative examplethat characterized the discourse in Year 1. The case began with one group (of two students) reporting their findingsafter an investigation (e.g., manipulation to their ecosystem): “We decreased the population of Muk (species #4)to see what would happen to the population of others and to see if Dr. Finklesheetz (species #6) ate anything...andwhat we found out was that Muk went down [in population] after Dr. Finklesheetz also went down [in population].So we think Dr. Finklesheetz ate Muk and also the population of Mitch (species #9) went completely down.Meaning since Dr. Finklesheetz didn’t have Muk to eat he was completely focusing on Mitch.” The studentsconcluded that Dr. Finklesheetz ate Muk and Mitch. The teacher then asked “…are the arrows correct? If thepopulation of Mitch increases, does that have a positive effect on the population of Dr. Finklesheetz?” Severalstudents confirmed this. The teacher added the new food web arrows while asking students which direction thearrows should face, and then moved on to the next group once the arrows were created.Y2: Focus of whole-class discussions on the quality of claims that formed the masterfood webIn Year 2, the MFW was automatically generated through the claims submission process, off-loading theconstruction task from the teacher. She focused whole-class discussions about group claims in greater depth andthe classroom community’s emergent understanding about the entire WallCology ecosystem, as represented bythe master food web. Below we describe an illustrative example in Year 2 (at a comparable point in the unit asthe previous case). The discussion began in a similar fashion, with the same teacher asking each group to discusstheir claims and what they learned from their manipulations. With their claim displayed on the MFW, the groupbegan with: “We think Maushy (species #0) eats Phogqu (species #5). In Figure 1 you see we decreased Phogquand that Maushy went down…Maushy eats Phogque. In Figure 2, you can clearly see Maushy went down…Last,in Figure 3, you may think you see lots of Phogqu. But actually, that whole top part was filled with Phogqu,showing Maushy probably eats it. Also, you see that there are a lot more Maushy's than Pansirty's (species #7)in the picture.” The teacher then asked the class “What do you think?” and five students raised their hands. Whencalled upon, a student said “I think this claim is good but it’s not promising because the word ‘probably’ shouldn’tbe in a claim…it's just kind of like (shrugs shoulders). Also, in Figure 3 I think there should have been a ‘before’picture because it’s not that believable.” The discussion continued with the teacher describing the positivequalities of the claim (e.g., use of two clear population graphs that connects to the reasoning). She then asked if adifferent group could contribute another claim, which would strengthen the relationship on the MFW (as a thickerline). The discussion continued for a total of six minutes and included engaged verbal participation from at leastsix students (of 15 in the class) before moving on to the next group due to time constraints. The teacher alsofrequently gestured towards the MFW, particularly when addressing the class about community progress: “We’renot just trying to figure out ecosystem 5, we’re trying to figure out the whole thing. That’s the goal.”DiscussionIn both iterations, WallCology was framed around modeling species relationships as a community of learners. InYear 1, our design had students intentionally distilling community knowledge from the set of claims inconstructing the MFW during whole-class discussions. At the time, we believed the deliberate transfer ofknowledge from the claims database to the MFW was consequential and would elicit more thoughtful reflections.However, we found that the discussions did not progress past a superficial level of discourse. There was alsolimited engagement between groups during discussions. Our findings in Year 2 suggested that the MFW, as anaggregate visualization, created from real-time student-generated claims accurately reflected the state ofcommunity knowledge and was used as a meaningful object of community discourse. Whole-class discussionswere organized in a guided exploration context, which allowed the topic of discussion to be focused on the qualityof student claims. This in turn allowed the visualization to be used as a resource for identifying community effortand progress towards completion. Engaged patterns of participation was seen across groups illustrating the MFWas a context for argumentation, and adoption or rejection of candidate relationships present in the ecosystem.ReferenceMoher, T., Uphoff, B., Bhatt, D., Silva, B. L., & Malcolm, P. (2008). WallCology: Designing interactionaffordances for learner engagement in authentic science inquiry. Presented at the Proceeding of the 26thAnnual ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 163-172).AcknowledgementsThe material presented is based on work supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation under grants IIS1065275 and DRL-1020027.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1426© ISLS