Learning Biology Coherently Through Complex Systems, ScientificPractices, and Agent-Based SimulationsMiyoung Park, Emma Anderson, and Susan A. Yoonparkmi@gse.upenn.edu, ejanderso@gmail.com, yoonsa@upenn.eduUniversity of PennsylvaniaAbstract: The Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) calls for greater coherence in howscience is taught and learned in K-12 classrooms. Research on biology classrooms has shownthat different units are often taught in a disconnected way, with little focus on unifying themes(e.g., systems) that connect various concepts together in the study of biology. In this study, wehypothesized that a curricular model based on scientific practices and agent-based simulationsto teach biology through a complex systems lens would support students’ coherentunderstanding of biology. We investigated the extent to which and ways our curriculumsupported students’ biology coherence. Units covered topics of diffusion, ecology, enzymes,evolution, genetics, and modeling. Fifty-four students were randomly selected for focus groupinterviews from a larger study of 463 students. Findings provide promising evidence thatstudents developed a coherent understanding of biology.Keywords: Biology Teaching, Complex Systems, Modeling, Simulations, ScientificPractices, Integrated Knowledge, Curricular Coherence, NGSSIntroductionThe Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) in the United States has required a shift in how science istaught and learned in K-12 classrooms. There exists a greater focus on cross-cutting themes such as systemsthinking and modeling in order for students to have a deep and more connected understanding between variousconcepts that are taught (NRC, 2012). Too often, long lists of disconnected facts are taught to students with afocus on breadth, rather than on the overall coherence of how students understand science. This type ofapproach is alienating to students and also leaves them with fragments of knowledge that provides no sense ofthe creative achievements of science, logic and consistency in science, and the universality of science (NRC,2012). Some science education researchers have suggested that, in order to be a scientifically literate adult,knowledge of relationships among ideas is key—understanding the ways important ideas fit together (Roseman,Stern, & Koppal, 2010).A coherent understanding of biology is defined by an integrated understanding of the various units thatcomprise the study of biology. This means that students are able to connect separate topics with one another in away that helps them to better understand biological phenomena (Fortus & Krajcik, 2012). Additionally, anunderstanding of the relationships and patterns across units enables learners to explain and predict phenomenaas well as solve problems (Fortus & Krajcik, 2012). Yet, there are challenges that students face in developing acoherent understanding of biology. First, there exists a lack of integration across topics in science (Chiu & Linn,2011; Chiu & Linn, 2014; Gilbert & Boulter, 2000; Klymkowsky & Cooper, 2012; NRC, 2012). Second, staticimages and the ways processes are presented in textbooks make it difficult for students to see the dynamicnature of various phenomena, which make it hard for students to learn biology coherently (Hoffler & Leutner,2007; Plass et al., 2009; Roseman et al., 2010). Third, science is often taught in a didactic manner, requiringstudents to learn concepts through rote memorization, which adds to the issue that students often learn long listsof disconnected facts (Anderson & Schonbom, 2008; Osborne, 2014).We developed a curriculum intervention, which was designed to address these challenges that studentsface in learning biology coherently. This curriculum supported students’ connected understanding of biologythrough complex systems as an integrated theme, use of dynamic visualizations, and student investigations ofscientific practices related to inquiry and argumentation. The research questions that guide our study are: (1) Towhat extent did the curriculum help students to learn biology coherently?; and (2) How did the curricular modelsupport student understanding?In the following section we discuss the curricular design choices and provide evidence from theliterature that demonstrates how, in combination, these choices may address the curricular coherence problem.CSCL 2017 Proceedings199© ISLSConceptual frameworkThe study’s conceptual framework is underpinned by three current research areas in science education thatinclude learning about complex systems, instructional use of agent-based simulations, and scientific practicesthat more closely represent how science is done in the real world. Each unit in our curriculum was taughtthrough a complex systems lens in order to respond to the lack of integration across topics in science (Chiu &Linn, 2011; Chiu & Linn, 2014; Gilbert & Boulter, 2000; Klymkowsky & Cooper, 2012; NRC, 2012). Agentbased simulations are an integral part of our curriculum because they address the disparate and static manner inwhich textbooks present phenomena (Hoffler & Leutner, 2007; Plass et al., 2009; Roseman et al., 2010). Toaddress the prevalence of didactic instruction and rote memorization strategies in science class, we integratedkey scientific practices that encouraged students to actively construct knowledge (Anderson & Schonbom, 2008;Osborne, 2014). We expand on each of these literature bases in the following section.Complex systemsSystems and system models have value for integrating and unifying concepts (Pratt, 2012). Yet, students oftenhave misconceptions about systems, believing, among other things, that they are controlled by a central agentand intentionally designed with certain functions (Taber & Garcia-Franco, 2010). Learning about complexsystems is important as students develop understandings about the variability and unpredictability of systems(Osborne, 2014). Complex systems are characterized by multiple interrelated parts that form non-linearrelationships, which exhibit emergent properties. Because of this non-linearity, small changes can have largeconsequences (Yoon, 2008; Yoon, 2011). Curriculum developed through a complex systems lens can cutthrough various domains and concepts in science (Yoon, 2011; Grotzer et al., 2015; Wilensky & Rand, 2015).Although other studies have examined aspects and challenges of students’ complex systems understanding(Ben-Zvi Assaraf & Orion, 2010; Ben-Zvi Assaraf & Orpaz, 2010; Chi et al., 2012; Grotzer et al., 2015), we donot know of any studies that looked purposely at how computational thinking through complex systems cancontribute to developing a coherent understanding of biology.Agent-based simulationsThe second aspect of our conceptual framework and curriculum involves the use of agent-based simulations.Learning through simulations and modeling can lead to greater understanding of scientific phenomena throughscaffolding student meaning-making (Smetana & Bell, 2012). Visualizing patterns is better accomplishedthrough computer simulations than through static images or descriptions found in textbooks (Yoon et al., 2013).Chiu and Linn (2014) demonstrated that dynamic visualizations helped increase connections among students’ideas about chemical reactions compared to typical instruction. Beyond the simulations themselves, agent-basedmodeling allows the student to connect micro and macro aspects of scientific phenomena. By tinkering with theprogramming, students can explore questions, which reveal the implications of their ideas, while simulating newideas (Wilensky et al., 2014). Agent-based simulations enable students to understand how processes worktogether in emergent ways. In this study, we are interested in what ways this support enables students to learnabout biological complex systems in a dynamic way for coherent understanding.Scientific practicesAs students engage in scientific practices, they are involved in the very practices that are essential for a deeper,more nuanced understanding of science (NRC, 2012). The NGSS identifies eight scientific practices for K-12classrooms: asking questions, developing and using models, planning and carrying out investigations, analyzingand interpreting data, using mathematics and computational thinking, constructing explanations, engaging inargument from evidence, and obtaining, evaluating and communicating information (NRC, 2012). In one study,the importance of students’ designing, conducting, and critiquing experiments was highlighted to promote acoherent understanding of science (Chang & Linn, 2013). Students are being pushed to move beyond rotedemonstration of scientific content to developing, using, and engaging in constructing knowledge to make senseof the world (Berland et al., 2015).MethodsContextThis study is part of a larger project in which a series of units were developed to support improvedunderstanding of biology through a complex systems approach in the following topics: diffusion, ecology,enzymes, evolution, genetics, and modeling. Each unit takes 2-3 days of instruction to implement in aCSCL 2017 Proceedings200© ISLSclassroom. The units can be implemented in any order the teacher believes will best suit the curriculum in theirclassroom. Along with the curricular units, teachers were also provided with off computer tasks that could beused to introduce or reinforce complex systems ideas.Each unit consisted of a simulation and student packet, which scaffolded students’ learning aboutcomplex systems, scientific practices, along with biology content knowledge. Each of the curricular units wasintentionally constructed with complex systems components to enable students to understand multiple differentbiological phenomena through a complex systems perspective. For example, in the unit on evolution, complexsystems was first emphasized in the packet introduction. It highlighted how genetic drift is due to randomchance survival. Additionally, the units on diffusion, ecology, enzymes, and genetics also all emphasizedrandomness as a key component in understanding biological phenomena.In terms of scientific practices, students were asked to make hypotheses, collect data, create andinterpret graphs, compare results, answer argumentation questions, etc. In addition, several units requiredstudents to read or manipulate the simulation’s code. For example, students were asked to go ‘under the hood’ toexplore how fish move. Figure 1 provides an example of instruction and questions students are given in order tointerpret the code.Figure 1. Instructions for viewing the code and questions that ask students to interpret the code for thesimulations.All of the units ask students to respond to argumentation prompts that require students to state a claim,and provide evidence and reasoning to support their claim. For example, in one argumentation prompt, throughgroup discussion, students needed to figure out if the simulation has shown them genetic drift or naturalselection and why, with the following sentence starters: “Our claim is…”, “Our evidence for this is…”, and“Our reasons are that…”ParticipantsThe larger study involved 463 students in grades 9 through 12 from seven different schools in the northeasternUnited States during the academic year 2013-2014. We collected demographic information about this largergroup. For school-level data, the seven schools ranged from having 11.4% to 83% of students on free orreduced-price lunch. The schools also ranged from 3.4% to 79.1% non-white students, and ranged from 54% to89% of students above proficient in the state standardized exam. For this smaller study, we randomly selected54 students in grades 9-11 to conduct 12 focus group interviews at the end of the academic year to understand inmore detail how and what students learned.Data sourcesWe conducted 12 focus group interviews with 4-5 students in each. The combined interview time was 3 hoursand 15 minutes. Students were asked the following questions: (1) What do you think biology is? (2) Recall allthe units you did using the simulations, which units did you cover? Was there anything that these units had incommon? What were these common characteristics? (3) How do complex systems fit into biology? (4) Can youplease define what science is?Data analysisThe interview transcripts were mined for the three different conceptual framework components. For complexsystems, a coding scheme emerged through the data analysis, which included any student response that showedan overarching theme of complex systems thinking which could include nested levels, interdependence, andcomplex systems mechanisms such as randomness, feedback, cascading or nonlinear actions etc. The other twoaspects were coded using previously vetted and validated coding schemes. For agent-based simulations, acoding scheme was used from Yoon and Wang (2014), which included affordances of a phenomenon beingvisible, dynamic, details, interactive, and scaffolding. For instances of students engaging in scientific practices,CSCL 2017 Proceedings201© ISLSa coding scheme was used from the NGSS scientific practices (Pratt, 2012). Table 1 shows the coding schemefor complex systems, agent-based simulations, and scientific practices, with a description of each code and anexample and explanation for each of the codes.If the researchers disagreed on a code, the researchers discussed until they came to consensus on asingle code for that particular response. Each student was only coded once for each category. For example, if astudent made three different responses that could be coded as understanding the umbrella theme of complexsystems, that student was only coded once for that code.Scientific PracticesAgent-based SimulationsComplex SystemsTable 1: Coding SchemeCode DescriptionUmbrella theme of complex systemsStudent articulates an overarching theme of complexsystems thinking.Exemplar Coded ResponseExample: “I feel like the complex systems govern kind of theoverarching patterns that we see from stuff that’s really, reallytiny like the organelles in your cell. Like ribosomes and enzymesfunctioning and in each of those cells go by another and formorgans, each of those organs form complex systems, to formyour body. Each individual body forms complex systems within apopulation and it just builds, and builds, and builds.”Explanation: Here the student shows how multiple concepts inbiology can be understood from a complex systems lens.Example: “I think it was especially good for visualizing theVisibleAllows users to see things that are normally invisible.randomness aspect of a lot of this. You kind of hear that it movesrandomly, but you don’t quite register it until you see all thesethings bouncing all over the place. Then you are like, oh that'show they ended up over there. They weren't just making theirway for the gap, they just sort of bounced.”Explanation: Here the student is articulating that it wasn’t untilshe saw the visualization that she could truly understand that theagents were moving randomly, revealing normally invisibleinformation.Example: “So you got to see how over time they changed.”DynamicDisplays the phenomenon in motion, showing changes over Explanation: Here the student articulates the importance oftimeseeing the dynamic nature of the phenomenon.Example: “Yeah, it gave you like a visual of what was actuallyDetailsProvides scientific details of the phenomenon.happening.”Explanation: Student is articulating how actually seeing aphenomenon helped him to better understand biology.Example: “I think that was definitely the most helpful part;InteractiveEnables the user to interact with the device.being able to change something in the situation.”Explanation: Here the student articulates how changing avariable in the phenomenon, helped her learn biology better.Example: “I think the fact that everything was going on at onceScaffoldingProvides structure that focuses the users’ attention onmade it a lot clearer that a single action has more than onerelevant information.consequence. It's not just a chain reaction of events. It's all ofthis stuff is more or less happening at once, in various stages,and intersecting and bumping into each other. It's harder toconvey that on paper. You have to use a ton of arrows. Youusually just simplify it to one example of each aspect and that'sreally not how stuff worked in real life.”Explanation: By being able to show multiple things happeningat once the simulation was able to focus the students’ attentionto the fact that a single action has more than one reaction—in away that a textbook diagram cannot show.Example: “I may not directly find out what I want but I feel likeAsking questions and defining problemsStudents should be able to ask questions of each other about I’m finding out new things I didn’t know before and answeringthe texts they read, the features of the phenomena theyproblems that I would have never [gotten] to.”observe, and the conclusions they draw from their models or Explanation: Here the student articulates how he answeredscientific investigations. Asking questions and definingproblems by asking questions that he may have otherwise neverproblems progresses to formulating, refining, and evaluating considered, which helped him understand a phenomenon better.empirically testable questions and designing problems usingmodels and simulations.Example: “I’ve seen a flock of birds outside before but whenDeveloping and using modelsCSCL 2017 Proceedings202© ISLSModeling can begin with students’ models progressing fromconcrete “pictures” and/or physical scale models (e.g., a toycar) to more abstract representations of relevantrelationships in later grades, such as a diagram representingforces on a particular object in a system. It includes using,synthesizing, and developing models to predict and showrelationships among variables between systems and theircomponents in the natural and designed worlds.Planning and carrying out investigationsStudents should have opportunities to plan and carry outseveral different kinds of investigations. At all levels, theyshould engage in investigations that range from thosestructured by the teacher - in order to expose an issue orquestion that they would be unlikely to explore on their own(e.g., measuring specific properties of materials) - to thosethat emerge from students’ own questions. Planning andcarrying out investigations include investigations thatprovide evidence for and test conceptual, mathematical,physical, and empirical models.Analyzing and interpreting dataBecause raw data as such have little meaning, a majorpractice of scientists is to organize and interpret data throughtabulating, graphing, or statistical analysis. Such analysiscan bring out the meaning of data—and their relevance—sothat they may be used as evidence. Analyzing data includesintroducing more detailed statistical analysis, thecomparison of data sets for consistency, and the use ofmodels to generate and analyze data.Using mathematics and computational thinkingMathematical and computational thinking includes usingalgebraic thinking and analysis, a range of linear andnonlinear functions including trigonometric functions,exponentials and logarithms, and computational tools forstatistical analysis to analyze, represent, and model data.Simple computational simulations are created and usedbased on mathematical models of basic assumptions.Constructing explanations and designing solutionsThe goal of science is the construction of theories thatprovide explanatory accounts of the world. A theorybecomes accepted when it has multiple lines of empiricalevidence and greater explanatory power than previoustheories. Constructing explanations and designing solutionsincludes explanations and designs that are supported bymultiple and independent student-generated sources ofevidence consistent with scientific ideas, principles, andtheories.Engaging in argument from evidenceThe study of science and engineering should produce a senseof the process of argument necessary for advancing anddefending a new idea or an explanation of a phenomenonand the norms for conducting such arguments. In that spirit,students should argue for the explanations they construct,defend their interpretations of the associated data, andadvocate for the designs they propose. Engaging inargument from evidence includes using appropriate andsufficient evidence and scientific reasoning to defend andcritique claims and explanations about the natural anddesigned world(s). Arguments may also come from currentscientific or historical episodes in science.Obtaining, evaluating, and communicating informationAny education in science and engineering needs to developstudents’ ability to read and produce domain-specific text.CSCL 2017 Proceedings203you look at the programming specifically, you can see the rulesthat they’re following whereas if you looked at it outside, youwouldn’t see those rules really showing.”Explanation: Here the student articulates how seeing the rulesin the code that modeled a real-life phenomenon enabled her tobetter understand what was happening.Example: “We just made changes in the simulation but it gaveus the basis of what it means to make your own hypothesis.”Explanation: Here the student shows how developing ahypothesis was helpful.Example: “Sometimes we did [compare] data with other groupsso we got to changes to see if all complex systems are the same[or] if all were different. From mostly what we did I canremember for the most part, most group[s] kind of got the sameresults; they weren’t the same exact results.”Explanation: Here the student shows how, through datacollection and analysis of the data, they were able to see thelarger patterns across complex systems in biology, and the nonstatic nature of science, that science does not have one setanswer.Example: “I’ve seen a flock of birds outside before but whenyou look at the programming specifically, you can see the rulesthat they’re following whereas if you looked at it outside, youwouldn’t see those rules really showing.”Explanation: Here the student shows how using acomputational simulation with specific rules enabled them to seesomething they would otherwise not have been able to see andunderstand.Example: “Yeah because we [did] observations, charts andgraphs. And we also had to do that summarizing thing.”Explanation: Here the student is expressing how, in the unit,she had to summarize her findings—therefore she wasconstructing an explanation.Example: “…yeah and like the evidence, reasoning, claimthing.”Explanation: The student is explaining how she had to answerquestions using evidence, reason, and claims, the scaffoldingdesign in the project helped students answer argumentationquestions.Example: “And we had to like kind of hypothesize a lot and likeexplain why this happens and why everything comes on.”Explanation: The student is expressing how her group had to© ISLSAs such, every science or engineering lesson is in part alanguage lesson, particularly reading and producing thegenres of texts that are intrinsic to science and engineering.This includes evaluating the validity and reliability of theclaims, methods, and designs.communicate why her group had gotten the results to theirexperiments.ResultsTo investigate our research questions, we looked at the total number of responses per coded category, which isshown in Figure 2. In total, there were 114 unique codable responses. The most frequent categories includeddetail (21 responses) in agent-based simulations, umbrella theme of complex systems (18 responses), andplanning and carrying out investigations (14 responses) in scientific practices.Coded CategoryTotal Number of Responses per Coded CategoryUmbrella theme of complex systemsScaffoldingInteractiveDetailDynamicVisibleObtaining, evaluating, and communicating informationEngaging in argument from evidenceConstructing explanations and designing solutionsUsing mathematics and computational thinkingAnalyzing and interpreting dataPlanning and carrying out investigationsDeveloping and using modelsAsking questions and defining problems2053111062599101813211415Total # of Responses2025Figure 2. A bar graph representing the total number of responses per coded category.To answer our first research question, we found that 33% of students in our sample (18 students)articulated an umbrella theme of complex systems in understanding biology. For example, one student stated:I mean all [of the units] just had like -- It wasn't just sun hits plant, plant goes, yay. It was likethe protein goes over here. Then the RNA reacts like this, and this hooks onto here, but if ithits here, then it does this. If it goes over there, then it does that. There were multiple factorsall running around doing their own things and depending on how they interacted, when theybumped into each other mostly, the step would interact differently. Stuff would happen. Theywere all like that. (Focus Group ID 6, May 2014)In the above quote, the student explains that all of the units showed how systems have multiple intersectingagents, who randomly bump into each other, and depending on the ways in which they interact, differentoutcomes would occur in the system. The student shows a sophisticated understanding of complex systems andhow this is a tying theme across the units. Another student simply states, “Everything is a complex system; ifyou think about it.” (Focus Group ID 6, May 2014). This statement reveals this student sees complex systemseverywhere—understanding that complex systems are pervasive.To investigate the second research question, we analyzed students’ statements to understand the waysin which the most frequently identified supports helped students learn biology in a coherent way. Amongst thestudent responses related to the simulations, 41% identified detail as an important affordance of the simulations.For example, a student states, “The biggest thing that helps me understand biology was how everything in thesimulation has a set of rules that it follows and how things move about randomly in complex systems. It's hard toget that from a diagram that your teacher might draw on the board or something like that.” (Focus Group ID 9,May 2014). Here, we observe that seeing the detail in the simulation enabled the student to understandCSCL 2017 Proceedings204© ISLSrandomness in complex systems. This was important because his understanding of a complex system camethrough an affordance of the simulation, which ultimately contributed to his coherent understanding of biology.Amongst the student responses related to scientific practices, 31% identified planning and carrying outinvestigations as important. A student articulates that playing with the code of the simulations itself helped thestudent understand the simulation model, “I like using the coding; when you use the coding to change theprogram… Because I could control what everything was doing and I saw like how when you took the tumbleblocks in and out, I saw like [how] things worked. Like I could just know what they were suppose [sic] to do.”(Focus Group ID 5, May 2014). The student points out that being able to manipulate the code allowed her tounderstand how the agents function within the model (planning and carrying out an investigation), giving her agreater understanding of the complex system.Discussion and significance of the studyWe conducted this study in response to the need for students to have a coherent understanding of biology (NRC,2012; Roseman et al., 2010). Our curriculum was designed with complex systems, agent-based simulations, andscientific practices to address the challenges that students face in developing this coherent understanding. In theresults, we identified that there were particular aspects of the agent-based simulations and scientific practicesthat had been designed into the curriculum that enabled students to learn biology through complex systems,which in turn helped them learn biology in a coherent manner. Developing a coherent understanding of biologyusing standard curriculum is challenging to do, and here we found that a third of our students were able to veryclearly articulate a systems understanding that brought multiple units of biology together. This study wascompleted in five units that took about ten days of instruction. It was a small portion of the curriculum, andyet we see promising evidence that a third of the students had a clear understanding of complex systemsunifying the various topics in biology. From earlier studies we know that students do understand complexsystems (Yoon et al., 2015)—what we see in this study is that understanding complex systems, whichwas enabled through the details in simulations and students’ planning and carrying out their own investigations,may have contributed to their coherent understanding of biology for at least a third of the students.Agent-based simulations let students see details in processes. Scientific practices enabled students tounderstand how models function and what is actually happening in the phenomena. These scaffolds worktogether to help students learn biology coherently. Moreover, this study extends the literature that suggests waysin which supports may help students to better understand scientific phenomena (Berland et al., 2015; Osborne,2014; Wilensky et al., 2014). This is important as we consider the design of future biology curriculum and theways we can incorporate complex systems as a unifying theme for various units, with the supports ofsimulations and scientific practices. The results of this study are encouraging and give us reason to believe thatfollow-up curricula that demonstrate how biology is interconnected through a systems lens would supportpattern recognition across content domains. In the future, an experimental randomized controlled study of thiscurriculum would validate these findings, since a limitation of the current study is the lack of a control group.Additionally, further study of classroom observations and teacher interviews may reveal additional mechanismsthrough which students developed a coherent understanding of biology.ReferencesAnderson, T. R., & Schonbom K. J. (2008). Bridging the educational research-teaching practice gap.Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education, 36, 309-315.Ben-Zvi Assaraf, O., & Orion, N. (2010). System thinking skills at the elementary school level. Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching, 47(5), 540–563.Ben-Zvi Assaraf, O., & Orpaz, I. (2010). The “Life at the Poles” study unit: Developing junior high schoolstudents’ ability to recognize the relations between earth systems. Research in Science Education, 40,525–549.Berland, L. K., Schwarz, C. V., Krist, C., Kenyon, L., Lo., A. S., & Reiser, B. (2015). Epistemologies inpractice: Making scientific practices meaningful for students. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,1-32.Chang, H., & Linn, M.C. (2013). Scaffolding learning from molecular visualizations. Journal of Research inScience Teaching, 50(7), 858-886.Chi, M. T. H., Roscoe, R., Slotta, J., Roy, M., & Chase, M. (2012). Misconceived causal explanations for“emergent” processes. Cognitive Science, 36, 1–61.Chiu, J. L., & Linn, M. C. (2011). Knowledge integration and wise engineering. Journal of Pre-CollegeEngineering Education Research, 1, 1-14.Chiu, J. L., & Linn, M. C. (2014). Supporting knowledge integration in chemistry with a visualization-enhancedCSCL 2017 Proceedings205© ISLSinquiry unit. Journal of Science Education Technology, 23, 37-58.Fortus, D., & Krajcik, J. (2012). Curriculum coherence and learning progressions. In B.J. Fraser, K.G. Tobin, &C.J. McRobbie (Eds.), Second international handbook of science education (pp. 783-798). New York,NY: Springer.Gilbert, J. K., & Boulter, C. J. (2000). Developing models in science education. Dordrecht, Netherlands:Kluwer.Grotzer, T. A., Power, M. M., Derbiszewska, K. M., Courter, C. J., Kamarainen, A. M., Metcalf, S. J., & Dede,C. (2015). Turning transfer inside out: The affordances of virtual worlds and mobile devices in realworld contexts to teaching about causality across time and distance in ecosystems. Technology,Knowledge and Learning, 20, 43–69.Hoffler, T.N., & Leutner, D. (2007). Instructional animation versus static pictures: A meta-analysis. Learningand Instruction, 17, 722-738.Klymkowsky, M. W., & Cooper, M. M. (2012). Now for the hard part: the path to coherent curricular design.Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education, 40, 271-272.National Research Council. (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, Crosscutting concepts,and Core Ideas. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.Osborne, J.F. (2010). Arguing to learn in science: The role of collaborative, critical discourse. Science, 328,463-466.Osborne, J. (2014). Teaching scientific practices: Meeting the challenge of change. Journal of Science TeacherEducation 25, 177-196.Plass, J.L., Homer, B.D., and Hayward, E.O. (2009). Design factors for educationally effective animations andsimulations. Journal of Computing in Higher Education, 21, 31-61.Pratt, H. (2012). NSTA’s Reader’s Guide to a Framework for K-12 Science Education. Expanded Edition.NSTA Press: Arlington, VA.Roseman, J. E., Stern, L., & Koppal, M. (2010). A method for analyzing the coherence of high school biologytextbooks. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 47, 47-70.Smetana, L. K., & Bell, R. L. (2012). Computer simulations to support science instruction and learning: Acritical review of the literature. International Journal of Science Education, 34(9), 1337–1370.Taber, K. S., & García Franco, A. (2010). Learning processes in chemistry: Drawing upon cognitive resourcesto learn about the particulate structure of matter. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(1), 99-142.Wilensky, U., Brady, C., and Horn, M.S. (2014). Fostering computational literacy in science classrooms.Communications of the ACM, 57(8), 17-21.Wilenksy, U., & Rand, W. (2015). An introduction to agent-based modeling. Modeling natural, social andengineered complex systems in NetLogo. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.Yoon, S. (2008). An evolutionary approach to harnessing complex systems thinking in the science andtechnology classroom. International Journal of Science Education, 30(1), 1-32.Yoon, S. (2011). Using social network graphs as visualization tools to influence peer selection decision-makingstrategies to access information about socioscientific issues. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20(4),549-588.Yoon, S., Anderson, E., Koehler-Yom, J., Sheldon, J., Schoenfeld, I., Wendel, D., Scheintaub, H., Klopfer, E.,Oztok, M., & Evans, C. (2015). Design features for computer-supported complex systems learning andteaching in high school science classrooms. Journal of Research in STEM Education, 1(1), 17-30.Yoon, S., Klopfer, E., Wang, J., Sheldon, J., Wendel, D., Schoenfeld, I., Scheintaub, H., & Reider, D. (2013).Designing to improve biology understanding through complex systems in high school classrooms: Nosimple matter! In the proceedings of the Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, Madison,Wisconsin.Yoon, S., & Wang, J. (2014) Making the invisible visible in science museums through augmented realitydevices. Tech Trends. 58(1), 49-55, 2014.AcknowledgementsWe thank Eric Klopfer, Josh Sheldon, Ilana Schoenfeld, Daniel Wendel, Hal Scheintaub, and Jessica Koehlerfor their collaboration on the project. This work was funded by the U.S. National Science Foundation DiscoveryResearch K­12 (DRL 1019228).CSCL 2017 Proceedings206© ISLS