Youth, Learning and Social Media in K-12 Education:The State of the FieldEmilia Askari, Diana Brandon, Sarah Galvin, and Christine Greenhow (1)e.s.askari@gmail.com, dlbrandon17@gmail.com, sgalvin119@gmail.com, greenhow@msu.eduMichigan State UniversityAbstract: Prior reviews of social media in education found that most early research focused oncollege students. This review analyzes emerging research on social media with youngerlearners. Using PRISMA standards, we considered 1321 articles, selecting 48 reviewed here.We find that research on social media in K-12 learning is increasing rapidly, yet largely failingto study impacts on learning. Research is taking place across the globe on a variety of socialmedia platforms, but the majority continues to look at the oldest K-12 learners. Few studies usecontrol groups or comprehensively use analytic data collected by social media platforms. Wehighlight opportunities for scaling K-12 learning with social media globally and call foreducators to engage more with social media developers and owners. With this overview, weoffer an agenda for future learning sciences research, policy, practice and commercialdevelopment in this growing field.IntroductionEducational researchers and professionals have theorized the potential of social media to transform learning inand out of classrooms (Greenhow & Askari, 2017; Manca & Ranieri, 2012). Educational design initiatives haveshown that engineered Facebook applications can support knowledge building and discussion in informal(Greenhow, Gibbons and Menzer, 2015) and formal higher education settings (Tsovaltzi et al, 2014). However,we know very little about K-12 students’ processes, perceptions and outcomes related to learning with thesetechnologies. Unlike studies in the learning sciences that have focused on isolated technology-based learningenvironments, open social media spaces offer expanded vistas from which to study cultures of learning andteaching. For instance, online social networks introduce tools, people, and materials to school culture that couldhelp to break up established routines and assist students in getting feedback on their performances (Greenhow,2009). However, the field has struggled to understand the new cultures of learning arising in such "openenvironments" and connect them with educational practices.In spite of their merits, social media are still largely perceived in the public discourse as platforms forsocial interaction devoid of learning (Whiting & Williams, 2013). Educational policies worldwide restrict theiruse, some even banning social media altogether, while others are vague and unhelpful. We propose a differentapproach – evidence based – focusing on the learner as a key factor in the effective use of social media-enabledlearning environments. In this novel synthesis of over a decade of educational research, we present the state-offield concerned with youth, learning and social media (2007-2017). This systematic literature review aims toprovoke conversation on how learning scientists can advance timely, usable research that informs policy debatessurrounding social media in K-12 education and the design of learning environments.Social media, learning and youthSocial media, like social network sites (e.g., Facebook, Ning) and microblogging services (e.g., Twitter) include:1) uniquely identifiable profiles that consist of user-supplied content and/or system-provided data; 2) (semi-)public display of connections that can be traversed by others; and 3) features that allow users to consume, produce,and/or interact with user-generated content provided by their connections (Ellison & Boyd, 2013, p. 7). Recentusage statistics in the U.S. indicate that Facebook dominates teenager’s media practices; in 2014, 78% of youthaged 12-17 reported using Facebook (Elliott 2014). Learning applications and pedagogy that build on theseroutines may help bridge formal and informal learning by situating social learning opportunities within students’everyday online contexts and appropriating peer interactions on both curricular and extracurricular topics. Thetheoretical foundation of research on social media, learning and youth is unsettled, with scholars citing a widerange of explanations for how and why the learning occurs. Social learning theory as articulated by Vygotsky(1978) is one popular foundation of research in this emerging field. So is Gee (2015)’s affinity space theory,Jenkins’ (2009) writings on participatory cultures, Wegner (1998)’s ideas about communities of practice andSeaman (2008)’s work on collectivism. Several studies included in this review are based on Ellison, Steinfieldand Lampe (2007)’s work on social capital in digital spaces as well as Goffman (1959)’s theories about identityICLS 2018 Proceedings344© ISLSformation. Scholars suggest that social media can facilitate learners’ collaborative knowledge construction;accessing specialized just-in-time information, contributing to the hybridization of expertise; relationaldevelopment and peer/alumni support especially in times of transition; academic help-seeking; social and civicbenefits; and the blurring of boundaries between learning spaces, social spaces and leisure spaces (Manca &Ranieri 2013). Other scholars assert that these environments should be used for social reasons not for formal orinformal learning (Crook, 2011; Selwyn, 2010).To date, reviews of the educational research on learning and teaching with social media provide littleguidance to teachers or designers on best practices for applying these technologies in K-12 education. Publishedliterature reviews have focused mainly on the perceptions and experiences of college students (Aydin 2012; Manca& Ranieri 2013) and higher education faculty (Forkosh-Baruch & Hershovitz 2012). Moreover, the benefits ofappropriating these technologies into learning contexts are contested in this research. Some studies suggest theiraffordances for interaction, collaboration, information and resource sharing (Maxman & Usluel 2010);encouraging participation and critical thinking (Mason & Rennie 2006; Ajjan & Hartshorne 2008); and increasedpeer support and communication about course content and assessment (DirVall & Kirwin 2012). Other researcherswarned against exploiting social network sites for learning. Kirschner and Karpinski (2010), for instance, foundthat time spent on Facebook negatively affected college students’ grades. The purpose of this systematic literaturereview is to assess the current state of educational research on K-12 youth, learning, and social media (2007-2017)to set a programmatic agenda for the future of learning sciences research in this area.Connection to ICLS 2018 and partner conference themesThis literature review connects to the ICLS 2018 Conference theme by contributing to our understanding of thecomplexity of K-12 learners’ processes, perceptions and concerns when social media, and designed applications,are embedded in different educational and cultural contexts. This research synthesis will also contribute to theknowledge base on how learning may be facilitated with existing social media platforms and designedapplications.Furthermore, this paper connects to themes of the Festival of Learning partner conferences: AEI(concerned with ubiquitous learning environments, informal learning, and social networks), Learning@Scale(concerned with opportunities to scale learning), and the development of commercial educational technology byadvancing knowledge of the state-of-the field of youth, learning and social media research to foregroundopportunities to design and study educational applications that run on global social networks, potentially leadingto commercialization. Acknowledging that the most popular social media are owned by commercial companies,and are monetizing information collected from users, we offer ideas about how educators might engage morepowerfully with these companies to shape the future of these important communication and education platforms.MethodsThe Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) Standards guided themethodology for this literature review (Moher, et al., 2009). In consultation with a library science expert, theteam identified four prominent databases for educational research: Education Full Text, ERIC, Scopus, and Webof Science. We performed database searches using the following terms: “(K-12 Teaching OR teacher training ORprofessional development OR elementary school or middle school or high school) AND (social media or socialnetwork sites or social networking sites or Facebook or Twitter or microblogging or Pinterest or Instagram) NOT(higher education)” finding 1268 articles. Note: this paper will address themes in the articles concerned with K12 learners only and not themes in identified articles related to K-12 teachers and preservice teachers as this codingis still ongoing. The team reviewed each title and abstract, evaluating the relevance of each record. Criteria for anarticle’s inclusion were: a focus on K-12 learning (e.g., students’ learning in- or outside of school) and an inclusionof social media within our parameters (e.g. social networks, microblogs, collaboration tools, etc.). Articles wereexcluded if they were outside of K-12 education (e.g. nursing school, undergraduate education, etc.).Furthermore, 100 journals publishing education or educational technology research were identified basedon previous reviews (Manca & Ranieri, 2013). Any journals not covered in the database search underwent amanual table of contents search for the years available: Journal of Literacy and Technology (Dec. 2007 - Present),Journal of Educational Technology Development and Exchange (2011 - Present), and International Journal ofOnline Pedagogy and Course Design (2011 - Present). Two journals were unavailable online and, therefore,excluded: International Journal of Continuing Education and Lifelong Learning and International Journal ofTechnology in Teaching and Learning. We also scanned the bibliographies of articles deemed relevant. Throughthis process, we identified an additional 53 articles from other sources; we removed 8 duplicates, leaving a totalof 93 articles.ICLS 2018 Proceedings345© ISLSThose 93 articles were then rated by three independent researchers based on the abstract and as needed,the full text. Any discrepancies between coders were discussed and resolved. This process lead to the exclusionof 42 articles deemed not relevant, leaving a total of 50 relevant articles. Of these 50 articles, two were excludedbecause they could not be accessed. During the process, each researcher kept notes about search and relevancedecisions, in keeping with the PRISMA standards.The 48 full-text articles were then read and coded by the team and analyzed for themes. Based onprevious literature reviews (e.g. Greenhow & Askari, 2017; Manda & Ranieri, 2013; 2016) five categories wereidentified as important to note in analysis: country context for the study; social media platform; age and/or gradelevel of participants; methodology; type of learning: formal, informal or other. Further, coders looked to the datato derive additional themes, allowing the data to suggest categories outside those established in the literature.FindingsThe overarching conclusion of this review is that research into uses of social media in K-12 education is rapidlyincreasing. Where earlier reviews of social media in learning found only a handful of studies with participants inthe K-12 age range, this review identified 48 studies published in peer-reviewed journals, most within the last fiveyears. Yet, within that sample, participants still skewed towards the older end of our age spectrum. Only six ofthe 48 studies in this review had elementary school aged participants (5-11 years old). Seventeen had participantsof middle school age (12-15 years old) while 36 had participants of high school age (16-18 years old).While Facebook remains the most prolifically studied social media platform (22 studies or 46%), thebreadth of the literature is expanding. The next largest percentage of studies reflects this trend; ten (or 21%) werenonspecific in their research, collecting data on social networking sites in general rather than limiting findings toa particular platform. Sixteen different types of social media were represented in the articles; one was designedby Mallan, Singh, and Giardina (2010) specifically for their learners.The diversity in social media studied is likely a result of the global interest in learning with social media.With 21 different countries represented in 48 articles, it is clear that the impacts of social media on K-12 learningis a worldwide concern. Furthermore, no single country has a monopoly on this the work; the country where themost studies (10) were conducted, the United States, still accounts for less than 20% of the places researched.England, with eight studies, and China, with five, were the next most frequently represented countries in ourdataset. Only one study (Lantz-Andersson, Vigmo & Bowen, 2013) compared social media use by K-12 studentsin different countries (i.e., in Colombia, Finland, Sweden and Taiwan).Roughly equal numbers of studies focused on informal (19 studies) and formal (22 studies) learningcontexts. Although definitions of informal and formal learning are contested in the research literature (Greenhow& Lewin, 2015), informal learning here refers to unconscious personal development (e.g. identity work) orconscious, but voluntary learning that is not a requirement of the classroom curriculum (Greenhow & Lewin,2015). Formal learning may be driven by teaching objectives or curricula associated with K-12 schooling. Fourstudies straddled informal and informal learning, while three studies focused on describing student practices onsocial media that connected to learning without anchoring the study to any specific learning environment. Forinstance, Cook (2012) engaged hundreds of English high school students in focus group discussions of thedifferences in their social media practices in school and outside of school. Ma and Chan (2014) surveyed 299Hong Kong high school students about their motivations for sharing content via social media, and Lee (2015)surveyed 720 middle and elementary students in Korea about negative behaviors on social media such as usingimproperly using digital content without the owner’s consent.In examining topics taught in classrooms where formal learning studies were conducted, the mostcommon subject addressed was language arts, including writing and digital media, which served as the focus for13 studies, explored below under the Media Literacy heading. Six studies focused on teaching study skills orcollaboration within a formal classroom where other subjects of learning were not specified (Andersson, Hatakka,Grönlund & Wiklund, 2014; Fewkes & McCabe, 2012; Kio, 2016; Rosen, Carrier & Cheever, 2013; Vasbø,Silseth & Erstad, 2014; Vilca & Vallejos, 2015). Five studies analyzed social media use in science- or technologydesign-related classrooms (Huang, Wu, She & Lin, 2014; Lai et al., 2015; Reynolds & Chiu, 2016; Veira, Leacock& Warrican, 2014; Won, Evans, Carey, & Schnittka, 2015). As an example of the studies connecting social medialearning to science learning in k12, Won, Evans, Carey, and Schnittka (2015) surveyed 44 students at a Virginiamiddle school, documenting the utility of Edmodo for supporting collaborative design process in an afterschoolprogram, Studio STEM. Three studies took place in classrooms where English as a Second Language was taught(Lantz-Andersson, Vigmo & Bowen, 2013; Sun et al., 2017; Vikneswaran & Krish, 2016).A strong preference for surveys emerged in methodology across the studies. A total of 26 studies (54.2%)used a survey. Thirteen studies (27%) used only surveys as their source of data, with eight focusing on informallearning and five divided between formal and informal learning.ICLS 2018 Proceedings346© ISLSThe number of participants in the 48 studies in this review ranged from one, for a case study analyzingone English student’s Bebo profile page (Dowdall, 2009), to 2611, for a survey of social media use by high schoolstudents in England and Wales (Luckin, et al., 2009). Fourteen studies, nearly 30% of the articles in this review,had 50 participants or fewer including five studies with ten participants or fewer. Twenty-seven studies, (56%)had more than 100 participants, including six with 500-1000 participants and three with more than 1,000participants.Twenty studies (or 41.7%) included some quantitative analysis of social media activity such as numberof posts. An additional eight studies included observation of social media or implementation of social media aspart of the procedures, making a total of 30 studies (62.5%) that directly engaged with social media. The otherstudies asked participants to describe experiences using social media to support student learning.Only five studies (or 10.4%) used a control and treatment group design (Baris & Tosun, 2013; Cano,2012; Ch., Mahmood, & Rasood, 2016; Lai et al., 2015; Sun et al., 2017).Impact on learning outcomesOne of the most startling trends identified was the dearth of attempts to measure social media’s impact on studentlearning. Only nine studies, including the five control and treatment design studies mentioned above, presentedsuch findings. Baris and Tosun (2013); Cano (2012); Huang, Wu, She, and Win (2014); Lai et al. (2015); andReynolds and Chiu (2016) all found content-specific grade improvements because of social mediaimplementation. Sun et al. (2017)’s work with English as foreign language students found that social media isalso effective in improving English language skills. In an interesting disagreement, Ch., Mahmood, and Rasood(2016) and Khan, Wohn, and Ellison (2014) found correlations between social media use and higher grades, whileRosen, Carrier, and Cheever (2013) found that social media use led to lower overall GPAs. Although the majorityof studies reported success with social media in K-12 classrooms regardless of acknowledged challenges, thesefindings, in most studies, are not supported by data on changes in student learning connected to social media.Social media and literacyThroughout the literature, social media is seen as creating both a new path toward learning traditional languagearts skills as well as a path toward gaining new digital skills – media literacy – that prepare students for the 21stcentury. Karal, Kocok, and Cakir (2015), for example, found that Facebook helped improve 30 Turkish highschool students’ writing skills, analyzing how their interactions and relationships between students themselvesand between the teacher and students were essential to their growth. Li and Wu (2017) used a survey and focusgroup to study how 1,039 high school students in China practiced reading on WeChat, investigating theirmotivations through a cultural and social lens. Cano (2012) found that 280 high school students performed betteron Spanish assessments after integrating Twitter into the curriculum.Beyond bringing new perspectives and methods to traditional literacy skill sets, Reynolds and Chiu(2016)’s work with 242 middle and high school students suggests media literacy may help address the digitaldivide. The study’s data comparing students’ computer skills growth with the education levels of their parentsshowed that students whose parents had lower education levels improved more than those whose parents hadhigher levels of education after the implementation of the game-design social media, Globaloria. Although Lu,Hao, and Jing (2016) did not find a similar correlation between parent education level and student social mediause in their survey of 186 Hong Kong high school students, these two studies may still be pointing towards thesame finding: the potential for media literacy learning is not dependent on parent education level; media literacyprograms in schools can create equal competence in students from varying backgrounds.Luckin et al. (2009) explains that social media has the potential to be an asset in students’ learning, butthat a lack of the media skills required to complete complex tasks online is preventing effective application. Basedon their case study of three 5th grade girls’ usage of Reading Revolution, Lindstrom and Niederhauser (2016,p.116) build on the idea that students need a new skill set to be academically productive online: media literacyis “a new cultural form that builds on established rules and conventions, and is neither right nor wrong, but simplyconstitutes a new way to communicate.”Peer-to-peer learning and hybridized expertiseSocial learning as an aspect of media literacy was highlighted in 13 studies, underlining the affordance of socialmedia to continue peer-to-peer interaction and learning beyond specified school times and places. As one of thesestudies – Khan, Wohn and Ellison (2014, p. 139) – points out, “Evidence shows that the cognitive processes fordeep learning and information retention processes occur in dialogs.” In traditional educational setting, thisdiscussion occurs in a classroom. Social media extends those conversations, which numerous studies found to becritical to learning, and which also mimic the kind of learning that occurs in many work situations the studentsICLS 2018 Proceedings347© ISLSwill encounter later in life. Khan, Wohn and Ellison (2014) collected survey responses from 690 US high schoolstudents, finding that Facebook enabled students to collaborate effectively on learning activities, includinghomework and resource-seeking.Civic learning and engagement with the world outside of schoolThree studies highlight the affordance of social media to connect learners with the world beyond the classroom.Beach and Doerr-Stevens (2011) used Ning as a platform for capturing the argumentative exchanges of 30 studentsin a U.S. high school participating in a virtual debate about school policies. The authors concluded that socialmedia can be beneficial for forefronting competing opinions on an issue and encouraging response towardsbuilding collective understanding if not always agreement. Huang, Wu, She and Lin (2014) analyzed the Facebookposts of 83 Taiwanese high school students engaged in group conversation about science news as a tool forcollectively developing understanding of the nature of science. Charitonos, Blake, Scanlon and Jones (2012) usedTwitter to help 29 British 13- and 14-year-olds share ideas about artifacts explored on a field trip to The Museumof London.Steps towards bringing social media learning to scaleFour studies reach toward developing tools that might be used to support learning by young people via socialmedia at scale, envisioning replication in educational contexts around the world. Oussalah, Escallier and Daher(2016) is among them. The authors created an automated system for analyzing Twitter posts by 133 high schoolstudents in England. The system explored ways to assess the grammar used in these posts, and was supplementedby surveys asking students about their perception of the experiment. While the authors conclude that abbreviationsand slang that are commonly used on Twitter create challenging obstacles for automated analysis of grammar,this study takes a step toward potential future development of similar tools that might be deployed with largenumbers of learners.In addition, the three studies looking at using social media to learn English as a Second Language offerpotential guidance for developers thinking about using social media at global scale in K-12 learning. Given aBritish Council (2014) report declaring English to be the dominant global language with 1.5 billion learnersstudying English as a Second Language, and noting that “there appears to be a fast-moving worldwide shift, innon-anglophone countries, from English being taught as a foreign language (EFL) to English being the mediumof instruction (EMI) for academic subjects such as science, mathematics, geography and medicine,” (Dearden,2015, p. 4), these studies suggest how social media might be used to address the planet-wide market for Englishlearning. Unlike many other subjects, English grammar and usage may be less negotiable and influenced localcurricular preferences than some other subjects, and thus perhaps more suitable for learning at scale. Yet, weacknowledge that all languages evolve, and people learning English as a Second Language are participating inthat process (Sockett & Toffoli, 2012). Studies with college students have found that social media is seen as agood place to learn English (Kabilan, Ahmad & Abidin, 2010; Yunus, Salehi, & Chenzi, 2012) -- a concept thatcould reach an even wider audience of informal English learners (Sockett & Toffoli, 2012). Turning to the k12studies in this review focused on learning English as a Second Language, Vikneswaran and Krish (2016) examinesthe motivations of ten Chinese-speaking high school students in Malaysia who are asked by their new school touse Facebook to help them learn English. As Vikneswaran and Krish (2016, p.298) observes, "writing on socialmedia platforms is generally informal, hence making it easier for users who are not very proficient in the Englishlanguage to contribute their thoughts and ideas" without expectation of judgement, forefronting more intrinsicmotivations related to learning and communication with peers. Lantz-Andersson, Vigmo and Bowen (2013)analyzed a closed Facebook group created for use by a total of 60 high school students studying English as asecond language in Colombia, Finland, Sweden and Taiwan. The authors found promise for using Facebook as amedium for language learning across cultural context, noting, however, that such efforts must be “deliberatelyand dynamically negotiated by educators and students to form a new language-learning space with its ownpossibilities and constraints” (Lantz-Andersson, Vigmo & Bowen, 2013, p. 310). Sun et al. (2017) analyzed how72 Chinese first graders studying English used Chinese-based social media platform focused on sharing photosand audio files, Papa. The authors found that students who communicated with each other in English by sharingrecordings improved significantly more than a control group. This shows potential for using Papa and similarapplications at scale, in other settings -- both formal and informal -- where English is not the native language.Discussion and implicationsOur findings suggest opportunities for research, facilitation of learning, education policy, and commercialdevelopment of educational technology, as discussed in these next sections.ICLS 2018 Proceedings348© ISLSAgenda for researchThe field of research on social media in K-12 education is still young. We see numerous opportunities for futurestudies in with this population – particularly focusing on social media’s impact on learning outcomes.Additionally, more studies are needed with elementary school-aged participants, who are the least-studied agegroup in this review. Further, we hope to see more studies using data related to social media posts actually madeby students, as opposed to more studies asking students how they use social media. Nevertheless, we see this dataon actual posts as one component of potentially rich ethnographies of student social media use, which would bebolstered by student interviews exploring motivations and impacts related to social media usage. Noting that wereviewed only research published in English, yet observing that many of the studies in this review were conductedin countries where English is not the native language, we call for reviews similar to ours analyzing research printedin other languages – and ideally sharing that analysis with the English-speaking research community. Further, wesee a need for more comparative studies looking at use social media use in K-12 learning in different languageand culture contexts.Facilitation of learning: implications for teaching practicesAs many studies in this review point out, facilitating learning with social media in K-12 settings presents teachingchallenges. Therefore, we offer three practical suggestions for K-12 teaching context. First, use social media tocreate a sense of community and a space to build relationships. Social media enables students to create acomfortable, supportive environment, where learning risks and identity development can be explored without fearof judgement (Eamer, Hughes & Morrison, 2014; Erjavec, 2013; Vikneswaran & Kirsh, 2016). Encouragingstudents to use social media as a way of blending identity and academic work allows students to have an authenticexperience and reveals details of students’ learning practices that can inform teachers’ practices (Lindstrom &Niederhauser, 2016; Vasbø, Silseth & Erstad, 2014). Forkosh-Baruch, Hershkovitz, and Ang (2015) looked atdifferences between teachers and students who were and were not willing to connect on Facebook, and this themeof understanding the significance of the changing relationships that social media incurs is also emphasized in thework of Callaghan and Bower (2012) and Yang, Crook, and O'Malley (2014).Second, teach students how to use social media for more than the transfer of information; integratecreative projects in which students are producing content. Given more training in advanced skills, social mediadoes not need to be a distraction for students in the classroom; it can be a vehicle for discovery, constructivistlearning, and imaginative thinking (Charitonos, Blake, Scanlon, & Jones, 2012; Fewkes & McCabe, 2012; Khan,Wohn, & Ellison, 2014; Lu, Hao, & Jing, 2016; Luckin et al, 2009; Ranieri & Bruni, 2014). Mallan, Singh, andGiardina (2010) called for more student involvement in teachers’ quests to understand the potential of technologyin the classroom; youth adapt technology to their needs just as quickly as technology improves, and they can be aresource for discovering useful social media tools.Third, maintain a strong teacher presence and accepting social media as an integral part of students’ lives.Andersson, Hatakka, Grönlund, and Wiklund (2014) proclaim that teachers need to “reclaim the students,” andrather than thinking of social media as a “beast,” teachers should embrace more structure and stricter management(p. 49, 47). Social media cannot be ignored in the classroom; it is a “hidden curriculum” fully integrated in youths’learning whether teachers accept it or not (p. 22). Rosen, Carrier, and Cheever (2013) point to the impossibilityof expecting students to disengage from their digital lives during class; students will always check their phones,or worry about checking their phones; instead of fighting a losing battle, consider options that ease students’multitasking compulsion without detracting from learning such as offering “technology breaks” (p. 956). As Caseyand Evans (2011) summarize, “Teachers cannot take this approach in fear of chaos and disorder; they must findinnovative ways to construct disorder and flow with chaos and build resilience to the traditional training thatinstinctively drives them to take control” (emphasis added).Implications for education policyOur results suggest the need for shifts in education policy at all levels – school, district or region, state and national.If we acknowledge that K-12-aged students are growing up with social media as large component of global culture,then we need educational policies at all levels that support teachers’ use of these important communicationplatforms for learning. School-level policies that block access to social media sites should be reexamined.Curriculums that are silent on use of social media should be amended to include suggestions on how to use socialmedia effectively. In addition, teachers should be offered guidance on how to manage their professional socialmedia accounts in ways that will model good digital citizenship. When teachers observe misbehavior on socialmedia, there should be policies in place to encourage resolution and turn these mis-steps into learning experiences.We note that while the tone of most studies in this review is positive, our search criteria eliminated studies focusedon cyberbullying and social-media related depression, where these studies were not explicitly also connected toICLS 2018 Proceedings349© ISLSlearning. Nevertheless, some studies in this review noted learning-related downsides to social media use, such asinattention and lower grades. In this context, we wonder why educators are ceding control of data about howyoung people are using social media in education to the for-profit companies that create social networkingplatforms. The data collected by Facebook and other popular social networking sites on users – including ouryoungest students – is analyzed by Facebook and its competitors and sold to private data brokers for marketingpurposes (Ramirez, Brill, Ohlhausen, Wright & McSweeny, 2014). As educators, we ask: why should we allowthese companies to make money from our students’ use of these important platforms of communication andliteracy development? Why isn’t it easy for researchers to get data about uses of social media in educationalcontexts? Since the Terms of Service created by these companies require users to give up much of the data abouttheir use of these platforms for marketing purposes, why shouldn’t these companies be compelled to share thedata for research purposes as well? We note that Facebook Research partnered with researchers on several oftcited studies with college student participants (Ellison, Steinfield & Lampe, 2007; Ellison, Steinfield & Lampe,2011). That work and other studies conducted with college students should be extended to younger students,especially since developmental theory suggests that early adolescence is a time when friendships and related socialcapital are intensely important (Berndt, 1982). We are eager to see collaborations between social media companiesand researchers working in K-12 education contexts. Under U.S. law, major social media companies are allowedto design for users who are 13 or older, so there should be no legal restraints to conducting large-scale researchon social media with US students in middle school and high school. We call for policies at all levels of educationpushing for greater access for researchers to data collected by social media platforms that may be owned by largefor-profit corporations, yet are increasingly used as essential tools in public education. By blocking researcheraccess to this data, school policies are not protecting students’ privacy. Instead, such policies merely ensure thatonly the for-profit companies that own the major social media platforms are seeing this data.Implications for the commercial development of educational technologyCompanies such as Facebook and Twitter are powerful enough to compare their executives to global politicalleaders. These companies profit from selling the data they collect about all their users, including students andteachers, to companies that want these users to buy commercial products and services. Social media companies,notably Facebook, have been widely criticized for designing algorithms to manipulate user’s emotions to provokeengagement with paid content. Yet it is possible to envision newer, innovative platforms replacing or remakingthese iconic social media brands. In this discussion of future developments of social media in education, we drawattention to the ideas of the high school student participants studied by Bowler, Knobel and Mattern (2015, p.1274), who suggested that in the future social media developers should “design for hesitation, design forconsequence, design for empathy, design for personal empowerment, design for fear, design for attention, anddesign for control and suppression.” For example, social media could employ more “undo” buttons, giving usersthe ability to edit or even erase social media activity over a longer period of time. Social media could usealgorithms to connect people who might be impacted by the topic of a post with people who are discussing thattopic from a distance on social media. We think such features would enhance learning opportunities with socialmedia in K-12. We hope that the public-interest perspectives of K-12 students and teachers -- and the researcherswho study them -- will help develop the next generation of social media.Endnotes(1) Authors contributed equally and are listed alphabeticallyAbbreviated ReferencesDue to space constraints please find the full Reference List here: http://bit.ly/youthlearningsocialmediaAndersson, A., Hatakka, M., Grönlund, Å., & Wiklund, M. (2014). Reclaiming the students–coping with socialmedia in 1: 1 schools. Learning, Media and Technology, 39(1), 37-52.Baris, M. F., & Tosun, N. (2013). Can social networks and E-portfolio be used together for enhancing learningeffects and attitudes?. TOJET: The Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, 12(2).Beach, R., & Doerr-Stevens, C. (2011). Using social networking for online role-plays to develop students'argumentative strategies. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 45(2), 165-181.Berndt, T. J. (1982). The features and effects of friendship in early adolescence. Child development, 1447-1460.Bowler, L., Knobel, C., & Mattern, E. (2015). From cyberbullying to well‐being: A narrative‐based participatoryapproach to values‐oriented design for social media. Journal of the Association for Information Scienceand Technology, 66(6), 1274-1293.ICLS 2018 Proceedings350© ISLSBritishCouncil.(2014).TheEnglishEffect.RetrievedNovember17,2017fromhttps://www.britishcouncil.org/sites/default/files/english-effect-report-v2.pdf.Callaghan, N., & Bower, M. (2012). Learning through social networking sites–the critical role of the teacher.Educational Media International, 49(1), 1-17.Casey, G., & Evans, T. (2011). Designing for learning: Online social networks as a classroom environment. TheInternational Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 12(7), 1-26.Ch, A. Q., Hussain, T., Mahmood, Z., & Rasool, M. S. (2016). A Comparative Study between the Learning Styleof User and Nonuser Students of Social Media at Elementary School Level. Bulletin of Education andResearch, 38(2).Huang, H. Y., Wu, H. L., She, H. C., & Lin, Y. R. (2014). Enhancing Students' NOS Views and ScienceKnowledge Using Facebook-based Scientific News. Journal of Educational Technology & Society,17(4).Lantz-Andersson, A., Vigmo, S., & Bowen, R. (2013). Crossing boundaries in Facebook: Students’ framing oflanguage learning activities as extended spaces. International Journal of Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning, 8(3), 293-312.Li, W., Wu, Y. (2017). Adolescents’ social reading: motivation, behaviour, and their relationship. The ElectronicLibrary, 35(2), 246-262.Lindstrom, D. L., & Niederhauser, D. S. (2016). Digital Literacies Go to School: A Cross-Case Analysis of theLiteracy Practices Used in a Classroom-Based Social Network Site. Computers in the Schools, 33(2),103-119.Luckin, R., Clark, W., Graber, R., Logan, K., Mee, A., & Oliver, M. (2009). Do Web 2.0 tools really open thedoor to learning? Practices, perceptions and profiles of 11–16‐year‐old students. Learning, Media andTechnology, 34(2), 87-104.Manca, S., & Ranieri, M. (2016). Is Facebook still a suitable technology-enhanced learning environment? Anupdated critical review of the literature from 2012 to 2015: Is Facebook a suitable TEL environment?Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 32(6), 503–528. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.12154Mao, J. (2014). Social media for learning: A mixed methods study on high school students’ technologyaffordances and perspectives. Computers in Human Behavior, 33, 213-223.Mazzoni, E., & Iannone, M. (2014). From high school to university: Impact of social networking sites on socialcapital in the transitions of emerging adults. British Journal of Educational Technology, 45(2), 303-315.Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG, The PRISMA Group (2009). Preferred Reporting Items forSystematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses: The PRISMA Statement.PLoS Med 6(7):e1000097.doi:10.1371/journal.pmed1000097Oussalah, M., Escallier, B., & Daher, D. (2016). An automated system for grammatical analysis of Twittermessages. A learning task application. Knowledge-Based Systems, 101, 31-47.Ranieri, M., & Bruni, I. (2013). Mobile storytelling and informal education in a suburban area: a qualitative studyon the potential of digital narratives for young second-generation immigrants. Learning, Media andTechnology, 38(2), 217-235.Ranieri, M., Manca, S., & Fini, A. (2012). Why (and how) do teachers engage in social networks? an exploratorystudy of professional use of facebook and its implications for lifelong learning. British Journal ofEducational Technology, 43(5), 754-769. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8535.2012.01356.xRosen, L. D., Carrier, L. M., & Cheever, N. A. (2013). Facebook and texting made me do it: Media-induced taskswitching while studying. Computers in Human Behavior, 29(3), 948-958.Rust, J. (2015). Students' Playful Tactics. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 58(6), 492-503.Won, S. G., Evans, M. A., Carey, C., & Schnittka, C. G. (2015). Youth appropriation of social media forcollaborative and facilitated design-based learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 50, 385-391.Yang, Y., Crook, C., & O'Malley, C. (2014). Can a social networking site support afterschool group learning ofMandarin?. Learning, Media and Technology, 39(3), 267-282.ICLS 2018 Proceedings351© ISLS