A New Approach to Lesson Study Practice in Japanfrom the DBIR PerspectiveJun Oshima, Ritsuko Oshima, Yuji Chiyonishio, and Ayano Ohsakijoshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jp, roshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jp, chiyo@edu.shimane-u.ac.jp, ohsaki-ayano@aiit.ac.jpRECLS Shizuoka UniversityAbstract: We report our progress in developing continuous improvement for educationalpractices in a local school district in Japan. Utilizing design-based implementation research(DBIR) design principles, we started to identify a focus for joint work with a school. Afterthree years of searching for and identifying a focus for joint work (development andevaluation of student collaboration skills), a teacher and researchers started collaborativeDBIR research practice as a new lesson study using a new evaluation tool, socio-semanticnetwork analysis of student discourse. In addition to an ordinary post-lesson colloquium, weperformed a second post-lesson colloquium that combined researchers’ discourse analysiswith teacher observations and evaluations to share and discuss. The second post-lessoncolloquium was found to significantly facilitate comprehension of how students engaged instudent learning.Keywords: design-based implementation research, lesson study, socio-semantic network analysis,post-lesson colloquiumBackground and research purposeDesign-based research (DBR) is now widely pervasive (Barab & Squire, 2004; Sandoval & Bell, 2004), but wesometimes experience communication breakdowns between practitioners and researchers in Japan. This mightbe due to the unique historical background of lesson study practice in Japanese teacher communities. There,lesson study is an established professional development practice in which teachers exchange ideas forimproving classroom lessons, share lesson plan documents, act out lessons for their colleagues to observe, anddiscuss and analyze how lessons should proceed based on lesson plans across a variety of scales, fromindividual schools to national events (Lewis, Perry, & Murata, 2006). On the surface, lesson study practice isvery similar to DBR in that it takes PDCA (plan–do–check–act) steps. However, practitioners and researchersapproach educational practices from different perspectives. First, teachers are more concerned with localizedhow-to and know-why knowledge, whereas researchers are more interested in the transferability ofpractitioners’ knowledge (Bereiter, 2014). Second, teachers do not necessarily have epistemic beliefs for theknowledge society regarding their teaching (Oshima et al., 2006), most of which are not related to newperspectives of learning as knowledge creation (Paavola & Hakkarainen, 2005). To bridge the gap betweenpractitioners and researchers in educational practice, we applied an interventionist approach (Penuel, Cole, &O’Neill, 2016) from the perspective of design-based implementation research (DBIR) (Fishman et al., 2013;Penuel et al., 2011) to design the lesson study for facilitating teachers’ comprehension of student engagement intheir collaboration by using a new evaluation technology.An interventionist approach to lesson study in japanDBIR studies (e.g., Fishman et al., 2013; Penuel et al., 2011) propose four design principles for the sustainableimprovement of educational practices at scale. First, a DBIR team should form around a focus on persistentproblems from multiple stakeholder perspectives. Our DBIR team comprised teachers, a principal, a memberfrom the district’s educational department, and researchers like us. The team was formed at the request of thedistrict’s educational department for school reform to bring our learning sciences expertise into classroompractices. Before starting our lesson study practice with teachers, we visited the school several times to observeand discuss their practices. Through discussions with the principal and teachers, we extracted two problems.One problem was that instructional goals were based on national curriculum guidelines. Although every schoolis obliged to follow these guidelines, doing so is sometimes not feasible when students have standardized scoresbelow 40 for knowledge corresponding to their grade level. Researchers provided teachers with the concept oflearner-centered approaches, and decided to start lessons by setting a level of expertise that students could buildon. Another challenging problem was new assessments that appropriately evaluate improvement in students’collaboration skills and their conceptual understanding of the study topic. Standardized tests do not capture fineimprovements in student expertise during collaboration. Test scores did not correspond with teacher673assessments of their students’ understanding. To solve this problem, we proposed the use of video-basedanalysis and a socio-semantic network analysis of students’ discourse that we developed (Oshima, Oshima, &Matsuzawa, 2012).Second, our team committed to iterative and collaborative design. Our collaborating school hadengaged in the iterative cycle of their lesson study before we began the collaboration. We further implementedknow-why (theoretical) knowledge of how to design lessons by using jigsaw instruction. More specifically, weintroduced the concept of constructive interaction (Miyake, 1986) for designing expert group activities. Evenwhen students tackle the same content, they can bring different perspectives to the materials. Differences instudent perspectives constructively induce interaction. We discussed how to design study documents andworksheets so that every student could contribute new perspectives. In jigsaw activities, where students havingstudied different materials gather and collaboratively integrate knowledge sources, students are supposed toengage in productive interaction across multiple zones of proximal development (ZPD) depending on theknowledge sources examined (e.g., Brown & Campione, 1996). To facilitate interactions across multiple ZPDs,we examined how study materials in the expert group would interact to help students come up with ideas forforest management.Third, we were concerned with developing theory and knowledge related to both classroom learningand implementation through systematic inquiry. To develop theoretical knowledge related to classroomlearning, we decided to implement a new assessment technology, socio-semantic network analysis (SSNA) ofdiscourse (Oshima et al., 2012). SSNA was used in this study as an assessment tool for researchers to analyzestudent discourses during jigsaw group activities, then provide teachers and other stakeholders with feedback onhow they engaged in collective knowledge advancement. (We discuss SSNA in more detail in the “LessonStudy from the DBIR Perspective” section). Furthermore, through implementation of the new assessment toolfor student discourse, we revised our lesson study practice by having another post-lesson colloquium a monthafter the ordinary post-lesson colloquium conducted on the research lesson day. The two post-lesson colloquiawere expected to facilitate our scrutiny of research lessons from multiple stakeholders’ perspectives and toenable more systemic inquiry.Finally, we were also concerned with developing capacity for sustaining systemic change. Theeducation department provided funding of seven million yen (about US$60,000) to renovate infrastructure andto purchase information and communications technology such as iPads for students to use during inquiry-basedlearning. We discussed with teachers and the principal how they wished to renovate their learning environment,and coordinated the construction and purchase processes. The educational department asked us to additionallycoordinate renovation of the learning environment at a high-performance school, to implement what they called“sandwiching” tactics. That is, they thought that if we succeeded in reforming both high- and low-performingschools, other schools might be more interested in similar reforms.Lesson study from DBIR perspectivePurpose of the lesson study in DBIRThe lesson study practice reported in this study was a sub-component of our DBIR project with highest- andlowest-performing high schools. In both schools, we collaborated with teachers of different subjects. The highperforming school was a top-quality college preparatory school. Most graduates go on to colleges or universitiesafter graduation. The low-performing school was an industrial high school for agriculture and forestry forstudents with low learning skills and motivation. The educational department requested that the researchers helpboth schools establish new learning cultures based on the idea of 21st-century skills (Griffin, McGraw, & Care,2012). To that end, the educational department decided to encourage schools to implement jigsaw instruction asa collaborative learning method. Our mission in lesson studies at the two high schools was to create a new styleof learning activity that applies students’ prior knowledge and expertise to improve jigsaw instruction. Wepreviously reported our progress in developing a learning culture at the prep school at CSCL 2015 and 2017(Oshima et al., 2015, 2017). In this paper, we report on progress in our collaborative lesson study at theagricultural and forestry high school.Research lessonThe study topic was forest management. Seven twelfth-grade students had engaged in extensive forestry studiesand had managed practical forest divisions for three years. The instructional goal was understanding how tomanage forests in consideration of their carbon fixation function. During 50-min class periods, expert groupstudents were divided into three groups to study 1) determining the size of their practical forests using a digitalplanimeter, 2) figuring out how much carbon dioxide per hectare is fixed by trees of different ages by examining674a graph, or 3) calculating how many trees are needed to fix the amount of carbon dioxide produced by a personin Japan by examining a table of tree volumes and carbon fixation amounts. In jigsaw group activities during thenext class period, students from different expert groups were grouped to exchange ideas and integrateknowledge regarding how forest divisions should be managed to maximize carbon dioxide fixation. Studentactivities were video recorded using 360-degree cameras and microphones, and their discourses weretranscribed for SSNA.Figure 1. Participatory structure of the jigsaw instruction.Socio-Semantic Network Analysis as a new assessment tool for teachers andresearchers to share and examine student discourseIn the computer-supported collaborative learning research (CSCL) field, there have been discussions on theadvantages of using social network analysis (SNA) to investigate collective knowledge advancement (e.g.,Martinez et al. 2003; Reuven et al. 2003). De Laat et al. (2007) proposed an approach to synthesizing andextending comprehension of CSCL teaching and learning processes to balance SNA, content analysis, andcritical event recall. In the complementary approach, SNA was used to study interaction patterns within alearning community in the network, and to study how participants share and construct their knowledge. De Laatet al. (2007) concluded that the inclusion of SNA in any multi-method approach is advantageous, because itprovides researchers and learners with tools for illustrating comprehension and cohesion of group activities, aswell as providing researchers a method for selecting appropriate groups to study. For instance, to analyzestudent collective knowledge-building in Knowledge Forum, Zhang et al. (2009) implemented a complementaryapproach that used SNA to visualize and compare classroom collaboration among fourth-grade elementaryschool students over three years. An analysis of online participatory patterns and knowledge advancementindicated that this learning process effectively facilitated knowledge advancement through critical changes inorganizations within the classroom, from fixed small groups in the first year of the study to appropriatecollaboration through the dynamic formation of small teams based on emergent goals.Based on those preceding studies, we extended the potential of SNA by developing a different type ofnetwork, the socio-semantic network. Ordinary SNA illustrates the social patterns of learners. As de Laat et al.(2007) suggested, this approach is thus informative when examining developments or changes in theparticipatory structure of a community. However, several studies have argued that existing social networkmodels cannot examine how collective knowledge advances through learner collaboration (Oshima et al., 2012;Schaffer et al., 2009). Instead, we proposed a procedure similar to ordinary SNA but with a different type ofsocial network, one based on the words learners use in their discourses. Figure 2 shows the interface of a SSNAtool called Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer (KBDeX) (Oshima et al., 2012). Discourse datasets in CSV675format can be input into KBDeX and analyzed by visualizing a socio-semantic network of vocabulary ofresearcher concern. In addition to visualization of the socio-semantic network, KBDeX also providesresearchers with several metrics of network structures, such as centralities. The visualization of studentdiscourse, a socio-semantic network of vocabulary in particular would help practitioners to examine howstudents collaborate from the perspective of collective knowledge advancement.In their ordinary post-lesson colloquium after the research lesson, practitioners discuss how the lessonunfolded by relying only on observation notes. They also sometimes use video data, but such use is notsystematic and shows certain points of discourse or activities that they consider as important for reflection.Computational analysis tools like KBDeX would further extend practitioners’ reflections in post-lessoncolloquia as follows. First, they can easily view and compare total processes of student discourse betweengroups. When practitioners examine the discourse process of a given group, they can stop the visualization andfreely review what happened during collaboration, rewinding to the original discourse and conducting briefconversation analysis. After examining all groups, they can be categorized into cohorts representing specificinteraction patterns. Practitioners can also examine student contributions to collective knowledge advancementthrough discourse by discarding exchanges from the discourse datasets to reveal changes in the vocabularynetwork structure. Significant structural changes are characteristic of significant student contributions.Figure 2. Socio-semantic network analysis with KBDeX.In ordinary lesson study, teachers conduct a post-lesson colloquium on the same day as the research lesson. Inour DBIR lesson study, we added a second post-lesson colloquium in which researchers used SSNA to analyzestudent discourse in the jigsaw group and to give teachers feedback regarding researcher findings forcomparison with teacher reflections in the first post-lesson colloquium. Colloquia were video recorded andtranscribed. Here, we report on researchers’ SSNA analysis of student discourse and how findings comparedwith teachers’ reflections in the first post-lesson colloquium to develop new ideas for improving lesson plans forthe next year.SSNA of student discourse in jigsaw group activitiesTo examine how students in the jigsaw group activities engaged in collective knowledge advancement, weselected a list of vocabulary related to the materials studied in the expert groups and visualized the selectedvocabulary network of their discourse (Figures 3 and 4). Each visualization shows how a student contributed tocollective knowledge advancement. Red nodes in the visualization represent vocabulary terms used by thestudent.In both groups, student discourses were visualized as well-structured vocabulary network. Most wordsrepresenting three expert-group documents were used in the discourses and interconnected. However, when we676examined how many words each student used and which expert documents the words came from, differences instudent contributions between the groups were revealed. Our analysis suggested that jigsaw group 1 betteradvanced collective knowledge than did group 2. This finding contradicted teacher reflections in the first postlesson colloquium. In jigsaw group 1, students used many words from all the three expert group documents intheir discourse. This revealed that student contributions to collective knowledge advancement were distributedand overlapped among students, who attempted to link their ideas with others from their expert perspective. Incontrast, one student (2c) in jigsaw group 2 took the lead in integrating different pieces of knowledge, followedby two other students (2a and 2b). The fourth student (2d) used a single word related to his expert groupdocument but did not contribute at all. The teacher evaluated student 1a and 2a as unmotivated ones based onhis classroom practices (“They do not like to pay attention to the study topic, instead playing games on theirsmartphones during class.”), but our SSNA found that they played important roles in integrating different piecesof knowledge from expert documents. The results of our SSNA suggested that these learners did not meetteacher expectations. Rather, they contributed to collective knowledge advancement by making utterances thatlinked different ideas or helped others to do so.Figure 3. Socio-semantic network of vocabulary in a jigsaw activity by group 1.Figure 4. Socio-semantic network of vocabulary in a jigsaw activity by group 2.Teacher reflections on student learning based on observations and SSNA at post-lesson colloquia677We conducted the second post-lesson colloquium one month after the research lesson. At the second post-lessoncolloquium, researchers first explained their analysis of student discourse in jigsaw group activities, thenaccepted questions from practitioners. We as researchers demonstrated visualization of student discourse frombeginning to end. We then summarized our SSNA results as described in the previous section. When theresearch lesson teacher saw the vocabulary network visualized for jigsaw group 2 compared with group 1, herecognized that advancement by group 1 exceeded that of group 2. This awareness led him to ask theresearchers to demonstrate in detail how group 1 engaged in their discourse. Researchers ran KBDeX tovisualize time-serial changes in vocabulary network structure, stopping at times of critical change. We discussedhow each student in group 1 contributed to collective knowledge advancement by looking back at the originaltranscript and video.During the second post-lesson colloquium, teachers and researchers could come up with issues forfurther research lessons. First, we need to redesign the lesson plan so that student contributions during groupactivities might be more democratized. The remarkable difference in student contributions to their collectivediscourse in KBDeX demonstrated that the jigsaw participatory structure was insufficient for supportingstudents in productive collaboration for knowledge creation. Further instructional intervention (namely,scaffolding) should be implemented. We decided to further modify the expert group documents and the jigsawgroup activity worksheet in order to democratize student contributions. Second, teachers realized that studentmotivation was not innate, but rather resulted from interaction with the environment. SSNA clearly showed thattypically “unmotivated” students productively engaged in collaboration though discourse. The research lessonteacher was highly interested in what motivated students to work on the study topic in the research lesson. Theresearchers were asked to provide a detailed analysis of discourse to allow specification of possible factors formotivation and lesson plan redesign based on the analysis.DiscussionWe started our DBIR by searching for and deciding on a focus for joint work with teachers and the school. Wespent three years identifying the focus for joint work, development of collaboration skills as an instructionalgoal, and implementation of a tool (SSNA) for evaluating changes in student discourse at finer granularity. Inthis paper, we reported on how we designed a new lesson study practice using DBIR as an extension ofteachers’ original practices. Here, we discuss how our interventionist approach would make our collaborationsustainable in the future.First, we did not have to introduce completely new ideas for lesson plans. Teachers at the school hadalready started lesson study for jigsaw instruction. What we attempted was to help them to examine theirinstruction and lesson plans from a perspective of learning as knowledge creation, that is, how students engagein collective knowledge advancement during discourse. Many teachers are resistant to theory, which theyconsider unhelpful for creating lesson plans and conducting them in the classroom. During our joint three-yearendeavor to search for a focus for our work, we successfully developed a trust relationship by sharing lessonstudy practices many times. After the three years, teachers requested that we implement something from ourtheoretical perspective. We felt that it was time for more rigorous lesson research by intimately collaboratingwith teachers as reflective practitioners.Second, to more rigorously examine student discourse, we proposed that the school implement SSNAas an assessment tool. We recommended this because we considered the tool as needed for evaluating studentdiscourse. Before starting our research lesson in the year, we introduced SSNA at another meeting andrequested that they use it for the evaluation. The school was interested in implementing this new assessmenttool. Implementation of the new tool consequently led to the second post-lesson colloquia, which were found tobe productive for several reasons. One reason was that time (a month) had passed since the research lesson. Theresearch lesson teacher and researcher could step back a bit and discuss how the lesson went on based on avariety of evidence. Doing so might facilitate us to “reflect on our action rather than reflection in action”(Schön, 1983). In his seminal book on reflective practitioners, Schön defined two types of reflection thatpractitioners engage in. Reflection in action is a process by which practitioners reflect on their present action.When someone reflects-in-action, he becomes a researcher in the practice context. He is notdependent on the categories or established theory and technique, but constructs a new theoryof the unique case. (Schön, 1983, p. 68)In our research lesson practice, the first post-lesson colloquium was an opportunity for the teacher to engage inreflection-in-action since the lesson was in the middle of a curriculum of the study unit. As Schön described, theteacher realized “new” incidents that were unexpected before the lesson and attempted to explain why they678happened. In his attempt, there was no space for us to introduce theories to his reflections, because he dealt withseveral incidents case-by-case. Over the three years of our experiences with teachers, this phenomenon wastypically seen in post-lesson colloquia right after the research lesson. At the second post-lesson colloquium, wesucceeded in implementing reflection on action.We reflect on action, thinking back on what we have done in order to discover how ourknowing-in-action may have contributed to an unexpected outcome. (Schön, 1983, p. 26).At our second post-lesson colloquium, we brought a variety of evidence on research lessons from multiplestakeholders’ perspectives. Although evidence from different perspectives suggested different conclusions, thecontradictory relation among different pieces of evidence stimulated our boundary-crossing effort (Engeström,1999, 2011) to develop more comprehensive understanding of learners.In this way, our interventionist approach to lesson study practice promoted a new style of lesson studythrough partnerships among teachers, the school, the district education department, and researchers. In futureresearch, we will further examine whether this change represents just another proof of concept or continuousimprovement. The following studies are further necessary and promising. First, we have to conduct morerigorous qualitative analyses of how our designed post-lesson colloquium has influence on the critical change inteachers’ epistemic beliefs and comprehension of students’ performance. We can examine how we as a group ofpractitioners and researchers constructed our shared understanding of student performance based on the resultsof SSNA by conducting the conversation analysis. Second, our report here is only the result in the first year ofour endeavor. Through the iterative lesson studies in the DBIR framework, we can further examine ourhypothetical design principles of the post-lesson colloquium.ReferencesBarab, S., & Squire, K. (Eds.). (2004). Special issue on design-based research. Journal of the LearningSciences, 13(1).Bereiter, C. (2014). Principled Practical Knowledge: Not a Bridge but a Ladder. Journal of the LearningSciences, 23(1), 4–17.Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1996). Psychological theory and the design of innovative learningenvironments: On procedures, principles, and systems. In L. Schauble & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovationsin learning: New environments for education (pp. 289–325). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence ErlbaumAssociates.de Laat, M., Lally, V., Lipponen, L., & Simons, R.-J. (2007). Investigating patterns of interaction in networkedlearning and computer-supported collaborative learning: A role for social network analysis.International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2(1), 87–103.Engeström, Y. (1999). Innovative learning in work teams: Analyzing cycles of knowledge creation in practice.In Y. Engeström, R. Miettinen, & R.-L. Punamäki-Gitai (Eds.), Perspectives on activity theory (pp.377–404). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Engeström, Y. (2011). From design experiments to formative interventions. Theory & Psychology, 21(5), 598–628.Fishman, B. J., Penuel, W. R., Allen, A.-R., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. (2013). Design-Based ImplementationResearch: An Emerging Model for Transforming the Relationship of Research and Practice. NationalSociety for the Study of Education, 112(2), 136–156.Griffin, P., McGaw, B., & Care, E. (Eds.). (2012). Assessment and teaching of 21st century skills. Dordrecht:Springer.Lewis, C., Perry, R., & Murata, A. (2006). How should research contribute to instructional improvement?: Thecase of lesson study. Educational Researcher, 35(3), 3–14.Martinez, A., Dimitriadis, Y., Rubia, B., Gomez, E., & de la Fuente, P. (2003). Combining qualitativeevaluation and social network analysis for the study of classroom social interactions. Computers &Education, 41(4), 353–368.Miyake, N. (1986). Constructive interaction and the iterative process of understanding. Cognitive Science, 10,151–177.Oshima, J., Horino, R., Oshima, R., Yamamoto, T., Inagaki, S., Takenaka, M., Yamaguchi, E., Murayama, I., &Nakayama, H. (2006). Changing Teacher’s Epistemological Perspectives: A Case Study of TeacherResearcher Collaborative Lesson Studies in Japan. Teaching Education, 17(1), 43–57.Oshima, J., Ohsaki, A., Yamada, Y., & Oshima, R. (2017). Collective knowledge advancement and conceptualunderstanding of complex scientific concepts in the jigsaw instruction. In Smith, B. K., Borge, M.,679Mercier, E., and Lim, K. Y. (Eds.), Making a Difference: Prioritizing Equity and Access in CSCL, 12thInternational Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 2017, Volume 1 (pp.57–64). Philadelphia, PA: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Oshima, J., Oshima, R., Masukawa, H., Chiyonishio, Y., Hayashi, K., Yamaguchi, E., & Ohsaki, A. (2015).Instructional design for facilitating collective discourse with tablet PCs for understanding scientificconcepts. Presentation at the preconference workshop at CSCL2015.Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Matsuzawa, Y. (2012). Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer: A social networkanalysis application for knowledge building discourse. Educational Technology Research &Development, 60, 903–921.Paavola, S., & Hakkarainen, K. (2005). The knowledge creation metaphor—An emergent epistemologicalapproach to learning. Science & Education, 14, 535–557.Penuel, W. R., Cole, M., & O’Neill, D. K. (Eds.). (2016). Special issue on contemporary cultural-historicalapproaches to intervention. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25(4).Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development at theintersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331–337.Reuven, A., Zippy, E., Gilad, R., & Aviva, G. (2003). Network analysis of knowledge construction inasynchronous learning networks. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 7(3), 1–23.Sandoval, W. A., & Bell, P. (Eds.). (2004). Special issue: Design-based research methods for studying learningin context. Educational Psychologist, 39(4).Schaffer, D. W. et al. (2009). Epistemic network analysis: a Prototype for 21st Century assessment of Learning.International Journal of Learning and Media, 1(2), 1–21.Schön, D. (1983). The Reflective Practitioner: How professionals think in action. London: Temple SmithZhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., & Messina, R. (2009). Designs for collective cognitive responsibility inknowledge-building communities. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18, 7–44.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the participating teacher and students. We also have gratitude to Barry Fishman for his comments onour earlier draft. This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 16H0187.680