Multimodal Engineering Design Notebooks andMeta-Representational CompetenceKristen Wendell, Tufts University, kristen.wendell@tufts.eduChelsea J. Andrews, Tufts University, chelsea.andrews@tufts.eduPatricia Paugh, University of Massachusetts Boston, patricia.paugh@umb.eduFayette Shaw, Tufts University, fay.shaw@tufts.eduAbstract: Research in mathematics and science education shows that elementary studentsdevelop more sophisticated disciplinary ideas and practices when teachers provide explicitsupports for discourse and representation. Extending this research to engineering education,we describe how a multimodal design notebooking app influenced fifth graders’ work duringa collaborative design challenge. Unexpected meta-representational competence emerged asstudents constructed and critiqued external representations of their engineering designsolutions in notebook entries as well as in more formal texts.IntroductionResearch in mathematics and science education has generated powerful strategies that help young learnersparticipate in the Discourses that mediate individual and collective knowledge building in a particular discipline(McKlain & Cobb, 2001; Michaels & O’Connor, 2012). Compared to mathematics and science, in engineeringeducation less is known about how to support discursive and representational practices during learningexperiences in elementary classrooms. Although a growing number of organizations offer K-5 engineeringcurriculum materials, the field is still discovering how instructional supports such as talk moves and studentnotebooks help create learning environments where all elementary students can fully participate in engineering.The overall goal of our research is to explore the influence of multimodal documentation technologyon elementary students’ engineering design discourse and decision-making. Adapting earlier work on digitalscience notebooks and design diaries (e.g., Puntambekar & Kolodner, 2005) to both elementary-schoolengineering and to modern computing tools, we developed a design notebooking iOS app to support students indocumenting and reflecting on their engineering design ideas, tests, and decisions in disciplinary ways. Thisposter reports on an early teaching experiment with the notebooking app in which we found that students’ metarepresentational competence mediated the influence of the technology on their engineering thinking.Theoretical approachIn this research we draw on decades of learning sciences research on knowledge-building communities wherethinking is made visible in order to apprentice learners to ways of representing ideas in a particular discipline(Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989) and to enable idea improvement by others (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994).Within the discipline of engineering, knowledge-building involves making evidence-based arguments about thesoundness of design decisions. Documentation and visualization tools aid professional engineering designers indoing this work (Aurigemma, 2013). Young engineering students may need specific scaffolds to document andvisualize their engineering design work in particular ways at particular moments. In turn, the acts ofdocumentation and visualization may help them engage in the challenging discourses of small-groupengineering design (McFadden & Roehrig, 2018). The design notebooking app that we developed and used inthis teaching experiment offers seven multimedia notebook page templates: Problem, Ideas, Test, Final Design,Feature, Exploration, and Issues. Each template combines brief prompts with blank photo, video, sketch, or textfields to highlight a different epistemic practice of engineering design. These templates draw on the idea thatdisciplinary work involves using the discipline’s epistemic forms – ways of organizing knowledge – and playingits epistemic games – sets of rules, strategies, and moves made to populate a form (Collins & Ferguson, 1993).Methodological approachThe data for this study come from a teaching experiment that three authors conducted with two teachers at anelementary school in a city in the eastern United States. In a fifth-grade classroom where students had notpreviously participated in engineering design, the first author and lead teacher co-taught a unit on theengineering of “stomp rockets,” paper devices launched by air pressure. Over the course of ten days (60 minuteseach day), students planned, built, tested, documented, and discussed the success and failure of small rocketsmade out of lightweight paper and plastic. Working in teams of three or four, they used the design notebookingapp for documentation, and at the end of the unit they created formal posters with both texts and figures toICLS 2018 Proceedings1649© ISLSpresent design recommendations to another class of students. Before creating their own notebooks and posters,students analyzed several “mentor texts”– examples of completed digital design notebooks and design posters.We utilized an interpretive case study approach and microethnographic analysis (Bloome et al., 2005)to explore the students’ discursive and representational practices as they interacted with the notebooking appand created their design posters. Data sources included classroom field notes, digital and tangible studentartifacts, video recordings, and transcripts of whole-class and team conversations. To characterize how fluentlystudents created and critiqued different kinds of representations of their engineering designs, we turned to priorwork investigating children’s meta-representational competence, which is the ability to generate representationsspontaneously, to judge the adequacy of such representations for a disciplinary task, and to notice differencesbetween spontaneous representations and more canonical ones (diSessa, 2004).Preliminary findingsAs students captured their design work with the notebooking app and created posters to summarize their designrecommendations, they displayed meta-representational competence frequently during whole-class discussionsin two main ways. First, they intentionally generated new forms of representation to model aspects of rocketperformance that photos or text alone could not show. For example, one student explained why she sketchedwavy lines inside a wireframe drawing of her team’s rocket: “See the squiggly in black? We drew that, since wecouldn’t get a clear picture of what it would look like on the inside of a rocket, so we decided to draw, estimate,what our picture would look like, so that squiggle in the hole is showing the air going into the hole, whichwould push the rocket up.” Second, as the students judged the adequacy of their own and other teams’multimodal representations, they explicitly discussed the strengths and weaknesses of the notebookingtechnology for communicating about design ideas and results. In one whole-class discussion, several studentstalked about the value of being able to annotate and draw on top of photographs of design artifacts to drawattention to important features: “when we could take a picture and draw on top of the picture, it helped us withour ideas because we could get two ways to look at our ideas.” In another design share-out, one student realizedthat his oral explanation of a rocket design failure was quite limited, and he asked for permission to project avideo from his notebook on the classroom’s projector screen because “it would help me explain my point.”ReferencesAurigemma, J., Chandrasekharan, S., Nersessian, N. J., & Newstetter, W. (2013). Turning experiments intoobjects: The cognitive processes involved in the design of a lab-on-a-chip device. Journal ofEngineering Education, 102(1), 117-140.Bloome, D., Carter, S. P., Christian, B. M., Otto, S., & Shuart-Faris, N. (2005). A microethnographic approachto the discourse analysis of classroom language and literacy events. Discourse analysis & the study ofclassroom language and literacy events—A microethnographic perspective, 1-49.Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. EducationalResearcher, 18(1), 32-42.Collins, A., & Ferguson, W. (1993). Epistemic forms and epistemic games: Structures and strategies to guideinquiry. Educational Psychologist, 28(1), 25-42.diSessa, A. A. (2004). Metarepresentation: Native competence and targets for instruction. Cognition andInstruction, 22(3), 293-331.McClain, K., & Cobb, P. (2001). An analysis of development of sociomathematical norms in one first-gradeclassroom. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 236-26.Michaels, S., & O’Connor, C. (2012). Talk science primer. Cambridge, MA: TERC. Available online athttp://inquiryproject.terc.edu/shared/pd/TalkScience_Primer. pdf.Puntambekar, S., & Kolodner, J. L. (2005). Toward implementing distributed scaffolding: Helping studentslearn science from design. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42(2), 185-217.McFadden, J., & Roehrig, G. (2018). Engineering design in the elementary science classroom: supportingstudent discourse during an engineering design challenge. International Journal of Technology andDesign Education.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant 1316762.Any opinions or findings expressed are those of the authors. We wish to thank our teacher collaborators.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1650© ISLS