“Doing Double Dutch”: Becoming Attuned to Rhythms ofPathways In and Through Community SpacesJoyce M. Duckles and Brandon Stroudjoyce.duckles@warner.rochester.edu, bstroud@u.rochester.eduUniversity of RochesterGeorge Moses and Ryan Van Alstynegmoses@neadrochester.org, rvanalstyne@neadrochester.orgNorth East Area DevelopmentAbstract: As activists and co-researchers from the university and the Cedarwood community,we have engaged in a long-term participatory ethnography to uncover and inform thetransformation of an urban community. Our research focuses on understanding relationshipsand pathways within and across “hubs” emerging in the neighborhood that lead to authentic andmeaningful change. This paper presents our current analytic attention to the boundaries,pathways and spaces between hubs. Adopting the metaphor of “doing Double Dutch” emergingfrom team analysis, we develop the themes of “pathways in” as opening doors; “pathwaysthrough” as feeling the rhythms; and the learning and dexterity that energizes trajectoriesbeyond the hubs in the neighborhood. We propose the constructs of rhythm, attunement anddexterity as conceptual and analytic tools to inform our understandings of pathways andboundaries as “hidden energies” for community development and their generative potential forlearning. We conclude that stagnation is not an option.Keywords: boundaries; community transformation; pathways; rhythms; attunement; dexterityRhythm is the soul of life. The whole universe revolves in rhythm. Everything and everyhuman action revolves in rhythm (Babatunde Olatunji, 2000).IntroductionEducational researchers and activists interested in community transformation have demonstrated increasedattention to the generative potential of boundaries as spaces of learning and change. In particular, many scholarshave stressed the learning potential of boundary crossing (Akkerman, 2011; Akkerman & Bakker. 2011). Culturalhistorical theorists have explored the changing nature of participation over time and across dynamic communities(Gutierrez & Rogoff, 2003) and horizontal learning across activity systems (Engeström, 2001). Boundary crossinghas been proposed as a way to introduce new ways of participating in established practices as well as expandingand transforming these practices (Akkerman, 2011). This analytic lens can lead researchers to examine how people“traverse or otherwise connect one environment with another in their everyday lives” and how opportunities tolearn are “organized and accomplished through trajectories connecting multiple places” (Leander, Phillips, &Taylor, 2010, p. 331).Trajectories also imply movement and energy. Leander et al. (2010) apply the metaphors of houses fromthe critical geography work of Lefebvre (1991) and rhizomes from Deleuze and Guattari (1987) to emphasize the“continual movements and transformations” and connections across places and within spaces (p. 341). Althougha house may appear as a stable physical structure, it is actually a nexus of in and out conduits through whichenergy flows, just as social spaces are produced through energy and movement. Lefebvre encourages us toincrease our sensitivities to movement and the “diverse, multiple rhythms of everyday life” (2004, p. 20). In asimilar way, rhizomes are connected yet open systems though which nutrients flow. With underground systemsof roots, shoots, and nodes, they mirror the ways surface entities that appear distinct have deep subterraneanconnections. The rhizome metaphor (Deleuze & Guattari, 1987) illustrates the generative yet often hidden energiesand capacities across spaces. These theoretical approaches treat structures and places as sets of networkedassemblages that are “composed in unfolding activity” (Leander et al., p. 341).As activists and co-researchers from the university and the Cedarwood community, for the past five yearswe have engaged in a participatory ethnography aimed to uncover and inform the transformation of an urbancommunity. Our research spans activities across “hubs” that together we have identified, including the LibertyMarket (a corner store), The Liberty School Summer Program and Café, Central City Development (CCY) (anactive community development office and organization) and the Greenhouse Collaborative (a new initiative ofICLS 2016 Proceedings250© ISLScommunity gardens and greenhouses). Our overarching goal is to understand relationships and social pathwayswithin and across these hubs that lead to authentic and meaningful change of individuals and community. Thispaper presents our current analytic attention to the boundaries and spaces between hubs, to the rhythms, pathways,and the generative potential of boundary crossing. It has led us back to our field notes and interviews from thebeginning of this long-term ethnography, as we began our research in the hub of the Liberty Market, and ourevolving conceptualizations of engagement and belonging in community. As we revisited transcripts and fieldnotes in team meetings with this new lens, a community researcher proposed a new metaphor to capture themovement we are uncovering within and across spaces:Have you ever done Double Dutch? That’s what this reminds me of…these circles areconstantly moving. You Double Dutch on the side until you decide to jump in at one of thesepathways…then you jump in, you slide, and there you go. [Team Meeting, 10/2015]Building on this metaphor, we constructed questions to guide our current data collection and analysis: How docommunity members pick up on, and become attuned to, the varying rhythms of community places and practices?How does this learning lead to engagement in the neighborhood and trajectories beyond the community?Our interest in transformation and social justice is consistent with the conference theme of transforminglearning and empowering learners. The generative nature of boundaries and spaces also leads us to consider howlearning environments and community practices are being mutually constituted to enable learners to acquire thekind of learning that empowers them to design their own social futures. This takes place within and across hubs,along pathways and trajectories, and across the community and university. In this paper, we present findingsemerging from this new analytic focus. As we explore these spaces, we are learning about “pathways in” asopening doors; “pathways through” as feeling the rhythms; and the learning and dexterity that energizestrajectories beyond the hubs in the neighborhood. We propose the constructs of rhythm, attunement and dexterityas conceptual and analytic tools to inform our understandings of pathways and boundaries as “hidden energies”for community development and their generative potential for learning.Theoretical frameworkWe reach across cultural practice and activity theories of learning (Gutiérrez & Rogoff, 2003; Leander, Phillips,& Taylor, 2010) and a rhizomatic model of interdependence and generativity (Deleuze & Guattafri, 1987) to frameand guide our interest in spaces and pathways, rhythms and trajectories. Leander et al. (2010) examine therelationship of learning to space and place and, in particular, the relations between learning and movement ormobility. They build on the sociocultural attention to ways learning is distributed across people and places, aswell as Lave and Wenger’s communities of practice, but also claim that these theories adopt “container narratives”that perpetuate images of bounded spaces. In contrast, they encourage researchers to attend to “how opportunitiesto learn are organized and accomplished through trajectories connecting multiple places” (p. 331). Culturalpractice approaches conceptualize learning as a process occurring within ongoing activity and recognize thediversity of activity settings and practices. Gutiérrez and Rogoff (2003) address some of the challenges ofengaging in dynamic practices and shifting activity systems. As people move across systems, they propose thatthey develop dexterity in navigating practices and participation appropriate to different activity systems.Our attention to movement has also made us aware of the threats of stagnation. The radical democraticconstruct of dissensus (Ziareck, 2001) helps us theorize a different boundary crossing; creating spaces to speakacross difference and to respectfully challenge differing perspectives of theoreticians and practitioners. This ismost evident within our research team, in our daily interactions, where we resist the temptation to insist uponconsensus and allow our mutually respected differences to inform authentic debate to energize our research andpractices.Together, these theories provide a framework for considering pathways in and through community spacesand trajectories beyond. They remind us that spaces and practices are shifting and non-linear and that they aresituated in “a culture that’s constantly being built” (Research team member, 10/2015). We find this focus onmovement and change presenting unique methodological challenges.MethodsNespor (2006) describes the work of researchers and ethnographers as looking for patterns. He conceptualizespatterns as “descriptions of processes and networks through which things are moving and changing” (p. 300). Hepoints out that the problem is that we, as researchers, are not good at “thinking movement.” Nespor describes thechallenge as navigating a “moving dance-floor (historically shaped and propelled) where dissonant orchestras ofsocial relations battle to define the rhythms” (p. 300). To enter into moving and shifting spaces and practices, heICLS 2016 Proceedings251© ISLSrecommends that we take the advice of Latour (1987) and “follow the movement of things.” We are directing ourresearch and theoretical lenses to spaces where practices are in the process of being mutually constituted, wheredifferent rhythms are taking shape.To address this challenge, we adopt grounded theory approaches to ethnographic inquiry (Charmaz &Mitchell, 2001) within a participatory action research (PAR) framework (McIntyre, 2008). In our work, which isby nature iterative in the ways that theory and analysis inform and energize our practice as activists, we are notable to ignore the ethnographic attention to culture and everyday life. We engage the PAR cycle of data collectionanalysis-implementation-collection in iterative cycles to build a local evidence base and inform practice. Residentshave been trained in research methods and ethical practices as co-researchers, and together with university teammembers, work as co-authors and co-implementers to address community-identified issues. As we developed ourcurrent questions, we returned to transcripts and field notes from across our data set. Our data is coded usinggrounded theory approaches: themes are iteratively generated and validated through assiduous member checkingprocesses. Adopting the constant comparative method and theoretical sampling (Charmaz, 2014), as we exploredthe concepts of rhythm and movement in our research team meetings, the metaphor of Double Dutch emerged.We adopt this metaphor to frame our presentation of findings and analysis.FindingsNespor (2006) directs us to “note how both people and things change as they move through networks that meshat some points and generate tensions at others” (p. 301). As we look at what moves, Nespor (2006) recommendschallenging the boundaries and looking at how neighborhoods are defined by the intersections of multiplepathways. As we explore these pathways and spaces, we are learning about pathways in as “opening doors”;pathways through as “feeling the rhythms”; and the learning and dexterity that energizes trajectories beyond thehubs of the neighborhood.Opening doors - Pathways inAs we developed our model of interdependent hubs, our initial concept maps depicted the hubs and pathways butit had the appearance of a closed system (Appendix A). We had focused on the processes and activities, but, asNespor (2006) noted, we were challenged in seeing the movement and in particular the movement in and out. Inthe store and across hubs, we recognized the challenge of engaging community members who have traditionallybeen “dis-engaged,” directing our attention to “pathways in.” Our data suggested that this begins with meetingpeople “where they’re at” and not judging others:I think it’s more like, how do we go about reaching the people without it, without them gettingoffensive. To you talking to them, and then, meeting them where they’re at. Trying to find outwhat’s going on, to just not always being judgmental. [Greenhouse Collaborative Meeting,2/2015]We realized that as community activists we needed to attend to what “meeting people where they’re at” lookslike, and how it can be facilitated. As we were analyzing data, a co-research suggested that it begins with openingthe doors wider:So when we were talking about the guys on the street corners and the dealers and stuff, butmaking pathways available for them as well? You can’t judge them because that’s where theyare right now, but instead you have to connect with them and have pathways for them…Andsome of them won’t. We may not get all of them, but if we get one or two to come along we’remaking progress. So, that’s harder work, going from feeling totally disengaged to entering thework that you want to do. How do we pull them along or at least make pathways for them?Cause it can’t always be them that are there and ready to move. Sometimes you’ve got to makethe door wider open some way or another. [Team meeting, 9/2015]Parents and community developers talked often of making pathways for everyone who “wants to comealong” and opening the doors in intentional ways. Our data has many examples of an apprenticeship model acrosshubs with attention to providing first time experiences to youth and adults. Through the Work Experience Program(WEP), adults have come to work in the market, the CCY office, and the Liberty School Café. Youth are alsotrained at the market and as “junior servant leaders” in the Liberty School. A community member described theseinteractions as “reshaping what interactions look like in the community.” Processes of building relationships andICLS 2016 Proceedings252© ISLSways of interacting echo across the hubs – the consistency is intentional. Rather than accepting silos, theconnections between spaces ensure the consistencies as individuals move along the pathways.This means that “pathways in” can occur through any hub. At a team meeting, a co-researcher pointedto the lines we were drawing between hubs on our concept map:That’s what I would say about these lines. It’s intentional. It’s organic but it’s intentional. It’sintentional for them to come to any one of these hubs and to be able to organically, to be exposedto each of them.Several years later, this was articulated through the Double Dutch metaphor. We recognized the circles or hubsas constantly moving. And then,You Double Dutch on the side, until you decide to jump in at one of these pathways. Whetherit’s the market, the school, university, or garden, you know, you just Double Dutch. Then youjump in, and you slide, and there you go.Feeling the rhythms - Pathways through and between hubsOpening the doors is the beginning. A co-researcher described how participants enter on pathways through andbetween the hubs. It begins with listening and using ideas shared by residents:So that they know, hey, I am relevant, I am important, I am a part of it. Then through that, itallows them to spread the word or the message to others. But when you don’t make them feelwelcome, you don’t make them feel like their voices are heard, they’re going to continue downthe same roads that they’ve been. It’s just the bottom line. [Team meeting, 10/2015]Feeling the rhythms means feeling part of something bigger. A team member described this as people “becomingconscious or aware and feeling, you know I’m a part, because the conversations that we now have, they participatein, where before they didn’t” [Team meeting, 10/2015]. They are now “at the table.” They are part of the “FreedomMovement.”The Double Dutch metaphor becomes powerful here for illustrating the challenges of feeling the rhythmsacross hubs. The Double Dutch conversation continued in our meeting, focusing on “getting the rhythm” so thatyou can jump in. We noted that you get better at “jumping in” over time, that you can’t be “stagnant” becauseonce you’re in you have to be a part of it. CCY’s director asked if we all knew how to “twirl,” noting that everyonecan’t jump in, but most people know how to twirl. He extended it further:So that metaphor is, you just, what you’re doing is you get into rhythm. So as we start to talkabout energy it’s attunement. Cause we’re using static in different ways - static being still orstatic where tuning in stations. So you’re tuning until you get to the right station. So it’s energy.So what you’re trying to do is get on the right energy level…so that’s Double Dutch. You havethat pathway to get in, but you have to Double Dutch to get in, and once you get in you have tohave the right energy to get in rhythm with everything else. [Team meeting, 10/2015]The pathways through and between are also co-constructed in intentional ways. In our early renditionsof our model, we began to recognize the hubs and the consistency of processes within them. We spoke of“challenging the norms” that have come to be accepted in the community by building rhizomatic connectionsbetween spaces that echo similar messages, practices, and expectations. Again, the rhythms of different hubs werenoticed:All components at some point tie in on a different level, whether it be social, economical, health,educational…so there’s like a constant interjection between them. So even though it may lookstatic-y, it may be static, but at any frequency there’s always going to be static until you finetune it. It’s the fine tuning of all the components together that makes you come to a strongfrequency to push out there. [Team meeting, 9/2015]Pushing “out there” means moving beyond, extending the movement beyond the neighborhood.ICLS 2016 Proceedings253© ISLSSharing the rhythm and developing dexterity – Pathways beyondPart of moving forward is sharing the rhythm and “passing it forward”: “You reach one, you teach them, and thenyou let them reach someone else.” Keeping up the momentum and sharing the rhythm is described as central tothe “Freedom Movement.” This was illustrated during a team meeting using our model of rhizomes:HC: I know irises grow in a rhizome and that’s how they spread. I mean I don’t know if this isan issue, but after a while if you don’t cut them up and replant them the center will die.LJ: So what does that mean for our data?DJ: Well, you’re never going to stop, you have to keep changing and developing and if you’vegot entrepreneurial ventures that become their own nodes, they are building on the sameprinciples, same processes that we’ve been talking about, and then they move to anothercommunity.RG: Yeah, and what does that mean for this work?LJ: So they can become centers of their own.RG: There you go. [Team meeting, 4/2013]Another “pathway beyond” takes shape through developing the skills or the “dexterity” to enter differentspaces with different rhythms. Stories of community residents who are “making it” are shared often. Abby beganas a WEP worker in the store. She worked in the café and received her safe food certification, and she now has ajob downtown. One researcher noted that Abby could have kept working her WEP hours, but “now she’s in themindset of I want something of my own.” Community members, both adults and children, navigate the multiplerhythms of the different hubs in the community, learning how to “jump in” and participate. Similar to therepertoires for participating in practices proposed by Gutiérrez and Rogoff (2003), we can encourage people “todevelop dexterity in determining which approach from their repertoire is appropriate under which circumstances”(p. 22) or across varying activity settings. We propose that following participants like Abby can add to ourunderstanding of “how engagement in shared and dynamic practices of different communities contributes toindividual learning and development” (Gutiérrez & Rogoff, 2003, p. 21). We also argue that developing thisdexterity is part of the learning that can empower people to design their own social futures.Within our research team, we also became aware of how work at boundaries generates learning.Akkerman and Bakker (2011) identified transformation as a recognized mechanism for constituting the learningpotential of boundary crossing. In this framework, moving or transgressing from expected roles or modes ofinterpretation can open up spaces for the construction of new ways of being and thinking. In our roles as universityand community researchers, we entered this emergent zone of contact and this joint work at the boundaries. Weuse the concept of dissensus (Ziarek, 2007) to illuminate the ways that collaborative research can foster generativetensions at the boundaries. A doctoral student on our research team summarized this tension in a memo:We do create shared narratives. We also embrace the continuous joint work we are crafting atthe boundaries – our unique frameworks, experiences, identities and practices shape the dialogicspaces we con-construct; lead us to embrace dissensus and recognize the generative potential itholds for us as a research team. [Memo, 5/2012]Whether in the store or in our team meetings, friction and dissensus emerging from boundaries ground our“constant move forward.” As we work together toward urban transformation, stagnation is not an optionConclusion and implicationsThe theoretical lens framing our current analysis encouraged us to treat structures and places as networkedassemblages that are “composed in unfolding activity” (Leander et al., p. 341). The themes of boundaries,movement and rhythms have permeated our data from the very beginning of this long-term ethnography. Weadopted the theoretical metaphor of rhizomes (Deleuze & Guattari, 1987) to bring attention to pathways and theirtransformational potential. However, we had been conceptualizing the interdependent hubs as a closed system ofrelations. Returning to our data and devoting research team meetings to this analysis created a dialogic space touncover what is happening along the pathways connecting hubs and at multiple boundaries. Metaphors of DoubleDutch and notions of “attunement” emerged from these meetings, providing conceptual tools to add to ourunderstandings of the pathways and spaces, their rhythms and “hidden energies” for community development andICLS 2016 Proceedings254© ISLStheir generative potential for learning. This metaphor extended our attention to pathways in and pathways beyond,reminding us that the systems are open.As social activists and researchers, we align with the conference goal of uncovering ways that we canempower learners to design their own social futures. In our analysis, this emerged as “pathways beyond.” Buildingon the concept of repertoires of practice developed by Gutiérrez and Rogoff (2003), we propose that examiningthe dexterity to feel and navigate the rhythms of different spaces suggests a new way for us to explore how peopleare learning. Our findings mirror notions of learning as increased participation in valued practices of a community,but also provide insights into how this learning can move with and across spaces, and how it might empowerlearners to extend across and beyond participation in the hubs in the neighborhood.Our analysis is also pointing to challenges and barriers, to processes that constrain access or challengethe momentum toward transformation. As we focus on movement and dynamics, we also need to considercohesion or stasis. As a community member stated, “Stagnation is not an option.” We proposed “pathways in”taking shape as opening doors by creating spaces for voices and we recognized that the intentional redundancyacross hubs was providing multiple entry points. However, we know that some community members do not “feela part of” the changes under construction in Cedarwood. We are also interested in why some may choose to stayout, and the physical and psychological barriers that persist. Exploring historically closed doors can help uschallenge simplistic views of access to resources based on physical accessibility, especially as we consider“pathways in” to the shifting rhythms of community spaces.Consistent with the conference theme, our goal as researchers and practitioners is to uncoverdevelopment and learning across spaces in community, and in particular the kinds of learning that might empowercommunity members to engage with and design their own futures. As we have uncovered the generative potentialof working the boundaries and pathways across hubs in the community, we have also explored ways to make theconnections and rhythms more intentional and explicit. Recently, our “visual connections” initiative has emergedto create a visual representation of the pathways across hubs of activity. A series of mural and community artsprojects are being created that link these pathways through powerful images, spoken word, and digital media(#FreedomSankofa, Figures 1). Our research continues to guide our practice as we work toward engagingcommunity in imagining pathways and creating spaces that foster connections across their histories, within theircommunity, and toward their futures.Figure 1. #FreedomSankofaReferencesAkkerman, S.F. (2011). Learning at boundaries. International Journal of Educational Research, 50, 21-25. doi:10.1016/j.ijer.2011.04.005Akkerman, S.F., & Bakker, A. (2011). Boundary crossing and boundary objects. Review of Educational Research,81(2), 132-169. doi: 10.3102/0034654311404435Charmaz, K. (2014) Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative analysis (2nd ed.).London, UK: SageCharmaz, K., & Mitchell, R. G. (2001). Grounded theory in ethnography. In P. Atkinson, A. Coffey, S. Delmont,J. Lofland, & L. Lofland (Eds.), Handbook of ethnography (pp. 160–174). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Deleuze, G, & Guattari, F. (1987). A thousand plateaus: Capitalism and schizophrenia. Minneapolis, MN:University of Minnesota Press.Engeström, Y. (2001). Expansive learning at work: Toward an activity theoretical reconceptualization. Journal ofEducation and Work, 33(1), 107-123.Gee, J.P. (2008). A sociocultural perspective on opportunity to learn. In P.A. Moss, D.C. Pullin, J.P. Gee, E.H.Haertel, & L.J. Young, (Eds.), Assessment, equity, and opportunity to learn (pp. 76-108). New York,NY: Cambridge University Press.Gutiérrez, K., & Rogoff, B. (2003). Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits or repertoires of practice.Educational Researcher, 32(5), 19-25. doi: 10.3102/0013189X032005019Latour (1987). Science in action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.ICLS 2016 Proceedings255© ISLSLeander, K.M., Phillips, N.C., & Taylor, K.H. (2010). The changing social spaces of learning: Mapping newmobilities. Review of Research in Education, 34, 329-394. doi: 10.3102/0091732X09358129Lefebvre, H. (2004). Rhythmanalysis: Space, Time and Everyday Life. New York, NY: Continuum.McIntyre, A. (2008). Participatory action research. London, UK: Sage. doi: 10.4135/9781483385679Nespor, J. (2006). Finding patterns with field notes. In J. Green, C Camilli, P. Elmore, A. Skukauskaite, & E.Grace (Eds.), Handbook of complementary methods in educational research (pp. 297-308). Mahwah,NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Ziarek, E.P. (2001). An ethics of dissensus: Postmodernity, feminism, and the politics of radical democracy.Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.ICLS 2016 Proceedings256© ISLSAppendix A:Model of Interdependent Processes & Transformational Pathways**As presented at:Duckles, J.M., Moses, G., Moses, R., Gallegos-Greenwich, J., & Stroud, B. (2015, February). Co-constructingactive and collective pathways of family and community engagement: A community-based approach.Data Analysis Session. 36th Annual Ethnography in Education Research Forum: Inequality, Poverty andEducation: An ethnographic invitation. University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.ICLS 2016 Proceedings257© ISLS