Towards a Critical Sociocultural Theory of How TeachersUnderstand Inequity, Power, and OppressionGrace A. Chen, Vanderbilt University, grace.a.chen@vanderbilt.eduAbstract: Teacher educators and researchers argue that teachers must understand inequity,power, and oppression. Critical sociocultural theories suggest that teacher learning isenmeshed in systems, that it either reproduces or contests oppressive power relations, and thatresistance is an infinite praxis. However, a review of teacher education literature illustratesthat by contrast, teachers’ “understanding” of inequity, power, and oppression is typicallyconceived as being an individual trait, an achievable state, and transferable. This poster callsfor more teacher education research to use critical sociocultural theories to conceptualizeteacher learning and relatedly, teachers’ ability to disrupt oppressive systems.Keywords: equity, teacher education, critical consciousness, sociocultural, critical theoryIntroductionTeacher educators and scholars have long argued that the world we live in is rife with inequity, and teachersmust recognize this and act accordingly. As Alcoff (2007) argues, however, the structures and systems in oursociety often conceal the mechanisms and the oppressive power relations that produce and maintain inequity.Consequently, those who seek to disrupt the status quo must find ways to perceive what is hard to perceive inorder to prevent the reproduction of existing patterns of oppression. But what does it mean for teachers to“understand” inequity, power, and oppression in this way?Theoretical frameworkEducational researchers have long used sociocultural theories of learning to frame phenomena such as teachingpractice, teacher identity, and teacher learning (for a review, see Russ, Sherin, & Sherin, 2016). Socioculturaltheories of learning foreground the dynamic social, cultural, historical, and political contexts in which learninghappens, making them well-suited to the analysis of teachers’ “understanding” of inequity. Critical theoriesadditionally center the role of power relations in organizing and structuring social contexts. As a result, learningscientists are increasingly integrating sociocultural theories with critical theories that elucidate the role of powerand systems of oppression in learning (e.g., Enyedy, 2016).Drawing on the work of these scholars, I highlight three ideas that illustrate the promise of criticalsociocultural theory to support research into teachers’ “understanding” of inequity. First, teacher learning isenmeshed in systems of actors and artifacts, which carry histories embedded with power. Therefore, studies ofteacher learning must study systems, and must account for relational histories and situational contexts inlearning (e.g., Esmonde & Booker, 2017). Second, power relations within these systems are either reproduced orresisted (e.g., Philip, 2011). Activity that does not resist existing power relations legitimizes the social order, sothere is no neutral ground. Third, resisting is an infinite praxis; not only is the status quo too complex to simplyoverthrow once and for all, but also, transformation requires a constant struggle and a constant effort atprovisional action (e.g., Butler, 2005; hooks, 1994). Figure 1 shows the first of these ideas in the two uppersections, the second idea at the bottom, and the third idea represented by the cyclical nature of the diagram.Figure 1. A critical sociocultural theory of teachers' understanding of inequity.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1515© ISLSMethodsTo determine how “understanding” is conceptualized in existing teacher education literature, I conducted arepresentative but not exhaustive review of empirical studies that made claims about how K-12 teachers learn to“understand,” using search terms such as “critical consciousness” and “teacher education.” Three-quarters of the45 studies described interventions in university-based teacher education courses, and the remainder were mostlyobservational or action research studies with in-service teachers. I coded studies for their desired outcomes,research design, and evidence of learning (what was learned and by whom?), among other features. Then, Isynthesized these codes into themes summarizing how researchers conceptualized teacher “understanding.”FindingsAlthough exceptions certainly existed, the majority of reviewed articles conceptualized teachers’“understanding” of inequity, power, and oppression as an individual trait, as an achievable state, and astransferable across contexts and situations. Table 1 offers a brief summary of these prevailing assumptions.Table 1: Typical conceptualizations of teacher understandingThemeIndividual traitAchievable stateTransferableEvidence in studiesReliance on individual surveys orself-reported statements such as “Irealized” and “now I am aware”Describing teachers as being“changed” or “transformed” or asgaining “newfound awareness”Claims of universal (“children in allplaces”) or general (“I know whatracism really is”) understandingLimitationsOverlooks teachers’ historicized selves(Gutiérrez & Jurow, 2016), the teachereducator’s positionality, and artifactsPartitions understanding into discretelevels; does not allow for partial orsituational understandingAssumes that teachers who “understand”in one interaction, situation, or contextwill “understand” forevermoreConclusionApplying a critical sociocultural theory of teacher learning to studying teachers’ “understanding” of inequity,power, and oppression calls for greater attention to the systems and situational contexts of teacher learning inaction, to the histories and power dynamics involved, and to moment-to-moment interactions rather than staticunderstandings that can be acquired and applied. Accordingly, teacher educators must seek pedagogies thatengage teachers in this active, ongoing, and important work.ReferencesAlcoff, L. (2007). Epistemologies of Ignorance: Three Types. In S. Sullivan & N. Tuana (Eds.), Race andEpistemologies of Ignorance (pp. 39–57). Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.Butler, J. (2005). Giving an account of oneself. New York, NY: Fordham University Press.Enyedy, N. (Ed.). (2016). Participatory design research and educational justice: Studying learning and relationswithin social change making [Special Issue]. Cognition and Instruction, 34(3).Esmonde, I., & Booker, A. N. (Eds.). (2017). Power and privilege in the learning sciences: Critical andsociocultural theories of learning. New York, NY: Routledge.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Jurow, S. (2016). Social Design Experiments: Toward Equity by Design. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 4, 565–598.hooks, b. (1994). Engaged Pedagogy. In Teaching to transgress: Education as the practice of freedom (pp. 1–22). New York, NY: Routledge.Philip, T. M. (2011). An “ideology in pieces” approach to studying change in teachers’ sensemaking about race,racism, and racial justice. Cognition and Instruction, 29(3), 297–329.Russ, R. S., Sherin, B. L., & Sherin, M. G. (2016). What Constitutes Teacher Learning? In D. H. Gitomer & C.A. Bell (Eds.), Handbook of research on teaching (5th ed.). Washington, DC: American EducationalResearch Association.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1445197. Anyopinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author anddo not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1516© ISLS