Developing Historical Thinking in PBL Class SupportedWith Synergistic ScaffoldingHaesol Bae, Fangli Xia, Yuxin Chen, Kalani Craig, and Cindy E. Hmelo-Silverhaebae@indiana.edu, fangxia@umail.iu.edu, yc58@umail.iu.edu, craigkl@indiana.edu,chmelosi@indiana.eduIndiana UniversityAbstract: As PBL has gained popularity across disciplines, there is an increasing need tounderstand how to successfully implement PBL in a large classroom. In this study, weinvestigated how PBL was used to support development of historical thinking skills in a largeuniversity history class. Video analysis showed that the instructor interacted with both thestudents and representational tools to provide multiple synergistic supports during the PBLsessions.Although Problem-based Learning (PBL) has been studied in a variety of contexts (e.g., Walker et al., 2015), PBLin large active learning classrooms has been less well studied. Adapting PBL for large classes requires a carefulbalance of PBL practices with the interactions in which PBL scaffolding is provided (Puntambekar, 2015). InPBL, instructors employ multiple forms of scaffolds to support collaborative learning and disciplinary problemsolving. These scaffolds include shared representational tools like structured whiteboards, but an instructor’stimely and contingent support is a crucial scaffolding element; this is generally only possible in classrooms witha small instructor-to-student ratio (Puntambekar, 2015). Visual representations make student thinking visible toinstructors in large classrooms, allowing quick access to the current state of students’ inquiry process and makingsynergistic scaffolding possible. Our PBL intervention was situated in a large university history classroom, inwhich small groups of students arranged at oblong tables equipped with whiteboards and large computer monitorsto serve as shared representational tools. The tables fostered collaboration in an open active learning space whereinstructors could wander and engage with the students. We focused on investigating interactions between theinstructor and students as they used these representational tools in order to understand how PBL was appropriatedamong students in order to develop historical thinking skills, and how multiple forms of scaffolding function in asynergistic and contingent way to make PBL in this large learning space achievable for both instructor and students.MethodsThis study was conducted with 93 undergraduate students in a large PBL history classroom at a public MidwesternUniversity. Students were divided into 16 groups of 5-6 students in an active-learning classroom with oblongtables that promote small-group collaboration via shared table space and a large shared monitor. Five groupsvolunteered to participate in the research and were video-recorded during three 75-minute class sessions. Openspace between tables facilitated a larger shared workspace by allowing the instructor and 2 teaching assistants towander and observe the groups in between the instructor’s mini lectures to the whole class. Students anchoredtheir PBL in an ill-structured question about historical responses to bubonic plague, and each PBL encounteradded iterative complexity to the question. The first question asked, “What single element was the most significantfactor in the responses to plague in the 6th century Justinianic Plague?”; the second asked “What two elementsinteracted to explain responses to plague in the 14th century”; the last question asked “What single element helpsexplain plague in three different outbreaks (6th century, 14th century and 20th century).” In the first twointerventions, groups were required to organize their historical thinking via a structured collaborative PBLworkspace divided into 4 quadrants. These quadrants integrated history-learning principles from the AmericanHistorical Association (AHA) together with the inquiry-oriented principles of PBL: “potential hypotheses”, “whatwe know (evidence with citations)”, “what we don’t know”, and “research agenda”. In the third intervention,students were given an open-ended question and allowed to structure their own group collaboration.Five groups were video recorded three times in the semester. We then narrowed our focus to three groupsthat were provided with different representational tools (either computers, whiteboards or iPads). InteractionAnalysis (IA) was employed to observe the distributed and ongoing social processes which occur moment-tomoment during collaboration in order to gain insights into students’ development of historical thinking skills andinstructor provision of contingent scaffolding for students learning (Jordan & Henderson, 1995).FindingsOver the course of the three PBL sessions, students gradually began to appropriate the norms of PBL to refinetheir responses to, and marshal evidence for, increasingly complex questions. At the first PBL session, studentsICLS 2018 Proceedings1483© ISLSstruggled with understanding PBL, with the ill-structured problem, and with finding appropriate evidence tosupport their hypotheses. For example, one student asked “What are we supposed to do?” on first encounter withthe PBL task, and another student answered “5 minutes to be confused.” This conversation demonstrated thatstudents struggled with the PBL process while also admitting that it was acceptable to be confused in the “messy”and complex PBL learning environment.However, students gradually appropriated the PBL process to develop historical thinking skills over timewith multiple forms of scaffolding functioning in a synergistic and contingent way. For example, at the secondencounter of PBL session, the visual representations of PBL quadrants on whiteboard, computer and iPad exposedstudents’ reasoning process, allowing the instructor to assess the current status of the group’s inquiry process andgive adjusted feedback in a more responsive and contingent manner. In particular, the PBL quadrant made students’thinking immediately visible to the instructor without the instructor interrupting the discussion or making studentsrepeat themselves. The instructor’s responses throughout the discussion drew on the students’ visualrepresentation of their thinking to validate the students’ performance in the inquiry process to date. (i.e.,instructor’s asking “Is there an element of, you guys had talked about medical response?” and suggesting “So,now you need to hunt down evidence and figure out how to go get more.”)At the third encounter of the PBL session, students demonstrated that they had appropriated not only theunderlying disciplinary norms that required them to synthesize three separate historical contexts into one argumentbut also the value of elaborating the argument in a shared PBL quadrant. More importantly, the instructor’sscaffolding was taken up by the students properly and was effective. For instance, the students appeared to regulatetheir argumentation process, as evidenced by the statement that they should clearly indicate the draft nature oftheir statement so the instructor “doesn’t come and say that doesn’t make sense.” Here, students acknowledgedthe fact that they would receive ongoing feedback based on what was written on the quadrant. The integration ofPBL norms, instructor scaffolding, and representational tool allowed students to advance their reasoning but in avery cautious and mindful way (i.e., using “not complete” wording on the whiteboard). This kind of interactiondemonstrated how the PBL quadrants supported both instructor evaluation of, and feedback, about studentselection of the vocabulary that would best demonstrate their historical thinking skills, as well as the challengeinherent in student appropriation of historical norms. (i.e., student’s initial frustration “Oh, my god”)DiscussionThis study illustrates how PBL, and particularly visual representations of students learning process, can supportthe development of historical thinking skills in large undergraduate classrooms in an active learning environment.By co-constructing the PBL quadrants, students in a history classroom were able to engage in an inquiry-orientedactivity by generating multiple hypotheses to answer a central problem. This activity can be considered as doinghistory, which involves navigating multiple perspectives, evaluating the reliability of evidences the students built,and experiencing the nature of history which is interpretive and ill-structured (Monte-Sano, 2012). As the semesterunfolded, student inquiry strategies evolved over time, in the later stages of the class, students demonstrated theability to craft strong hypotheses, locate appropriate evidence to support these hypotheses and evaluate the validityof a hypothesis without the instructor’s explicit support. These learning processes were possible in a large PBLclassroom because of the affordances of synergistic scaffolding. The representational tools common to PBL notonly served as a communication channel to mediate student learning processes but also allowed the instructor toprovide more contingent and efficient scaffolding without interrupting students. The instructor’s actions with thetools allowed her to successfully implement contingent scaffolding despite the generally perceived difficulty ofdoing so in a large classroom. Although more studies will be necessary in other disciplinary environments, weargue that this study effectively demonstrates the promise of PBL in a large history classroom, provided that careis taken to provide synergistic scaffolding that effectively integrates the instructor, students, and representationaltools.ReferencesJordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4, 39-103.Monte-Sano, C. (2012). Build skills by doing history. Phi Delta Kappan, 94(3), 63-65.Puntambekar, S. (2015). Distributing scaffolding across multiple levels: Individuals, small groups, and a class ofstudents. In A. Walker, H. Leary, C. E. Hmelo-Silver & P. Ertmer (Ed.), Essential readings in problembased learning (pp. 207–221). Indiana: Purdue University Press.Walker, A. E., Leary, H., Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Ertmer, P. A. (Eds.). (2015). Essential readings in problembased learning. Purdue University Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1484© ISLS