Video Data and the Learning Event: Four Case StudiesRicardo Nemirovsky (chair), Elizabeth de Freitas, and Kate O’Brienr.nemirovsky@mmu.ac.uk, L.de-freitas@mmu.ac.uk, kate.c.obrien@gmail.comManchester Metropolitan UniversityMolly L. Kelton, Washington State University, molly.kelton@wsu.eduJasmine Y. Ma, New York University, j.ma@nyu.eduFrancesca Ferrara, Università di Torino, francesca.ferrara@unito.itGiulia Ferrari, Università di Torino, giulia.ferrari@unito.itRogers Hall, Vanderbilt University, r.hall@vanderbilt.eduLauren Vogelstein, Vanderbilt University, lauren.vogelstein@gmail.comNathalie Sinclair (discussant), Simon Fraser University, nathsinc@sfu.caAbstract: Video data is now used throughout the learning sciences as a common form ofdocumenting learning events. Wearable cameras and real-time video feed-back have changedthe research terrain. And yet scholars often use such data without examining the ways thatvideo – as digital technology - structures and shapes the research findings, while enabling newinsights into the event-nature of learning. This international symposium addresses this topicby (1) showcasing and analyzing innovative uses of video technologies in the study oflearning, and (2) historically situating such video experiments within traditions of scientificcinema. The term ‘scientific cinema’ is used in media studies to describe all uses of themoving image in scientific study, beginning with the pioneering work of the Lumiére brothersin the 1890s. This symposium presents four contemporary case studies in which video is usedinnovatively to investigate mathematics learning experiences in three different countries (US,UK, Italy).Symposium themesThe mass dissemination of recording technologies has always been pivotal for the emergence of innovativeresearch methodologies in the social sciences (de Freitas, 2015, 2016; Schneider & Pasqualino, 2014). Over thelast 15 years new facets of digital video have spread in society, not only through the availability of novelrecording devices but through the pervasive growth of technical ecologies which made complex streams ofdigital video easily editable and communicable. These socio-technical innovations include action cameras (e.g.GoPro), streaming and generation of videos-of-videos (e.g. Skype), real-time diagramming (e.g. GPS drawing),eye-tracking and movement-tracking, and the assemblage of multiple video/audio sources (e.g. MulticamEditing). Scholars have begun to grapple with innovations in research methodologies as enabled and constrainedby these digital recording devices (van Nes & Doorman, 2010). Derry et al. (2010) published a thorough reviewof video research, identifying principles for systematic selection from an extensive video corpus, analysisprotocols, as well as discussing ethical issues with this kind of data. Software protocols for analyzing vast videoarchives are now deployed regularly, allowing researchers to annotate, code and sort images (Derry et al., 2010;O’Halloran 2013). But many of these software packages “mold” the data and reconfigure it, sorting andchunking it even before human eyes have seen it (van Nes & Doorman, 2010, p.6). The use of video analyticsoftware without adequate attention to how such software is structuring the data becomes increasinglyproblematic as we begin to rely more and more on findings based on this data.The question of what constitutes an event – as a unit of analysis - is brought to the forefront in videoresearch, as scholars are able to examine activity at micro-scales of interaction, and trace micro-gestures oraffective dispersal across a group. Derry et al. (2010) cited Lemke (2000), who claimed that “events are timeanalogs of objects. Like objects, they have underlying structures reflecting multiple parts and timescales” (p.7),but the pragmatics of this comment need to be investigated and opened up for further exploration. Thissymposium will present four case studies exploring the use of video data in studying learning events. All fourpapers focus on mathematics education, as a way of sustaining focus on a particular kind of content, althougheach delves into very different kinds of learning.Powell et al. (2003) reviewed a large spectrum of video research in mathematics education, but most ofthis was tacitly realist in its use of video, without adequate consideration for the specific ways that videostructures the visibility of the event. The range of approaches to video collection and analysis includes Jacobs etal. (1999), who propose methods to “transform the video images into objective and verifiable information”(Jacobs et al., 1999, p. 718), and Hall, Nemirovsky, and Ma (2015) who see video creation and analysis asICLS 2018 Proceedings1195© ISLSmeans to generate new images of teaching and learning. This symposium examines technical affordances andlimitations of digital video technologies, such as action cameras, streaming, diagramming, and multicamediting, insofar as these become part of a learning event. Papers explore initiatives that interrogate social,educational, and methodological aspects of video-based research in the learning sciences, questioningpreviously unexamined ‘realist’ assumptions about the moving image (Schneider & Pasqualino, 2014).Like any other technical apparatus, video technology brings with it a particular way of producingsubjects. The danger is that we are all too likely to treat the video image as a recording of “raw data”, indexicalof a given time-space relationship, as though it were a transparent realist representation of an event. Symposiumpresenters situate their work within the history of scientific cinema, a term from media studies that describesany use of the moving image in scientific study. Cartwright (1995) shows how scientific cinema has been part ofthe history of the moving image since its invention in the 1890s by the Lumière brothers. The early film makers,like Lumière, were experimental physiologists who were interested in recording the movements of the humanbody. Indeed, many of Lumière’s contemporaries regarded his invention of the cinematographe as a keycontribution to physiology. The Lumière laboratories manufactured film stock and equipment for science hundreds of films in the Lumière’s catalogues cover a vast array of different studies of bodily movement.During the early 20th century, scientists interested in the movement of the human body in various contexts –including formal and informal learning contexts – relied on moving image data to theorize about learning. Byhistorically situating the ongoing work of the symposium members within this tradition, we hope to betterunderstand the potential innovation (and limitations) that the digital nature of video allows today.Symposium papers share a focus on the movement of bodies during learning events, exploring how thebody is reconfigured in video data. This focus is pursued differently in each paper, studying the way the humanbody is both produced and recruited in different kinds of learning events. The challenge these papers explore ishow to develop methods of inquiry that mobilize digital video innovatively, and with awareness of its power tostructure what we see. Each set of authors explores: How does video help us plug into the heterogeneousduration of an event? What can we do – as researchers – that might allow us to study video data for thecrystalline structure of a learning event? The symposium aims to address the conference theme by closelyexamining the specificity of the digital. We take inspiration from Wanono (2014) who describes how her workin anthropology has taken up new aesthetic-political perspectives that reflect the digital technology she is using.She uses programming as a creative language to re-assemble the pixels in her documentary video, usingparticular tactics that reflect her theoretical and political concerns. The aim of this symposium is to take on thischallenge of thinking more innovatively about digital video research, while focusing on the complex temporalindividuation of bodies during learning events.The symposium will open with a 5 minute introduction to questions and themes, and set the stage forthe four papers (each 15 minutes, including video data), followed by 25 minutes for the discussant and audiencediscussion.Paper 1: Graphing, measuring, and feeling force: Using multiple video feeds incomplex learning eventsRicardo Nemirovsky, Elizabeth de Freitas, and Kate O’BrienThis paper focuses on a teaching experiment in the UK with a group of 12 students, aged 11 years. The groupparticipated in four 1.5 hour sessions where they worked with a variety of force sensors connected to computersgenerating real-time numerical and graphical displays. The goal of this study was to investigate student learningabout physical force as an intensive (rather than extensive) quantity. Forces are typically learned through theireffects, and tend to be associated with action. Research suggests that many students associate force with speedrather than acceleration. We revisit some of this previous research, but direct attention to how the differentialintensity of force is an embodied experience. We used computer webcams and screen capture software, as wellas wearable GoPro cameras and wall-mounted cameras to build a video-rich environment. As part of thesessions, real-time and slow-time video data were folded into the experiments, allowing students to investigatethe otherwise invisible concept of force. This paper presents data from this research experiment, and shows howvideo was used to open up multiple temporalities in the learning event.Our data analysis is microethnographic: a collection of techniques and approaches tracing the momentby-moment bodily and situated activity, encompassing talk, gesture, facial expression, body posture, drawing ofsymbols, manipulation of tools, pointing, pace, and gaze (Erickson 1996, Goodwin 2003, Erickson 2004, Stivers& Sidnell 2005, Streeck & Mehus 2005). Our data sources include: four GoPro cameras head-held by children,two electronic bracelets recording temperature, skin electric conductivity, and heart pulse, one hand-heldICLS 2018 Proceedings1196© ISLScamcorder, three wall-mounted GoPro cameras, one for each team, screen capture videos of force vs. timegraphs generated by using force sensors.Building on Henri Bergson’s (1889, 1996) distinctions between time and duration, and betweenextensity and intensity, and later reworkings of these ideas by the philosopher Gilles Deleuze, this paperexplores the work that video does in learning about invisible forces. We propose that three kinds oftemporalities were woven together through the use of video. Our use of video opens up the learning event toreveal: 1) Parallel temporalities in the synchronous depiction of the same events recorded from differentperspectives, 2) Graphical temporalities in the juxtaposed screen capture alongside the wearable GoPro, and 3)Recursive temporalities in that students watched and reflected on these videos as they were replayed to them atvarious speeds. We weave these three temporalities together as part of the rich differential fabric of the event.For instance, in session 4 a group of children travelled in an elevator moving up and down while one child stoodstill on a force platform or scale. As the force measured by the scale was recorded on a graph of force vs. time,the elevator’s glass doors were videotaped with a webcam to keep track of its movement and stops. Later, in theclassroom, the whole group watched and discussed the video of the graph and of the glass elevator’s doors. Attimes these videos were played in slow motion. As children and instructors watched and discussed these videos,additional videos with the whole group where recorded for subsequent study. These other dimensions are notspatial in the typical sense, in that they follow Bergson’s attempts to create a “new empiricism” that might studyduration without representing it in terms of sensory-motor action.Based on the case study, this paper elaborates on how the video data furnishes parallel, graphical, andrecursive temporalities which together create a productive medium to learn about the intensive nature of forceand its relation to movement. The use of video allowed students and researchers to investigate the conjunctionof heterogeneous temporalities in the working sessions, unpacking learning events in terms of their temporalcomplexity.Paper 2: Reflections on video-based techniques for studying bodies on-themove in an immersive mathematics exhibitionMolly L. Kelton and Jasmine Y. MaWe present video-based methods developed to study visitor learning in Taping Shape, a large, immersivegeometry exhibition installed in a US science center, with the objective of investigating a technical ecology forrecording, analyzing, and representing collective sense-making on-the-move in immersive-scale mathematicsenvironments. We critically reflect on our own methods of viewing and mapping complex multi-videoassemblages of mobile mathematics learners.Extending scholarship on family learning in museums (Ellenbogen, Luke, & Dierking, 2004), ourtheoretical framework drew on theories for understanding walking and movement as forms of place- andsense-making (Hackett, 2015; Lee & Ingold, 2006), as well as scholarship that views sensual experience andmaterial exchange as genuine constituents of mathematical thinking and learning (Nemirovsky, Kelton, &Rhodehamel, 2013).Data come from a video-based field study (vom Lehn, Heath, & Hindmarsh, 2002) of visitors toTaping Shape. The unusual geometries of the 3000-square-foot immersive mathematics exhibition presentednumerous data collection challenges, including the inexistence of any single panoptic vantage and visitors’mobility as they explored the space. Our records come from multiple video technologies, including stationary3rd-person cameras and wearable 1st-person cameras.While methods of analysis included multimodal microanalysis (e.g., Erickson, 2006; Jordan &Henderson, 1995) we critically departed from its more orthodox articulations. Specifically, our theoreticalframing pushed us to resist viewing events as having official boundaries or representing (a)typical phenomena.Instead, we treated video-recorded events as pointing backward and forward along experiential trajectories. Tounderstand collective family-group activity, we repurposed video-editing software for multi-camerasynchronization and viewing (see Figure 1).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1197© ISLSFigure 1. Screen capture from multi-camera software environment. 1st-person camera views are shown for fourmembers of a multi-generation family group inside a region of the exhibition shaped like a double torus.Analysis was conducted through online collaborative viewing sessions during which we focused onone or two 1st-person camera angles at a time. Extending interactionist methodologies for studying learning onthe-move (Hall & Stevens, 2015), we crafted techniques for spatial transcriptions that coordinate representationsof verbal and nonverbal interactions with spatio-temporal maps of members’ pathways through the exhibition(see Figure 2).Figure 2. Excerpt of spatial transcript representing a family’s coordinated talking and walking in theexhibition.Results, in the form of methodological reflections, address the increasing use, and under-theorization,of wearable cameras in studies of learning on-the-move. While it is tempting to assume wearable camerasprovide a more intimate vantage, our analysis leads us to question a simplistic mapping of 1st- and 3rd- personcamera angles respectively onto ‘intrinsic’ and ‘extrinsic’ perspectives on experience. Additionally, indeveloping spatial transcriptions, we encountered a tension between (a) representing trajectories of multiplemoving bodies in interaction and (b) representing the multiplicity of the body in terms of multi-modalexpressions of hands, eyes, feet, etc. Finally, our attempts to stay with continuous flows of time and movementwere imbricated with a countervailing desire to discretize participants’ pathways (evidenced by the dots inICLS 2018 Proceedings1198© ISLSFigure 2, placed at 5-second intervals), echoing the slicing up of movement in early scientific cinema (deFreitas, 2016).This paper’s significance lies in advances to understandings of emergent video-based methodologiesfor studying immersive mathematics learning environments. While these spaces afford opportunities forencountering mathematics in unprecedented ways, they also raise important methodological questions withrespect to research on learning about mathematical objects by moving through them.Paper 3: Collecting and capturing movement in the mathematics classroom:Assembling the researcher and the digitalGiulia Ferrari and Francesca FerraraThis paper discusses a case study in Italy with a class of grade 7 students aged 12 years. The study is part of amedium-term classroom intervention concerning mathematical activities with graphing motion technology. Theclass worked on the creation of couples of real time graphs, which capture spatio-temporal relationshipsassociated to movements. These movements occur with pairs of students who move two controllerssimultaneously in front of a sensor, in a wide interaction space. The main aim of the intervention was to learnfunction by means of a graphical approach. Classroom interactions were filmed using two mobile cameras tocapture activity from different points of view. Additional data comes from recordings of the graphical window.Therefore, the combined videos capture two students creating motion graphs, the classmates seated all aroundwatching them, and the computer screen displaying real-time graphs (e.g. Figure 3).Figure 3. Combined videos with two data sourcesOur analysis is devoted to capturing and tracing the moving bodies and choreographies of collectivemovement in order to better grasp the potentiality of the individual and collective body as a center ofindeterminacy and understand dynamic aspects of temporality as duration (in line with the vision of Bergson,1896/1988). In the style of early scientific cinema, the assemblage of the data helps us examine the event andthe entanglement of mathematics and the learning bodies, as numerous unanticipated contingencies getincorporated (de Freitas, 2016). In so doing, we hope to offer a vision of the body primarily as an expressivebody. The actions of such a body are not mere communicational and cognitive representations of rationalthinking, but are an actualization of the qualitative kinaesthetic dynamics and “gradient information” (SheetsJohnstone, 2011) experienced by students through change.This perspective calls for the development of experimental methodologies to enrich research practicesbased on video recording and the subsequent use of professional video editing software (Derry et. al, 2010). Forexample, Multicam Editing Software (e.g. Final Cut Pro) allows for automatic pairing of video sources that havebeen recorded simultaneously from different angles. The software works through audio synchronization, whichuses audio waveforms to compare and match different sources over time. Therefore, it creates video displaysthat—through the audible— embrace multiplicity of points of view around a learning event, assembling theresearcher and the digital in new ways.In this paper, we present these new ways of assembling with the data by discussing how synchronizedmultiple video streams help us: (1) make apparent distributed and unexpected dimensions of the classroomevent; and (2) re-assemble complex learning events which involve a multiplicity of bodies simultaneously activein the classroom. We also delineate how the integration of videos from multiple sources may question the veryact of seeing, interpreting, and learning of students, educators, and researchers. In addition, it addresses currentissues emerging from theories that portray bodies as dispersed across auditory, visual, digital, kinaesthetic, andmaterial dimensions (e.g. de Freitas and Sinclair, 2014).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1199© ISLSPaper 4: How did they do that? Using video-elicited re-enactments to inviteensemble learning in mathematical activityRogers Hall and Lauren VogelsteinVideo recordings are commonly used as data for analyses of learning and teaching mathematics and a widevariety of other conceptual practices (Derry et al., 2010; Hall & Stevens, 2015). We report on research that usesvideo records both as the object of mathematical exploration and as data for understanding how learning andteaching are organized in that exploration. We focus in particular on using video-elicited re-enactments both tocreate and to analyze ensemble mathematical activity (Ma & Hall, in press).As object, we used video records found in wide media circulation to create environments for exploringand learning mathematics. The “found object” in this paper is an episode selected from the television coverageof dance performances in opening ceremonies of the 2016 Rio Olympic Games (Figure 4, left). As data, wecaptured and analyzed video records of four-person ensembles (called “quartets”), who used their bodies andphysical props (e.g., 7’ x 7’ square Mylar sheets) to re-enact what Rio performers were doing in the foundvideo object (Figure 4, right). The quartets we studied used re-enactments to pose and answer basic questionsconcerning “How did they do that?” in found video from the Rio performance. We also used video-elicited reenactments of our own to analyze what quartets were doing as they explored the original video object(Vogelstein, Hall & Brady, 2017).Figure 4. (left) Video stills from television coverage of the opening ceremony for the Rio 2016 Olympic Games.Quartets in the “found” video used square, reflective sheets to create a dynamic array visual forms. (right) Videostill images (toon sequence) from above and to the side as a quartet (PhD scientists, now middle school STEMeducators) enacted a double reflection of their Mylar™ square prop.Video-elicited re-enactments, both by study participants and analysts, involved forms of doing that ledto explanations and new discoveries beyond what was possible by only viewing the found (or recorded, forresearch purposes) video. The first part of our paper shares findings from close analyses of video-elicited reenactments of mathematical activity by ensemble quartets. The second part of our paper argues for re-enactmentas a powerful addition to methods of interaction and multi-modal analyses of learning and teaching.We captured video recordings of talk and activity in an ensemble performance space, treated as aclinical interview in which research participants were asked to make things together. Cameras and microphonesICLS 2018 Proceedings1200© ISLSwere positioned to capture different perspectives on re-enactment, as quartets alternated between closelyinspecting the Rio video (viewing) and enacting their own efforts to create dynamic visual elements they foundin the recordings (doing through re-enactment). We asked quartets also to explore expressive possibilities withprops to create movement sequences with interesting visual and mathematical qualities. Our approach theorizeslearning as consequential shifts in how people participate in conceptual practices that also change during theirparticipation (Hall & Jurow, 2015; Lave, 2012). Our design based research seeks to create new forms ofmathematical activity that combine cultural activities from everyday life with formal schooling (Hall, Ma &Nemirovsky, 2015; Ma, 2016, 2017).We report several findings. First, participants found video records rich in detail, but recognized theseoffered a limited perspective and only partial access to techniques involved in ensemble performance. Whatcould not be seen (or heard) while viewing became a deeply engaging problem for quartets to work out whiledoing (i.e., during re-enactments). Second, quartets with different backgrounds (i.e., middle school students,STEM educators, and professional dancers) explained “how did they do that” in ways that drew from familiarcultural practices (e.g., how task formats signal mathematical concepts in school textbooks). Third, discoveriesmade while doing (re-enactment) went well beyond what was possible while viewing found (or recorded) videoalone. For example, while using Mylarsheets as a 1:1 scale model of props in the found Rio video,reenactments allowed participants to explain not only what Rio performers (or study quartets) were doing, butalso to make discoveries about with might be done with the set up consisting of ensemble-plus-props. Thisincluded necessary aspects of technique (e.g., that thumb and index finger grips on corners of the Mylar sheetcycled between “up” and “down” positions during complex performance routines) and discoveries about new,expressive possibilities that had interesting mathematical meanings (e.g., “gathering” the Mylar sheet as ahandy transition point during geometric transformations, or “billowing” the sheet in ways that made novel,extra-planar shapes and opened up new ways of operating together in the ensemble).Finally, analysts’ bodies are rarely used in systematic analysis of the interactive organization oflearning and teaching (e.g., Erickson, 2004, proposes choral readings of transcripts, augmented with scoredrhythm or beat). We argue that ensemble re-enactment is a powerful but underutilized method for interactionanalysis in learning sciences research. Much as archeologists re-enact tool use or hypothesized cultural practicesin relation to the built environment (e.g., using sun, moon, star and building alignment as an agriculturalcalendar), we and our research participants made discoveries about the expressive possibilities of ensembleplus-prop set ups that went well beyond a typical, seated viewing of found video recordings. As a matter ofmethod, we recommend closer attention to reenactments that place analysts’ bodies into the very culturalactivities of interest in their analysis. Linked to the organizing theme of this symposium on the history of filmand in scientific visualization and discovery, viewing and doing (re-enactment) together are more powerful thanviewing alone.ReferencesBergson, H. (1889/1971). Time and free will: An essay on the immediate data of consciousness. London, UK:George Allen and Unwin.Bergson, H. (1896/1988). Matiére et mémoire. (N. M. Paul & W. S. Palmer: Matter and Memory, Trans.). NewYork, NY: Zone Books.Cartwright, L. (1995). Screening the body: Tracing medicines visual culture. University of Minnesota Press.de Freitas, E. (2015). Classroom video data and the time-image: An-archiving the student body. DeleuzeStudies, 9, 318-336.de Freitas, E. (2016). The moving image in education research: Reassembling the body in classroom video data,International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 29, 553-572.de Freitas, E. & Sinclair, N. (2014). Mathematics and the body: Material entanglements in the classroom. NewYork, NY: Cambridge University Press.Derry, S.J., Pea, R.D., Barron, B., Engle, R.A., Erikson, F., Goldman, R., Hall, R., Koschmann, T., Lemke, J.L.,Sherin, M.G. & Sherin, B.L. (2010). Conducting video research in the learning sciences: Guidance onselection, analysis, technology and ethics. The Journal of the Learning Sciences. 19, 3-53.Doane, M. A. (2002). The emergence of cinematic time. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Ellenbogen, K. M., Luke, J. J., & Dierking, L. D. (2004). Family learning research in museums: An emergingdisciplinary matrix? Science Education, 88(S1), S48- S58.Erickson, F. (1996). Ethnographic microanalysis. In N. H. Berger and S. McKay (Eds.), Sociolinguistics andlanguage teaching (pp. 283-306). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Erickson, F. (2004). Talk and social theory. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1201© ISLSErickson, F. (2006). Definition and analysis of data from videotape: Some research procedures and theirrationales. In J. L. Green, G. Camilli, & P. B. Elmore (Eds.), Handbook of complementary methods ineducation research (pp. 177- 191). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Goodwin, C. (2003). The semiotic body in its environment. In J. Coupland & R. Gwyn (Eds.), Discourses of thebody (pp. 19-42). New York: Palgrave/Macmillan.Hackett, A. (2016). Young children as wayfarers: Learning about place by moving through it. Children &Society, 30, 169–179.Hall, R., & Jurow, A. S. (2015). Changing concepts in activity: Descriptive and design studies of consequentiallearning in conceptual practices. Educational Psychologist, 50(3), 173-189.Hall, R. & Ma, J. (in press). Learning a part together: Ensemble learning and infrastructure in a competitive highschool marching band. Instructional Science.Hall, R., Ma, J. Y., & Nemirovsky, R. (2015). Re-scaling bodies in/as representational instruments in GPSdrawing. In V. R. Lee (Ed.), Learning technologies and the body: Integration and implementation informal and informal learning environments (pp. 112-131). New York, NY: Routledge.Hall, R., & Stevens, R. (2015). Developing approaches to interaction analysis of knowledge in use. In A. A. diSessa, M. Levin, & N. J. S. Brown (Eds.), Knowledge and interaction: A synthetic agenda for theLearning Sciences. New York, NY: Routledge.Jacobs, J. K., Kawanaka, T., & Stigler, J. W. (1999). Integrating qualitative and quantitative approaches to theanalysis of video data on classroom teaching. International Journal of Educational Research, 31, 717724Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 4, 39-103.Lave, J. (2011). Apprenticeship in critical ethnographic practice. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.Lee, J., & Ingold, T. (2006). Fieldwork on foot: Perceiving, routing, socializing. In S. Coleman & P. Collins(Eds.), Locating the field: Space, place, and context in anthropology (pp. 67-85). Oxford, UK: Berg.Ma, J. Y. (2017). Multi-party, whole-body interactions in mathematical activity. Cognition & Instruction, 35,141-164.Ma, J. Y. (2016). Designing disruptions for productive hybridity: The case of walking scale geometry. Journalof the Learning Sciences, 25, 335-371.Nemirovsky, R., Kelton, M. L., & Rhodehamel, B. (2013). Playing mathematical instruments: Emergingperceptuomotor integration with an interactive mathematics exhibit. Journal for Research inMathematics Education, 44, 372-415.Pasqualino, C. & Schneider, A. (2014). Experimental film and anthropology. In A. Schneider & C. Pasqualino(Eds.), Experimental film and anthropology (pp. 1-24). London: Bloomsbury Press.Powell, A.B., Francisco, J.M., Maher, C.A. (2003). An analytical model for studying the development oflearners’ mathematical ideas and reasoning using video tape data. Journal of Mathematical Behavior,22, 405-435.Sheets-Johnstone, M. (2011). The primacy of movement. (2nd Ed.). Amsterdam: Benjamins.Stivers, T., & J. Sidnell (2005). "Multimodal interaction." Semiotica 156(1/4): 1-20.Streeck, J., & S. Mehus (2005). Microethnography: The study of practices. Handbook of Language and SocialInteraction (pp. 381-404). K. L. Fitch and R. E. Sanders. Mahwah, NJ, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.van Nes, F. & Doorman, M. (2010). The interaction between multimedia data analysis and theory developmentin design research. Mathematics Education Research Journal, 22, 6-30.Vogelstein, L., Hall, R. & Brady, C. (2017, June). Embodied mathematical technologies: Making sense ofensemble-based embodied mathematical thinking and learning. Paper at the 47th Annual Meeting ofthe Jean Piaget Society, San Francisco.vom Lehn, D., Heath, C., & Hindmarsh, J. (2002). Video-based field studies in museums and galleries. VisitorStudies Today, V(III), 15-17.Wanono, N. (2014). From the grain to the pixel, aesthetic and political choices. In A. Schneider & C. Pasqualino(Eds.), Experimental film and anthropology (pp. 183-198). London: Bloomsbury Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1202© ISLS