Learning About Climate Change Through CooperationLauren R. Applebaum, University of California, Berkeley, lauren.applebaum@berkeley.eduKyle W. Fricke, University of Texas at Austin, kyle.w.fricke@gmail.comJonathan M. Vitale, University of California, Berkeley, jonvitale@berkeley.eduMarcia C. Linn, University of California, Berkeley, mclinn@berkeley.eduAbstract: Students maintain a range of alternative ideas around the causes of climate change(Rye et al., 1997). To help students diversify their repertoire of ideas, we engaged students ina cooperative activity in which individual students chose to investigate one of three possibletopics (meat-eating, albedo, or ozone), and then reported back to their peers. Studentsinvestigated Netlogo (Wilensky, 1999) models that included features relevant to their chosentopic. After exploring one of the computer models, students met in jigsaw groups (Aronson &Patnoe, 2011). Results on assessment items matched to each investigation show that scoresimproved across all topics for all students. However, students in the meat-eating investigationshow more improvement for the meat-eating item, while students who investigated albedo andozone performed equally well on all items. These findings suggest that the jigsaw activityhelped all students learn about the causes of climate change from their peers.Keywords: knowledge integration, climate change, jigsaw, computer modelsThe major issueMiddle school students maintain a range of alternative ideas around the causes of global climate change (Rye,Rubba, & Wiesenmayer, 1997). One of the most strongly held ideas is that ozone hole depletion and ultravioletradiation are the primary causes for global warming. In order to help students integrate new ideas about climatechange into their repertoire, we implemented student-led computer-based investigations, as well as acollaborative jigsaw activity (Aronson & Patnoe, 2011) to promote understanding of causes of global warming.One way to help students integrate new ideas about global climate, such as the effects of greenhousegases, is through computer models (Vitale, McBride, & Linn, 2016). Through model use, students can altermodel features and observe the impact on temperature. For example, students can change the number offactories running at a time and monitor the relationship between greenhouse gases and temperature throughgraphs. Yet, given the complexity of the topic and the range of factors to be studied, students may lose interestor become uninvolved in the investigations. To encourage student participation and interest, we implemented acollaborative jigsaw activity. The “jigsaw method” (Aronson & Patnoe, 2011) allows for students to engage indeep exploration of model features while also supporting student involvement (Lazarowitz et al., 1994) andcooperative integration of new ideas. By allowing students to choose their own investigation and engage indiscussions with their peers, students can discover the value of finding answers for themselves and workingtogether with other students to gain new knowledge (Songer, Lee, & Kam, 2002). Yet, whether students benefitequally from listening to their peers and investigating their own topics is an open question.In order to promote a greater number of ideas around global warming, students chose one of threemodel-based investigations: meat-eating, albedo (surface reflectivity), or ozone. Following students’investigations, two students representing each topic met in a small group to discuss their findings. We have twomain research questions: 1) Do all students make more conceptual links across all topic areas at posttestcompared to pretest? 2) Do students become “experts” in their topic areas?Potential significance of workThe work presented here attempts to not only explore methods that successfully teach students about factorsrelated to climate change, but it also seeks to validate a jigsaw activity as a productive way for results ofcomputer simulations to be shared. Specifically, is personally exploring a computer model just as effective ashearing about a model from a peer? By showing gains from pre- to posttest on three assessment items that matchthe investigation topics, we suggest that jigsaw activities allow students to delve into topics of interest throughcomputer model exploration, while also supporting knowledge gains in areas they did not personally explore.Methodological approachesWe tested 273 8th grade students from the classrooms of 2 teachers at a middle school in the northwest UnitedStates. Students used the web-based inquiry science environment (WISE) unit What Impacts Global ClimateCSCL 2017 Proceedings664© ISLSChange? The unit consisted of a 5-class-period lesson on climate change, with a focus on the chemical reactionsthat affect global temperatures. Following the main unit, students began a 2-day challenge unit extension duringwhich students chose to investigate one of three topic options related to global climate change.Independent investigationDuring the challenge unit, students had the opportunity to independently investigate the relationship betweenclimate change and one of the following topics: meat-eating, albedo, or ozone. Each student ranked theinvestigations by preference. The second author made great efforts to ensure that each student was able toinvestigate either their first or second choice while ensuring that each topic was equally represented.Figure 1. Snapshot of meat-eating investigation model.To start their investigations, students saw a computer model that matched their topic (see Figure 1 for asnapshot of a meat-eating model). After exploring the model, students generated research questions that couldbe answered using the model. Once students selected their research question and explained the data they wouldneed to answer their question, students gathered their data using the computer model. Computer modelexploration was followed by reflection prompts about their investigation and their findings.Collaborative jigsaw activityAfter completing their investigations and reporting the results of the findings within WISE, students participatedin a jigsaw activity. During the jigsaw activity, students were placed in groups of six (two students from eachtopic). Students were asked to present the findings of their investigations to their group members.AssessmentsAt pre- and posttest students were asked 3 questions relevant to the challenge (one question for each topic). Formeat-eating: Suppose everyone on earth started eating twice as much meat as they do now. Would that makeearth’s climate colder, hotter, or have no effect? Explain your reasoning. For albedo: Suppose we covered theEarth’s land with giant mirrors. Would that make earth’s climate colder, hotter, or have no effect? Explain yourreasoning. For ozone: Does the ozone hole make earth’s climate significantly colder, hotter, or have no effect?Explain to [fictional character name] the role of ozone in global warming.CodingScoring (1-5) was completed using knowledge integration rubrics (Liu, Lee, & Linn, 2011). Knowledgeintegration acknowledges the diverse set of ideas that students hold. Without penalizing for alternative ideas, theknowledge integration rubric focuses on the links between two ideas and awards higher scores for not juststating normative ideas but also linking them together. Links for each item can be found in Table 1.CSCL 2017 Proceedings665© ISLSTable 1: Links for each assessment itemPre-/Posttest itemLinkMeat-eatingCows/trucks/factories release greenhouse gases AND this leads to higher temperaturesGreenhouse gases reflect infrared radiation AND this leads to higher temperaturesMirrors reflect solar radiation AND this leads to lower temperaturesMirrors prevent infrared radiation from transforming into heat beneath the earth’ssurface AND this leads to lower temperaturesOzone protects us from UV rays AND this does not affect temperatureThe amount of ozone can increase or decrease AND this does not affect temperatureAlbedoOzoneMajor findingsOverallStudents at pretest held, on average, non-normative or incomplete ideas about the effects of meat-eating, albedo,and ozone on global temperatures (meat-eating: M=2.21, SD=.61; ozone: M=2.07, SD=.50; albedo: M=2.54,SD=.90). By posttest, student scores were higher on all items (meat-eating: M=3.20, SD=.97; ozone: M=2.88,SD=.94; albedo: M=2.94, SD=1.11). The differences between pre- and posttest scores were significant for allquestions (meat-eating: M=.99, SD=.99, t(247)=15.85, p<.001; ozone: M=.81, SD=1.07, t(236)=11.62, p<.001;albedo: M=.40, SD=1.21, t(249)=5.35, p<.001). See Figure 2 for average assessment scores by question.Figure 2. Average scores by question.How does the investigation affect student performance?Recall that students had direct experience with only one of the investigations before learning from their peersand that they were responsible for explaining their findings to their peers. Therefore, we ask: is studentperformance better for the item matching the investigation the student conducted themselves? In order to answerthis question, we conducted a mixed effects regression with random effects for student and fixed effects forpretest score (totaled across all three pretest items), teacher, and dummy variables for whether the investigationthe student conducted matched the assessment item. (See Figure 3 for posttest score averages by investigation.)Pretest score significantly predicted posttest performance (β=.19, p<.001), as did teacher (students in teacherA’s class performed significantly better than students in teacher B’s class: β=.21, p=.01). The effect of the meateating investigation was significant (β=.52, p<.001), which suggests that students who chose the meat-eatinginvestigation performed significantly better on the meat-eating posttest item than those students who conducteda different investigation. There were no effects for either of the other two investigations on posttest performance(albedo: β=-.007, p>.1; ozone: β=.11, p>.1).CSCL 2017 Proceedings666© ISLSFigure 3. Average posttest item scores by student investigation.Conclusions and implicationsStudy results show that regardless of investigation choice, students made gains on all assessment items. Thissuggests that the jigsaw activity performed one of its main functions: to help students integrate knowledge froma diverse range of ideas, regardless of their investigation choice. This provides evidence that students learnedfrom their own investigation and from peer descriptions of the other investigations. Interestingly, students in themeat-eating investigation seemed to become “experts.” The advantage for the meat-eating investigation may, inpart, be due to differences in relevant prior beliefs. At pretest, students had little prior knowledge regardingmeat-eating (e.g., “Why would meat effect the Earth's climate”, “eating meat has nothing to do withtemperature”). On the other hand, regarding albedo, students often (correctly) recognized that surfacereflectivity decreases temperatures. Conversely, for ozone, students often (incorrectly) implicated ozonedepletion in climate change. The extent to which investigations provided evidence that was surprising orconflicted with prior beliefs likely impacted the effectiveness of collaborative groups. For example, it might bethe case that having little prior exposure or intuition around the role of meat-eating and temperature made thesimulation particularly salient as they discovered something novel, whereas the discovery that ozone does notimpact climate change is potentially less striking, and may be equally-well conveyed through discussion.Overall this study suggests that simulation-based jigsaw activities can confer learning benefits tostudents who engage with the simulation directly and to students who learn from their peers. These results arepromising given the affordances of simulations in modeling complex phenomena such as climate change.ReferencesAronson, E. & Patnoe, S. (2011). Cooperation in the classroom: The jigsaw method (3rd ed.). London: Pinter &Martin, Ltd.Lazarowitz, R., Hertz‐Lazarowitz, R., & Baird, J. H. (1994). Learning science in a cooperative setting:Academic achievement and affective outcomes. Journal of research in science teaching, 31(10), 11211131.Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B. S. (2011). Science learning and instruction: Taking advantage of technology topromote knowledge integration. Routledge.Liu, O. L., Lee, H. S., & Linn, M. C. (2011). Measuring knowledge integration: Validation of four-yearassessments. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 48, 1079 –1107.Moskowitz, J. M., Malvin, J. H., Schaeffer, G. A., & Schaps, E. (1985). Evaluation of jigsaw, a cooperativelearning technique. Contemporary educational psychology, 10(2), 104-112.Rye, J. A., Rubba, P. A., & Wiesenmayer, R. L. (1997). An investigation of middle school students’ alternativeconceptions of global warming. International Journal of Science Education, 19(5), 527-551.Songer, N. B., Lee, H. S., & Kam, R. (2002). Technology‐rich inquiry science in urban classrooms: What arethe barriers to inquiry pedagogy? Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39(2), 128-150.Vitale, J. M., McBride, E., & Linn, M. C. (2016). Distinguishing complex ideas about climate change:Knowledge integration vs. specific guidance. International Journal of Science Education, 38(9), 15481569.Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo (and NetLogo user manual). Center for Connected Learning and ComputerBased Modeling, Northwestern University. http://ccl. northwestern. edu/netlogo.CSCL 2017 Proceedings667© ISLS