Recognizing Competencies vs. Completion vs. Participation:Ideal Roles for Web-Enabled Digital CredentialsDaniel T. Hickey, Indiana University Learning Sciences Program, dthickey@indiana.eduGrant T. Chartrand, Indiana University Learning Sciences Program, gchartra@indiana.eduAbstract: Open digital badges are new credentials that can contain specific claims and links toweb-enabled evidence and can circulate in networks. Badges are helping facilitate broader shiftsaway from measuring, accrediting, and credentialing achievement and towards capturing,validating, and recognizing learning. A study of 30 funded efforts to develop badges found thatnone of the efforts to develop competency badges (for demonstration of specific competencies)resulted in thriving badge-based ecosystems, while four of the five efforts to developparticipation badges (for engaged participation in social learning) resulted in thrivingecosystems. The findings were more mixed for the remaining efforts to develop completionbadges (for individuals completing projects or investigations) and hybrid badges (for multipletypes of learning). This suggests that innovators temper their ambition for capturing andrecognizing evidence of individual competencies, and consider exploring more socialassessments and informal and crowdsourced recognition.Keywords: digital badges, metadata, constructivism, participation, recognition.Over roughly a century, the existing systems for credentialing learning via grades, transcripts, degrees, andcertificates emerged alongside modern practices for assessing students, testing achievement, and accreditingschools. Because of this co-evolution, current practices for testing, accrediting, and credentialing remain opaquefor many stakeholders, and many of the practices are taken for granted. This leads to problems that obstructprogress, such as the way presumed expectations of external accreditors have discouraged some schools fromexpanding into online courses (e.g., Parker, 2008; Gallagher, 2016) and discouraged others from allowing studentsto transfer in credits from courses taken online (Schrock, 2010; AACRAO, 2017).In addition to being opaque, prevailing practices for testing, accrediting, and credentialing are analog, orhave only embraced technology as proxies for analog practices. For example, while tests are increasinglyadministered online, most still employ the same measurement assumptions from decades ago (Timmis, Broadfoot,Sutherland, & Oldfield, 2016). Likewise, while admissions officers or hiring managers are likely to use emailrather than phone calls when seeking information beyond transcripts and resumes, such individualized nonnetworked communication is still quite laborious. Arguably, these practices represent major obstacles for thebroad embrace of the many innovative educational technologies of interest to learning scientists and educationalinnovators. And while the impact is less obvious, these entrenched practices also obstruct efforts to overcome theinequities that plague contemporary education in most countries (e.g., Bowen & Bok, 2016; Carnoy, 2005).Open digital badges were introduced to address these challenges and help facilitate the shift away fromtesting, credentialing, and accrediting achievement and towards capturing, validating, and recognizing learning.Badges can contain detailed claims about learning, evidence supporting those claims, and links to moreinformation like completed work, and can then circulate readily in social networks where they can gain additionalmeaning. Earners can curate their own collections of badges for specific audiences, and badges can be organizedinto learning “pathways” that allow learners, educators, and employers to envision broader learning trajectories.Open digital badges were introduced in 2012 via the MacArthur Foundation’s Badges for LifelongLearning initiative. That initiative supported efforts at the Mozilla Foundation to establish the initial metadatastandards that made badges interoperable (i.e., function across multiple platforms) and extensible (i.e., functionin more advanced platforms in the future). The MacArthur initiative also funded 30 proposals (from over 600submissions) to design and build open badge systems (with supplemental funding from the Gates Foundation).Together, these events led to broad media coverage in both mainstream venues (e.g., Carey, 2012) and educationrelated outlets (e.g., Young, 2012). By 2014, multiple systems for issuing and displaying open badges existed.Expanded open badge metadata standards were released on January 1, 2017 and were adopted by theIMS Global Learning Consortium, the leading standard-setting organizations for educational technology.Significantly, these new standards include specifications for third-party endorsements (Everhart, Derryberry,Knight, & Lee, 2016). Proponents believe that these developments will allow these “e-credentials” to eventuallytransform education in a similar manner as consumer reviews allowed e-commerce to gradually (but inexorably)transform retailing and publishing starting around 2000.ICLS 2018 Proceedings792© ISLSContrasting different uses of digital badgesNot surprisingly, digital badges have been taken up in a diverse range of educational programs and learningcontexts. Some view them as ideal for motivating and recognizing inquiry-oriented and project-based learning(e.g., Cucciara, Giglio, Persico, & Raffaghelli, 2014; Diamond & Gonzalez, 2016). Conversely, proponents of“gamification” have enthusiastically embraced badges (e.g., Mallon, 2013; Metzger, Lubin, Patten, & Whyte,2016); some have equated open badges with the movement toward competency-based education (e.g., Blackburn,Porto, & Thompson, 2016; Duncan, 2011). Meanwhile, others have argued for “learning recognition networks”consisting of badges and e-portfolios (e.g., Buchem, 2016) that appear more consistent with newer socioculturaltheories of learning and motivation that provided much of the theoretical impetus behind MacArthur’s broaderinitiative (Yowell, 1999, 2014; Brown, 2012). The various chapters in two recent edited volumes confirm therange of this diversity (Ifenthaler, Belin-Mularski, & Mah, 2016; Muilenburg & Berge, 2016).This diversity of badge uses was represented by the 30 projects funded by MacArthur’s 2012 initiative.An extended study of those 30 efforts provided some initial evidence about the apparent appropriateness of digitalbadges for different types of educational programs. This paper summarizes some of those findings in the contextof a follow-up study that examined which of those 30 efforts succeeded in leaving behind a “thriving” badgebased ecosystem two years after the initial funding was exhausted. As will be shown, one type of badge systemappeared particularly successful in this regard, while another category of badge system appeared less successful.The badge Design Principles Documentation projectThe initial study of the 30 digital badge systems was known as the Design Principles Documentation project. Thisproject ran from 2012 to 2014. The project was organized to capture the “practical wisdom” (Halverson, 2004)that emerged as each of the 30 badge design efforts set out to build and implement their proposed badge system.The project first carried out a content analysis of the 30 funded proposals to identify the intended design principlesfor using digital badges to recognize, assess, motivate, and study learning. Once those projects were wellunderway in 2013, the DPD project interviewed each of the teams to determine which of the intended designprinciples had been implemented and explored the factors that supported or thwarted each principle. In late 2014,after each of the efforts had exhausted their funds, a final interview explored which of the design principles hadbeen formalized and whether the badge system had been implemented, partially implemented, or suspended. Thesefindings were synthesized into a set of principles in a widely distributed report entitled Where Badges Work Better.This report included general badge system design principles (8) and more specific principles regarding recognition(12), assessment (7), and motivation (17). Grant (2014) reports additional detailed information about these efforts.The DPD project report also proposed a framework for organizing research of badge systems. This newframework crosses three dimensions that are relevant to studying badge systems. The first dimension is thepurpose of the research (i.e., summative research of badge systems vs. formative research for improving badgesystems). The second dimension is sources of evidence (i.e., conventional evidence vs. new forms of evidenceprovided by the contents of the badges themselves). Crossing these two dimensions results in four categories ofbadges research. Within each of those four categories was additional dimension of research scope (i.e., specificbadges, larger badge systems, and broader badge-based educational ecosystems).DPD follow-up studyA follow-up study was carried out in 2015-2016, at the request of a project advisor and the program officer. Inlate 2015, the DPD project followed up with each of the 30 efforts and searched the web and elsewhere forevidence that each system was suspended (i.e., no evidence that the badges were being issued), existing (i.e.,badges might be issued but no evidence that they were being earned or shared by actual learners), or thriving (i.e.,a functioning badge-based ecosystem where learners were earning, claiming, and sharing badges). Determiningthe status of the projects proved to be challenging because some of the teams were still trying to implement theirbadge system or establish a broader ecosystem. Ultimately, consensus was reached among the research team.The follow-up study then explored whether the success of the various badge systems was associated withthe type of badge systems in terms of the forms of learning that the system intended to motivate and recognize.Only a few of the proposals articulated specific theories of learning. Nonetheless, most of the proposals featuredactivities and assessments that were generally consistent with one of three widely acknowledged "grand theories"of knowing and learning. These three perspectives are rooted in more fundamental philosophies andepistemologies (e.g., Greeno, Collins, and Resnick, 1996) and are widely embraced by many researchers andtheorists. Re-analysis of the original proposals and DPD interviews confirmed that most (but not all) of the 30proposed badge systems were generally consistent with one of these three perspectives. After substantialICLS 2018 Proceedings793© ISLSdeliberation and additional interviews, each of the badge systems were characterized as competency-based,completion-based, participation-based, or hybrid.Competency-based badge systemsSome of the proposed badge system designs appeared to be most consistent with “associationist” theories. Theserather traditional theories (sometimes labeled didactic or empiricist) assume that knowledge consists of arelatively large number of specific associations. These views of knowledge are rooted in the British empiricistphilosophy and are most strongly associated with behaviorism and its focus on stimulus-response associations(e.g., Skinner, 1953). However, associationist perspectives are well represented in the work of many cognitivescientists who focus on cognitive “if-then” associations (e.g., Anderson, 2013). Such modern “informationprocessing” perspectives are appealing to instructional designers who worry about "cognitive load" (e.g., Sweller,Van Merrienboer, & Paas, 1998) that results when too much information is presented to learners. The DPD projectconcluded that badge system designs that were consistent with associationist perspectives would emphasize (a)badges for self-paced individualized mastery of specific competencies, (b) summative assessments of thosecompetencies, and (c) external and extrinsic forms of motivation. It seemed appropriate to characterize these ascompetency-based badge systems.Eight of the proposed badge systems were deemed competency-based. This included three proposals thatreceived substantially greater funding as part of the Gates Foundation's Project Mastery initiative. This initiativesupported K-12 efforts to implement “proficiency-based pathways,” which offer “opportunities for students toengage in a learning experience where they can demonstrate mastery of content and skills and earn credit towardsa diploma, certificate, or some other meaningful marker” (Gates Foundation, 2012, p. 7). These efforts included(1) Pathways to Global Competence from the Asia Society, (2) LevelUp from EffectiveSC and the Adams 50School District in Colorado, and (3) the Youth Digital Filmmaker Badge System proposed by YouTopia and theSchool District of Philadelphia. All three of the Gates-funded projects were also examined in a comprehensivesummative evaluation carried out by the RAND Corporation (Steele et al., 2014).As elaborated in the RAND report and the DPD report, all three of these badge design teams struggledwith technology, validity, and personnel issues. The Pathways to Global Competence badge system was neverimplemented and the other two badge systems were suspended after pilot implementations. In particular, the badgeteams struggled to implement and manage the relatively massive demands for summative assessment of specificcompetencies from student-generated work. This included gathering all the elements of student work andpresenting that work to qualified teachers or experts while keeping track of scores and competencies andrepresenting the resulting evidence meaningfully in digital badges.None of the other efforts to develop competency-based systems resulted in thriving ecosystems aroundopen badges. The (4) Sustainable Agriculture & Food System badge system from Agricultural SustainabilityInstitute at the University of California-Davis proposed an ambitious degree program featuring sophisticated selfpaced e-portfolios and competency badges. This effort stalled in the face of technology challenges, assessmentchallenges, and personnel changes; a conventional course-based degree was ultimately established. The (5) YoungAdult Library Services Association (YALSA) succeeded in implementing an ambitious YALSA Badges system foryouth-serving librarians. The group reported that the requirements for independently attaining and gaining expertendorsement numerous specific competencies was too much work considering the modest value of the badge, andthe program was suspended. The (6) National Manufacturing Institute succeeded in implementing a singleComputer Integrated Manufacturing badge within the widely-used Project Lead the Way STEM curriculum. Thebadge ultimately languished and became redundant as it only duplicated the effect of course grades. (7) TheNational Manufacturing Institute also proposed an ambitious badge system organized around the standardizedperformance assessments from by SkillsUSA for specific industry-defined competencies. However, that effortstalled when the team was unable to secure a formal endorsement for its badges from employers; without formalrecognition, the vocational programs were unwilling to purchase and use the SkillsUSA assessments. (8) Thestartup ScoLab successfully implemented badges within its BuzzMath arithmetic drill and practice website.However, privacy concerns with their young learners precluded the implementation of web-enabled open badges,and their badges simply served as learning tokens within their popular gamified website.It is worth noting that the DPD project concluded that the challenge that these efforts encountered wentwell beyond the decision to implement competency-based badges. Nonetheless, these findings suggest that cautionis needed when developing competency-based badge systems. In particular, it seems competency-based systemsshould anticipate the challenges that the DPD project uncovered as well as the tensions in competency-basededucation (CBE) implementations reported in the separate evaluation of the three Gates’ Project Masteryinitiatives (Steele et al., 2014). This includes the challenges of equating evidence from anytime/anywhere learningwith conventional criteria; determining who can authorize credit; maintaining a common definition of proficiency;ICLS 2018 Proceedings794© ISLStechnical, financial, and logistical barriers to efficiency; and concerns over equity. These bolster the concernsabout CBE in a report from the Carnegie Foundation (Silva, White, & Toch, 2015), while also highlighting thechallenges that learning management systems present for CBE (cf. Leuba, 2015).Completion-based badge systemsThe largest group of proposed badge systems were generally consistent with “constructivist” theories of learning.This broad class of perspectives is rooted in Piaget’s (1970) genetic epistemology and is associated with modernlearning perspectives that emerged in the 1980s. This perspective is widely embraced by many cognitive scientists(e.g., Glaser, 1984), educational psychologists (e.g., Savery and Duffy, 1995), and teacher educators (e.g.,Richardson, 2003). Constructivist perspectives embrace a rationalist theory of cognition which assumes thatknowledge consists of broader conceptual schema that the human mind constructs when attempting to make senseof (i.e., "rationalize") new information in the world. Rather than numerous specific stimulus-response or if-thenassociations, constructivist instruction focuses on fewer "higher-order" competencies and more generalcompetencies such as problem-solving and critical thinking.The DPD project assumed that badge systems were consistent with constructivist perspectives when theyemphasized (a) inquiry-oriented learning, typically via individual completion of projects or investigations, (b)informal formative assessments of that learning via performance and/or portfolio assessment, and (c) moreintrinsic forms of motivation associated with curiosity and interest. It seemed appropriate to characterize badgesystems that emphasized such features as completion-based.The project concluded that 12 of the 30 proposals were completion-based. Of these 12, four resulted inbadge systems that appeared to be thriving in 2015. (1) NatureBadges were used to extend exhibits at SmithsonianNatural History Museum using computer-based assessments in partnership with Credly. This system was laterrenamed Q?rius. (2) Intel and the Society for Science and the Public successfully added open badges into itsexisting Intel Science Fair curriculum and web technology. (3) The Sweetwater Foundations’ proposedAQUAPONS, an urban aquaponics project that partially implemented a badge system in 2014; after scaling backambitions portfolio and performance assessment goals, the AQUAPON badge system appeared to be thrivingwithin the Chicago Project LRNG program. (4) The American Social History Project and the EducationalDevelopment Center added badges to an existing project-based teacher professional development program knownas Who Built America? While the project was unable to implement some ambitious peer/expert performanceassessments, the badge system was successfully implemented, and badges were approved for New Your City’sAfter School Professional Development Program. Thus, of the four completion-based badge systems that werethriving in 2015, one of them (NatureBadges) relied on computer-based assessments while another (Intel) usedan extensive network of existing assessment practices associated with its science fairs. The two other teams thatsucceeded in creating thriving completion-based badge systems both did so after scaling back their assessments.Four of the proposed completion-based badge systems succeeded in implementing badge systems by2014, but no evidence of a thriving ecosystem was found in 2015. This included (5) the 4-H/USDA badges, (6)the Starlite Academy Robotics from Project Whitecard Inc and the Center for Educational Technologies atWheeling Jesuit University, (7) Planet Stewards from 3-D Game Labs, and (8) My Sash is an App from the GirlScouts of Greater Chicago and Northwest Indiana. The four remaining proposals for completion-based badgesystems failed in implementing their badge systems. This included the (9) Wilderness Explorers Badges fromDisney/Pixar, the (10) Earthworks Rising badges from The Ohio State University and Digital Watershed, andbadge systems for (11) Roadtrip Nation and (12) StoryCorpsU from Corporation for Public Broadcasting.While the obstacles for the eight completion-based badge systems were varied, they generally struggledto implement ambitious technology-supported performance and portfolio assessments. These assessment systemswere different from the competency-based systems in that they aimed to help teachers or outside experts assesscompleted projects for evidence of relatively high-level student learning outcomes, typically against detailedrubrics. But this is still a time-consuming process that requires specific expertise with both assessment and thedomain, and it likely requires extensive refinement. One interesting observation was that several teams reportedthat badges fostered transparency (and increased scrutiny) that heightened the challenges that prior constructivistassessment reforms have encountered in using performance and portfolio assessments to generate valid evidenceof disciplinary problem solving (e.g., Shavelson, Baxter, & Pine, 1992).Participation-based badge systemsA few of the proposed badge system designs appeared most consistent with sociocultural theories of learning.This perspective is rooted in the early work of the Soviet psychologist Lev Vygotsky (1980) and emerged in itscontemporary form in the 1990s (e.g., Lave & Wenger, 1991). One well-known strand of socioculturalperspectives is called situated cognition, which reflects the assumption that knowing is strongly bound (i.e.,ICLS 2018 Proceedings795© ISLS"situated") in the social, cultural, and technological contexts where that knowledge is learned and used. Theseperspectives are strongly embraced by some cognitive scientists (e.g., Pea, 1993; Greeno, 1998). Theseperspectives assume that knowledge is primarily represented in social and cultural practices of groups of people,and view learning in terms of increasingly successful engaged participation in those social practices. One definingcharacteristic follows from Collins, Brown, and Newman's (1989) notion of cognitive apprenticeship, and thecorresponding practices of modeling, coaching, scaffolding, articulation, and reflection, often accomplishedwithin what Lave and Wenger (1991) characterized as a community of practice. Sociocultural perspectives wereinfluential in MacArthur’s Digital Media and Learning initiative from which open digital badges emerged (i.e.,Yowell & Smylie, 1999; Chaplin, 2014). The DPD project concluded that proposed badge systems were consistentwith sociocultural perspectives when they emphasized (a) badges for engaged participation in social learning andcompletion of collaborative projects, (b) peer and “crowdsourced” assessments, and (c) social and cultural formsof motivation. The team decided that it was appropriate to characterize such badge systems as participation-based.The DPD project concluded that five of the 30 efforts resulted in participation-based badge systems. In2015, evidence showed that four of these five systems were thriving. (1) The Supporter to Reporter (S2R) badgesystem was proposed by MakeWaves in the United Kingdom for its existing youth sports journalism network.S2R had already developed a sophisticated website that included extensive networked peer endorsement anddiscussion of learner projects (mostly videos). The badges were awarded for completion of projects, and mostprojects were completed collaboratively by cohorts of students, with particular attention directed at teamwork andcooperation. In 2016, MakeWaves parlayed their success into a standalone open source badge and contentmanagement platform known as Open Badge Academy. MakeWaves and the platform were acquired by the Citiesand Guilds Group, the leading vocational training and credentialing organization in the UK.(2) The PBS News Hour Student Reporting Labs (SRL) badge system was similar to S2R in that it layeredbadges into an existing curriculum and website for secondary students who completed web-based news articlesand videos. The program placed particular emphasis on building communities of learners, both within theparticipating schools as well as across schools via its website. A sophisticated badge system was implemented in2013, including a feature whereby the high-level badges were ultimately approved by a producer at the local PBSaffiliate. The badge system and program were still thriving in 2015, with over 300 SRL Superstar badges issuedand the introduction of a new STEM badge, and some badge earners were getting internships at PBS stations.(3) The badges system at Mouse Inc. was proposed to recognize middle and secondary students learningof network and computer management skills by supporting the technology help desk and network managers attheir school. The badges that were layered into its existing web-based program included a Community Win! badgespecifically designed to recognize engaged participation in the Mouse network. The program organized cohortsof students known as “Mouse Squads” to complete workshops and projects together. A sophisticated trackingsystem allowed each squad to keep track of its collective progress. The badge system was successfullyimplemented in 2013, and there was ample evidence that the program and the badge system were thriving in 2015.(4) The Cooper-Hewitt Design Prep badge system was proposed by a partnership between theSmithsonian National Design Museum and Cooper-Hewitt School of Design. The teams proposed to layer badgesinto Cooper-Hewitt's existing DesignPrep program and website. Their goal was helping students from underservedschools in New York gain design, collaboration, and presentation skills while developing a portfolio of designsfor their applications. The initial badge system that was implemented in 2012 consisted of competency badgesfocused on discrete skills and accomplishments. However, few earners claimed their badges; interviews revealedthat students were more interested in "pre-professional" badges that focused more on their professional roles. Thebadge system was revised to offer participation badges. In 2015, the new badges were featured on the newDesignPrep website and were being offered in ongoing programs. While the badges were not as widely claimedand shared as the three previous projects, this evidence appeared sufficient to characterize the system as thriving.(5) Design for America (DFA) proposed to add badges to its interdisciplinary network of students inengineering and learning sciences at Northwestern University focused on positive social impact by using the needsof community members to inform the design and implementation of “social impact” projects. They succeeded inimplementing its Digital Lofts Badge System in 2013 and were awarded an NSF Cyberlearning Grant to expandbadges and other features of the Digital Loft. While DFA and the Digital Loft certainly appeared to be thriving in2015, no evidence was found that the badges were still being used. The DFA badge system was deemed existing.Hybrid badge systemsThe five remaining badge systems proposed issued two or even three types of badges. Some systems even issuedbadges that did not fit into any category The research team decided that it was appropriate to characterize them ashybrid systems. (1) The Computer Science Student Network (CS2N) was a collaboration between CarnegieMellon University (CMU) and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). They intended toICLS 2018 Proceedings796© ISLSdevelop educational systems for computer science and other STEM fields for diverse learning groups rangingfrom middle school students to adult learners and hobbyists. They intended the badge system to serve as a guidedpathway for learners to acquire skills in robotics, computer science, and related STEM content areas usingambitious artificial intelligence systems designed to track and develop learners’ progression throughout theprogram. CS2N included competency badges in robotics and artificial intelligence, completion badges for criticalthinking in computer science, engineering, and robotics, and participation badges for some networked socialactivities. The badge system was only partially implemented in 2014 in the face of challenges associated withautomatically awarding competency and completion badges. But further funding and development resulted in athriving badge-based ecosystem in the Carnegie Mellon CS-STEM network and affiliation with Cities of Learningand Project LRNG.(2) The Providence After School Alliance (PASA) partnered with after school and extracurricularprograms to offer learning experiences to middle and high school students. PASA collaborated with AchieveryInc., a badge-based startup. The effort developed a badge for diverse after-school activities, including self-paced,competency-based activities, cohorted courses, and collaborative projects. A sophisticated attendance trackingand assessment system allowed students to earn course credit for work completed in the after-school programs.As was announced in the national educational media (Ash, 2012), PASA and Achievery successfully implementedits badge system in 2012 and students did indeed begin earning course credit for after school projects. However,the final DPD interview and a detailed ethnography of the program (Davis & Singh, 2015) found that the studentsfelt that awarding of formal credit interfered with and undermined the value of the badges. While the badge systemstill exists, PASA stopped issuing badges in 2014, and Achievery suspended operations in 2015.(3) The School District of Philadelphia proposed the Leverage for Digital On-Ramps badge system aspart of an ambitious program to prepare urban high school students for entry into college and the workforce. Theyintended to add badges to the Philadelphia Academy's Post-Secondary and Career Readiness Course, adevelopmental multi-year course designed to provide 21st century and college readiness skills. The courses andproposed badge system included features that were consistent with all three perspectives, including competencybased programs, individual and group projects, problem solving activities, and face-to-face and networked socialinteraction. The badge system was partially implemented in 2014 but was soon suspended. This effort laidimportant groundwork for subsequent participation in Cites of Learning project and Project LRNG.(4) Microsoft proposed to add open badges to its Partners in Learning Network (PiLN) for educators andschool leaders to promote technological competencies and relevant digital networking skills. PiLN aimed to equipeducators with the capacity to teach information and communications technology and 21st century skills. Thenetwork included self-paced competency-based activities, cohorted workshops, problem solving activities, andextensive social interaction. While an internal badge system was implemented in 2014 and the network appearedto be thriving in 2015, technology constraints with the existing network prevented PiLN from implementingsharable open badges, and their badges served only as internal tokens within the network.(5) Badges for Vets aimed to connect civilian employers with veterans by translating their skills directlyto the workplace. However, veteran organizations and agencies did not cooperate as originally envisioned,preventing the envisioned ecosystem from being established. Rather, the new website took on a social networkingfunction as veterans began to connect with one another. The act of translating military skills to civilian workready skills seemed to call on practices that were consistent with multiple perspectives but did not really alignwith any assumptions about knowing and learning. While a badge system was partly implemented in 2013 andapparently still exists, their badges were never awarded to actual earners.Discussion and conclusionsMany factors were at play in establishing badge systems that continued to thrive after the initial funds wereexhausted. But the challenges of assessing individual competencies or completion of projects were clearly asignificant factor. The broader conclusion here is that badge systems that emphasized mastery of numerousspecific, measured competencies or project completion towards external credit or recognition appeared tooverwhelm the assessment capacity of their broader educational and professional contexts. These challengesseemed to be enhanced with self-paced and individualized learning because they eliminate some of informalassessment that occurs naturally with cohorts of learners. As assessment experts like James Popham (e.g., 1997)have long argued, assessing completed artifacts for evidence of specific competencies and/or higher-orderproblem solving skills can be remarkably difficult. Doing so requires substantial knowledge regarding (a) thetargeted disciplinary competencies, (b) how the competencies can be represented in artifacts, and (c) how thoseartifacts were created.To summarize, assessment was a major challenge for the seven competency-based systems that failed tothrive, while the one that did thrive issued an automated non-open badge; the four completion-based badgeICLS 2018 Proceedings797© ISLSsystems that were thriving either built on existing assessments or significantly scaled back their assessments ofcompleted projects; the one thriving hybrid open badge system used automated computer-based assessments fortheir competency and completion badges. These findings lead to the conclusion that badges work better …where expectations for assessment of individual skills and competencies are modest and manageable.To varying degrees, all four types of badge systems included various forms of social interaction amonglearners. However, those interactions were only emphasized in the participation-based badge systems, and weremostly represented in the other types of badge systems as peer-assessment of individual competencies or projects.The fact that four of the five participation-based badge systems appeared to be thriving and that one led to anentirely new badging platform that is gaining wider use leads to the conclusion that badges work better … wherelearning, recognition, and assessment is primarily social.To reiterate, the competency-based and completion-based systems aimed to award badges for evidenceof specific competencies or more conceptual understanding. In contrast, the participation-based badge systemsawarded badges for successful participation in workshops, apprenticeships, and courses, typically with cohorts ofother learners. Importantly, most of these badges did include claims of specific competencies or higher orderskills. But, rather than directly assessing those competencies or understanding, these badge systems left it up toeducators or experts to make the judgement that someone who completed the particular program, activity, orcourse had demonstrated those competencies or understanding. This leads to the conclusion that badges workbetter … when awarded for completion of workshops, course, or projects, rather than specific competenciesor knowledge.Finally, it is important to distinguish between badges awarded for engaged participation in the socialpractices of learning and badges awarded for mere attendance, which are sometimes inappropriately labeled as“participation badges”. Kyle Bowen of Purdue University coined the term “carpet badging” to refer to suchpractices, while Serge Ravet (2015) characterized this practice as “spray and pray.” The widespread practice ofawarding such badges for attendance at educationally-oriented conferences started around 2013 and seems to havebroadly undermined the value of badges for many potential stakeholders.ReferencesAsh, K. (2012, June 13). ‘Digital badges’ would represent students’ skill acquisition. Education Week. Retrievedfrom https://www.edweek.org/dd/articles/2012/06/13/03badges.h05.htmlBlackburn, R. D., Porto, S. C., & Thompson, J. J. (2016). Competency-based education and the relationship todigital badges. In L. Y. Muilenburg, & Z. L. Berge (Eds.) Digital badges in education: Trends, issues,and cases (pp. 30-38). New York, NY: Routledge.Bowen, W. G., & Bok, D. (2016). The shape of the river: Long-term consequences of considering race in collegeand university admissions. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.Buchem, I. (2016). Digital badges as (parts of) digital portfolios: Design patterns for educational and personallearning practice. In D. Ifenthaler, N. Bellin-Mularski, & D.-K. Mah (Eds.) Foundation of digital badgesand micro-credentials (pp. 343-367). Switzerland: Springer International Publishing.Carey, K. (2012 November 12). Show me your badge. The New York Times.Carnoy, M. (2005). Have state accountability and high‐stakes tests influenced student progression rates in highschool? Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice, 24(4), 19-31.Chaplin, H. (2014). Q&A: Connie Yowell on digital media and learning. In Leading thinkers: Digital media andlearning–Spotlight on digital media and learning (pp. 212-225). The MacArthur Foundation.Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading,writing, and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.) Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor ofRobert Glaser, 18, 32-42.Cucchiara S., Giglio A., Persico D., Raffaghelli J.E. (2014) Supporting self-regulated learning through digitalbadges: A case study. In: Y. Cao, T. Väljataga, J. Tang, H. Leung, & M. Laanpere (Eds.) New horizonsin web based learning. ICWL 2014 lecture notes in computer science (pp. 133-142). Switzerland:Springer International Publishing.Davis, K., & Singh, S. (2015). Digital badges in afterschool learning: documenting the perspectives andexperiences of students and educators. Computers & Education, 88, 72-83.Diamond, J., & Gonzalez, P. C. (2016). Digital badges for professional development: Teachers’ perceptions ofthe value of a new credentialing currency. In D. Ifenthaler, N. Bellin-Mularski, & D.-K. Mah (Eds.)Foundation of digital badges and micro-credentials (pp. 391-409). Switzerland: Springer InternationalPublishing.Duncan, A. (2011, September 1). Opening remarks and DML 2012 competition event transcript. Retrieved from:http://dmlcompetition.net/Competition/4/opening-event-transcript.php.ICLS 2018 Proceedings798© ISLSEverhart, D., Derryberry, A., Knight, E., & Lee, S. (2016). The role of endorsement in open badges ecosystems.In D. Ifenthaler, N. Bellin-Mularski, & D.-K. Mah (Eds.) Foundation of digital badges and microcredentials (pp. 221-235). Switzerland: Springer International Publishing.Gates Foundation (2012). Supporting students: Investing in innovation and quality. [College Ready WorkMonographs]. Seattle, WA: The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Retrieved fromhttps://docs.gatesfoundation.org/documents/supporting-students.pdfGlaser, R. (1984). Education and thinking: The role of knowledge. American Psychologist, 39(2), 93-104Grant, S. (2014). What counts as learning: Open digital badges for new opportunities. Digital Media and LearningHub. https://dmlhub.net/publications/what-counts-learning/ .Greeno, J. G. (1998). The situativity of knowing, learning, and research. American Psychologist, 53(1), 5-26.Greeno, J. G., Collins, A. M., and Resnick, L. B. (1996). Cognition and learning. Handbook of educationalpsychology, 15-46. New York, NY: MacMillian.Halverson, R. (2004). Accessing, documenting, and communicating practical wisdom: The phronesis of schoolleadership practice. American Journal of Education, 111(1), 90-121.Ifenthaler, D., Bellin-Mularski, N., & Mah, D.-K. (Eds.). (2016). Foundation of digital badges and microcredentials. Switzerland: Springer International Publishing.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, MA:Cambridge University Press.Leuba, M. (2015, October 12). Competency-based education: Technology challenges and opportunities.EDUCAUSE Review. Retrieved from http://er.educause.edu/articles/2015/10/competency-basededucation-technology-challenges-and-opportunitiesMallon, M. (2013). Gaming and gamification. Public Services Quarterly, 9(3), 210-221.Metzger, E. C., Lubin, L., Patten, R. T., & Whyte, J. (2016). Applied gamification: Creating reward systems fororganizational professional development. In D. Ifenthaler, N. Bellin-Mularski, & D.-K. Mah (Eds.)Foundation of digital badges and micro-credentials (pp. 457-466). Switzerland: Springer InternationalPublishing.Muilenburg, L. Y., & Berge, Z. L. (Eds.). (2016). Digital badges in education: Trends, issues, and cases. NewYork, NY: Routledge.Popham, W. J. (1997). What's wrong–and what's right–with rubrics. Educational Leadership, 55(2), 72-75.Pea, R. D. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributedcognitions (pp. 47-87). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Piaget, J. (1970). Science of education and the psychology of the child. Trans. by D. Coltman. New York, NY:Orion Press.Ravet, S. (2015, February 27). #Open badges: Beyond “Spray and pray”! Learning futures [Blog]. Retrieved fromhttp://www.learningfutures.eu/2015/02/openbadges-beyond-spray-and-prayRichardson, V. (2003). Constructivist pedagogy. The Teachers College Record, 105(9), 1623-1640.Savery, J.R., & Duffy, T.M. (1995). Problem-based learning: An instructional model and its constructivistframework. Educational Technology, 35, 5.Shavelson, R. J., Baxter, G. P., & Pine, J. (1992). Research news and comment: Performance assessments:Political rhetoric and measurement reality. Educational Researcher, 21(4), 22-27.Silva, E., White, T., & Toch, T. (2015). The Carnegie Unit: A century-old standard in a changing educationallandscape.CarnegieFoundation.Retrievedfromhttps://www.carnegiefoundation.org/resources/publications/carnegie-unitSkinner, B. F. (1953). Science and Human Behavior. Simon and Schuster.Steele, J. L., Lewis, M., Santibanez, L., Faxon-Mills, S., Rudnick, B., Stecher, B., & Hamilton, L. (2014).Competency-based education in three pilot programs: Examining implementation and outcomes. SantaMonica,CA:RANDCorporation.Retrievedfromhttp://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/RR700/RR732/RAND_RR732.pdfSweller, J., Van Merrienboer, J. J., & Paas, F. G. (1998). Cognitive architecture and instructional design.Educational Psychology Review, 10(3), 251-306.Timmis, S., Broadfoot, P., Sutherland, R., & Oldfield, A. (2016). Rethinking assessment in a digital age:Opportunities, challenges and risks. British Educational Research Journal, 42(3), 454-476.Vygotsky, L. S. (1980). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Yowell, C. M., & Smylie, M. A. (1999). Self-regulation in democratic communities. The Elementary SchoolJournal, 99(5), 469–490.ICLS 2018 Proceedings799© ISLS