The Digital Use Divide and Knowledge BuildingThérèse Laferrière, Laval University, therese.laferriere@fse.ulaval.caAlain Breuleux, McGill University, alain.breuleux@mcgill.caAbstract: This paper delves into the digital divide challenge through an interaction analysisof educational partners engaged in co-designing, sustaining, and scaling classroom-basedinnovation using collaborative platforms in rural settings. The innovation is analyzed byreferring to an emerging multilevel multiscale model, with emphasis on the five dimensions ofDede’s conceptual framework (Depth, Sustainability, Spread, Shift [in Ownership], andEvolution, 2006). Organizational structures, interaction processes put in place and thetechnology in use during the Remote Networked School (RNS) initiative are identified.Keywords: Innovation, scalability, collaborative technologiesIntroduction and backgroundAt the onset of the Remote Networked School (RNS) initiative in the Province of Quebec, Canada, the targetwas to temper the closing of small rural schools, based on the assumption that Internet-enabled activities wouldenhance the learning environment (equity of access and quality of education). Online courses not being anoption, this constraint became an opportunity for suggesting the use of the computer for collaborativelearning/knowledge building purposes between students from different classrooms geographically dispersed.Given the obscure general awareness of the possibilities that Internet were opening for remote networkedschools, a more attainable goal was set, that of enriching their learning environment so that it would becomedifficult for a school district to close such a school on the basis of underachievement.Educational partners (teachers, school principals, school district administrators, and government publicservants), brought together by a knowledge transfer agency named CEFRIO, were invited to engage inparticipatory design (Silva & Breuleux, 1994). According to Bereiter & Scardamalia (2003), the design mode isa process of working with ideas for solving real complex problems with no ready-made solutions, identifyingand exploiting promising ideas. Design experiment/design-based research was the methodology of use. Ely’s(1999) conditions of innovation with information and communication technologies (dissatisfaction with thestatus quo, available resources, available time, rewards or incentives for participants, expected and encouragedparticipation, commitment, and leadership) were monitored at least twice a year during a ten-year period(Hamel, Turcotte, & Laferriere, 2013). Co-design was favored (Voogt et al., 2015). Volunteer teachers engagedstudents into networked learning/knowledge building activities with the support of collaborative platforms –Knowledge Forum (KF) and a desktop videoconferencing system (iVisit) and, later, a web-based one (Via). Amember of the research and intervention team (RIT) was available during working hours, in a virtual room ofthe videoconferencing system, to respond to on-demand practitioners’ inquiries. Teachers were provided studentparticipation data (e.g., numbers of written, read, revised, and linked contributions on KF, use of scaffolds,types of questions asked). RIT held meetings onsite/online to co-interpret data with school and school districtpartners. Research results pertaining to learning outcomes (e.g., students’ vocabulary growth, readingcomprehension and explanation level) were provided to educational partners for informed decision making.In relation to the theme of the 2017 CSCL conference, it can be stated that the RNS initiative (20022017), now involving on a yearly basis over 6 000 students, 200 teachers 100 schools and 23 school districts,enlarges the digital use divide in the Province with teachers engaging students in advanced collaborative workwhile others do not. It can also be stated that the RNS helps reduced the digital use divide by engaging somerural school students in advanced uses similar to those some urban school students in North America andbeyond may engage in. Scaling innovation is critical for addressing the digital use divide. For Engeström (1987,2015), innovation occurs when an acculturation process takes place. In this short paper, we identify theorganizational structures and interaction processes put in place as the RNS initiative was co-designed, andgained sustainability and scale while propulsing local practitioners at the upper end of the digital use divide.MethodBuilding on Coburn’s (2003) conceptualization of scale (four interrelated dimensions: depth, sustainability,spread, and shift [in ownership]), Dede (2006) suggested that evolution, meaning the learning that takes placefor the original creators of an innovation while they interact with users, is an additional dimension to beconsidered. The depth dimension refers notably to teacher beliefs about classroom teaching and to what studentsCSCL 2017 Proceedings613© ISLScan do when prompted to engage in unfamiliar interaction with their peers (e.g., knowledge building,Scardamalia, 2002; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006). Shift (in ownership) refers to local educational leaderstaking charge of the innovation. We referred to these dimensions and applied an earlier draft of Law, Yuen andLee’s (2015) multilevel multiscale model that distinguishes eight different levels: international, system, schooluniversity-government partnership, school district, school (leadership), teacher, classroom student, andtechnology. For each level, the organizational structures, the interaction processes and the technology put inplace were identified as we revisited RNS technical reports (conditions of innovation put in place, teacherprofessional development, onsite/online activities, classroom learning/knowledge building artifacts). We presentthe organizational structures, interaction processes, and technologies that stood out.FindingsDepthThere were no well-elaborated pedagogical materials to begin with (technology). The initiative tapped onteachers’ agency, encouraging them to engage in new forms of interaction among themselves and with students(organizational structure). Volunteer teachers’ beliefs about classroom teaching and what students can do werechallenged (interaction process) through their uses of KF (technology). Administrative, technical andpedagogical support (interaction process) was provided. For teachers to come online, ask questions or talk aboutissues with a RIT member, trust had to be built (interaction process). RIT monitored the presence/absence ofconditions for innovation and provided feedback iteratively (interaction process) during RNS district/schoolcommittee meetings (organizational structures).The RNS initiative put forward a variety of educational practices (adult-adult, adult-student, studentstudent) using the collaborative platforms (technology). Participants reported on their activities onsite, onlineand at annual provincial knowledge transfer sessions (organizational structure), thus contributing todemonstrate the collaboration that could happen within and between networked schools. Regarding knowledgebuilding (KB), a deliberate effort to increase the cultural capital of a community (Scardamalia & Bereiter,2006), teachers and other educational partners at the system level have been introduced to its principles(interaction process). KF’s affordances (e.g., neuronal presentation of notes, basic participation measures,scaffolds, promising idea highlight, analytical tools) and those of the videoconferencing system (e.g., a virtualroom for on-demand technical and pedagogical support, identification code allowing teacher self-managementof online classroom activities) informed and facilitated the conduct and analysis of written and verbal onlinediscourse (technology). Both platforms presented constraints: Via required more bandwidth, equipment and timecoordination; KF required the writing and reading of contributions (organizational structure).Ongoing contact with RIT (organizational structure) allowed for online individual and small-groupconversations on topics of interest to teachers (interaction process): how to focus students on a drivingquestion? What to do with promising ideas? When to end a collective investigation? Gradually, the RNSwebsite (www.eer.qc.ca) presented artifacts of collaborative inquiry by Quebec Francophone students(interaction process). Co-design as a form of professional development (Voogt et al., 2015) was practicedonsite/online between teachers from different classrooms and schools, and online with RIT members(interaction process). The Knowledge Building International Project (KBIP) (organizational structure) tookprofessional development beyond local expectations (Laferrière et al., 2015).SustainabilityGovernment funding endured but was reduced when another program provided subsidies to remote schools fortheir digital infrastructure (technology). CEFRIO remained the coordinating body (interaction process), and RITkept providing professional development and research results (organizational structure). The two collaborativetechnologies that were part of the design of the RNS were challenged by IT school district departments wantingto roll in new “collaborative” technologies. The desktop videoconferencing system was replaced by a web-basedone to the satisfaction of all but KF remained the main online written discourse platform (technology).SpreadIn 2008, the Government financed an Anglophone collaborative initiative across classrooms (organizationstructure). Recently, the Government expanded the limit number of school districts that could receive fundingfor participation, and the RNS initiative was renamed “The networked school” initiative (organizationalstructure). A growing number of Quebec urban private and public schools and France’s rural academies arebecoming interested in the model as they see what teachers and students accomplish with KB (interactionprocess) and KF (technology).CSCL 2017 Proceedings614© ISLSShift (in Ownership)Some school districts modified their school funding policies and provided for some teachers to work in theirclassroom four days a week, and devote the fifth day to the induction of volunteer colleagues into RNS practices(organizational structure). A governing body was established (organisational structure), composed of fourschool district superintendents, and representatives of Ministry of Education, Quebec Federation of schooldistricts. The CEFRIO’s representative became the director of the initiative. The KF server remained universitybased, and a research center of which RIT was a member (organizational structure), offers on-demand support(interaction process), including server maintenance and upgrade (technology).EvolutionRIT’s valuing of the agency of the educational partners involved was put to test many times. RIT learnt to workwithin the zone of proximal development, and deal with tensions/contradictions between principle-based designand provincial/district policies, norms, procedures and routines (organizational structure). The virtualcommunity, composed of elementary, secondary and postsecondary Francophone teachers engaged in KBpractices (organizational structure), has its ups and downs (interaction process) but new ways to move aheadlocally and also to participate in the international KB community are found.DiscussionFacing together the problem of quality of education in small remote schools, educational partners envisionedthat teachers from different schools could establish viable collaborations among themselves and among students(organizational structure). Their co-design rested on collaborative platforms, one for written discourse and theother for verbal discourse (technology). In best instances, the combination of the two platforms afforded deeperstudent understanding of authentic problems through collaborative inquiry.This analysis of the depth, sustainability, spread and shift (in ownership) dimensions uncovers twodouble-binds. The first pertains to “spread” without “depth” or “depth” without “spread”. “Spread” without“depth” occurred when teachers and students used the videoconferencing system to do time consuming surfaceactivities (e.g., having students introduce themselves one after the other in a repetitive manner) or when studentswrote on KF repetitive notes in response, for example, to a question originating from a teacher instead of aquestion growing out of a classroom discussion. The RNS initiative also had “depth” without “spread”. Forinstance, some teachers guided students to improve promising ideas and develop a collective understanding of aquestion or problem but this practice did not spread. Another double-bind reflects a tension between“sustainability” and “evolution”. RIT’s thinking was that teachers willing to engage in collaborative activitieswere boundary spanners, not followers. It counted on teachers’ agency, and therefore on their capacity to adaptand take advantage of the affordances of the collaborative technologies in a sustainable manner. But teachers,who had to cope with daily obligations, were asking for exemplars and more resources. RIT responded bydeveloping some resources. Coburn and Stein (2010) stressed the importance of available teaching/learningactivities and materials for innovation. Over the years, activity exemplars and materials were co-created withteachers (e.g., Allaire & Lusignan, 2011).This analysis adds to Chan’s (2011) three interacting themes (context and systemic change, capacity andcommunity building, and innovation as inquiry), two other themes: 1) Ongoing use of up-to-date collaborativeplatforms, and 2) participation in a network. See also Clarke, Dede, Ketelhut and Nelson (2006), Coburn andStein (2010), Coburn, Russell, Kaufman, and Stein (2012). We suggest that these five themes are critical foraddressing the digital use divide in socially responsible ways.ConclusionGiven that the first-level divide (access to digital technology) has been significantly reduced, the US NationalEducation Technology Plan (2016) highlights the challenge of the “digital use divide” (second-level divide). Itis a call to which one can respond by engaging in partnership research, or research-practice partnerships(Penuel, Fishman, Haugan Cheng, & Sabelli, 2011), committed to bring innovation to scale. It is a challengingtask but one worth pursuing as third-level divides, according to Van Deursen and Helsper (2015), are nowappearing. These authors defined this new generation of divides as “disparities in the returns from internet usewithin populations of users who exhibit broadly similar usage profiles and enjoy relatively autonomous andunfettered access to ICTs and the internet infrastructure” (p. 30). They add: “The internet remains morebeneficial for those at the highest education levels, with higher social status, not in terms of how extensivelythey use the technology but in what they achieve as a result of this use for several important domains.” (p. 46).ReferencesCSCL 2017 Proceedings615© ISLSAllaire, S., & Lusignan, G. (2011). Enseigner et apprendre en réseau : collaborer entre écoles distantes à l’aidedes TIC. Montréal, Canada: Éditions CEC.Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (2003). Learning to work creatively with knowledge. In E. de Corte, L.Vershaffel, N. Entwistle, & J. van Merriënboer (Eds.), Powerful learning environments: Unravelingbasic components and dimensions (pp. 55– 68). Oxford, UK: Elsevier Science.Chan, Carol K. K. (2011). Bridging research and practice: Implementing and sustaining knowledge building inHong Kong classrooms. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6(2),147-186. doi: 10.1007/s11412-011-9121-0.Clarke, J., Dede, C., Ketelhut, D. J., & Nelson, B. (2006). A design-based research strategy to promotescalability for educational innovations. Educational Technology, 46(3), 27-36.Coburn, C. E. (2003). Rethinking scale: Moving beyond numbers to deep and lasting change. EducationalResearcher, 32(6), 3–12.Coburn, C. E., & Stein, M. K. (2010). Research and practice in education: Building alliances, bridging thedivide. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.Coburn, C. E., Russell, J. L., Kaufman, J., & Stein, M. K. (2012). Supporting sustainability: Teachers' advicenetworks and ambitious instructional reform. American Journal of Education, 119(1), 137-182.Dede, C. (2006). Scaling up: Evolving innovations beyond ideal settings to challenging contexts of practice. InR. K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 551-566). Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.Ely, D. P. (1999). Conditions that facilitate the implementation of educational technology innovations.Educational Technology, 39, 23-27.Engeström, Y. (1987, 2015). Learning by expanding: An activity-theoretical approach to developmentalresearch. Helsinki, Finland: Orienta-Konsultit. See also Cambridge University Press, 2 nd edition.Hamel, C., Turcotte, S., & Laferrière, T. (2013). Evolution of the conditions for successful innovation in remotenetworked schools. International Education Studies, 6(3), 1-14.Laferrière, T., Breuleux, A., Allaire, S., Hamel, C., Law, N., Montané, M., Hernandez, O., Turcotte, S., &Scardamalia, M. (2015). The Knowledge Building International Project (KBIP): Scaling upprofessional development for effective uses of collaborative technologies. In C.-K. Looi & L. W. Teh(Eds.), Scaling educational innovations (pp. 255-276). Singapore: Springer, Education InnovationSeries. doi: 10.1007/978-981-287-537-2_12Law, N., Yuen, A., & Lee, Y. (2015). Precarious school level scalability amid network level resilience: Insightsfrom a multilevel multiscale model of scalability. Paper presented at the annual meeting of theAmerican Educational Research Association (AERA), Chicago, IL.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Haugan Cheng, B., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development atthe intersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40, 331–337.Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith(Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago, IL: Open Court.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In K. Sawyer(Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97-118). New York, NY: CambridgeUniversity Press.Silva, M., & Breuleux, A. (1994). The use of participatory design in the implementation of internet-basedcollaborative learning activities in K-12 classrooms. Interpersonal Computing and Technology: AnElectronic Journal for the 21st Century, 2(3), 99-128. Retrieved from:http://www.helsinki.fi/science/optek/1994/n3/silva.txtUnited States Department of Education, Office of Educational Technology (2016). National EducationTechnology Plan (NETP). Retrieved from : https://tech.ed.gov/files/2017/01/NETP17.pdfVan Deursen, J. A. M., & Helsper, E. J. (2015). The Third-Level Digital Divide: Who Benefits Most fromBeing Online?, in L. Robinson , S. R. Cotten , J. Schulz , T. M. Hale , ? A. Williams (ed.)Communication and Information Technologies Annual (Studies in Media and Communications, 10 (pp.29 – 52). Emerald Group Publishing Limited. doi 0.1108/S2050-206020150000010002Voogt, J., Laferrière, T., Breuleux, A., Itow, R., Hickey, D. T., & McKenney, S. (2015). Collaborative (re-)design as a form of professional development: Teacher learning by design. Instructional Science, 43(2),259-282.CSCL 2017 Proceedings616© ISLS