Using Multiple Perspectives to Study Identity Development inDigital EnvironmentsMirlanda E. Prudent, University of Illinois at Chicago, mprude2@uic.eduAbstract: Within the field of identity research, our understanding of the interplay betweendigital technology, identity, and learning has been impeded by differences in vocabulary. Thispaper reviews two main theories and proposes a new integrated model of identity developmentthat uses measurable constructs in place of discrepant terminology for similar concepts. Thismodel has the potential to further enrich our understanding of identity and the ways we canimprove the designs of digital learning environments.Divisions in the field of identity researchDigital technology impacts the process and outcome of identity development (Turkle, 1984) which in turn affectshow people learn (Steele, 1997). However, scholarship around the construct of identity and the process of identitydevelopment is variant which has led some to argue that the construct of identity is too poorly defined to be useful.Additionally, there is a wealth of research that focus on specific domains or expressions of identities, e.g., racialidentity (Sfard & Prusak, 2005; Nasir, McLaughlin & Jones, 2009) or gender identity, wherein some effort hasbeen made towards integrating models. However, this work has yet to contribute to our understanding ofcomposite identity development. Increasingly, scholars are calling for more integration of the various perspectiveson identity to better support the advancement of identity research (McLean & Syed, 2015). Integrated approacheswould also allow for more in-depth examinations of the relationship between identity, learning, and the use oftechnology enabling learning scientists to better design educational technologies that promote learning.The modern-day conception of identity was developed by the first psychologists and sociologists tobranch out from philosophy - the two most notable being George Herbert Mead and William James (Hammack,2015). Mead’s theory and its derivatives maintains that society and identity inform each other dialecticallythrough interaction (Hammack, 2015). Identity then is a reflection of an individual’s roles or positions withinsociety. Eriksonian theories, which were inspired by William James, assert that identity development is a fluidand ongoing process of exploration, reflection, and commitment (Crocetti, Rubini & Meeus, 2008) and involvesinteraction between three levels of identity: ego, personal and social (McLean & Syed, 2015). Briefly, ego identityconsists of basic, private beliefs and is concerned with consistency across time and space; personal identity goesbeyond private beliefs to include goals and positions, and strives for congruity between beliefs, values, and roles;and social identity is the synthesis of an individual’s memberships to and roles within various social groups.By combining corresponding elements and replacing general constructs with identity-relevantconceptualizations, one possible working definition of identity development could read as such: an iterativeprocess wherein our values, conceptions of possible selves, and salient aspects of our self-concept influence thequality and quantity of our experiences and social interactions, which lead to new or revised commitments aftera period of interpretation and reflection governed by our processing style.Integrating the psychological and sociological models of identityThe similarities between the Eriksonian and Mead perspective are obscured by disparate vocabulary. Also, vaguedefinitions make it difficult to measure the process and outcome of identity development in systematic ways. Theproposed definition attends to all of the main components of both perspectives and utilizes constructs for whichscholars have already created reliable and valid measures. Values encompass both beliefs (Maio, et. al., 2003)and the internalizations of imposed positions (Hitlin, 2011). Similarly, Cheek, Smith and Tripp’s (2002) Aspectsof Identity attends to the importance of structures - which includes positions/roles and memberships - for identitydevelopment. They assert that people assign significance to their self-aspects differently and that these aspectsare clustered into four levels: personal, relational, social or collective. The dialectic between structure and agencyrequires that the individual make sense of the structures within which they are operating so as to tailor theirbehavior to the situation. However, individuals process identity relevant information in three distinct andsystematic ways: informational, normative, and diffuse-avoidant (Berzonsky, 2008). Individuals do not fall neatlyinto these categories but instead show preferences for at least two of these Processing Styles depending on thecontext (Kerpelman, Pittman & Baeder, 2008). The enactment of agency is easily observed, but to understandbehavior we must have insight into motivation which is not as easily obtained/accessible. Understanding theprimary style(s) with which an individual processes identity relevant information elucidates the germane aspects1773of an experience for an individual and the degree to which they explore, reflect and commit which in turndetermines the robustness of their resultant identity. Lastly, people call upon their experiences and understandingof the world when thinking about who they want to become (Oyserman & James, 2011). If behavior is identity inaction, we can reconceptualize goals as possible identities which are circumscribed by an individual’s perceptionof the world and their past experiences.Advancing learning sciences research using the integrated modelIn order for learning scientist to fully understand identity’s impact on learning, we need to have a comprehensiveunderstanding of the internal, external and interactional aspects of identity. A digital learning environment whosedesign employs the proposed model of identity development should aim to seamlessly evaluate the user’s values,conceptions of possible selves, and salient aspects of their self-concept in order to effectively prompt exploration,reflection, interaction and commitment in relation to the learning objectives. Findings from research such as thiswould help design-based researchers make more informed decisions about the features they should include,mode(s) of delivery, and types of content to help foster positive identity development and promote learning. Forinstance, the culture of science often conflicts with that of marginalized people as evidenced by the field’s lackof diversity. One possible way to address this issue is by designing and implementing an interest-based digitallearning environment that aims to help participants develop positive science identities. This could beaccomplished by providing users opportunities to explore the relationship between their interests and science,reflect on these new experiences (e.g., in a journal), and revise their commitments as evidenced through changesto their self-representations or career aspirations.By embedding measures of the proposed constructs into the digital learning environment, researcherscan simultaneously elucidate the unique impact that these environments have on the process and outcome ofidentity development and the ways in which we can improve our designs to amplify their efficacy. Additionally,these findings would allow researchers to time intervention aspects to coincide with other phases of developmentto enhance the final outcome.ReferencesBerzonsky, M. D., Cieciuch, J., Duriez, B., & Soenens, B. (2011). The how and what of identity formation:Associations between identity styles and value orientations. Personality and Individual Differences,50(2), 295-299.Cheek, J. M., Smith, S. M., & Tropp, L. R. (2002, February). Relational identity orientation: A fourth scale forthe AIQ. In meeting of the Society for Personality and Social Psychology, Savannah, GA.Crocetti, E., Rubini, M., & Meeus, W. (2008). Capturing the dynamics of identity formation in various ethnicgroups: Development and validation of a three-dimensional model. Journal of adolescence, 31, 207-222.Hammack, P. L. (2015). Theoretical foundations of identity. The Oxford handbook of identity development, 1130.Hitlin, S. (2011). Values, personal identity, and the moral self. In Handbook of identity Theory and research (pp.515-529). Springer New York.Kerpelman, J. L., Pittman, J. F., & Adler-Baeder, F. (2008). Identity as a moderator of intervention-relatedchange: Identity style and adolescents' responses to relationships education. Identity: An InternationalJournal of Theory and Research, 8(2), 151-171.Maio, G. R., Olson, J. M., Bernard, M. M., & Luke, M. A. (2003). Ideologies, values, attitudes, and behavior. InJ. DeLamater (Ed.), Handbook of social psychology (pp. 283–308). New York: Plenum.McLean, K. C., & Syed, M. (2015). The field of identity development needs an identity: An introduction to theoxford handbook of identity development. In Oxford handbook of identity development, New York:Oxford University Press.Nasir, N. I. S., McLaughlin, M. W., & Jones, A. (2009). What does it mean to be African American? Constructionsof race and academic identity in an urban public high school. American Educational Research Journal,46(1), 73-114.Oyserman, D., & James, L. (2011). Possible identities. In Handbook of identity theory and research (pp. 117145). Springer New York.Sfard, A., & Prusak, A. (2005). Telling identities: In search of an analytic tool for investigating learning as aculturally shaped activity. Educational researcher, 34(4), 14-22.Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and performance. AmericanPsychologist, 52, 613-629.Turkle, S. (1984). The second self. New York: Simon and Schuster.1774