Engaging With Climate Change as a Socioscientific Issue in anInformal Science Learning EnvironmentKelsey Tayne, Megan K. Littrell-Baez, Erin H. Leckey, and Anne U. Goldkelsey.tayne@colorado.edu, megan.littrellbaez@colorado.edu, erin.leckey@colorado.edu,anne.u.gold@colorado.eduUniversity of Colorado, BoulderAbstract: In this study, we discuss an informal science learning environment that was designedto support student engagement with climate change as a socioscientific issue (SSI). We explorehow engaging with climate change as an SSI in this context helped make student ideas morecentral and simultaneously strengthened students’ science content learning. These researchfindings point to the potential value of the design of this learning environment for engagingstudents in meaningful learning around climate change.IntroductionPrior research has shown that socioscientific issues, social dilemmas with links to science, “can provide a forumfor working on informal reasoning and argumentation skills, [Nature of Science] conceptualizations, theevaluation of information and the development of conceptual understanding of science content” in scienceeducation (Sadler, 2004, p. 533). In this study, we discuss a learning environment that was designed to supportstudent engagement with climate change as a socioscientific issue (SSI), exploring how student engagement withclimate change as an SSI was supported and what learning opportunities were afforded to students. We found thatfocusing on climate change as an SSI in this learning environment helped make student ideas central andstrengthened students’ science content learning. In particular, we saw that discourse around social aspects ofclimate change, focusing on anthropogenic causes and solutions, supported students in developing their scientificunderstanding and that student ideas were taken up by facilitators in these instances. Our findings point to thepotential value of this learning environment design for supporting meaningful learning around climate change.This study takes the perspective that meaningful science education involves learning that holds value instudents’ lives by supporting and empowering students in the choices they make and the actions they take.Drawing on sociocultural theories (e.g., Lave and Wenger, 1991), research suggests that science education shouldbe relevant for students’ lives, build on student ideas and address science learning in its sociocultural context,rather than focusing primarily on de-contextualized scientific content knowledge which may be more removedfrom students’ experiences (e.g., Birmingham & Calabrese Barton, 2014). Designing learning environments thatexplicitly support engagement with socioscientific issues (SSIs) is one such possibility for making sciencelearning more relevant for students (Sadler, 2004). In the context of learning about climate change, providingpathways for students to engage with the sociocultural context of science is critical for meaningful student learning(Walsh & Tsurusaki, 2014). Climate change is an SSI that has far-reaching impacts on people and ecosystemsacross the globe (National Research Council, 2012), and we take the perspective that learning environmentsshould support students in grappling with this complex SSI in a way that is relevant in their lives and solutionfocused, in contrast to ways that are more de-contextualized.Methods and contextThis research was conducted during a week-long summer program in the Western United States in which highschool students worked collaboratively in small teams, with the support of a science mentor and a film mentor, toproduce a film about climate change as it relates to and/or impacts participating students’ lives. Students attend ashort climate change workshop and then generate and develop a film topic, conduct scientific research on theirtopic, create a storyboard and script, interview experts, film scenes, edit their film and screen the film for anaudience. Program student participants were ages 14-17 and attended the program as part of a summer scienceprogram. Participants self-identified with a wide diversity of racial backgrounds, with a majority of participantsidentifying as Hispanic/Latino or Native American. Many participants indicated an interest in science and/or filmprior to participating in the program. Science mentors were graduate students studying chemistry or geology andthe majority of mentors identified as White. All names of participants in this paper are pseudonyms. Multiple datasources were collected during the workshop including pre- and post-surveys, field notes, interviews, and artifacts.Field notes were conducted by the first author who took the role of a participant observer (Spradley, 1980). Thisposter presents the results of an interpretive case study (Yin, 2009) which looked at how one group of studentsand their science mentor engaged with climate change as an SSI while developing their film.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1715© ISLSFindingsIn presenting the case study of one climate change film group, our findings suggested this learning environmentsupported student engagement with climate change as an SSI, particularly by supporting student discussion abouthuman contribution to climate change and ways that humans can address climate change. We found that thislearning environment provided a way for students to engage with climate change from a scientific perspective inan authentic, purpose-driven way. Moreover, by focusing on climate change as an SSI, student ideas were madecentral in discussions within the film group. This film group consisted of four high school students, Lucas, Teresa,Amanda and Mateo, and their science mentor, Josh and film mentor, Amy. On day one of the week-long program,the film group quickly began discussing ideas for their film. Josh asked students to reflect on the ways that peoplewho live in the city that the students are from are contributing to climate change, prompting the group to engagewith climate change as an SSI. One student, Lucas, suggested that smoking may be a contributing factor, whileanother student, Teresa, suggested that her community did not contribute very much towards environmentalproblems because few people drive cars, there were very few factories in her city, not very much trash and peopledid not waste water on their yards. This conversation turned to a more general discussion of what contributes toclimate change as the group continued to discuss what they wanted to present in their film, and students discussedfood choices (considering the role of eating meat and the impact of packaged food vs. “healthier” options), nonrenewable vs. renewable energy sources, and how trash is dealt with, whether it is littered or recycled. As studentsshared their ideas about environmental actions, their science mentor Josh continued to ask questions about theirideas and created a category (“Activism”) on the chalkboard, listing the ideas that students were suggesting.While discussing climate change as an SSI, the group engaged in scientific discussion that centeredaround or built off of the social aspects of SSI discourse. As a participant observer, the first author talked withone student, Lucas, during the research section about carbon footprints: the amount of carbon dioxide emissionsassociated with making something (e.g. growing a pound of strawberries) or doing something (e.g. driving a car50 miles). She had pulled up an e-book about carbon footprints, to use as a starting point for ideas for theirresearch. As the first author and Lucas skimmed through the book, Lucas noticed that one of the topics was thecarbon footprint of sending a text message. He asked the first author and science mentor how there was a carbonfootprint associated with text messages. The group had just been talking about carbon emissions of fossil fuelburning, and Lucas asked about how there was smoke associated with the text message, appearing to ask how thiswas connected to the carbon dioxide emissions the group had just discussed. This led to a second, more in-depthconversation about energy from power plants and burning coal and other fuels, and ultimately Josh talked withLucas and the first author about the difference between visible smoke, made by incomplete combustion, andgreenhouse gases that we cannot see, then discussed energy reflection and absorption with Lucas. Other discussiontopics during and following the conversation about the anthropogenic causes and solutions to climate changeincluded the “10% rule” (energy movement up trophic levels in an ecosystem), mechanisms by which cows emitmethane and how coal is used as an energy source to generate electricity. This learning environment supporteddiscussions of scientific content that appeared to be largely driven by student questions and ideas related to climatechange as an SSI.ConclusionIn this case study, we saw that students contributed many ideas when discussing climate change as an SSI andthat these ideas, taken up by the film group science mentor, were generative of further scientific discussion whichwas afforded by the particular approach of this program. Supporting student engagement with climate change asan SSI appeared to create an opportunity for more meaningful learning in this informal science context. Ratherthan encroach on other important goals for scientific learning, these findings suggest that designing for SSIengagement with climate change can promote scientific understanding for students in a meaningful way.ReferencesBirmingham, D., & Calabrese Barton, A. (2014). Putting on a green carnival: Youth taking educated action onsocioscientific issues. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 51(3), 286–314.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge Univ. Press.National Research Council. (2012). Climate Change: Evidence, Impacts, and Choices. National Academies Press.Sadler, T. D. (2004) Informal Reasoning Regarding Socioscientific Issues: A Critical Review of Research.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(5), 513-536Spradley, J. P.(1980) Participant Observation. Wadsworth, Belmont, USA.Walsh, E. M., & Tsurusaki, B. K. (2014). Social controversy belongs in the climate science classroom. NatureClimate Change, 4(4), 259-263.Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods fourth edition. Los Angeles and London: SAGE.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1716© ISLS