Cultivating Formative Intervention Research Partnerships inMathematicsCharles Munter, Cara Haines, and Rebecca Brutonmunterc@missouri.edu, carahaine@mail.missouri.edu, rmmbpc@mail.missouri.eduUniversity of MissouriAbstract: This paper describes an approach to cultivating formative intervention researchpartnerships in mathematics with school districts in the U.S. state of Missouri by researchingthe diagnosis and specification of problems as framed and experienced by those grapplingdaily with challenges related to learning and teaching mathematics. Through a mixed methodsapproach, we engage various stakeholders in identifying and describing important problems ofpractice, work to specify the inherent contradictions that often exist in those challenges, and,by confronting those contradictions, initiate a process of innovation rooted in the contexts inwhich students, teachers, leaders, and parents learn and work.IntroductionChanging the nature of mathematics teaching in the U.S. at any significant scale has proven to be extremelydifficult (Hiebert, 2013). The predominant approach continues to be some variant of what Freire (1970/2000)criticized as the “banking” method, with teachers narrating largely procedurally-focused demonstrations andasking students to repeat it themselves. A common story in research in mathematics education has been theintroduction of some conjectured driver of change (e.g., a professional development program, a new curriculum,different approaches to assessment, etc.), for which researchers work to find schools or districts willing toprovide test-sites and subjects for their research, with the idea that an “effective” idea will eventually get “scaledup.” While innovations in education are certainly needed (and worthy of support) and while there are potentialbenefits for the students, teachers, parents, principals, and district leaders who act as research participants, theproblems and designs for solutions are typically identified at the outset by researchers, rarely originating in thecommunities with whom those researchers briefly partner. Consequently, the innovations that are put in placeare often not sustained after the research effort has concluded (Resnick & Hall, 1998), and typically fail tochange the “instructional core” of what happens between teachers and students around disciplinary ideas(Elmore, 2004; Hiebert, 2013).Innovation through partnershipTo address this shortcoming, different models for collaborating and conducting research in/with entities such asschool districts have emerged in recent years, often captured under the umbrella term “improvement science”(Lewis, 2015). There are variations across different models, but all share a commitment to taking up “problemsof practice.” For example, one of the more prominent models in recent years—and one that has been wellreceived in mathematics education—has been design-based implementation research (DBIR). As described byPenuel, Fishman, Cheng, and Sabelli (2011), DBIR focuses on persistent problems of practice from multiplestakeholders’ perspectives through iterative, collaborative design work. Consistent with the tradition of designresearch in education (Cobb, Confrey, DiSessa, Lehrer, & Schauble, 2003), the aim of DBIR is to developtheory related to both classroom learning and implementation through systematic inquiry, but it is alsoconcerned with developing capacity for sustaining change in systems. Thus, DBIR holds potential for researchpartnerships that lead to more authentic, lasting change.Of course, improvement science approaches such as DBIR implicitly require something to beimplemented, and often that design quickly becomes the predominant focus as collaborators pursue potentialsolutions. Less attention—particularly in scholarly writing about such partnerships—has been devoted to firstunderstanding and defining the problem(s). As Lewis (2015) noted, “there is relatively little education researchin the improvement science tradition, which emphasizes building organization members’ understanding of theproblem and its causes” (p. 2015). One approach that holds promise for treating such problem specification asan object of interest (and not merely prerequisite work) is the cultural-historical activity theory tradition offormative intervention research. Drawing on Engeström (2011), Penuel (2014) suggested that the methodologyincludes three key commitments: (a) focusing on a problem of practice—a contradiction encountered byparticipants in their life or work activities (the “germ cell”); (b) stimulating participants to produceinnovations—by first calling attention to a challenging situation or set of obstacles, and then triggering a processfor overcoming those obstacles through design work; and (c) taking as the primary goal the expansion ofICLS 2018 Proceedings1169© ISLSparticipants’ agency—to “enable new forms of collective activity to emerge through direct engagement with thecontradictions embedded in practice” (p. 100). These contradictions are, at first, abstract. Through attempts tounderstand and model their relationship, they are made concrete, through which “learners learn something thatis not yet there” (Engeström & Sannino, 2010, p. 2).As an example in mathematics education, for teachers who strive to provide students with culturallyrelevant and responsive opportunities to engage in meaningful mathematical practice and to become proficientin standard ideas and skills, a contradiction in practice (or “germ cell”) might be the inherent challenge ofaffording learning opportunities that are emergent in order to achieve learning goals that are, to a large extent,prescribed (Munter, Stein, & Smith, 2015). Neither emergent nor prescribed learning goals and processes can beeliminated; the transcendence of the contradiction is fundamental to the work (and agency expansion) ofteachers and students. But, as the first commitment of formative intervention research above suggests, such“germ cells” cannot be identified a priori, but only as the result of investigating a problem of practice. Instead ofpursuing a predetermined agenda or implementing a particular program, “the researcher aims at provoking andsustaining an expansive transformation process led and owned by the practitioners” (Engeström, 2011, p. 606).It is exactly there that our project is attempting to initiate partnerships with school districts—in theinvestigatory work of understanding problems that students, teachers, principals, parents, and leaders face, andidentifying germ cells for expansion through partnership. We do so with the expectation that what we areembarking on will be a long, slow process (in fact, internally, we describe the project as a 20-year pursuit).Ultimately, our aim is to revolutionize the learning and teaching of mathematics in the state of Missouri. Ourstarting point, however, is to enlist practitioner partners in co-investigating their current problems of practice.MethodsOur work is guided by the three commitments of formative intervention research listed above. Our first step—which is the focus of this paper—is to diagnose the problem(s) of practice that Missouri school districts arefacing, and how various stakeholders frame those problems. To accomplish this, we employ a mixed methodsapproach—primarily through interviews, and supported by applicable quantitative analyses of district data.Setting and sampleThis ongoing study is taking place in K-12 school districts across the state of Missouri. To date, we arecollaborating with 9 districts, ranging in size from large urban districts to very small rural districts. Our sampleincludes 37 (and counting) district leaders, principals, teachers, and parents/community stakeholders.Data sources and analysisBeginning with an initial, relevant contact in each district (e.g., curriculum director), we have conducted andaudio-recorded semi-structured interviews, snowballing out to others from there (Talbert & McLaughlin, 1999),including district leaders, principals, teachers, and other partners (e.g., parents). In each case, we write asummary of the interview, share it with the participant and invite their feedback with respect to the summary’saccuracy. Additionally, we make use of publically available quantitative data for each participating district.After interviewing all of the additional individuals suggested by interviewees and similarlysummarizing those interviews, we analyze the summaries using qualitative analysis software to identify the (a)problems, (b) underlying causes of those problems, and (c) responses to those problems described across allinterviews in the district. Our interest is in understanding how individuals frame the problems that they identify,for which two of the framing tasks described by Benford and Snow (2000) are applicable. The first, diagnosticframing, concerns the source and attribution (or underlying causes) of a problem. The second, prognosticframing, pertains to the proposed solutions for (or responses to) a problem. We also conduct quantitativeanalyses of publically available data for the district that are relevant to the problems described by interviewees.We then write a synthesis report for participants to review and to initiate a follow-up discussion, inwhich we call attention to similarities and differences between participants with respect to not only whatproblems, causes, and responses were identified but also how those problems, etc. were framed—with theintention of sparking subsequent investigations of those problems and possible responses, which, in some cases,we might take up in continued partnership. We audio-record those follow-up discussions as well and then writea summary of the discussion, which we share with participants.To further prepare for facilitating those follow-up discussions, we create two artifacts—one to sharewith participants and one for internal purposes. The first acts as an accompaniment to the narrative report. It is asingle-page representation of the district’s problems, underlying causes, and responses, which we distribute atthe meeting and use to structure the discussion (Figure 1 below). The second is our own agenda for the meeting,in which we list the participant reactions we anticipate and how we might respond. These are organized into 5ICLS 2018 Proceedings1170© ISLStypes, as we anticipate participants might: (a) think to express elaborations or new realizations after reading thereport and seeing the diagram; (b) provide updates to the report since the interviews concluded; (c) invite ourown ideas for solutions or professional development; (d) question the purpose or implications of the report (i.e.,“so what?”); and/or (e) express disagreements (with us or among each other).ResultsThus far, a number of patterns have emerged across multiple districts with respect to the problems that areidentified and the variations in participants’ framing of those problems. Our focus here, however, is to describethe results of our efforts to date in terms of cultivating partnerships rooted in the co-investigation of currentproblems of practice. At this early stage, we consider it a success if the work described above sparks continuedinterest and conversation between our team and a school district. Below we describe initial success by thisstandard in District K, a public school district in an urban center.Included below as Figure 1 is the representation we provided to district K leaders. As it indicates, theproblems that emerged in interviews were related to student achievement outcomes, instructional quality,meeting students’ (not strictly academic) needs, and teacher recruitment and retention (with the second andfourth of those framed by some as an underlying cause of the first and third). Items drawn outside the ellipserepresent elements of the broader contexts in which the district is situated. Overall, district leaders’ reactions toour summary report were positive with respect to its accuracy in capturing what they had expressed to us ininterviews. This representation of “challenges and initiatives” was especially well received and acted as animportant referent in our follow-up discussion in a variety of ways, including (district leaders’) updates andchanges to district plans and (researchers’) questions about relations between components in the diagram,particularly between some that were not connected based on the interviews.Figure 1. District K challenges and initiatives.For example, a consistent emphasis in the new “strategic plan” that the district had recently released—which interviewees described as a key response to the challenge of meeting students emotional, relational,academic, and other needs—was the importance of cultural responsiveness. However, few details were includedwith respect to what that means in practice—particularly in any terms specific to mathematics learning andteaching. Using the diagram in Figure 1, we were able to raise questions about whether and how ideas in thestrategic plan are (or should be) connected to other challenges (e.g., poor quality instruction) or initiatives (e.g.,curriculum updates) that, up to that point, had not been explicitly connected. This led to a conversation about thepossibility of considering all components of the strategic plan in terms of mathematics learning and teaching.Allowing our (researchers’) questions to emerge from ideas and goals that had already been establishedas important in the district oriented us to identifying inherent contradictions that might be fruitful to address andaround which we might build a partnership. For example, with respect to culturally responsive learning andICLS 2018 Proceedings1171© ISLSteaching, the district’s strategic plan stressed student-centeredness and tailoring to students’ needs and strengths.But it also committed to a “rigorous” curriculum based on “high standards” supported by “reliableassessments.” In response, we raised the question of whether those commitments might act as “competingforces” that are all likely necessary and helpful in their own way, but could potentially attract disproportionateattention, to the detriment of the overall plan. District leaders expressed interest in engaging with us in codesign efforts aimed at empowering students through mathematics by building from the district’s strategic planand confronting the contradictions that we uncover through our partnership.Discussion and conclusionOur efforts our dual in nature. First, by investing in understanding the problems of practice that district leaders(perceive that they) face, including identifying the variation in how individuals within the same communitymight frame those problems, we hope to initiate partnerships at the ground level—a co-investigation and cospecification of problems before anything is “implemented.” Second, through such a process, we hope to findinherent tensions on which we can focus sustained attention as a means for inducing innovation. In this paperwe have described an approach to investigating the problems that practitioners identify and how they framethose problems, and our process for planning for and facilitating follow-up discussions about what we find. Inthose presentations of our findings to potential partnering school districts, we have used representations likeFigure 1 to invite participants’ reflection on whether tensions exist within their current challenges and initiatives(and broader contexts) that could be especially difficult to resolve, with the idea that continued co-examinationof such contradictions could lead to the identification of “germ cells” that could manifest at multiple levels. Asnoted above, these are the very initial stages of what we hope will be prolonged partnerships. By starting a few“steps back” from where work typically has begun, we hope to make progress in confronting the stubbornchallenge of changing mathematics teaching.ReferencesBenford, R. D., & Snow, D. A. (2000). Framing processes and social movements: An overview andassessment. Annual review of sociology, 26(1), 611-639.Cobb, P., Confrey, J., DiSessa, A., Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educationalresearch. Educational researcher, 32(1), 9-13.Elmore, R. F. (2004). School reform from the inside out. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press.Engeström, Y. (2011). From design experiments to formative interventions. Theory & Psychology, 21, 598-628.Engeström, Y., & Sannino, A. (2010). Studies of expansive learning: Foundations, findings and futurechallenges. Educational Research Review, 5, 1-24.Freire, P. (2000). Pedagogy of the oppressed (M. B. Ramos, Trans., 30th ann. ed.). New York: Continuum.(Original work published 1970)Hiebert, J. (2013). The constantly underestimated challenge of improving mathematics instruction. In K. R.Leatham (Ed.), Vital directions for mathematics education research (pp. 45–56). New York, NY:Springer.Lewis, C. (2015). What is improvement science? Do we need it in education?. Educational Researcher, 44(1),54-61.Munter, C., Stein, M. K., & Smith, M. S. (2015). Is there a common pedagogical core?: Examining instructionalpractices of competing models of mathematics teaching. NCSM Journal of Mathematics EducationLeadership, 16(2), 3-13.Penuel, W. R. (2014). Emerging forms of formative intervention research in education. Mind, Culture, andActivity, 21(2), 97-117.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development at theintersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331-337.Resnick, L. B., & Hall, M. W. (1998). Learning organizations for sustainable education reform. Daedalus, 127,89-118.Talbert, J. E., & McLaughlin, M. W. (1999). Assessing the school environment: Embedded contexts andbottom-up research strategy. In S. L. Friedman & T. D. Wachs (Eds.), Measuring environment acrossthe life span (pp. 197-226). Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.AcknowledgmentsThis work was funded by a University of Missouri Research Board grant.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1172© ISLS