What Are Crosscutting Concepts in Science? Four MetaphoricalPerspectivesAnn E. Rivet, Gary Weiser, Xiaoxin Lyu, Yi Li, and Diego Rojas-Perillarivet@tc.columbia.edu, gw2301@tc.columbia.edu, xl2502@tc.columbia.edu, yl2857@tc.columbia.edu,dfr2111@tc.columbia.eduTeachers College, Columbia UniversityAbstract: To think more productively about the role of crosscutting concepts (CCCs) and howthey influence students’ three-dimensional science understandings of phenomena, we took ahermeneutic approach to examine the literature and language of the Next Generation ScienceStandards and its supporting documents. Using the perspective of Lakoff and Johnson (2003)’sconceptual metaphors, our analysis identified a set of four metaphorical perspectives – CCCsAS LENSES, CCCs AS BRIDGES, CCCs AS TOOLS, and CCCs AS RULES – that the textsuse to describe the role of CCCs in three-dimensional science learning. We discuss theaffordances and limitations of each perspective, their implications for instruction andassessment design, and directions for future research.IntroductionTraditional science instruction has primarily consisted of a series of teaching activities focused around a singlecore idea. Current reforms in science education are changing that perspective to emphasize three-dimensionalunderstanding of core conceptual ideas in combination, interaction and progression with science practices andcrosscutting concepts, in ways that bridge ideas from multiple disciplines across phenomena (Pellegrino, Wilson,Koenig & Beatty, 2014; Roseman, Fortus, Krajcik, & Reiser, 2015). The seven crosscutting concepts (CCCs) inthe Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS; NGSS Lead States, 2013a) play a particularly important role inthis new perspective on learning. In A Framework for K-12 Science Education (referred to as the Framework),the National Research Council [NRC] (2012) emphasizes these concepts as particularly important and necessary,in that they “help provide students with an organizational framework for connecting knowledge from variousdisciplines into a coherent and scientifically-based view of the world” (p. 83).In our efforts to support teachers and developers with designing instruction for three-dimensionallearning, however, we have found the CCCs to be the most difficult dimension to discuss and develop sharedunderstanding. The language used to describe the CCC dimension and how it relates to the other two dimensionsin the Framework, the NGSS, and other supporting documents is generally sparse, ambiguous, and inconsistent.The lack of consistency and details in explaining the CCCs is a contributing factor that has limited our ability toconsider ways to effectively support understandings of this important dimension in terms of instruction andcurriculum materials. To address this problem, we conducted a hermeneutic analysis of the texts describing CCCsfrom the Framework, NGSS and its appendices, and other supporting and foundational documents. Through thisprocess, we identified four different metaphors used to describe the nature of CCCs. Rather than representationsof what the CCCs actually are, we found that these metaphors served a more abstract purpose, in that they areused to describe four different conceptual frameworks for thinking about the role CCCs play in three-dimensionalunderstandings of science.This paper presents the results of this analysis, describing the affordances and limitations of these fourmetaphorical perspectives on CCCs. We consider how these different perspectives may help the field betterconceptualize and utilize CCCs productively, particularly with respect to instruction and assessment design.Theoretical framework and methodologyLakoff & Johnson (2003) define conceptual metaphors as linguistic representations of complex phenomena thatmake use of language associated with more relatable experiences. For example, one often describes the conceptof time using words that we might more readily apply to money: that meeting wasted my time; this shortcut willsave you hours; traffic on the highway cost me three hours (Lakoff & Johnson, 2003). These idioms reflect acoherent metaphor, TIME IS MONEY, which allows us to think productively about how time is a valued resourcewith the language usually applied to money, a more tangible resource that people value. In our hermeneuticanalysis we focused on how the language around CCCs in the Framework, the NGSS appendices (NGSS LeadStates, 2013a; 2013b) and other supporting documents reflect different conceptual metaphors.Our analysis began by examining theses texts for instances where they describe the nature and use ofcrosscutting concepts through comparison to more tangible phenomena. These instances were flagged andICLS 2016 Proceedings970© ISLSclustered into nine potentially productive conceptual metaphorical categories. We compared, scrutinized and reclustered the evidence in this initial categorization scheme against foundational and supplementary documents tofurther support how the metaphors provided meaningful insights on the CCCs and the interrelation between CCCs,SEPs, and DCIs. This process resulted in a set of four conceptual metaphors for CCCs that operated in ways akinto that of the TIME IS MONEY metaphor (Lakoff & Johnson, 2003).Four metaphorical perspectives for thinking about cross cutting conceptsMetaphor 1: CCCs AS LENSESMost commonly, the language of the NGSS and related documents conveys the crosscutting concepts through themetaphor of a set of lenses, particularly describing them as a means of observing and seeing salient features ofphenomena. For example, the language of the NGSS (NGSS Lead States, 2013b) notes that Patterns (one of theseven CCCs) must be “observed” or “noticed.” Another crosscutting concept, Scale, Proportion and Quantityallows students to see things that are “too small, too large, too fast, or too slow to observe directly.” A third, Causeand Effect, helps students to “see events” in terms of the internal causal phenomena (NRC, 2012). Sight is anunderstandably useful experience to ground metaphorical understanding (Lakoff & Johnson, 2003), as many ofthe goals of science are described as attempting to see the previously unseen (Duschl et al., 2007). We refer tothis conceptual metaphor as CCCs AS LENSES. This metaphor has a number of affordances for scientificreasoning. When students engage with the CCCs via the CCCs AS LENSES metaphor, they consider features of aphenomenon or problem that they may have previously found insignificant. The different CCCs allow analysesof a situation or problem in distinct ways, all of which can be considered legitimate approaches to reasoning aboutthat phenomenon. For example, a problem involving force and motion can be addressed by taking an Energy andMatter lens (i.e. focusing on the transfer of energy in the system), or it might also be examined from a Cause andEffect lens (i.e. focusing on what forces will cause changes in motion). These perspectives could also be combinedto consider both the causal relationship and the transfer of energy within the interaction. Taken together,considering CCCs AS LENSES results in students’ robust three-dimensional understandings of the relationshipbetween force and motion.However, real lenses are engineered for a limited set of purposes; one would not expect a pair of glassesto help them observe the structure of a cell nor a microscope to help them read the newspaper. Similarly, CCCsAS LENSES suffers from a lack of well-defined transferability amongst disciplines. While several lenses may beuseful to solve a particular problem in a discipline, it may not be obvious that the lens has utility in a new context.The CCCs AS LENSES metaphor is a productive way of thinking, but understanding the CCCs also requires theability to see how the same concept is used across several scientific knowledge domains.Metaphor 2: CCCs AS BRIDGESTo develop sophisticated scientific understanding, it is important for students to recognize the application andtransfer of content knowledge between interconnected domains and phenomena. The NGSS and supportingdocuments use the language of “connections” and “directions” to convey this role of crosscutting concepts inthree-dimensional science learning. We labeled the use of this language as reflecting a second metaphor for CCCs,that of CCCs AS BRIDGES. For instance, the NGSS states that the crosscutting concept Cause and Effect servesto help students understand phenomena A and B in terms of “interactions which connect” the two (NGSS LeadStates, 2013b). Similarly, the CCC progression for Systems and Systems Models includes that in high school,“students can…simulate the flow of energy, matter, and interactions within and between systems.” (NGSS LeadStates, 2013b). An example of the utility of understanding the crosscutting concept Structure and Function fromthe Framework (NRC, 2012) describes how an engineer’s understanding of the role of density in structural designcan “lead in turn to an examination of atomic-scale structure” in designing a new bike (NRC, 2012, p. 97). Thelanguage of connectivity, transfer, and movement is emblematic of this linguistic image of CCCs AS BRIDGES.In this metaphor, students use CCCs to recognize conceptual relationships between phenomena, and as a meansfor explaining the complexity of a macrosystem in terms of its constituent parts.However, considering CCCs AS BRIDGES is potentially limited in its ability to support understandingrelationships between concepts in the ways that scientists do. Given the plethora of potential connections thatcould exist between phenomena – and without clear criteria for evaluating the efficacy of one connection overanother – connections that scientists make may not be seen as productive by students. It is also the nature of“connection” to emphasize similarities over differences. Students using CCCs AS BRIDGES may findcorrespondences between concepts more prominent than non-correspondences, when both are required fordeveloping sophisticated understanding. This metaphor is a powerful means to develop a sense of thetransferability and connectivity between concepts, but understanding CCCs also requires one to recognize whichconnections are productive in explaining and predicting the natural world.ICLS 2016 Proceedings971© ISLSMetaphor 3: CCCs AS TOOLSWithin the Framework (NRC, 2012), we identified a third metaphor for understanding the role of CCCs: CCCsAS TOOLS. The authors of the Framework frequently emphasize a mechanistic approach in which considerationof a CCC helps students leverage existing understanding to produce more sophisticated knowledge. “Crosscuttingconcepts have value because they provide students with connections and intellectual tools that are related acrossthe differing areas of disciplinary content and can enrich their application of practices and their understanding ofcore ideas” (NRC, 2012, p. 218). This underscores the value of CCCs in helping students to engage with scienceand engineering practices in a more meaningful and effective ways. We also found evidence for this third metaphorin the language of the NGSS. For instance, within the description of the CCC Patterns, “students progressivelybuild upon this innate ability [to identify patterns] throughout their school experiences” (NGSS Lead States,2013b). In one performance expectation (HS-PS2-1), students are expected to use their understanding of the CCCCause and Effect to generate the evidence needed to “support an argument that the gravitational force exerted byEarth on objects is directed down.” (NGSS Lead States, 2013a). The language of tools, building, and constructionis evidence for the mechanistic CCCs AS TOOLS metaphor. Just as levers and pulleys provide mechanicaladvantage in doing physical work, through this metaphor, students gain advantage in using their existingunderstandings to construct complex explanations and resolve practical problems. In this sense students’understandings of different CCCs operate as cognitive tools (Brown, Collins & Duguid, 1989) that developmeanings through their applied use in different contexts.While the perspective of CCCs AS TOOLS conveys the useful and practical aspects of developingunderstandings of CCCs, this view does not imply that subsequent use CCCs will be inherently transferable orgeneralizable. Rather, students’ situated expertise with CCCs develops over time, and requires explicit reflectionon when, how, and for what kinds of phenomena and problems consideration of the different CCCs are mostproductive. Additionally, considering CCCs AS TOOLS specifically emphasizes the ways that these perspectivesleverage students’ prior knowledge and understandings to explain phenomena or address problems. However, itis important to keep in mind that students’ prior knowledge varies across groups and contexts. This in turn impactsthe ways in which different students may be able to use the CCCs AS TOOLS and the depth to which they engagewith the CCCs in their learning, thus further influencing the extent to which they develop robust three-dimensionalscience understanding as called for in the NGSS.Metaphor 4: CCCs AS RULES of the GameIn the NGSS and supporting documents, the process of developing robust three-dimensional understanding ofscience is at times portrayed as a form of playing an epistemic game (Collins & Ferguson, 1993) which has bothgoals (Krajcik, Codere, Dahsah, Bayer, & Mun, 2014) and rules of engagement (Collins & Ferguson, 1993). Fromthis perspective the CCCs play the role of CCCs AS RULES for this epistemic game. In this sense, understandingand using different CCCs to learn science can provide order and structure to students’ potential understandings ofa complex (and often chaotic) world. For example, applying the CCC Patterns can make “order…emerge fromchaos” (NGSS Lead States, 2013b) by creatively organizing students’ thoughts about phenomena (NRC, 2012).Likewise, when describing CCCs such as Structure and Function, the NGSS states that understanding how CCCsserve rule-like functions helps constrain investigations “in order to know what properties [and aspects]…arerelevant” (NGSS Lead States, 2013b). Rules help to establish a shared language to communicate acceptablebehavior within a game (Walton, 1990); CCCs are able to serve a similar purpose from this point of view. Anearly step in developing sophistication for understanding the CCC Scale, Proportion, and Quantity is for studentsto recognize that there exists “standard units” of measurement agreed upon by the scientific community (NGSSLead States, 2013b). The existence of rules helps to justify representational systems (Walton, 1990), includingscientific investigations (Duschl, et al., 2007), to ensure that outcome of the game leads to understandings (Collins& Ferguson, 1993) of the natural world as aimed for in the NGSS.In describing the three dimensional learning framework, Duschl (2008) points out how students mustdevelop epistemic understanding of “[the] specialized ways of talking, writing, and representing phenomena” (p.275) in the sciences. Considering CCCs AS RULES enables students to use CCCs as a way to organize theirlearning in light of these epistemic practices of science (NRC, 2012). The epistemic focus of this metaphor is astrength but also a challenge. In science classrooms, students often develop epistemologies of their practices thatare distinct from what scientists do, often with unproductive results (Sandoval, 2005). Likewise, students usingCCCs AS RULES may consider the CCCs as rules for the classroom, but not necessarily for the scientificcommunity. Ideally, students’ understanding of the CCCs should enable them to develop formal and practicalepistemologies about their science knowledge similar to those of practicing scientists (Duschl et al., 2007; NRC,2012; Sandoval, 2005).ICLS 2016 Proceedings972© ISLSImplications for teaching and assessmentOur discussion of these four metaphorical perspectives on CCCs identified from the framing documents of theNGSS illustrates how students’ understanding of the role of CCCs as part of three-dimensional learning can vary,and the implications that these different understandings of CCCs may have on their resulting scienceunderstanding. We believe these metaphorical perspectives will be helpful for teachers and curriculum designerswho are using the NGSS and supporting documents to craft instruction. For example, teachers can direct studentsto the CCCs AS LENSES metaphor to suggest novel ways of looking at situations using several different CCCs,and help students recognize that each lens results in a different way of considering the problem. When bundlingseveral NGSS performance expectations (Krajcik, et al., 2014) into a coherent unit, designers may utilize theCCCs AS BRIDGES metaphor as a way to assist both students and teachers to connect content ideas that addressdifferent parts of a bigger problem or context. Alternatively, teachers may use the CCCs AS TOOLS perspectiveto leverage students’ understandings of simple systems to construct more complex explanations that are useful fora greater set of problems or contexts. Teachers may consider the CCCs AS RULES metaphor as a way to fosterthe idea that science is socially constructed, as rules of games are often socially negotiated (Walton, 1990), or ascriteria to limit the scope of an investigation (Collins & Ferguson, 1993) in ways that are most productive foranswering particular questions.Each of these metaphorical perspectives conveys a different story about the CCCs. The story that studentsdevelop about CCCs will frame their views of how the crosscutting concepts fit within their three dimensionalunderstanding of phenomena. Like any other representation, the set of four linguistic representations of CCCunderstanding have both affordances and constraints. No single representation is as useful in isolation as they aretogether. Thus the aim is for students, like scientists, to not draw distinctions between the different ways ofunderstanding CCCs. Instead, these combined perspectives on CCCs are one aspect of more encompassing gestaltsystem that is greater than the sum of its parts.The NGSS challenges not only existing curriculum materials (Roseman, et al., 2015), but also the nature,role, and features of existing assessments (Pellegrino, et al., 2014). These metaphorical perspectives on CCCs inthree-dimensional learning can also provide guidance for considering the design of assessments. They provide ameans for conceptualizing how evidence of the role of CCCs can be made visible in student activities and products,and may be used to inform understanding of learning progressions and instructional decision-making. Our futureresearch and design efforts will focus on these goals.ReferencesBrown, J.S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. EducationalResearcher, 18(1), 32–42.Collins, A., & Ferguson, W. (1993). Epistemic forms and epistemic games: Structures and strategies to guideinquiry. Educational Psychologist, 28(1), 25–42.Duschl, R., Schweingruber, H., & Shouse, A. (2007). Taking Science to School: Learning and Teaching Sciencein Grades K-8. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.Duschl, R. (2008). Science education in three-part harmony: Balancing conceptual, epistemic, and social learninggoals. Review of Research in Education, 32(1), 268–291.Krajcik, J., Codere, S., Dahsah, C., Bayer, R., & Mun, K. (2014). Planning instruction to meet the intent of thenext generation science standards. Journal of Science Teacher Education, 25(2), 157–175.Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (2003). Metaphors We Live By (2nd ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.National Research Council. (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, Crosscutting Concepts,and Core Ideas. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.NGSS Lead States. (2013a). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.NGSS Lead States. (2013b). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States (Appendix G).Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Pellegrino, J., Wilson, M., Koenig, J., & Beatty, A. (Eds.). (2014). Developing Assessments for the NextGeneration Science Standards. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.Roseman, J-E., Fortus, D., Krajcik, J., & Reiser, B. J. (2015). Curriculum materials for next generation sciencestandards: What the science education research community can do. Paper presentation at NARST.Chicago, IL: April 2015Sandoval, W. (2005). Understanding students’ practical epistemologies and their influence on learning throughinquiry. Science Education, 89(4), 634–656.Walton, K. (1990). Mimesis as Make-Believe: On the Foundations of the Representational Arts. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.ICLS 2016 Proceedings973© ISLS