Playful Mathematics Learning: Beyond Early Childhood and SugarCoatingMelissa Gresalfi (chair), Ilana Horn, Lara Jasien, and Panchompoo Wisittanawatmelissa.gresalfi@vanderbilt.edu, ilana.horn@vanderbilt.edu, lara.jasien@vanderbilt.edupanchompoo.wisittanawat@vanderbilt.eduVanderbilt UniversityJasmine Y. Ma and Sarah C. Radkej.ma@nyu.edu, scr274@nyu.eduNew York UniversityVictoria Guyevskey and Nathalie Sinclairvictoria_guyevskey@sfu.ca, nathsinc@sfu.caSimon Fraser UniversityAnna Sfard (discussant), University of Haifa, sfard@netvision.net.ilAbstract: In this symposium, we ask what mathematical engagement looks like in the contextof play, focusing on contexts designed to support mathematical thinking through open-endedactivity, and looking at ages that are traditionally overlooked in studies of play. We heedDewey’s admonition to look beyond sugar-coating: we do not seek to claim that “play is a goodmethod for supporting traditional mathematics learning,” but rather, to explore the ways thatmathematics is engaged through play, and how such different engagement with mathematicsmight transform students’ relationships with the domain. Taken as a collective, the papers inthis symposium address this issue by looking across technical and physical contexts, usingdifferent lenses on play, and studying different experiences of play. Despite these contrasts, wejointly ask questions about what mathematics thinking and learning could look like if wechanged the rules of the game.Keywords: play, mathematics education, informal learningEverything is made play, amusement. This means over-stimulation; it means dissipation ofenergy. Will is never called into action. The reliance is upon external attractions andamusements. Everything is sugar-coated for the child, and he soon learns to turn away fromeverything that is not surrounded with diverting circumstances.John Dewey, Interest and Effort in Education, pp. 4-5There is widespread agreement about the importance of play in supporting learning. Early childhood educationhas a long tradition of play-based curriculum, with significant evidence demonstrating how children substantivelyengage the world through play. Some play scholars demonstrate the ubiquity of play as a developmental strategy,extending this lens into the animal kingdom, and developmental theorists often articulate how different kinds ofplay develop over childhood (Piaget, 1932/1965; Vygotsky, 1967). Studies of children as they move into formalschooling consider the role that play takes in supporting development of social-emotional skills, in providingexercise, and generally allowing for periods of focus in the classroom. However, little research investigates therole of play in learning mathematics in older children.Indeed, once children enter school, discussions of learning almost never reference play, and workinvestigating the design of learning environments has seldom explored whether or how play might be involved.And yet, much of what is considered to be sophisticated disciplinary engagement involves many of the samefeatures as play, including exercising personal agency to set and reach goals, exploration, imagination, and joy.Thus, it seems likely that there is quite a bit of play involved in learning in the later years, and the field couldbenefit from better understanding how and when play is involved in disciplinary engagement.In the mathematics education community, the context for this symposium, there is a significant historyfor studying students’ mathematical problem solving (Schoenfeld, 1985), and how their engagement with tasksICLS 2018 Proceedings1335© ISLSmight extend to their relationships to the discipline (Boaler & Greeno, 2000). Most of this work has taken placein the context of formal schooling, which is often sufficiently constrained so students have few opportunities toengage in the kind of open exploration of ideas foundational to mathematical problem solving. In settings lesspressed by time and uniformity, mathematical problem solving can involve visualization and imagination,exploration and play, and investigating what if questions—all elements of engagement that are very much likeplay (Sutton-Smith, 1997; Gray, 2015). However, little is known about students’ engagement in such spaces, whatis playful or enjoyable, and what mathematical ideas students think about when playing therein.Thus, in this symposium, we ask what mathematical engagement looks like in the context of play,focusing on contexts designed to support mathematical thinking through open-ended activity, and looking at agesthat are traditionally ignored in studies of play (that is, children who are in elementary and middle school). Weheed Dewey’s admonition to look beyond sugar-coating: we do not seek to claim that “play is a good method forsupporting traditional mathematics learning,” but rather, to explore the ways that mathematics is engaged throughplay, and how such different engagement with mathematics might transform students’ relationships with thedomain.Specifically, Paper 1 considers how a teacher's’ use of a multi-touch app called TouchCounts and acollection of web-based Dynamic Geometry sketchpads help create propitious conditions for mathematical playin K-7 students. In exploring the relations between mathematics and play, they consider what children were aimingto do, how those aims emerged, and how the aesthetic features of their activity shaped their play. Paper 2investigates middle school students’ engagement in a large-scale number line activity called Secret Pattern, wherestudents performed a walking pattern along a giant number line on the floor for others to guess. They considerhow this activity became a kind of socio-dramatic play as students explored the tension between wanting todevelop and perform a pattern difficult for the other team to guess while also producing a good performance, andhow this tension supported the flexible and creative recruitment of existing mathematical understandings in theservice of meeting the challenge. Paper 3 explores how children’s self-chosen and self-directed play withmathematically structured objects creates opportunities for spontaneous mathematical sense-making. Specifically,they reveal that as children persisted in their attempts to repair trouble, they often became increasingly systematicin their efforts. This systematicity involved careful exploration of objects’ properties and relations between them,which, by design, were also mathematical properties. Finally, Paper 4 explores what play can mean in the contextof an educational videogame, and asks what students might be playing at. The paper explores how a gamer initiallyset aside the game goal according to the game narrative and took a playful, explorative stance toward the game,and in doing so, he began to uncover and question the underlying mathematical structure of the game world.Taken as a collective, the papers in this symposium address this issue by looking across technical andphysical contexts, using different lenses on play, and studying different experiences of play. Despite thesecontrasts, we jointly ask questions about what mathematics thinking and learning could look like if we changedthe rules of the game.Designing intellectual playgrounds for mathematics learningNathalie Sinclair and Victoria GuyevskeyDrawing on the work of historian Johan Huizinga, Featherstone (2000) argues for the central importance of whatshe calls intellectual play in mathematics learning. She draws many parallels between the characteristic featuresof play and mathematical activity as it is described by mathematicians. These characteristic features include:stepping outside of ordinary or “real” life; being orderly and, in consequence, beautiful; being governed by rules;creating social groupings; and, being voluntary. Featherstone does not argue that play and mathematics areidentical, nor that teachers should include play periods as part of their mathematical lessons; instead she isinterested in “the ways in which 'play' might expose children to aspects of the discipline that may not ordinarilybe visible to them” (p. 16).In this paper, we explore some of the features of environments in which Featherstone’s intellectual playcan emerge. We do so in the context of elementary school mathematics, because we are particularly interested inthe way that play might free children “from the dictatorship of concrete objects,” as Vygotsky (1967, p. 19) writes,and enable them to “develop the capacity to behave in accordance with meaning.” This is all the more pertinentin the primary school grades, where the emphasis on the concrete — through manipulatives and real-life situations— may in fact delay children’s mathematical development.In addition to these characteristics, Featherstone underscores the fact that play is not an aimless,spontaneous activity, but it instead, always has an aim: “The player wants something to 'go', to 'come off; he wantsto 'succeed' by his own expertise” (Huizinga, 1955, pp. 10-11). This aim is rooted in aesthetics: “Play has atendency to be beautiful. It may be that this aesthetic factor is identical with the impulse to create orderly form,ICLS 2018 Proceedings1336© ISLSwhich animates play in all its aspects” (p. 10). Play thus typically involves aspects of aesthetic experience, suchas tension and poise, balance and contrast, solution and resolution, repetition and variation.Following Papert (1980), well-designed and open-ended computer-based environments are effective atproviding mathematical microworlds that operate outside of ordinary life. Such microworlds also provide the kindof “mathland” that Papert described as being like the immersive environment in which language learning occurs—where many words may not be fully understood, but in which fluency can develop. We conjecture that they mightbe especially effective at promoting mathematical play. In order to investigate this conjecture, we analyse severaldifferent instances of intellectual play, in the sense of Featherstone, in which K-7 children are engaged in twoopen-ended computer-based environments. Our goal is to examine how these environments, including the teacher,help create propitious conditions for play. The first environment is a free, multi-touch App called TouchCounts,in which children use their fingers and gestures to count, add and subtract, and which provides auditory, haptic,visual and symbolic feedback. For example, when one finger taps the screen, the word “one” is said aloud, a discappears and the symbol “1” appears on the disc. The environment is open-ended in that there are no prescribedtasks and no evaluative feedback provided. Teachers may propose some tasks, as may children. The multi-touchfeature encourages children to work together on the screen, as multiple fingers can be used simultaneously. Priorresearch on the use of TouchCounts with young children has focused on the ordinal aspects of number that theapp facilitates, as well as on the way that the gestures for making numbers, adding and subtracting change the waythat children think about number. Coles and Sinclair (2017) have argued that children’s tendency to create largenumbers (beyond those prescribed by grade-level curricula) provides them with a sense of the structure ofnumbers, which facilitates their understanding of place value—not as a cardinal concept, but as a temporal andsymbolic one. The second environment is an online Dynamic Geometry platform that features a collection of WebSketchpads, where children manipulate various geometric shapes and create geometric designs within interactivesketches. Visual and dynamic component allows learners to play and explore, test conjectures, discover patterns,think creatively, and otherwise get engaged. Students are excited to interact with the software, which offers manyopportunities for collaboration and discussion.In the paper, we consider three different episodes involving two or more children and first show howthey can be identified as examples of intellectual play. We then analyse these episodes to better understand thechildren’s aims, how those aims emerged, and how aesthetic features of their activity shaped their play. We alsostudy how children’s play enabled them to develop relational meanings in the absence of any concrete objects orreal-life settings. In doing so, we identify features of the environment that gave rise to intellectual play in youngchildren including, most significantly: (1) the symbolically structured nature of the environments, where thesymbols are mathematical in nature and the structure enables relational meanings to emerge (Coles & Sinclair, inpress); and (2) the participative revoicing of the teacher in the children’s process of goal setting.Guess my secret pattern: Imaginative explorations through operating as pointson a walking scale number lineJasmine Y. Ma and Sarah C. RadkeThis paper investigates fourteen middle schoolers’ engagements in a large-scale number line activity called SecretPattern, in which students performed a walking pattern along a giant number line on the floor for others to guess.The somewhat competitive nature of the activity, the open-ended possibilities for completing the task, as well asthe imaginative requirements of operating as a point along a giant number line supported a playful atmosphere formathematical reasoning. We present findings here that describe how these students’ mathematical engagementsshaped and were shaped by their play.Secret Pattern took place on the first day of an elective mini-course called Math Battle! that ran for threehours a day for five days during the school’s mid-winter “minimester,” designed for students to explore innovativeextensions of the school’s regular curriculum. Math Battle! was advertised, in part, as an opportunity to design agiant game of Human Battleship, in the context of which students would explore the number line and thecoordinate system using their whole bodies. It took place in an empty gymnasium-sized space in the schoolbuilding. On the first day the students engaged in activities on what we call a Walking Scale Number Line, a longorange number line made of painter’s tape placed on the floor (Figure 1). The number line was partitioned byunnumbered hash marks made of short pieces of blue tape placed at equal intervals (the length of the secondauthor’s shoe). Every other hash mark was slightly shorter than its neighbors. Secret Pattern took place afterstudents had each chosen a “home position” on a hash mark, placing an index card labelled with his name there(all students in the mini-course were boys). The group then explored the number line, negotiating physical logisticsICLS 2018 Proceedings1337© ISLSof moving along the line as a group and developing shared language for discussing their location on the line andrelative to each other.Figure 1. Math Battle! students standing on their home positions on the walking scale number line.Our analysis is framed by contemporary theories in the learning sciences that foreground whole bodies andmovement as constitutive of processes of meaning-making (e.g., Hall & Stevens, 2016; Marin, 2013; Taylor,2017). From this point of view, multimodal and multisensorial aspects of mathematics activity are notepiphenomenal to reasoning, but instead must be taken into account in an analysis of knowledge and learning.Walking and attendant embodied sensations are forms of place-making, of coming to know and simultaneouslyproducing place (Ingold, 2007). Our analysis focuses on walks on the thin strip of tape that we called a numberline, and how students infused it with mathematical meanings and developed corresponding representationalpractices (Hall, 1996) in repeated walks along its surface.Data collected included documents related to instructional design of workshop activities, detailed fieldnoteswritten after each workshop day, multiple streams of video and audio recordings, including stationary videocameras mounted on tripods, GoPro cameras worn on students’ chests, and digital audio recorders placed on thefloor. Analysis followed multimodal, microethnographic methods (Jewitt, Bezemer, & O'Halloran, 2016; Streeck& Mehus, 2005), following students’ coordinated movements and talk as the site of mathematics sense-making,and attending deliberately to sociomaterial phenomena of relevance to participants in the data, and meaningsproduced in unfolding interaction.Findings explore the tension between wanting to develop and perform a pattern difficult for the otherteam to guess while also producing a good performance. This tension supported the flexible and creativerecruitment of existing mathematical understandings in the service of meeting the challenge. Enyedy and hiscolleagues (2012) described how students in socio-dramatic play “often spend more time articulating andnegotiating the rules of a play situation than they spend actually in character ‘playing’ their parts…as a result, therules that govern a situation become visible and explicit for children” (p. 353). If we take students operating aspoints on a number line to be a form of socio-dramatic play, then we see how negotiations between members ofthe group made explicit, challenged, and expanded their understandings of the mathematical relations that wouldgovern their pattern and how it would be performed on the walking scale number line. These negotiations includedsuggestions for mathematical patterns proposed in talk (e.g., adding one each time or the Fibonnaci sequence),trial walks implementing the pattern on the number line, and revisions aimed at either making the pattern walkablegiven the constraints of the taped line or making the pattern more complicated. Analysis illuminates how, throughimaginative exploration, students’ moving bodies and the tape on the floor accumulated mathematical meaningover the course of negotiation.The emergence of mathematical thinking through construction playLara Jasien, Ilana Horn, and Melissa GresalfiMathematics education research emphasizes student sense-making as foundational to mathematics learning(Hiebert, Carpenter, Fennema, Fuson, Wearne, & Murray, 1997). However, we need tools and frameworks thatsupport mathematical inquiry, particularly ones that engage students' personal agency with respect to decisionmaking and reflection in mathematical activity. Within the constraints of the U.S. school system, a focus onmaking progress on content can become so dominant that it overshadows a focus on exploration. This isparticularly ironic, since play is a core activities of childhood, yet it is increasingly eliminated from U.S. schools.The reduction of play represents a loss not just to children’s physical and emotional health, but to their intellectualhealth as well: play supports sophisticated forms of negotiation, reflection, experimentation, persistence, andICLS 2018 Proceedings1338© ISLSlearning –– all disciplinary practices of mathematics. Indeed, Lev Vygotsky (1933/1978) proposed that whenplaying, children are able to act “...a head above themselves,” (p.95) literally by engaging in a zone of proximaldevelopment because of their freedom from the constraints of the “real” world. Following this perspective, in thisstudy, we look at how students’ play with mathematical objects to consider specifically how play centered onbuilding or designing –– often called construction play (Forman, 2006) –– supports formal concepts andreasoning.Prior studies have shown that preschool children who engage in construction play in informalenvironments develop relationships to materials and ideas that seem to support later success in math (Stannard,Wolfgang, Jones, & Phelps, 2001). Similarly, older children who do well on construction tasks also tend toperform well in mathematics (Casey, Pezaris, & Bassi, 2012). However, little of this scholarship has exploredhow or why such playful activities might support mathematical thinking, and indeed have only rarely made claimsabout the mathematical concepts that might be engaged in children’s play (Seo & Ginsburg, 2004), leaving uswith little knowledge about children’s actual mathematical sense-making in constructive play. In addition, fewstudies of children’s play take place in environments with materials explicitly designed to direct children’sattention to mathematical concepts. This is a large theoretical and methodological gap, as the mathematicalgenerativity of children’s play is linked to material constraints that lead children to experience trouble as theywork to achieve their goals (Bergen, 2009; Forman, 2006; Papert, 1980). In overcoming the constraints ofmaterials, children not only engage in creative problem solving but also often become increasingly systematic intheir examination of the object’s properties (Karmiloff-Smith & Inhelder, 1974). We argue that examiningchildren’s self-chosen and self-directed play with mathematically structured objects is likely to provide richinformation about children’s emerging mathematical concepts and sense-making.To better understand how mathematics is engaged in children’s play, we examine school-aged children’sactivity in a mathematics playground at the Minnesota State Fair called Math On-A-Stick (MOAS). MOAS hasnine exhibits, each with unique mathematically structured objects such as tiling pentagons, pattern machines,tessellating turtles, and 6x5 egg crates with colorful plastic eggs. Over 10 days, we collected video data usinghead-mounted GoPros, capturing children’s perspectives of their play (n = 348). Children’s average MOAS visitslasted 26 minutes, with median visit per exhibit at approximately four minutes. Out of the 348 participants, thisstudy focuses on older children (7 – 12 years old, n = 277, visit length: m = 28 minutes), because this age group’smathematical play is understudied.To understand how mathematics was engaged in children's play with the mathematical objects at MOAS,we used interaction analysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995), a method that centered the children's perspectives.Specifically, we initially reduced our data to look for sustained engagement towards one goal for at least twominutes, as we hypothesized longer episodes of engagement were more likely to contain more complex forms ofplay. Then we inductively coded our video data to look for when children experienced trouble (e.g., when theystopped to reorganize, expressed frustration or confusion, etc.) and then worked to repair it, what we calledepisodes of trouble-and-repair. Trouble was often signaled by audible expressions of frustration or confusion, andrepair was signaled by solicitations for help or multiple revision attempts. We conducted a close examination ofhow children's strategies and goals shifted as they engaged with and experienced push-back from the mathematicalobjects. As children persisted in their attempts to repair, they often became increasingly systematic in their efforts.This systematicity involved careful exploration of the objects’ properties and relations between them. When thiskind of systematicity and exploration arose in children's play as they persevered through trouble in order to meettheir goals, we have come term this activity mathematically generative play.Our analyses suggest that Mathematically generative play arises when children explicitly engage withmathematical properties of objects (although they do not necessarily name them with mathematical terms), whichoften involves children’s use of disciplinary practices such as attending to precision and making generalizations.This is not only a feature of play, but also of the objects in the exhibit; throughout our analyses it appeared thatthe mathematical affordances of the objects makes it more likely that children attend to and engage withmathematical concepts. This research serves to deepen our understanding of school-age children's mathematicalsense-making as we begin to look at children's spontaneous mathematical concepts and ways of thinking incontexts that center children's decision making and agency.“Playing” the game: Exploring the underlying mathematical structure of animmersive gamePanchompoo WisittanawatICLS 2018 Proceedings1339© ISLSOne challenge in understanding play is that play describes both 1) a form of activity and 2) a stance or orientationtoward an activity (Malaby, 2009). In the first sense, play describes a form of activity that is game-like either withimplicit and emergent rules (e.g. children’s pretend play) or formal and more stable rules (e.g. soccer, chess,videogames). In another sense, play describes a mode of cultural experience that occurs in many forms of activity.This means that an activity that looks like a play activity may not be playful (e.g. students play a mathematicsgame to complete a homework assignment). On the other hand, an activity that does not look like a play activitymay in fact be playful (e.g. students solve a homework math problem with a playful stance). Conceptualizing playin this second sense, as a mode of orientation toward an activity, raises the question: when students appear to beplaying a mathematics videogame in a classroom, are they playing, and what are they playing at?This case analysis draws data from a larger research project that investigates an educational videogamedesigned to support mathematical problem solving. The game, called “Boone’s Meadow,” builds on a projectbased curriculum that was developed as part of the “Adventures of Jasper Woodbury” project (Cognition andTechnology Group at Vanderbilt, 1997). In this game, students play the role of a wildlife rescue assistant whotransports injured animals from a nature reserve to a clinic. Players make rescue plans (i.e., deciding which planeand which route to fly and) and act out their plans (i.e., flying a plane to transport an animal). The conjecture thatframed the design of the game was that greater engagement with the game narrative would lead to consequentialengagement with mathematics (Gresalfi & Barnes, 2015), when students increasingly used mathematics to makeand reflect on decisions in the game.This paper presents a case analysis that explores a unique form of play that emerged as Calvin, a studentgamer (grade 6), played Boone’s Meadow. This form of play, common in videogame communities, is unique inthis context in the sense that this is the only observed case in our data corpus. While most of his peers played thegame by adopting the goal according to the game narrative (i.e., rescuing an injured animal), Calvin temporarilyset aside that goal and “played” the game to expose its mathematical structure. Calvin presented himself as agamer, someone who played a lot of games and was knowledgeable about genre(s) of videogames. How Calvinplayed the game became of analytic interest because this is a case that did not fit our design conjecture. Prioranalyses demonstrated that while Calvin and his partner were very engaged with the game narrative, they appearedas though they didn’t engage with mathematics in the game, at least not in the ways intended by the designers.Calvin and his partner were not enthusiastic about conducting calculations that were required to make preciserecommendations about saving the eagle, and did not use the calculations they did to inform their game choices.However, upon closer analysis, Calvin appeared to interact with the game in a deeply mathematical way. He tookan explorative, playful stance toward the game, and intentionally “played” the game to expose its underlyingmathematical structure.Data include screencapture recordings of three class periods of game play. This analysis used methodsof interaction analysis, attending to talk and game actions, and in particular, what Calvin noticed in the game andwith whom he shared his noticing. Calvin and his partner sometimes addressed the computer (“Dear Boone’sMeadow creators …”) or directed his comments to researchers in the room. Comments directed to “designers”contained game jargon (e.g. “8-bit graphics” or “It’d be cool if it goes like a turn-based JRPG.”), and they oftenincluded his evaluations of the game.Analysis of Calvin’s play revealed playful attunements to the activity that were different from theintended forms of engagement envisioned by the designers. First, Calvin engaged in a kind of beta testing: Ingaming communities, the goal of beta testing is to creatively challenge the design in order to push the limit of thedesign, and it is an important mechanism for a co-creative game production (Wirman, 2012). The beta testingframe oriented Calvin to seek the limit of the game. Despite some objection from his partner, when he had achance to maneuver a plane in the game, he tried different backflips and diverted the plane away from thedestination to find the edge of the game world. He commented to one of the researchers, “Can you give us a littlemore room to fly the plane?” Calvin also noticeably attended to visual details; he first noticed many “textureissues” with the game. For example, “There are texture issues. This is when people went cheap on the game andthey did not give Larry the proper texture, because they want to go cheap on him. … His thumb just went throughhis arm!” This suggests that Calvin’s ways of seeing in the game included paying attention to very minute visualdetails. Finally, Calvin’s play served to expose the underlying mathematical structure. His Calvin’s carefulattention to visual cues was also integrated in how he “played” the game to expose its underlying structure, whichhe seemed to assume to be mathematical. In running two of their eagle rescue operations, Calvin and his partnerused two different planes, and they crashed because they ran out of gas both times. After the second plane crashed,Calvin expressed his surprise: “Our thing died at the exact same time as the one that had the most fuel efficiency.”This comment suggests some intentionality in how Calvin varied his game actions, i.e., he was cognizant thatwhat was varied between the two trials was fuel efficiency. Also implicit in this comment was an expectation thattwo planes with different fuel efficiency should not have crashed at the same location. This expectation entailedICLS 2018 Proceedings1340© ISLSan understanding that some common relationship governed these two flight trials, which should not have yieldedthe same result given that an important factor in that relationship (i.e., fuel efficiency) was varied. In terms of alearning goal in this game, this form of reasoning demonstrated a sophisticated understanding of proportionalrelationships. Through his playful exploration, Calvin uncovered and (mildly) questioned the accuracy of theseunderlying relationships in the game.At least in the early attempts, Calvin didn’t play the game to save animals as most of his peers did. Hetook a playful stance toward playing the game to explore the underlying mathematical structure of the game world.As someone familiar with videogame media, he was highly attuned to visual cues, and the beta-testing framepossibly heightened this attunement that led to him noticing and questioning the mathematical structure of thegame. After some playful explorations, Calvin started to take up the game mission according to the narrative,commenting to his partner, “Dude, we have to do this [again]. We’ve killed two eagles in the span of 5 minutes.… I feel so bad. I was starting to drive legit too.”ReferencesBergen, D. (2009). Play as the Learning Medium for Future Scientists, Mathematicians, and Engineers. AmericanJournal of Play, 1(4), 413-428.Casey, B. M., Pezaris, E. E., & Bassi, J. (2012). Adolescent boys’ and girls’ block constructions differ in structuralbalance: a block-building characteristic related to math achievement. Learning and IndividualDifferences, 22(1), 25e36. http:// dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lindif.2011.11.008.Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1997). The Jasper Project: Lessons in curriculum, instruction,assessment, and professional development. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Coles, A. & Sinclair, N. (in press). Re-thinking ‘normal’ development in the early learning of number. Journal ofNumerical Cognition.Coles, A. & Sinclair, N. (2017). Re-thinking Place Value: From Metaphor to Metonym. For the learning ofmathematics, 37(1), 3-8.Dewey, J. (1913). Interest and effort in education. Houghton Mifflin.Enyedy, N., Danish, J. A., Delacruz, G., & Kumar, M. (2012). Learning physics through play in an augmentedreality environment. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 7, 347–378.Forman, G. (2006). Constructive play. In D. P. Fromberg & D. Bergen (Eds.), Play from Birth to Twelve: Contexts,Perspectives, and Meanings. New York, NY: Routledge. 103-110.Freudenthal, H. (1968). Why to teach mathematics so as to be useful. Education Studies in Mathematics, 1 (1-2),3-8.Gray, P. (2015). Studying play without calling it that: Humanistic and positive psychology. In J. E. Johnson, S.G. Eberle, T. S. Henricks, & D. Kuschner (Eds.), The handbook of the study of play, Volume 1 (121-136).New York: Rowman & Littlefield.Gresalfi, M. S., & Barnes, J. (2015). Designing feedback in an immersive videogame: supporting studentmathematical engagement. Educational Technology Research and Development, 1-22.Hall, R. (1996). Representation as shared activity: Situated cognition and Dewey's cartography of experience.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 5, 209–238.Hall, R., & Stevens, R. (2016). Interaction Analysis approaches to knowledge in use. In A. A. diSessa, M. Levin,& N. J. S. Brown (Eds.), Knowledge and interaction: A synthetic agenda for the learning sciences (pp.72–108). New York, NY: Routledge.Huizinga, J. (1955). Homo Ludens: a Study of the Play Element in Culture. Boston, MA, Beacon Press.Ingold, T. (2007). Lines: A brief history. London, UK: Routledge.Jewitt, C., Bezemer, J., & O'Halloran, K. (2016). Introducing multimodality. London: Routledge.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995) Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39-103.Karmiloff-Smith, A., & Inhelder, B. (1974). If you want to get ahead, get a theory. Cognition, 3(3), 195-212.Malaby, T. M. (2009). Anthropology and play: The contours of playful experience. New Literary History, 40(1),205-218.Marin, A. M. (2013). Learning to attend and observe: Parent-child meaning making in the natural world.(Dissertation). Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.National Governors Association Center for Best Practices and the Council of Chief State School (2010). CommonCore State Standards Initiative (CCSSI), Common Core State Standards for Mathematics. Washington,DC: Officers.Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. Basic Books, Inc.Piaget, J. (1932/1965). The moral judgment of the child. New York: The Free Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1341© ISLSPiaget, J. (1946/1962). Play, dreams and imitation in childhood. New York: Norton.Seo, K. H., & Ginsburg, H. P. (2004). What is developmentally appropriate in early childhood mathematicseducation? Lessons from new research. Engaging young children in mathematics: Standards for earlychildhood mathematics education, 91-104.Stannard, L.,Wolfgang, C. H., Jones, I., & Phelps, P. (2001). A longitudinal study of the predictive relationsamong construction play and mathematical achievement. Early Child Development and Care, 167(1),115e125. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/ 0300443011670110.Streeck, J., & Mehus, S. (2005). Microethnography: The study of practices. In K. L. Fitch & R. E. Sanders (Eds.),Handbook of language and social interaction (pp. 381–404). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Sutton-Smith, B. (1997). The ambiguity of play. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Taylor, K. H. (2017). Learning along lines: Locative literacies for reading and writing the city. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 26, 533–574.Vygotsky, L. S. (1967). Play and its role in the mental development of the child. Soviet psychology, 5(3), 6-18.Vygotsky, L. (1933/1976). Play and its role m the mental development or the child, in Bruner, J., Jolly, A. &Sylva, K. (Eds), Play: Its Role in Development and Evolution (pp. 537-554). New York, NY: BasicBooks.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Vygotsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Wirman, H. V. (2012). Co-creativity. In M. J. P. Wolf (Ed.), Encyclopedia of video games: The culture,technology, and art of gaming. Santa Barbara, Calif: Greenwood.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1342© ISLS