Interdisciplinary Computing and the Emergence of BoundaryObjects: A Case-Study of Dance and TechnologyKayla DesPortes, Monet Spells, and Betsy DiSalvo,ksdesportes@gatech.edu, monet.spells@gatech.edu, bdisalvo@cc.gatech.eduGeorgia Institute of TechnologyAbstract: Many educational interventions involving computer science and engineering havecreated interdisciplinary educational experiences to contextualize the learning. These effortshave begun to help diversify computing and engineering by encouraging young people who areunderrepresented in these fields to consider them from a different perspective. Computingprojects in these environments are often collaborative and require students with varyingbackgrounds and perspectives to work together. We propose that the coordination between theparticipants is facilitated in the presence of their differences through the computational artifactsthey create, which serve as boundary objects. Furthermore, integrating art into theseinterventions promotes abstract thinking, enabling the boundary objects to flow moreseamlessly between weakly and strongly structured implementations and interpretations. Weexamine this proposition within a case study of a dance and technology workshop. We highlighthow students and leaders negotiated and accepted differences within their perspectives andinterpretations of the dances they created.Keywords: boundary objects, computer science, engineering, broadening participationIntroductionInterdisciplinary learning environments involving computer science and engineering are beginning to create morediverse learning opportunities. From e-textiles (Buechley & Eisenberg, 2008) to augmented interior design(Camarata, Gross, & Do, 2003), there are a plethora of options for working across fields. One avenue of thisinterdisciplinary work is through STEAM (science, technology, engineering, arts, and mathematics) interventions.This type of work has the possibility of engaging those with artistic interests, while providing them with exposureand education in the realm of computer science and engineering. In particular, we will focus on the combinationof dance and technology, which gives students an embodied form of expression (Hanna, 2008). Others havesuccessfully coupled technology and dance within the educational domain, integrating dance into the Aliceprogramming environment (Leonard & Daily, 2014). The TechDance workshop is another effort in this domain.We create a community of learners (Rogoff, 1994) combining leaders from varying expertise, with students whohave diverse backgrounds in order to create technology enhanced dance performances using microcontrollers.With the myriad of students and educators that often work together in these educational endeavors it is importantto understand how the various backgrounds and interests of the participants affect the collaboration and learningthat takes place. Within TechDance we saw the students and leaders using their dance performances as boundaryobjects. These objects supported collaboration, enabled students and leaders to learn about each other and fromone another, and created opportunities for the participants to take on different roles. We discuss boundary objectsas a framework and then illustrate our findings within TechDance.Boundary objectsWithin an interdisciplinary curriculum involving collaborative work, the objects that the students and educatorscreate together serve as boundary objects in which various interpretations and values are embedded. Star andGriesemer (1989) present boundary objects as an analytical framework to interpret the collaborative practicessurrounding Berkeley's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology. They used the framework to describe how scientificfindings, which often had vastly different meanings and implications depending on the social world, could havecoherence (Star & Griesemer, 1989, p. 132). They further expand on these characteristics:Boundary objects are objects, which are both plastic enough to adapt to local needs and theconstraints of the several parties employing them, yet robust enough to maintain a commonidentity across sites. They are weakly structured in common use, and become strongly structuredin individual site use. These objects may be abstract or concrete. They have different meaningsICLS 2016 Proceedings890© ISLSin different social worlds but their structure is common enough to more than one world to makethem recognizable, as means of translation. (Star & Griesemer, 1989, p. 393)Star (2010) emphasizes that the term go beyond interpretive flexibility of objects to include understanding howthe object influences the “structure of informatic and work process needs and arrangements” within communitiesas well (p. 601). Star clarifies that boundary objects were originally created to describe the phenomena in whichopposing forces were able to work together without reaching consensus. She points to the importance of scopeand scale of the boundary objects in order to understand the affordances of the object based on its materiality andinfrastructural properties (p. 613).This definition has been applied in the educational domain in a few contexts. For example, boundaryobjects were used as a framework for examining the success of curriculum change that progressed in spite ofconflicting powers (Hultén, 2013). The framework has also been used in the context of individual courses, suchas understanding the success of an authentic science course in which students wrote for science journals, bridgingthem into communities outside of their schools (Polman & Hope, 2014). Wenger also examines learning atboundaries in the context of communities of practice (1998). Outside of these individual explorations, Akkermanand Bakker (2011) completed a literature review to offer insight on conceptualizing the use of boundary objectsand boundary crossings in the education domain. Their analysis reveals four ways in which learning occurs atboundaries: identification—understanding the diverse perspectives and practices in relations to one another;coordination—how the cooperation between the perspectives and practices is regulated; reflection—creatingopportunities for one to think about and expand their perspectives in relation to others’; and transformation—creating new practices based on the intersection of boundaries (p. 150). Throughout TechDance we saw how thestudents and leaders identified differences in their perspectives, created a structure for the coordination betweenthe disciplines and perspectives within the workshop, and created opportunities for reflection through theirdiscussion of differences. Due to the brevity of the workshop described in our case study, we did not witness newpractices being developed. However, through our analysis we reveal how the boundary objects served to fosterabstract thinking amongst the students and leaders during collaboration periods in which the objects were moreweakly structured. The abstraction of the objects allowed them to work together while having disparate concreteviews of the objects on an individual level.Case study: TechDanceThis paper examines a five-day workshop, TechDance, in which middle and high school female students workedwith dancers, choreographers, engineers, and computer scientists, to produce technology enhanced danceperformances. The workshop was designed to engage students who might not normally participate with computerscience or engineering, so we worked with a community organization who focuses on providing underserved girlswith experiences and guidance as they become young women. The workshop participants consisted of 13 girlsfrom the community organization, and 8 adult leaders—4 CS/engineers and 4 dancers/choreographers. Two of theresearchers participated as technology leaders during the workshop. Our data collection comprised of surveys,which covered demographics and student perspectives of computing, and qualitative data, which includedobservations, audio debriefs with leaders at the end of each day, and post-study interviews with six students andthe leaders. Two researchers reviewed and analyzed this data for emergent themes, which they then solidified intocodes (Saldaña, 2012). After initializing the codes, the researchers reviewed the data, identified any missed orcontroversial codes, and resolved any disagreements. We focus on the qualitative data for the purposes ofunderstanding the boundary objects in this context.The diversity of students and leaders within the workshop created a community of learners within theworkshop in which all members had expertise to offer as well as opportunities to learn. The leaders, who all hadeither an arts or technology background, had distinct contributions to the project. For example, one of the danceleader’s professional portfolio focused on choreographing dances around the world, while another specialized inboth dancing professionally as part of a company and teaching dance professionally. The leader who taught dance,often taught young African American girls, giving her more experience than any of the other leaders in thisdomain. Furthermore, the diverse backgrounds of the students created learning opportunities between all theparticipants. The students shared their expertise in their values as they integrated them into the dances.TechDance began with the leaders introducing the students to tools, concepts, and techniques that theycould use during the less structured project phase of the workshop. With a few exceptions, the students had littleexperience with dance or technology. Throughout the workshop the students worked on producing three dances,with technology and choreography they themselves produced. The three themes of the dances were, bullying, selfesteem, and destruction of nature. These themes were arrived at through a series of activities that scaffolded thestudents articulating and reflecting upon issues that they cared about. Through these exercises we also had theICLS 2016 Proceedings891© ISLSstudents thinking of how they could express these emotions using the technology and dance techniques learnedearlier in the workshop. The final activity they completed had them identify what they wanted to represent in theirdances and how they wanted to represent it using technology. We then used their responses to group them. Aswith most group work, there was not always a perfect match between the students. Despite mismatches, studentswere still able to create value driven designs. The expressive yet interpretive nature of dance helped the studentsthink abstractly and manage their differences enabling them to collaborate.Emergence of boundary objectsWhen the groups were first formed they worked in their groups to brainstorm. The bullying group was comprisedof two girls who wanted to work on bullying and one girl who wanted to represent a dictatorship. After each ofthe girls talked about their ideas, the girl who wanted to represent a dictatorship was able to find common ground.She remarked on how their ideas were not that different because each of their scenarios went from a bad situationto a good situation, and the expression would be similar. This realization enabled them to get over the first bumpin their collaboration and move forward discussing how they would use the dance and technology to express thebad situation and the good situation in their dance. Even before the dances and technology were realized, wewitnessed how the dance acted as a boundary object through the students’ negotiation of themes, helping thembridge their differences. While each of the girls had a robust definition of the meaning of their dance, they wereable to talk about it in an abstract way when they were working together across their perspectives.Having the students express their differences created an environment in which many of the students couldrecognize that art and technology can be interpreted in many different ways. During the post-interviews onestudent remarked, I enjoyed that we might like different things about what we do — Student 5. They alsorecognized these differences throughout the workshop as they caused tensions as the varying opinions emerged:At certain points in the dance, um, there were certain things that not everybody agreed on, sowe had to change a few things in the dance. It ended up working out but it was just, um, a bithard to agree on certain movements in the dance at certain points. — Student 1The need to collaborate on producing the dance brought contrasting views to light giving students opportunitiesto negotiate between their differences. However, they did not necessarily reach a consensus in order to moveforward with the decisions they had to make. The students had to coordinate between the various differingperspectives. A student in the deforestation group reflected on how her group members thought about the dance:One of my group members, her original theme was about bullying, and so [to] incorporate thatinto the nature theme she said that humans would bully nature so she took it that way. And then,so that was a difference. And the other group member, she thought a lot about the animals innature and protecting the animals so that was her main concern. — Student 1It was through these differences in perspectives of the dance itself that students were able to coordinate despitetheir differing interests. These particular differences between students’ views had an effect on what they wantedto incorporate and accomplish with the work they put into the dances. When one student was asked about how theother students contributed to her dance, she stated:Some of our ideas were different so we had to figure out how to come together…Like, two ofthem were similar, but not really. So we had to figure out where to put it all into thedance…everybody did like one part inside another part. — Student 5The dances became a conglomeration of the various aspects that each student contributed, but by working togetherthey were able to achieve cohesion. They were able to understand each other’s perspectives, and in this instance,weave their own additions to the dance into the greater structure.The dances were also a boundary object for the leaders who viewed the dances from their ownperspective. One leader remarked on her interpretation,They brought up…these global issues [that] also impact girls on a micro level and they impactthem in their everyday life. And it’s something that they do and want to build solutions for.They just need to have the know-how and education and resources to do it. — Dance Leader 1The leaders often saw the societal context in which the issues the students raised were situated. One dance leadersaw the dance as a tool for empowering these students to talk about the issues they want solved in the world.ICLS 2016 Proceedings892© ISLSThroughout the workshop we saw how the leaders’ different backgrounds led them to approach the various aspectswithin the dance or technology differently. One of the dance leaders remarked on her experience understandingthe technology through the students’ interpretation of the technology:I basically just sat back when you guys were doing your, uh, your lecture about the Arduinosand the breadboards and putting it together. And then I just circled around the kids when I feltlike they had, like, kind of figured out what they were creating and then asked them. What didyou create? What are you making? What does that do? So I feel like it also helped me to knowif they knew what they were talking about and it also taught me what they’re talking about. —Leader 2Here electronics portion of the dance was perceived differently: from the technology leaders’ perspective, it wasa teaching tool that uncovered how the students were thinking about the microcontroller; while from the danceleaders’ perspective, it was a learning tool which the students could use to explain the concepts to them. Thetechnology artifacts offered those coming in with different backgrounds different affordances.ConclusionBoundary objects enabled us to understand how the participants, with varying backgrounds, interests andexpertise, could still create value driven dance performances. The collaborations within the TechDance workshopwere facilitated through the dances and computational artifacts that the students and leaders created together.These boundary objects were a form of artistic expression that enabled the participants to collaborated usingabstractions while embedding different individual values. From learning about one another’s backgrounds tolearning about one another’s expertise, the boundary objects served as learning tools for the entire community oflearners. The boundary objects highlighted the various values and interests of the students and educators andhelped to identify the learning opportunities between the diversity of participants. With further research, boundaryobjects could prove to be an important analytical framework to understand how fostering abstract thinking aboutboundary objects affects collaboration and value driven learning in these interdisciplinary interventions.ReferencesAkkerman, S. F., & Bakker, A. (2011). Boundary Crossing and Boundary Objects. Review of EducationalResearch, 81(2), 132–169.Buechley, L., & Eisenberg, M. (2008). The LilyPad Arduino: Toward wearable engineering for everyone.Pervasive Computing, IEEE, 7(2), 12–15.Camarata, K., Gross, M., & Do, E. Y.-L. (2003). A physical computing studio: Exploring computational artifactsand environments. International Journal of Architectural Computing, 1(2), 169–190.Hanna, J. L. (2008). A nonverbal language for imagining and learning: Dance education in K–12 curriculum.Educational Researcher, 37(8), 491–506.Hultén, M. (2013). Boundary objects and curriculum change: the case of integrated versus subject-based teaching.Journal of Curriculum Studies, 45(6), 790–813.Leigh Star, S. (2010). This is Not a Boundary Object: Reflections on the Origin of a Concept. Science, Technology& Human Values, 35(5), 601–617. http://doi.org/10.1177/0162243910377624Leonard, A. E., & Daily, S. B. (2014). The Dancing Alice Project: Computational and Embodied Arts Researchin Middle School Education. Proceedings of the 45th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer ScienceEducation.Polman, J. L., & Hope, J. M. G. (2014). Science news stories as boundary objects affecting engagement withscience: SCIENCE NEWS STORIES. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 51(3), 315–341.Rogoff, B. (1994). Developing understanding of the idea of communities of learners. In Mind, Culture, andActivity (pp. 209–229).Saldaña, J. (2012). The coding manual for qualitative researchers.Star, S. L., & Griesemer, J. R. (1989). Institutional ecology,translations’ and boundary objects: Amateurs andprofessionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology. Social Studies of Science, (19.3), 387–420.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. New York: Cambridge UniversityPress.AcknowledgmentsWe thank participating teachers and students as well as the Georgia Tech GVU Center who funded this work.ICLS 2016 Proceedings893© ISLS