Examining the Role of Unpacking 3-Dimensional Teaching andLearning in Museum-Based Professional DevelopmentGauri Vaishampayan, Aaron Price, Kyle Kauffman, Patricia Messersmith, and Laura Rico-Beckgvaish2@uic.edu, Aaron.Price@msichicago.org, kyle.kauffman@msichicago.org,patricia.messersmith@msichicago.org, lricobeck@gmail.comMuseum of Science and IndustryBrian Gane, University of Illinois at Chicago, bgane@uic.eduAbstract: The purpose of this study is to examine changes in teachers’ attitudes and behaviorstowards three-dimensional instruction after participation in a Museum-based professionaldevelopment program. The study design includes a pre- and post-survey measuring attitudestowards three-dimensional instruction along with observation rubrics and facilitators’ fieldnotes. A preliminary analysis of early data is used to describe implications of applying the“backwards design” model in professional development.IntroductionThe international shift towards three-dimensional (3D) teaching and learning (NGSS Lead States, 2013),requires using and applying knowledge, skills, and abilities to make sense of scientific phenomena and/or designsolutions to problems (National Research Council, 2012). Central to this transition is the view that disciplinarycore ideas, science and engineering practices, and crosscutting concepts are intertwined and work together toadvance students’ learning through 3D instruction. Accordingly, teachers need guidance to (re)develop theirclassroom pedagogy to better align with the newer demands of teaching science. To address this need, a large,urban science museum has developed and facilitated professional development (PD) courses for teachers to (1)gain information about 3D instruction and (2) develop strategies directly relevant to the process of unit/lessonplanning for a next generation science classroom. The purpose of this study is to better understand the changein participants’ attitudes and behaviors towards teaching aligned with three-dimensional practices, uponparticipating in the PD. Our research question is, “What impact does participation in a science-museum basedPD program have on its participants’ attitudes towards key concepts and subsequent behaviors aligned withthree-dimensional instruction?”Literature reviewScience-focused PD for teachers is central to student achievement and ensuring overall successful scienceeducation reform. High quality professional development will produce superior teaching in classrooms, whichwill, in turn, translate into higher levels of student achievement. Informal science education institutions, such asmuseums, are increasingly active in providing teacher PD (NRC, 2009). Providing teachers a space to constructknowledge and develop skills and abilities that align with new reforms is important for achieving successfulstudent outcomes. While there are a few professional development opportunities being developed to support 3Dteaching and learning, many offer educators resources without a process/strategy to achieve lasting changes inteachers’ practical knowledge.The Understanding by Design framework provides guidance for curriculum planning process/strategythrough a three-staged approach also commonly known as backwards design (Wiggins & McTighe, 2005). Thisprocess emphasizes (1) identifying desired results, (2) highlighting acceptable evidence, (3) planning learningexperiences and instruction to meet the goals. Engaging in these steps allows educators to align activities andassessments with learning performances, as learning goals, to gain a better understanding of “knowledge inuse”, a key idea in the learning science (Krajcik, McNeill & Reiser, 2007)MethodsThe studied teacher PD program takes place at a large urban science museum for six day-long sessions spreadacross an academic school year. Participants were selected according to school need and requested to attend ingroups. This cohort consists of 3-4 teachers and one school administrator from 12 primary schools in the USA.The PD focused on unpacking 3D learning standards and then rebuilding domain and practical knowledge intothree-dimensional, conceptually coherent unit and lesson plans using the principles of backwards design. Anexample of the process used to model this approach with participants appears in Figure 1.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1495© ISLSData collectionA pre survey addressing science related attitudes, teaching behaviors, and three-dimensional (3D) instructionwas administered prior to the start of the course. Items related to 3D instructional practices were taken from aninstrument developed by Hayes et al. (2016) to measure the use of 3D teaching and learning with in-serviceteachers (hereafter: 3D scale). Attitude and behavior specific items on the survey were adopted from theDimensions of Attitude towards Science (DAS) instrument (van Aalderen-Smeets & van der Molen, 2013). Allfour sections of the survey consist of items in a five-point Likert format. A post survey will be administeredafter the last session in March and data will be analyzed prior to the conference proceedings. Additionally,observation rubrics were designed to understand the facilitators’ process of explaining the unpacking modelduring the PD and to identify potential learning barriers. The rubric included categories associated with eachitem in the Hayes, et al. (2016) survey. A researcher observed the first 2 sessions and took field notes. (The finalsession will be observed prior to the conference proceedings.) Following a design-based research (DBR) process(Barab & Squire, 2004), data from the observation rubrics and facilitators’ notes informed an iterative designprocess employed by the program facilitators who made continuous research based design changes to the PD.The notes were open coded to identify themes in the changes made in the iterations.Figure 1. PD model to explain unpacking process.Preliminary resultsThe observation rubrics and field notes reflect five major themes in the changes made during the courseiterations: increasing scaffolds, tapping into prior knowledge, modeling instruction/providing examples,increasing collaboration within teams and outsourcing additional resources. Each of these evidence-based ideasare known to reinforce learning and may improve teachers’ ability to understanding and apply the processdescribed in Figure 1. in their classroom.Fifty-four participants completed the pre-survey, representing 12 schools. 7 were administrators and 47were teachers. Pre-survey composite scores were aligned with the prior year’s study of a similar PD course thatdid not have a focus on 3D instruction, indicating the population of this program is similar to traditional PDpopulations at this institution. With the post-survey results in hand, we will be able to determine what impactthe 3D-specific changes described here had on overall attitudes of teachers.Implications3D teaching and learning presents a challenge for supporting teachers through PD, and little research exists onthat specific PD focus (Hayes, et al., 2016). In this paper we report on a PD that was iteratively developed usingbackwards design methods, and which is aimed at providing teachers with the skills to use backwards designwith 3 D standards. We expect that once we collect post-survey data, findings from this study will show howunpacking 3D standards to (re)build aligned unit/lesson plans using a backwards design approach can promote3D instruction. This PD model may provide a principled approach for addressing the complexities called for bynew visions for science education.ReferencesHayes, K. N., Lee, C. S., DiStefano, R., O’Connor, D., & Seitz, J. C. (2016). Measuring science instructionalpractice: A survey tool for the age of NGSS. Journal of Science Teacher Education, 27(2), 137-164.National Research Council. (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, CrosscuttingConcepts, and Core Ideas. National Academies Pressvan Aalderen-Smeets, S., & Walma van der Molen, J. (2013). Measuring primary teachers' attitudes towardteaching science: Development of the dimensions of attitude toward science (DAS) instrument.International Journal of Science Education, 35(4), 577-600.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1496© ISLS