How to Enjoy Writing Papers: Supporting Literature-BasedInquiry Learning to Reduce Procrastination and FosterOwnership and Positive EmotionsJulia Eberle, Tim Schönfeld, Selma Arukovic, and Nikol Rummeljulia.eberle@rub.de, tim.schoenfeld@rub.de, selma.arukovic@rub.de, nikol.rummel@rub.deRuhr-Universität BochumAbstract: Literature-based inquiry learning is a common form of instruction in the Humanitiesand Social Sciences but usually lacks the necessary support. In this paper, the effects of anonline environment to support the literature-based inquiry process with scaffolds and promptedlearning diaries are compared to unguided learning processes. We find a significant decrease inprocrastination and a significant increase in perceived psychological ownership and positiveemotions. In-depths interviews give insights into the learning process and epistemic emotionsduring the process when the supportive environment is used. Further data collection is currentlyin progress and will add to these findings.Introduction and theoretical backgroundA specific problem of literature-based inquiry learning is procrastination as research on academic writing hasshown (Klingsieck & Golombek, 2016) resulting in lack of time to plan the process, apply effective strategies toaccomplish relevant tasks, and reflect about the process – the three central components for successful selfregulated learning (Zimmerman, 2001). Unsuccessful self-regulation processes, in turn, lead to unpleasantemotions and aversive attitudes towards literature-based inquiry. Aversive attitudes towards a learning task havebeen shown to be major causes of further procrastination behavior (Steel, 2007). A sense of psychologicalownership, i.e. the feeling that the written text is ‘mine’ or an ‘extended part of me’, has been found to be linkedto perceived control, increased self-efficacy, and motivation (Pierce, Kostova, & Dirks, 2003), thus beingconducive to pleasant emotions. Additionally, during learning processes, many different epistemic emotions ofrather pleasant or unpleasant nature can occur that influence information processing and learning behavior.In order to enable learners to efficiently self-regulate during literature-based inquiry learning and gain asense of psychological ownership that can lead to pleasant epistemic emotions, guidance, structure, andinformation in moments of insecurity are necessary. A virtual environment can provide such support by makingthe activities of a literature-based inquiry process visible and by supporting the externalization of learners’ internalinquiry processes. In STEM areas, positive effects of scaffolds that provide an externalized schema of the stepsof the inquiry-learning process and guide the learners through this process have extensively been found (e.g. deJong, 2006). Additionally, learning diaries that include cognitive and metacognitive prompts have shown to be agood means of support for long-term learning processes such as the literature-based inquiry process, which usuallytakes several weeks of self-regulated work. (Berthold, Nückles & Renkl, 2007). These assumptions lead to thefollowing research questions:RQ 1: To what extent does a virtual environment that combines scaffolds and prompted learning diariesfoster beneficial learning processes (reflection and decreased procrastination) during literature-based inquiry?RQ 2: To what extent does a virtual environment that combines scaffolds and prompted learning diariesfoster learning outcomes (positive emotions towards literature-based inquiry and psychological ownership for aterm-paper) during literature-based inquiry?MethodsWe used a design-based research approach that included data collection in the form of an experimental field studyon different cohorts of students in a German Educational Science B.A. program as well as in-depths observationof the learning process of three individual students. The three cohorts consisted of a baseline group (N = 27),which did not receive specific support. We followed three of them while they tested the first version of the supportinstrument. The experimental group of cycle 1 (N = 16) received access to the first version of the supportinstrument as part of an introductory course in Educational Science and scientific writing. The experimental groupof cycle 2 (data collection is still in progress) receives access to an improved version of the support instrument.As a support instrument for the inquiry process of a literature-based term-paper, we designed the “OnlineResearch Log” which is set up in a moodle course as a work-flow-management-system. It visualizes the mainnecessary steps in a literature-based inquiry process by structuring each step according to three core elements: (a)ICLS 2018 Proceedings1583© ISLSSetting concrete and terminated goals for the step, (b) conducting the whole step and uploading the result, (c)reflecting about the process, focusing especially on what has been learnt, problems that have been solved, andachieved goals. The support instrument was improved between cycle 1 and 2 regarding its overall outline (onestep was broken down into two smaller steps), in the information available (an introduction video was added), andin the reflection prompts (a rating scale for current epistemic emotions was added).All three groups were asked to fill in online-questionnaires, the experimental groups received a pre- anda post-test before they started and after they finished the inquiry process. The questionnaires include instrumentsto measure procrastination behavior during each step of the inquiry process, psychological ownership towards theterm-paper, and state emotions towards future literature-based inquiry. Differences between the groups wereanalyzed using t-tests and Man-Whitney-U-tests. Additionally, we will analyze the reflection data. For the indepths observation of the three individuals in the baseline group, who tested the first version of the supportinstrument, we conducted a series of interviews over a period of two months.FindingsWhen comparing the reported procrastination behavior during the seven steps of the inquiry process between thebaseline group and the experimental group in cycle 1 (RQ 1), we found that the experimental group in cycle 1reported significantly reduced procrastination behavior for most of the steps. During the in-depths observations,participants pointed out that the identifying and understanding appropriate literature was especially challengingfor them. Furthermore, the in-depths analyses revealed that participants had problems in setting appropriate goalsas well as reflecting efficiently. Looking at the outcomes of the literature-based inquiry process (RQ 2), we see asignificant improvement in psychological ownership towards the term-paper and in positive emotions towardsfuture literature-based inquiry for the experimental group in cycle 1 compared to the baseline group. In-depthsanalyses show a huge fluctuation of epistemic emotions during the process but for all participants a rapid decreaseof fear when working with the Online-Research Log. The support instrument was improved accordingly, and weexpect to reduce procrastination behavior in cycle 2.Conclusion and further plans for researchThe preliminary results indicate that it seems possible to support learners during literature-based inquiry not onlyin cognitive aspects – which was the focus of previous research – but also in emotional and motivational aspects.Providing structure and guiding learners’ reflections in an online environment seem to be a way to supportcomplex inquiry processes that can otherwise hardly be supported sufficiently in a regular educational context.Furthermore, setting the focus on emotional aspects of inquiry learning could be important to better understandwhy learners are able and willing (or not) to use efficient learning strategies and show relevant learning activitiesrelated to tasks with which they have previous experiences.However, the sample in this study is currently quite small and additional data is needed to validate thesefindings. Additionally, further analyses will show how learners’ emotions change on a long-term basis, as well ason a short-term basis within the literature-based inquiry process when additional data of cycle 2 is available. Dataabout how aspects students reflect will give further insights into the learning and self-regulation process.ReferencesBerthold, K., Nückles, M. & Renkl, A. (2007). Do learning protocols support learning strategies and outcomes?The role of cognitive and metacognitive prompts. Learning & Instruction, 17(5), 564-577.De Jong, T. (2006). Scaffolds for scientific discovery learning. Handling complexity in learning environments:Theory and research, 107-128.Klingsieck, K. B. & Golombek, C. (2016). Prokrastination beim Schreiben von Texten im Studium. In A. HirschWeber & S. Scherer (Hrsg.), Wissenschaftliches Schreiben in Natur- und Technikwissenschaften (S. 195205). Wiesbaden: Springer.Pierce, J. L., Kostova, T., & Dirks, K. T. (2003). The state of psychological ownership: integrating and xtendinga century of research. Review of General Psychology, 7, 84–107.Steel, P. (2007). The nature of procrastination: a meta-analytic and theoretical review of quintessential selfregulatory failure. Psychological Bulletin, 133(1), 65-94.Zimmerman, B. J. (2001). Theories of Self-Regulated Learning and Academic Achievement: An Overview andAnalysis. In B. J. Zimmerman & D. H. Schunk (eds.), Self-regulated learning and academic achievement.Theoretical perspectives (pp. 1-37). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1584© ISLS