Examining Productive Discourse and Knowledge Advancementin a Knowledge Building CommunityYuyao Tong, Carol K.K. Chan, and Jan van Aalsttongyuyao2016@gmail.com, ckkchan@hku.hk, vanaalst@hku.hkThe University of Hong KongAbstract: This study examined an explicit reflection enriched knowledge building communityon students’ productive discourse and knowledge advancement. Knowledge advancement wasanalyzed using a social network analysis tool, called Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer(KBDeX) (Oshima, Oshima, & Matsuzawa, 2012). KBDeX analysis on keywords networkindicated that students in the intervention class had engaged in a more cohesive discussion.Further discourse analysis clarified that students in the intervention class engaged in a moreproductive progressive discourse.IntroductionThis study investigated a computer-supported knowledge building (KB) community (Scardamalia & Bereiter,2014) on students’ collective knowledge advancement in the online discourse using a social network analysistool in identifying students’ progressive discourse. Substantial researches indicated that the importance ofsustained inquiry and collective knowledge advancement, however, students would not spontaneously engage ina progressive discourse to advance their community knowledge (Yang, van Aalst, Chan, & Tian 2016). Achallenge arises pertaining to how can we scaffold students’ collective knowledge advancement in theircollaborative inquiry, and more researches needed to investigate the learning environment design in fosteringstudents’ collective knowledge advancement. To address this challenge, we designed and evaluated an enrichedKB environment with explicit reflection to scaffold students’ progressive inquiry and collective knowledgeadvancement. Therefore, this study examined how students engage in collective knowledge advancement in adesigned KB environment, using a social network analysis, followed by an in-depth discourse analysis.MethodsParticipants were two classes of 9th Grade students in a secondary school, among which one class was engagedin a designed discourse reflection and principle emphasized KB environment, for comparison, the other classwas engaged in a regular KB environment. The key design in the enriched KB class is focusing on discoursereflection. In this paper, we focused on examining whether students engage in the productive discourse, andadvanced community knowledge using their KF discourse as input data to KBDeX for social network analysis.Students notes in online discussion platform (Knowledge Forum®) were exported into KBDeX and a list ofconceptual words were selected based on the curriculum guide and students’ discussion. We conducted thekeywords network analysis which shows how ideas are connected as indicators for detecting collectiveknowledge advancement (Oshima et al., 2012; Oshima, et al., 2017). The first stage of analysis focused onexploration of keywords network changed over time. Then, we conducted in-depth discourse analysis toinvestigate how students engaged in the productive discourse.ResultsCollective knowledge advancement between intervention and comparison classTo investigate students’ collective knowledge advancement, we examined keywords network change over time.As shown in Figure 1, the network of keywords was changed from phase 1 (note 1 to 22) to 2 (note 1 to 100) to3 (note 1 to 181). Figure 1a showed an integrated cluster of keywords which indicated that students started theirKF discussion in a more cohesive way in the intervention class while the network of keywords was fragmentedfor the comparison class (Figure 1b), suggesting that students did not relate their ideas together in the discussion(The reason for the difference between the two classes at the initial KF discussion stage is due to the explicitreflection on ideas, students in the intervention class have a discussion and reflection on their ideas developingin the classroom before starting inquiry in KF while the comparison class start inquiry in KF directly withoutideas reflection). Moreover, through the discussion, in phase 2 and 3, the keywords network also stayedfragmented for the comparison class (Figure 1d and 1f) while the keywords network continued to integrate forthe intervention class (Figure 1c and 1e). Overall, the transition of keywords network change indicated that1775students in the intervention class integrated their ideas with a consistently discussion and the collectiveknowledge was advanced through the discussion than the comparison class..Figure 1. Keywords network change over time between intervention and comparison class.Progressive inquiry and discourse in KFIn addition to the keywords network analysis, we also analyzed students’ KF discourse to identify and explainhow students engaged in productive discourse and knowledge advancement. The following excerpt is a clusterof KF discourse (under a topic on what is art) for the intervention class (keywords is in bold). Student Aproposed a theory that arts can represent people’s emotions, followed by student B’s explanation that art workscan be different depending on people’s emotions and also proposed a new theory that art is creative, however,student C did not agree with student B’s idea, followed by student B’s continued build-on in explaining thevarious types of arts. Later, student D asked a sustained question based on previous idea on why art relate to life,followed by student E’s response. Moreover, student F also asked a sustained question on the function of art tomove forward the discussion. Overall, within this discourse example, different students made contributions andfully engaged in the productive discourse with ideas improvement through new questions emerged andsustained inquiry, and integrating various conceptual words to advance knowledge on what is art.Student A[My theory] … art can be a representation of emotions, people can design anartifact to represent the emotion…what kind of arts can represent emotions?Student B[My theory] I think art is different based on different people’s ideas andemotions, but the common thing is the creativity.Student C[My theory] I think art works only need to be beautiful.Student B[My theory] I think art not only refers to the drawing…also relation to life…Student DWhy do you think art works are relating to life?Student EArt can relate to life…art design can also be unrestrained…Student F…[I need to understand] what kind of social functions that arts have?Conclusion and significanceIn conclusion, analysis indicated the differences in the collective knowledge advancement between theintervention and comparison class. The study has theoretical value that extends the insights into scaffoldingstudents’ productive discourse and knowledge advancement focusing on explicit reflection of ideas anddiscourse, and for teachers, they can try to design this reflection-enriched KB environment to help studentsinvolved in progressive discourse and community knowledge advancement.ReferencesOshima, J., Oshima, R., & Matsuzawa, Y. (2012). Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer: a social networkanalysis application for knowledge building discourse. Educational Technology Research andDevelopment, 60(5), 903-921.Oshima, J., Ohsaki, A., Yamada, Y., & Oshima, R. (2017). Collective knowledge advancement and conceptualunderstanding of complex scientific concepts in the Jigsaw instruction. In B. K. Smith, M. Borge, E.Mercier, & K.Y. Lim (Eds.), Making a difference: Proceedings of the 12th International Conference onComputer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 2017, Volume 1. Philadelphia: ISLS.Yang, Y., van Aalst, J., Chan, C.K.K., & Tian, W. (2016). Reflective assessment in knowledge building bystudents with low academic achievement. International Journal of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning, 11(3), 281-311.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, andtechnology. In R. K. Sawyer (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (2nd ed.,pp.397-417). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.1776