Rethinking Loafers: Understanding the Productive Functions ofOff-Task Talk During Collaborative Mathematics Problem-SolvingJennifer Marie Langer-Osuna, Emma Carene Gargroetzi, Rosa Chavez, and Jen Munsonjmlo@stanford.edu, egroetzi@stanford.edu, rdchavez@stanford.edu, jmunson@stanford.eduStanford UniversityAbstract: This study examines the role of off-task participation in collaborative mathematicsproblem-solving among fourth graders. Results show that majority of instances servedproductive functions in relation to the collaborative problem-solving process. These functionsinclude: warming up to the collaboration, gaining the attention of others, gaining access to thecollaboration for self, recruiting others into the collaboration, extending the task, and resistingconcentrated authority.Students commonly get off-task when working together in small groups, whether because they start playingwith manipulatives, discussing games or movies, or singing together. Teachers, like most adults, typicallyassume such activity is counter to the work-at-hand, and some studies have suggested that off-task interactionsare detrimental to learning (Baker, Corbett, Koedinger, Wagner, 2004; Sabourin, Rowe, Mott, & Lester, 2011).Yet, off-task interactions can serve a variety of functions, some of which have the potential to support importantaspects of the collaborative process (Langer-Osuna & Esmonde, 2013; Sabourin, et al, 2011, Baker, D’Mello,Rodrigo, Graesser, 2010). Students utilize various strategies, often implicitly, to manage the attention,engagement, and cognitive activity of collaborative academic work (Barron, 2003; McCaslin, 2009; Volet,Vauras, & Salonen, 2009; Webb, 1982, 1991).The functions of off-task talk during collaborative work is less often studied from positioning theory,though recent work suggests that particular kinds of subject positions enable productive collaborative work,while others constrain possibilities for engagement (Wood, 2013). Subject positions become available throughsocially constructed storylines (Davies & Harré, 1990; Holland, Lachincotte, Skinner, & Cain, 2001). While ontask participation draws from storylines of schooling and school mathematics, off-task participation can draw ona greater range of storylines, including those of friendship, popular culture, and so on, potentially making agreater range of positional resources available to students to leverage during their collaborative activity(Esmonde & Langer-Osuna, 2013; Langer-Osuna, 2015). These storylines interact through both on-task and offtask talk. Langer-Osuna (2015) found that students drew on a variety of storylines including but going beyondthe storyline of school mathematics as they engaged with one another in collaborative work. The storylines thatorganized much of the off-task interactions, such as youth popular culture or the armed forces, offered the focalstudent, Terrance, positional identities that ultimately supported engagement in the mathematical work.Bringing these bodies of work together to bear on the potential role of off-task participation duringcollaborative work, we hypothesize that off-task participation can contribute to collaborative problem-solvingprocess by making a greater range of positional resources available to students. As such, it suggests thepossibility that off-task participation plays an even more robust role in collaborative problem-solving thanpreviously considered (Hickey, 2003; McCaslin, 2009).Data sources and analytic approachWe analyzed 13 videotapes of collaborative mathematics problem-solving among fourth graders during a uniton place value (Fosnot, 2007). The unit included about 20-30 minutes of student-led small group collaborativework each day, always around an open-ended conceptual problem that required students to compose anddecompose numbers, as well as combine numbers, as units of 10s and 1s. These activities were in the context ofa story problem where the main characters, a young boy and his grandmother, start a T-shirt factory and mustfind a system of organizing T-shirts for selling. The characters ultimately decide to sell T-shirts as bundles often and loose T-shirts. Students had access to materials such as paper and pencil, clothes hangers and rubberbands, as well as linking cubes and base ten blocks, for use during their activity.For each of 7 instructional days, we collected video of the entire classroom, as well as 2 additionalrepresentative small groups (1). Because in this classroom, students had the autonomy to choose both who theyworked with and where they worked, the students captured in each of the focal small groups varied. Weadditionally collected pre- and post-assessments and student interviews. Here we focus exclusively on thevideos of the small groups. For each small group table, we used a video camera mounted onto a tripod raisedICLS 2018 Proceedings745© ISLSover the small group and pointed in a downward angle in order to capture all students and their collaborativework artifacts. We used a table mic connected to the camera to capture small group talk.For each of the 56 instances, we coded the functions of off-task interactions on the collaborativedynamics. We coded the entire data corpus, drawing from both the literature (e.g., managing attention, Barron,2003; resisting domination, Esmonde & Langer-Osuna, 2013) and an inductive analysis of the video data itself(e.g., gaining entrance into the collaborative work) until saturation. To do so, we created analytic memosdescribing: (a) the content of words or actions, and (b) the spatial arrangement of students’ bodies and resource,before, during, and after the off-task interactions. The spatial arrangement of the collaboration included students'eye gaze and bodily positions in relation to one another, as well as physical access to the artifacts of thecollaborative work (e.g., manipulatives, worksheet). We determined the function of off-task talk in relation toshifts in the spatial and verbal aspects of (on-task) collaborative work directly subsequent to off-taskinteractions.Codes for off-task function were discussed and refined across the four authors for all instances untilconsensus was established and the data was saturated. In limited cases an instance was coded with more thanone function when the same off-task interaction served different functions for pairs of students at a table of four.In all of the double coded instances, an off-task interaction that served to fill time for one pair of students serveda productive function for the other pair of students.ResultsResults show that off-task interactions served both productive and unproductive functions in relation to thecollaborative problem-solving process. The functions of off-task interactions in our data set (n=56 instances), inorder of prevalence, were: (a) filling time (n= 17); (b) warming up to the collaboration (n= 9); (c) gaining theattention of others (n= 7); (d) avoiding work (n= 7); (e) gaining access to the collaboration for self (n= 6); (f)recruiting others into participation (n=6); (g) destabilizing collaboration (n=4); (h) extending the task (n=3); and(i) resisting concentrated authority (n= 2). An additional 7 instances were coded as flops (2). Table 1 defineseach function operationally and offers examples of the kinds of interactions that were coded as such.Table 1: Functions of off-task interactionsFunctionDefinitionExampleFill timeOff-task interactions that occurafter a declaration that the task iscomplete and continue until endof collaborative sessionWarm up tothecollaborationOff-task interactions that markthe beginning of the collaborativeactivity and functions to supportinitial connection/interactionswith peersGainattention ofothersOff-task interactions that serve toshift the gaze of others toward amarginalized peerA student utters aloud, "we're done!" andhigh-fives his two peers in the group.Giggling, the students spend the remainderof the session time hitting their ten sticktogether, testing which are the "strong" or"weak" sticks.Students walk over to their table for thefirst time as a group. A student asks herpeer whether the purple pen is his and thenstarts to take all of her pens out of a bag todemonstrate their varied colors. As the restof the table mates join the table, theyacknowledge the display of pens and oneanother. Immediately after, a student offersthe first on-task directive to the group.Prior to the off-task instance, a studentbids for the attention of this table mates,who ignore him. He begins to tell a storyabout playing the game Minecraft. Hispeers' gaze shift toward him, gaining theirattention.Avoid workOff-task interactions that occurafter a declaration that the task isnot complete and that serves toICLS 2018 ProceedingsA student bids for his partner to model thenumber 38 with connecting cubes. Hispartner counters by telling him the green746PercentFrequency(n=56)30.3616.0712.5012.50© ISLSresist efforts to make progress ontaskGain accesstocollaborationfor selfOff-task interactions that a)enable a student that waspreviously not participating in thecollaboration to enter, and b) arefollowed by on-task interactionsbetween now-collaborating peersRecruitothers intocollaborationOff-task interactions that a) bringa student or students previouslynot participating into thecollaboration, and b) are followedby on-task interactions betweennow-collaborating peersExtend thetaskOff-task interactions that arerelated to the context of the task,but that depart from the taskinstructionsResistconcentratedauthorityOff-task interactions that serve toignore or deflect a directive orother move that positions onepeer with concentrated social orintellectual authoritySustain thecollaborationOff-task interactions that (a)occur simultaneous to on-taskinteractions and (b) promote ormaintain peer interactionsOff-task interactions that serve toreject or deflect bids to join orremain in the collaborationDestabilizethecollaborationICLS 2018 Proceedingsconnecting cubes are peas and they willmake soup. They begin to build with thecubes. As he attempts to make sticks often, his partner launches into a story aboutmaking soup and insists the blocks are heringredients.Student’s on-task bids for participation arerejected. He and his peer begin to playfight with connecting cubes. In doing so,their bodies and talk become orientedtoward one another. Student’s subsequentbid for participation in the collaborativetask is successfully taken up.Prior to off-task instance, a student makesseveral bids to recruit his two table matesinto the collaborative task, which theyrepeatedly reject. He then begins to playwith the connecting cubes, loudlydeclaring that he is building a tower. Histwo table mates shift their bodies towardhim and one another, enabling cooperation,smile and join him in creating towers oftheir own and comparing them to eachother. Immediately subsequent, the studentrepeats his original contribution, which isnow taken up by his peers who shift intoon-task interactions.Students are tasked with adding imaginedorders for T-shirts, totaling the number ofT-shirts in an order. Before starting on theexpected task, students spend severalminutes discussing who should be incharge of small, medium, or large sizes ofT-shirts, elaborating on personalcharacteristics, such as height or preferredfashion style, that would make particularsizes reasonable for specific students totake on.A student tells her peer to stop makingsticks of ten and to instead write his nameon a shared worksheet. Her peer begins tocombine his ten sticks into a long stick,naming it a sword and launching into astory about its strength and importance. Hethen begins a new ten stick, naming it anew sword, ignoring the shared worksheet.Students break out into choral singingwhile building ten sticks together.Two students work on representing thenumber 34 as 3 tens and 4 ones. Onestudent asks his peer if she has anotheridea for representing the number 34. Hispeer responds with teasing him about whohe "likes" and continues to tease him untilhe stops asking for her contribution.74710.7110.715.363.573.807.14© ISLSFlopsOff-task interaction includes a bidto shift the group dynamics (e.g.gain attention of others or growthe collaboration) but no shiftoccurs, and/or the interaction isinterrupted by teacherinterventionA student repeatedly attempts to share anidea with his table mates. His two peersignore his attempts, as they share a storyabout a classmate who got in trouble thatmorning and pass the shared worksheetbetween the two of them.12.50The most prevalent function of off-task participation, more than a quarter of all instances was to fill time whenstudents perceived their task to be complete. Perhaps unsurprisingly, off-task participation occurred often whenstudents acted as if they had nothing else to do. However, when students did perceive work to be done, themajority of off-task instances, 58.93%, served a productive function. Only 12.50% of the time did off-taskinteraction serve to avoid work, one of the primary concerns of teachers. Below we offer a brief illustration ofeach of the productive functions of off-task interactions, in order of their prevalence in the data set, anddemonstrate the ways in which students used off-task interaction as a positional resource to shift the dynamicsof the collaboration.Warming up to the collaboration16.07% of off-task interactions served to essentially launch the collaboration. Similar to filling time, whichoccurred when students believed they were done with the task, these interactions served to connect the studentswho were gathering together, before establishing the done to be done. While most often, the collaboration wouldbegin with an on-task question, such as "so what are we doing?" or a directive "you get the hangers and I'll getthe base ten blocks", students also initiated connection and interaction through some amount socializing beforethe work began in earnest. For example, in one instance at the beginning of the group work session, as studentsjoin the small group table, they interact with one another around the topic of the video camera near their table.One student waves at the camera, as two others look on. A student jokes, "It's recording us. Hi, my name isVanessa. Just kidding. It is my name, so I'm not kidding." In doing so, their bodies orient toward one anotherand their gazes meet. The students then agree to get some building blocks to begin their task. The off-taskinstance functioned to orient students to one another at the start of the collaborative session, enabling the launchof the work.Gaining the attention of othersThe second-most prevalent productive function of off-task interactions, representing about 12.50% of instances,served to shift the gaze of peers toward a student who was previously not being attended to by others. At timesthis was the first step to gaining access to the collaboration or recruiting new peers into the collaboration, whileat other times, students were already in the collaboration, but were simply struggling to gain the attention oftheir peers. Once attention was gained through off-task interactions, students often shifted back to their on-taskcontribution, which was now more likely to be acknowledged or responded to by peers. The example belowillustrates this dynamic between two girls, Vanessa and Leah, working together as partners:Leah and Vanessa are both creating sticks of ten connecting cubes and representing particular numberswith ten sticks and loose cubes. Leah has represented and counted her number and has unsuccessfully bid forVanessa's attention to verify her work. Vanessa is instead counting her own ten sticks and loose cubes. Leahthen states, drawing on a pop song with the lyrics "black and yellow, black and yellow", "See look...black andzombie, black and zombie" to refer to her alternating black and green cubes on her 10 sticks. Vanessa shifts hergaze to Leah's cubes and smiles, looks over her representation and says, "You add four more" and placed fourcubes down on table.In the above example, neither Leah nor Vanessa were initially marginalized from the collaboration.Both were working individually on the shared task, yet Leah struggled to gain Vanessa's attention to her work.Once she referred to her 10 sticks, not as mathematical objects, but as related to a popular song, Leah was ableto gain Vanessa's attention and show Vanessa her progress.Gaining access to collaboration for self10.71% of off-task interaction functioned for a student to gain access to the collaboration who was previouslyspatially marginalized. These off-task instances typically began after unsuccessful bids to work with others onthe task. The off-task interactions created new opportunities for the students to engage with one another bydisrupting the on-task dynamics and enabling students to either gain traction into and join existingcollaborations. These instances typically occurred after a series of unsuccessful bids to either join or initiateICLS 2018 Proceedings748© ISLScollaborative work, suggesting that interactional pathways into the collaboration through on-task activity wererestricted or more cumbersome. While our analysis makes no claims about student intentionality, the off-taskinteractions successfully functioned to grow the collaboration in ways that previous on-task interactional bidswere not. The following example illustrates these dynamics between 3 students, Felix, Jose, and Mutya:Felix and Mutya are discussing how many ten blocks they were supposed to build, leaving Jose out ofthe collaboration. Felix and Mutya then take all the blocks that are on the table, including blocks that Jose washolding. Jose takes back one 10 stick, made up of red and green blocks, and teases, "You want to fight me?"Felix's gaze shifts to Jose and he responds, "No, you Christmas tree." Jose reaches over and takes more blocks,switching the colors of his 10 stick to black and red (rather than the Christmas colors green and red), and jokesagain, "You want to fight me now?" Felix holds his gaze on Jose and repeats "No, you Christmas tree." Joseresponds, "Because you're scared. I'm stronger than you." Jose then suggests the group make his number first,stating, "Why don't we make mine first because it's like the shortest." The group takes up his suggestions andcollaboratively represents his number with the manipulatives.Just prior to the off-task instance, Jose was marginalized from the collaboration and lost access to thematerials. Jose playfully takes one stick of 10s back and offers to battle his stick against one of Felix's. Throughthis action, Jose successfully gains Felix's attention as well as access to the materials. He extends the interaction,taking up Felix's retort that he would not battle a stick that looked like a Christmas tree, by gaining access tomore materials and positioning himself as powerful (...you're scared. I'm stronger than you."). From thisrelatively more powerful position, Jose bids for collaboration, suggesting they represent his number first as agroup. The students follow his suggestion, growing the collaboration to include Jose.Recruiting others into collaboration10.71% of off-task interaction functioned to recruit others into collaboration. Even during a group task, studentsoften pursue components of the task independently. Recruitment of group-mates into collaboration is centralpart of negotiating a collaborative task. Like gaining access to the collaboration for self, recruiting others intothe collaborations entailed off-task interactions, which subsequently shifted back to on-task, after growing thenumber of participants working together in collaboration.In one example, two pairs of students are working in parallel at the same table, not orienting to themembers of the other partnership. Gabe and Katy form one of the two partnerships. When Gabe bids to recruitLina, one of the members of the other partnership, through on-task talk, into a joint collaboration, his partnerKaty resists. She tells Gabe “No, they’re working together,” and later bids for Gabe’s attention by placing herglasses on top of the table mic and says “it’s a person.” Eventually Katy claims control of the materials andrefuses Lina access. As Lina orients toward Gabe, Gabe beings a conversation about Minecraft. He announcesthat he rode his horse and burned down the village. With this story, Gabe gains the gaze of both Lina and Katyand returns to the task at hand, directing them to “put all your tens in here, put all your tens in here.” As theepisode ends, Gabe, Katy, and Lina are all building ten sticks and oriented toward each other.Through the positional identity as warrior, Gabe is able to recruit a new collaborator into his existingpartnership and resolve the resistance coming from his existing collaboration. Where on-task talk of recruitmentand inclusion of Lina into the group was rejected, the use of the powerful figure of a warrior on a horse burningdown a village, positioned Gabe with the authority to give a directive with regard to the work, finally bringingKaty and Lina into a joint collaboration on the task.Extending the task5.36% of off-task interactions extended the context of the task, often the storyline and in a playful way thatdeparted from the task instructions. Arguably, these interactions might be considered "on task" since they areindeed related to the collaborative work. However, because the interactions took on a sense of fantasy and play,we included them in the analysis. Like Dyson (1987), we found these extensions could at time enhance orelaborate on the intellectual work of the group, even if these interactions did not necessarily progress problemsolutions. For example, in one instance, three students sit at a table with five 10 sticks in the middle. They arerepresenting the number 38 and must choose with of the five 10 sticks to include in their solution. One studentdecides that the "weak" sticks should not be included and begins to hit the sticks with a pen to see which fallapart and which don't. His peer joins him in this and they begin a discussion about the qualities of sticks thatwould make them weak or strong.Resisting authority3.57% of off-task interactions functioned to resist some kind of power move made by a peer. Often, theseinteractions served to resist domination, in particular of a peer issuing directives to another peer. Less often,ICLS 2018 Proceedings749© ISLSthese interactions serve to reject a bid for someone to take on a position of authority. For example, in oneinstance, a student states that her peer, also at the table, is the smartest of their group and should thus lead thework. They then begin a conversation about the problems with the word, "smart", ultimately refusing thepositional identity.DiscussionIn this study, we found that off-task interactions may play an important role in maintaining shared intellectualwork among students, in particular through its role in making available positional resources that can function tosupport the collaboration. Specifically, students utilized these positional resources during off-task participation,which drew on storylines of youth popular culture, friendship/romance, and home life, in ways that initiated,grew, and sustained the collaboration, gained the attention of others, extended the task, and resistedconcentrated authority.These findings have implications for research on collaboration. For one, these findings build on theliterature on collaborative co-regulation. In particular, we found that off-task participation not only helpedrenew motivation to participate (Sabourin, et al, 2011), but also offered alternate pathways into the collaborationand the maintenance of joint attention and sustained work (Barron, 2003). Further, relationships of power matterwhen it comes to managing and sustaining collaboration, and these relations emerge interactionally throughpositioning. Subject positions become available through storylines, and school mathematics as a storyline doesnot necessarily offer sufficient positional resources to navigate shared work. Off-task interactions, which drawfrom other storylines, broaden students' negotiating capacity.These findings additionally have implications for teacher professional development. Teachers wouldbenefit from understanding the functions of off-task interactions on the collaborative process and to develop alens for noticing how students engage in relational struggles in addition to the conceptual and communicativestruggles of collaborative problem solving (Langer-Osuna & Munson, 2017). All of the instances analyzed inthis study likely represent moments when teachers intervene and attempt to stop the off-task talk to get studentback on-task. But to do so would ignore the function that these interactions actually serve in getting studentsinto mathematical work. That is to say, these interactions are work, and sometimes intervention derails the workstudents are doing and learning to do as they engage in collaborative mathematics. Certainly, sometimesintervention is necessary. We ought to support teachers in knowing when to intervene and when to allowstudents to navigate their own way into the mathematics. Our findings suggest that teachers might benefit frompausing to notice off-task interactional dynamics and ask themselves questions such as, "Are students using theoff-task talk to gain access?" before deciding whether or not to intervene.Endnotes(1) One video had faulty audio and was removed from the dataset.(2) For example, a student who initiated off-task talk in a bid to gain attention may have continued to be ignored, resultingin no perceivable function to the collaboration. These failed bids were coded as “flops”.ReferencesBaker, R. S., Corbett, A. T., Koedinger, K. R., & Wagner, A. Z. (2004). Off-task behavior in the cognitive tutorclassroom: when students game the system. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Humanfactors in computing systems (pp. 383-390).Baker, R. S., D'Mello, S. K., Rodrigo, M. M. T., & Graesser, A. C. (2010). Better to be frustrated than bored:The incidence, persistence, and impact of learners’ cognitive–affective states during interactions withthree different computer-based learning environments. International Journal of Human-ComputerStudies, 68(4), 223-241.Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The journal of the learning sciences, 12(3), 307-359.Davies, B., & Harré, R. (1990). Positioning: The discursive production of selves. Journal for the theory ofsocial behaviour, 20(1), 43-63.Dyson, A. H. (1987). The value of “time off task": Young children's spontaneous talk and deliberate text.Harvard Educational Review, 57(4), 396-421.Esmonde, I., & Langer-Osuna, J. M. (2013). Power in numbers: Student participation in mathematicaldiscussions in heterogeneous spaces. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 44(1), 288-315.Fosnot, C. T. (2007). The T-Shirt Factory. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.Hickey, D. T. (2003). Engaged participation versus marginal nonparticipation: A stridently socioculturalapproach to achievement motivation. The Elementary School Journal, 103(4), 401-429.Holland, D. & Lachicotte, W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (2001). Identity and Agency in Cultural Worlds.ICLS 2018 Proceedings750© ISLSLanger-Osuna, J. M. (2015). From getting “fired” to becoming a collaborator: A case of the coconstruction ofidentity and engagement in a project-based mathematics classroom. Journal of the LearningSciences, 24(1), 53-92.Langer-Osuna, J. M., & Munson, J. (2016). Supporting Teachers’ Capacity to Foster Equitable and ProductiveMathematics Classrooms. In Proceedings of the 13th International Congress on MathematicsEducation.McCaslin, M. (2009). Co-regulation of student motivation and emergent identity. Educational Psychologist,44(2), 137-146.Sabourin, J., Rowe, J., Mott, B., & Lester, J. (2011). When off-task is on-task: The affective role of off-taskbehavior in narrative-centered learning environments. In Artificial intelligence in education (pp. 534536). Springer Berlin/Heidelberg.Volet, S., Vauras, M., & Salonen, P. (2009). Self-and social regulation in learning contexts: An integrativeperspective. Educational psychologist, 44(4), 215-226.Webb, N. M. (1982). Student interaction and learning in small groups. Review of Educational research, 52(3),421-445.Webb, N. M. (1991). Task-related verbal interaction and mathematics learning in small groups. Journal forresearch in mathematics education, 22(5), 366-389.Wood, M. B. (2013). Mathematical micro-identities: Moment-to-moment positioning and learning in a fourthgrade classroom. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 44(5), 775–808.http://doi.org/10.5951/jresematheduc.44.5.0775ICLS 2018 Proceedings751© ISLS