Problem Scoping in Designing Biomimetic RobotsFayette Shaw, Tufts University, fay.shaw@tufts.eduKristen Wendell, Tufts University, kristen.wendell@tufts.eduGillian Puttick, TERC, gilly_puttick@terc.eduDebra Bernstein, TERC, debra_bernstein@terc.eduEthan Danahy, Tufts University, ethan.danahy@tufts.eduAbstract: We examine problem scoping in our interdisciplinary curriculum where studentsbuild biomimetic robots. Biomimicry is a context for learning biology, computational thinking,and engineering design. In the solution space, students narrow the scope of their robot designs,informed by animal structure-function relationships. In the challenge space, they narrow thescope of real-world disasters by modeling them in the classroom. This dual problem scopingenables students to be active participants shaping the content of their learning.Keywords: problem scoping, interdisciplinary curriculum design, design-based researchIntroductionRobotics design over the past two decades has drawn heavily from the study of biological systems (Cho & Wood,2016), and biomimetics is beginning to make its way into K-12 classrooms (e.g., Gardner, 2012;glbiomimicry.org; teachengineering.org). Biomimetics provides an ideal context for both fostering andinvestigating interdisciplinary STEM learning, as it invites the study of biological structures, functions, andprocesses to inform engineered solutions to problems. In our work, middle school students build biomimeticrobots from available classroom materials to solve a search and rescue challenge. This poster focuses on an earlystage of a multi-year project and explores the research question: How do middle school students engage withproblem scoping in the development of a biomimetic robotics design challenge?Theoretical and methodological approachParticipatory learning spaces emphasize the intellectual resources of students as knowledge producers (TuckerRaymond et al., 2012), draw on the values, practices, and histories of learners and their communities (Bell et al.,2009), value distributed expertise, and flatten traditional knowledge structures (Jenkins, 2009). Our project’sparticipatory approach allows young people to shape content, collaboratively solve problems, and develop selfefficacy as learners and technology creators (Jenkins, 2009; Tucker-Raymond et al., 2012). The study uses adesign-based research (DBR) approach, driven by our design conjectures about the tools, task structures,participant structures, and discursive practices that support learning in a classroom environment. The DBRframework allows us to contribute to theory about participatory pedagogy as a strategy for improving learningand efficacy in STEM, and contribute design principles for effective interdisciplinary learning environments thatintegrate science, engineering, and computing. Here, we report on our investigation of problem scoping in threemiddle school classrooms that implement the pilot version of our biomimetic robotics curriculum.Problem scopingWe focus on problem scoping because it is an engineering practice aligned with participatory pedagogy. We defineproblem scoping as determining the boundaries of a complex problem space (Watkins et al., 2014). Much of theresearch on problem scoping has been done at the university level (Atman et al., 2008); we build on the work thathas been done with young learners (Watkins et al., 2014). As we have designed the curriculum and exploredscaffolding needed, we have observed that problem scoping both narrows the challenge space of search and rescue(Figure 1, left, green), and the solution space of biomimetic robot design (Figure 1, right, orange). Studentsemploy reflective decision-making (Wendell et al., 2017) as they decide how to represent real-world disasterscenarios and robotic solutions. Throughout the curriculum, students examine structure-function relationshipsfrom an organism to design a human-created system.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1413© ISLSFigure 1. Problem scoping in the challenge space (left, green) and solution space (right, orange).We highlight a hurricane disaster example in italics.We first examine the challenge space to include a wide range of natural disaster scenarios (C1). In these scenarios,the terrain may be impassable by wheeled vehicles, making animal adaptions applicable. Animals are able toburrow under, jump over, cut through, and manipulate obstacles (S1). In this example, we describe a hurricanescenario (C1) where large obstacles are downed trees (C2). Students study animals that can manipulate objects(S1) and move them out of the way (S2). They then examine potential robot tasks and they choose to grasp objects(C3) as inspired by an elephant trunk (S3). The students model their environment and wood dowels can representdowned trees (C4). Mimicking an elephant’s trunk, students design a pliable robot to pick up a dowel (S4) andhold it for 3 seconds (C5). One solution is to construct a cable-driven mechanism actuated by a servo (S5).Biomimicry provides a rich context for students to develop a wide variety of solutions to problems they identify,define. Students do repeated reflective decision-making as they narrow scope to build a representation of adisaster scenario and a robot that can negotiate it. The students are empowered as active learners as they definetheir own criteria for success.ReferencesAtman, C. J., Yasuhara, K., Adams, R. S., Barker, T. J., Turns, J., & Rhone, E. (2008). Breadth in problem scoping:A comparison of freshman and senior engineering students. International Journal of EngineeringEducation, 24(2), 234.Cho, K. J., & Wood, R. (2016). Biomimetic Robots. In: Siciliano B., Khatib O. (eds) Springer Handbook ofRobotics. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-32552-1_23Bell, P., Lewenstein, B., Shouse, A., & Feder, M. (2009). Learning Science in Informal Environments: People,Places, and Pursuits. National Academies Press.Gardner, G.E. (2012). Using Biomimicry to Engage Students in a Design-Based Learning Activity. AmericanBiology Teacher, 74, 182-184.Jenkins, H., Purushotma, R., Weigel, M., Clinton, K., & Robison, A. J. (2009). Confronting the challenges ofparticipatory culture: Media education for the 21st century. MIT Press.Tucker-Raymond, E., Torres-Petrovich, D., Dumbleton, K., & Damlich, E. (2012). Reconceptualizing together:Exploring participatory and productive media literacies in a collaborative teacher research group. In D.Alvermann & K. Hinchman (Eds.). Reconceptualizing literacies in adolescents’ lives. New York:Routledge. pp., 224-243.Watkins, J., Spencer, K., & Hammer, D. (2014). Examining young students’ problem scoping in engineeringdesign. Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education Research, 4(1), Article 5.https://doi.org/10.7771/2157-9288.1082Wendell, K. B., Wright, C. G., & Paugh, P. (2017). Reflective Decision‐Making in Elementary Students'Engineering Design. Journal of Engineering Education, 106(3), 356-397.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant 1742127.Any opinions or findings expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect the views of the NSF.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1414© ISLS