Exploring Design Trade-offs in Incorporating Making Activities IntoHigh School Science CurriculumsGrace Ann Flanagan-Hall, Northwestern University, graceahall2@gmail.comJue Wu, Northwestern University, JueWu2015@u.northwestern.eduKinnari Atit, University of California Riverside, kinnari@ucr.eduKay E. Ramey, Northwestern University, kayramey@u.northwestern.eduMark Vondracek, Evanston Township High School, vondracekm@eths.k12.il.usKemi Jona, Northeastern University, k.jona@northeastern.eduDavid Uttal, Northwestern University, duttal@northwestern.eduAbstract: This study seeks to explore design tensions in introducing making activities into highschool physics classrooms by examining making in semi-informal settings. Throughparticipation in an after-school program and/or summer internship, high school students usedArduino-compatible hardware and software to develop their own scientific instruments for usein classroom physics laboratories. Here we present findings on students’ roles as co-designersand how that influenced their learning and engagement. Furthermore, we discuss issues ofaccessibility in designing activities in terms of physical and computational affordances.Regardless of prior experience, students were more engaged using pre-assembled robots withdefined projects compared with materials and methods traditionally utilized in makerspaces.Additionally, the graphical programming language associated with these robots was moreaccessible than script-based languages generally used to program Arduinos. This suggests, thatto provide equitable access to -- and engagement with -- electronic making, more material andcomputational scaffolding are required than what is generally provided in conventionalmakerspaces for implementation in high school classes.IntroductionEfforts to improve U.S. students’ educational outcomes have often focused on improving their engagement,performance, and retention in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. One wayof improving students’ STEM outcomes is through ‘making’ (e.g., Blikstein, 2013). In making, individuals design,build, modify, and/or repurpose objects using electronics, hardware, and tools. Advocates of making suggest thatit is a powerful way to promote learning as students seek out STEM knowledge (e.g., Barton, Tan, & Greenberg,2016). Making engages students in science and engineering practices (Koh & Abbas, 2015) and supportsdevelopment of 21st century skills, such as problem-solving and critical thinking, which are essential for successin STEM fields (Martin, 2015). Making has also been suggested as an avenue to breaking down barriers of learningand attainment in STEM. “Anyone can make…anyone can change the world” (Hatch, 2014, p.14).Although makerspaces are now common in a variety of informal and out-of-school contexts, there islittle evidence that the maker movement has been successful in involving a diverse audience. These activitiescontinue to be dominated by white men who have resources to invest in technology and materials (e.g. TASCHA,2012). Likewise, many out-of-school makerspaces present barriers to entry (Lewis, 2015), such as a lack ofcomputing experience (e.g., AAUW, 2000), the vague purpose of these venues, and the absence of a clear goal(Lewis, 2015). One way to mitigate these barriers is to move making activities into the regular school day, wherethey can be made accessible to all students. Yet, moving making from informal into formal high school settingspresents significant challenges of its own, such as the pressure to align activities with curricular standards, toassess learning outcomes, and to work within time constraints imposed in schools.In this study, we examine the feasibility and challenges associated with introducing making activitiesinto high school physics classes through extracurricular activities. Using methodological principles of designbased research (DBR; Design-based Research Collective, 2003), we explore ways to bridge the divide betweenthe playful exploration of informal making activities and the structure of traditional schooling, all while providingstudents with exposure to tools and skills relevant for success in STEM careers. We asked high school studentsand a physics teacher to act as co-designers and design a set of making activities to be adopted within a typicalhigh school physics curriculum. Specifically, students were given an open-ended charge to explore ways to useArduino-based hardware and software to design and program scientific instruments that could be used by otherstudents to collect data and test scientific concepts during physics laboratory experiments (after Resnick, Berg, &Eisenberg, 2000). Our goal is to explore the design tensions in introducing making activities into high schoolICLS 2018 Proceedings961© ISLSphysics classrooms and understand the implications for student engagement and learning, ultimately providinginsights for others who seek to bridge the informal-formal divide.MethodsPhase one: After-school “Arduino Club”Seven eleventh and twelfth-grade boys participated in the “Arduino Club” after-school program. The programmet for one hour, once a week, for one school year. Students were recruited for the club by our partner teacherfrom his advanced level physics class. The group consisted of one Hispanic student, one Asian student, and fiveCaucasian students. All had prior computer programming experience, but only one student was familiar withArduino programming language.The aim of the program was to design scientific instruments using an Arduino micro-controller andvarious sensors. To examine what kinds of hardware and software were best suited for this purpose, studentsattempted to design instruments using different equipment in two separate iterations. The first iteration includedthe following equipment: Arduino Starter Kit, Elego UNO Project Super Starter Kit, and Kuman Project CompleteStarter Kit. These kits contained a few pre-planned activities users could actualize using the Arduino. Pre-written,editable script in the Arduino programming language was also provided. The second iteration equipment was fromMakeblock. Makeblock produces Arduino-based, programmable, robotic equipment for kindergarten through highschool students (see Figure 1). Kits provide instructions on how to build specified robots that collect data andcarry out tasks using different sensors (e.g., a motion sensor, an accelerometer). Robots and sensors areprogrammed using mBlock software, a graphical programming medium modeled off Scratch 2.0 (MIT) (see Figure1).Figure 1. Students in the after-school club work first with Arduino kits (left) then later with Makeblock kits(right).To examine the process and challenges associated with designing the instruments, data was collectedusing both “visor cameras” (see Figure 1) and a stationary video camera. The visor cameras (small camerasattached to the brim of a tennis visor) captured point-of-view audio and video from each student. The stationarycamera captured interactions across the entire group. Additionally, researchers took ethnographic field notesfocusing on students’ use of the technology, problems encountered, and supports or scaffolds utilized to addressthose problems. Furthermore, background questionnaires and researcher interviews were completed to understandstudents’ prior technological experience and their interest and engagement with regards to the assigned materialsand tasks.Phase two: Summer internshipDuring the subsequent summer, six high school students participated in a forty-hour internship. Students wererecruited for the internship using an application process developed by our partner teacher. Participants wereselected to try and replicate the demographics and skill level of a regular high school class. Student interest, priortechnological experience, and their availability to attend the internship were also considered during the selectionICLS 2018 Proceedings962© ISLSprocess. As a result, participants included two girls and four boys. Of those, two students were Black and fourwere White. The girls had no prior programming experience, while all four boys reported some experience.Students were divided into two tri-stratified groups based on prior programming experience. Each groupwas composed of one student with no prior experience (i.e., novice), one student with some programmingexperience (i.e., intermediate), and one student familiar with Arduino programming language (i.e., advanced).Working with the partner teacher, students were asked to create physics labs (and write associated lesson plans)that utilized Makeblock robots and add-on sensors (e.g., light and gas sensors). Researchers used identical methodsas in Phase One to collect data.FindingsUsing the iterative principles of DBR, we examined whether the open-ended Arduino equipment or the Makeblockrobotic equipment would provide the most amenable hardware and software for designing scientific instrumentsto be used in high school science classes. Our observations through the after-school club revealed that open-endedand unstructured equipment traditionally incorporated in making activities were too difficult for students to learnto use within time constraints of one-hour blocks. In line with traditional makerspaces, students were provided noguidance on how to use the equipment to design their scientific instruments. The lack of structure in the activitiesresulted in students not knowing how to proceed with the tasks using hardware and software at hand. For example,one student said, “I don’t have much I can do until I go home and can read about the sensor [in the manual],”indicating the student needed more time to understand the materials than what was provided. Furthermore,students struggled to use the script Arduino programing language, saying things like, “I’m learning C++...AlrightI don’t know what's going on.”Due to a lack of structure in activities and challenges associated with using script coding, we observedthat student interest in working with open-ended equipment waned. Throughout the year, five out of six studentsceased to attend “Arduino Club” until Makeblock robots were introduced. Once this new equipment was utilized,the same students, who had expressed frustration while using the previous equipment stated, “Now we actuallyget to do stuff.” This reaction suggests students felt they faced a functional block when working with fully openended equipment.After observing challenges associated with the open-ended Arduino equipment, we focused on findingequipment that was more accessible and engaging to students. Thus, we tried Makeblock robotic equipmentbecause of the scaffolding their graphical programming interface provides and the novelty and excitementgenerated from working with and building robots (e.g., Khanlari, 2013). Also, because these kits had more explicitinstructions on how to use hardware to carry out specific tasks, we suspected that this would help students focuson how to use sensors and robots to design experiments relevant to high school physics, rather than spending theirtime understanding the utility of the equipment. When Makeblock robotic kits were introduced to “Arduino Club”,students expressed greater enthusiasm for working with these kits than for the open-ended equipment. One of ouradvanced level participants was even inspired by Makeblock equipment to create a novel instrument usingadditional materials from Phase 1.The mBot graphical programming language used to program Makeblock robots made designing withArduinos accessible to students with all levels of programming experience. This accessibility was demonstratedthrough the summer internship, as one of our novice students stated, “I think being a beginner [block-basedcoding] was better, because you could see the flow of things, and everything had a color, and you could input it.”Students with little to no exposure to computation were able to create code that programmed robots to collectspecific data using sensors. For example, one physics lab the summer internship students created, called “Jakob’sMega Murder Mystery,” used the concept of evaporation, a Makeblock robot, and a gas sensor to determine howan imaginary individual “Jakob” died. A novice student who had an avid interest in forensics connected thatinterest with the sensors and code to formulate this creative and engaging lab.Additionally, we documented that robots were exciting for both genders, regardless of prior knowledge.One of the girls in the summer internship stated, “I think just being able to feel confident um or having seensomething outside of what [I’m] normally doing helped me think about it in a different way. So I think havingrobots would have been incredibly beneficial…I think [it] would have shown me a world where you can applythis.” Our partner teacher also noted that robots could be more engaging for students than the traditional labs.“Robots are cool and throughout the school year we had that after school thing…the whole robot notion, it justgrabbed their attention…not everyone [will be interested] but I think it’s more interesting to try than just using astopwatch and a meter stick.” This indicated that even advanced students, with a great deal of prior knowledgewere engaged.ICLS 2018 Proceedings963© ISLSMoreover, allowing students to formulate their own lesson plans, as co-designers, led to an increasedsense of agency and ownership of their own and their peers’ learning. Allowing students to be experts on creatinglessons that they could learn from led to them to think about the conceptual hurdles in learning new physicsconcepts and the technological tools used to investigate those concepts. For example, one student reflected onhow important it was to her to ensure the activities she was designing were accessible to students with littleprogramming knowledge, “If you're good at coding it's like riding a bike and once you learn how to ride a bike… you don't forget how to ride a bike, so you forget what it's like learning how to ride a bike. Or the trivial thingsto you are not trivial to someone else…They [coding learners] literally need the step by step to see it happen...”Finally, mixed-experience groupings and collaborative work were important scaffolds for students whenit came to programming the technology. When asked how students worked together within their groups, onestudent, who had no prior computer programming experience stated, “I think we worked really well together. Itwas nice having like, uh someone who knows a lot about [computer programming] and someone who’s in themiddle. Um so it was helpful letting us learn from them and it was nice having a group with different levels andwe all came together with our own ideas and stuff.” Our second novice student added that, “They [my other groupmembers] explained it really well to me, which is hard to do.” This indicated that intentionally grouping studentswith a range of prior knowledge provided all participants with the benefits of relative expertise documented byPenney, et al (2016). Our partner teacher noted the relative expertise served as an effective group scaffold, “[anovice student was] curious and able to bombard them [her group members] with the questions that she had andthat’s how she got what she needed…for someone who is new to this, to be able to talk it through, is very vital.”In summation, using robotic kits, the associated sensors, and the mBlock programming language, students in thesummer internship successfully created seven lesson plans covering topics including momentum, friction,acceleration, velocity, ultrasound, and electromagnetic radiation. The defined projects and kit constraints providedstudents with the structure necessary to deduce how to use the hardware and software available to create lessonplans, while implementing basic coding that would be accessible to all students in a high school physics classroom.Conclusions and implicationsOverall, our findings indicate a path forward for moving making activities into the regular school day, as part ofrequired science classes, and demonstrate many potential advantages in doing so. Through a design-based researchprocess, engaging students and our partner teacher as co-designers, we discovered activities and equipment thatare not only interesting and engaging to students, but also fit within constraints of a high school curriculum. Theseactivities simultaneously exposed students to sets of tools and activities (designing instruments to investigatescientific queries) that are more authentic to practices of professional scientists than labs typically done in scienceclasses (Chinn & Malhotra, 2002).The findings also challenge some assumptions of the maker movement and suggest important directionsfor future work. For example, despite arguments for a democratizing impact of making, our inability to recruitgirls for the after-school club and the small number of girl applicants for the summer internship adds to thegrowing body of evidence suggesting that informal making contexts may not be perceived to be appealing and/orwelcoming places for women. Furthermore, in contrast to open-ended, unstructured, activities advocated by manymaking enthusiasts, we found that some amount of structure and scaffolding is optimal, particularly for studentswho have less experience with relevant skills and materials. These findings suggest that it is not only possible tomove making activities into high school science classrooms without destroying their benefits for learning andengagement, but that doing so (and doing so in ways that layer structure and scaffolding into the experience) mayhave democratizing effects that making experiences offered solely in informal spaces do not. Our research alsodemonstrates benefits of engaging students and teachers as co-designers in the DBR process to design activitiesthat balance student interest and engagement with constraints inherent in moving making into schools.Selected ReferencesBlikstein, P. (2013). Digital fabrication and ‘making’ in education: The democratization of invention. FabLabs:Of Machines, Makers and Inventors, 1-21.Hatch, M. (2014). The maker movement manifesto. New York: McGraw-Hill.Lewis, J. (2015). Barriers to women’s involvement in hackspaces and makerspaces. Retrieved from: http://accessspace.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/Barriers-to-womens-involvement-in-hackspaces-andmakerspaces. pdf.ICLS 2018 Proceedings964© ISLS