Technology to Support Students’ Learning Mathematics FromOther Students WorkJeffrey B. Bush, University of Colorado, Boulder, jeffrey.bush@colorado.eduBrent Milne, Woot Math Inc., brent.milne@wootmath.comAbstract: This poster reports on a study of a digital formative assessment tool designed toprovide rich, formative information to both students and teachers during (and after) classroominstruction. Nine Algebra I teachers participated in a professional development series wherethey learned to use the tool in their classrooms. Results from student and teacher surveyssuggest that the tool was effective for short-cycle formative assessments as well as facilitatingmathematical classroom discourse. It also helped teachers display student work to build offtheir thinking and promote a growth mindset. This study has implications for the designtechnology and professional development that promote formative assessment, classroomdiscourse, and growth mindset thinking beyond a math classroom.IntroductionIn the K-12 mathematics progression, algebra presents a unique set of challenges to both students and teachers.It demands that students evolve their thinking from the strictly procedural patterns sufficient to masterarithmetic to abstract reasoning needed for algebraic thinking (Vogel, 2008). Algebra interventions focusing onthe development of conceptual understanding produce an average effect size almost double that of interventionsfocusing on procedural understanding (Rakes, Valentine, McGatha, & Ronau, 2010). One suggested approach isthat students should be afforded the opportunity to develop conceptual knowledge by modeling their thinkingusing graphs, tables, and manipulatives (Brenner et al., 1997). Teaching representational fluency is morechallenging than teaching elementary procedures because it requires that students apply multiple procedures andconnect them to abstract concepts. The platform investigated in this study, “Woot Math Polls,” enables teachersto construct rich interactive tasks from an array of digital manipulatives (graphs, tables, algebraic expressions,etc.). It is designed to lower the barriers for teachers to build conceptual understanding using a wide variety ofrepresentations and to facilitate richer and more productive interactions between students and teachers.Leahy and Wiliam (2012) report that the use of ‘short-cycle’ formative assessments can positivelyimpact student achievement. In general, despite widespread awareness among practitioners of the benefits offormative assessment, there are significant challenges that limit the extent and quality of implementations. Yinet al. (2015) report some evidence that middle school math teachers may find PD on formative assessment moredesirable when it is combined with training on a tool that supports the formative assessment activity. In a metaanalysis, Kingston and Nash (2011) report that “Two types of implementation of formative assessment, onebased on professional development and the other on the use of computer-based formative systems, appeared tobe more effective than other approaches.” (p. 28). Woot Math Polls simultaneously turns student devices intoclickers and digital notebooks. Students select or enter a response and show their work on a digital scratchpad.Then teachers can project student work for discussion or review it privately after the poll is finished. The toolwas designed to support teachers’ formative assessment practices and also to promote productive discussionsabout mathematics in the classroom. This study seeks to understand the affordances and limitations of WootMath Polls, through the context of professional development seminars with nine algebra teachers.Study designNine mathematics teachers who were teaching one or more Algebra I classes (in 8th or 9th grade) in the fall of2017 were recruited and enrolled in the study. Teachers participated in four 1-2 hour PD sessions withexpectations for use of 5 formative assessment tools (presented at each PD) with their students during the 3weeks between sessions. The first PD was on offline formative assessments. Before the second session but afterexposure to these assessments, students took a pre survey which includes prompts on self-assessment ofalgebraic reasoning and attitudes towards their mathematics class. During the second and third PD sessions,teachers were trained in the use of Woot Math Polls and its application to formative assessment. At theconclusion of the study, students and teachers took a post survey, teachers participated in a one-hour PD.FindingsFindings from the teacher survey suggest that the teachers found the prototype for Woot Math Polls to beparticularly effective for formative assessment and facilitating classroom discussions about mathematics.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1705© ISLSTeachers answered the question “To what extent were you able to use Woot Math Polls effectively for formativeassessment purposes in you classroom?” with an average response of 4.1 where 5 is “very effectively” and 1 is“not at all effectively”. They also responded to the question, “To what extent were you able to use it effectivelyfor the purpose of having classroom discussions about mathematics?” with an average of 4.0 on the same scale.In the qualitative responses, it was also clear that teachers found the tool helpful for formativeassessment. Coding was used to identify the next most common affordances of the tool. Figure 1 in the postershows a histogram of code frequency to the 6 qualitative item responses that were coded for each of the 9teachers. The table shows that teachers most frequently identified being able to promote a growth mindset andchanges in student attitudes as an affordance of Woot Math Polls. They also identified using student work andpromoting mathematics discourse as frequent benefits of the tool.Although subtler in their connections to the research questions, student responses still provide helpfulinsights. Analysis of the 252 student responses to the post survey question “Please describe your thoughts aboutWoot Math Polls. Was it helpful? If so, why? If not, why not”, the code of productive discussions only came uptwice (1% of all codes) and, although formative assessment was never mentioned, “provides helpful feedback”and “helpful to see student work” were coded 3 and 10 times respectively for a total of 5%. Even though it israre that students mention the value of the tool for formative assessment and promoting discourse, the fact thatsome of them notice this at all is strongly suggestive that it was happening in the classroom and was a changebrought about by Woot Math Polls.Codes also emerged relating to the perceived benefit of seeing student work (4%), promoting growthmindset (3%), and providing helpful feedback (1%) were observed. Although low in frequency, this does showthat some students identified benefits of Woot Math Polls that were similar to those the teachers identified.From the student responses on all Likert-type items on the survey, we also calculated the correlationmatrix after correcting for base response style (Javaras and Ripley 2007). We then identified the survey itemsthat most strongly correlated with students attributing greater learning gains to Woot Math Polls. We found thatstudents were more likely to report higher scores for: how much other digital resources helped their learning,how much seeing how peers answered a question helped their learning and how much participating in classdiscussions helped their learning. The first of these correlations could indicate that some students rank digitaltools in general with similar levels of helpfulness. The next two most highly correlated items highlight aconnection between Woot Math Polls and mathematical discourse in the classroom and learning from visibilityinto the work of peers. The latter was, in turn, most strongly correlated with reported gains in “willingness toseek help from others (teacher, peers) when working on math problems.”ConclusionThe findings from this pilot study with Woot Math Polls indicate that approaches that link appropriatetechnology, manipulatives, and teaching strategies to existing curricula and practices could have promise forimproving student outcomes in algebra. Responses from both teachers and students provide evidence that thereare opportunities for technology to effectively support and encourage formative assessment and mathematicaldiscourse in the classroom. A follow up randomized controlled trial study is planned in which differences inteaching practices, student attitudes, and student learning are measured as primary and secondary outcomes.ReferencesBrenner, M. E., Mayer, R. E., Moseley, B., Brar, T., Reed, B. S., & Webb, D. (1997). Learning byUnderstanding : The Role of Multiple Representations in Learning Algebra. American EducationalResearch Association, 34(4), 663–689.Kingston, N., & Nash, B. (2011). Formative Assessment: A Meta-Analysis and a Call for Research. EducationalMeasurement: Issues and Practice, 30(4), 28–37. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-3992.2011.00220.xLeahy, S., & Wiliam, D. (2012). From Teachers to Schools: Scaling up Professional Development for FormativeAssessment. In Assessment and Learning (pp. 49–71). 1 Oliver’s Yard, 55 City Road, London EC1Y 1SPUnited Kingdom: SAGE Publications Ltd.Rakes, C. R., Valentine, J. C., McGatha, M. B., & Ronau, R. N. (2010). Methods of Instructional Improvementin Algebra: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Review of Educational Research, 80(3), 372–400.Vogel, C. (2008). Algebra: Changing the Equation | District Administration Magazine. November 21, 2017Yin, Y., Olson, J., Olson, M., Solvin, H., & Brandon, P. R. (2015). Comparing Two Versions of ProfessionalDevelopment for Teachers Using Formative Assessment in Networked Mathematics Classrooms. Journalof Research on Technology in Education, 47(1), 41–70.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1706© ISLS