Realizing Research-Practice Connections:Three Cases From the Learning SciencesSusan McKenney, University of Twente, susan.mckenney@ou.nlJan van Aalst, University of Hong Kong, vanaalst@hku.hkCory Forbes, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, cory.forbes@unl.eduAbstract: Empirical insights from the learning sciences must be translatable to contexts ofapplication to maximize impact. Despite the importance of dissemination, however, littleguidance is available to help researchers proactively bridge the research-practice divide. Toaddress this need, we draw from theoretical perspectives on the utility of empirical research tocharacterize, illustrate, and discuss three cases involving the communication and translation ofresearch. By offering framework for analysis and initial findings based on three projects in thelearning sciences, this paper helps learning scientists conceptualize a range of research-practiceconnection types and envision how they can take shape in learning sciences projects.Keywords: research valorization, impact, DBR, RDD, teacher communityIntroductionA robust body of knowledge now exists to describe how policymakers and educators access, value and useresearch (Broekkamp & van Hout-Wolters, 2007; de Vries & Pieters, 2007; Vanderlinde & van Braak, 2010);various modes through which knowledge is generated and shared (Bauer & Fischer, 2007; Lavis, et al., 2003);and what aspects of evidence-based practice and research utilization in other fields can be applied to education(Thomas & Pring, 2004). However, both the scholarly insights and effective practices have yet to become widelyspread. Even though researchers are becoming increasingly required to disseminate research findings amongpractitioners, few models are available in the learning sciences and many researchers find it daunting. The presentpaper addresses this need by (a) outlining modalities of fruitful research-practice connections; and (b) analyzinghow these modalities are reified in three existing projects in the learning sciences.Theoretical underpinningsFactors affecting the uptake and use of scientific outputsEducational research has long been criticized for its weak link with practice. Explicit attempts to close theresearch-practice gap have been underway for over four decades. Informed by the work of Rogers (1969), andreview of over 2600 research studies, Havelock (1971) published a landmark report on the dissemination and useof scientific outputs. Havelock identified seven general factors that could account for how scientific outputs aretaken up and used: linkage, structure, openness, capacity, reward, proximity and synergy. Linkage refers to thenumber, variety and mutuality of research-practice collaborative relationships. Structure pertains to the degree ofsystematic organization around four factors: the resource system, the user system, the dissemination-utilizationstrategy, and the (coherence of the) message. Openness is the belief that change is desirable and possible; this isaccompanied by a social climate that is willing and ready for change. Highly correlated with power, size andexperience, capacity is the capability for retrieving and marshaling resources. Reward has to do with thefrequency, immediacy, amount, mutuality, planning and structuring of positive reinforcements. Nearness in time,place and context constitute proximity, which hinges on familiarity, similarity and recency. Finally, Havelockrefers to synergy as the number, variety frequency and persistence of forces that can be mobilized to produce aknowledge-utilization effect. In the learning sciences, these issues remain highly pertinent today.Modes of research-practice interactionBased on this synthesis, Havelock identified several modes in which those factors can be seen: social interaction;research, development and diffusion (RDD); and problem solving. More recently, attention has also been givennot only to the use of scientific knowledge for educational practice (e.g. Hargreaves, 1999; Levin, 2004), but alsoto how it is produced (Vanderlinde & van Braak, 2010). Specifically, there is growing attention for howresearchers and practitioners can collaboratively bear the responsibility for both producing and using relevantknowledge in education. Burkhardt and Schoenfeld (2003) identify seven models to describe the relationshipbetween research and practice, five of which feature strong divisions of labor, relate more to evidence-basedICLS 2016 Proceedings639© ISLSpractice and align well with the RDD model described by Havelock (the reading model; the summary model; theprofessional development model; the policy model; the ‘long route’) and two of which show more characteristicsof Havelock’s problem solving model (design experiments; and the engineering model). De Vries and Pieters(2007) add an eighth model which shares elements of Havelock’s social interaction model and highlights equalcollaboration: knowledge communities. Each of these models denotes different assumptions and expectationsregarding the roles of practitioners and researchers in the generation and application of theoretical understanding.Taken together, three broad types of research-practice interactions during knowledge production can bedistinguished in education today: RDD, design-based (implementation) research DB(I)R and teacher communities(Ormel, Pareja Roblin, McKenney, Voogt, & Pieters, 2012; Pareja Roblin, Ormel, McKenney, Voogt, & Pieters,2014; Voogt, McKenney, Pareja Roblin, Ormel, & Pieters, 2012). The most dominant model in scientific research,RDD is based on the notion that researchers deliver knowledge, intermediaries translate this knowledge into usableproducts for practice, and that professionals use knowledge in the form of the products. Here, DB(I)R to refers toa family of research approaches including design-based research (DBRC, 2003) and design-based implementationresearch (Penuel, Fishman, Cheng, & Sabelli, 2011), that share the dual aims of (1) deriving new knowledgethrough (2) collaboration between researchers and practitioners, to iteratively design and implement durablesolutions to real-world problems. In teacher communities, researchers and educators work together to understandand improve teachers’ existing practice, mostly through iterative cycles of observation and reflection.Toward publically-accessible learning sciences insightsInternationally, enormous efforts have been launched to improve the practical relevance and actual use of researchknowledge, especially in the fields of education and health care. As demonstrated above, common types ofresearch-practice interactions have been identified, as well as factors that support success. Additionally, crucialaspects of evidence-based practice and research utilization from other fields can be applied to the learningsciences. However, both the scholarly insights and effective practices have yet to become widely spread in thelearning sciences. Even though researchers are becoming increasingly stimulated to disseminate research findingsamong practitioners, few research programs devote serious attention to preparing their faculty for the task, andmany researchers find it daunting. Further, sustainable modalities for such work are lacking, especially due to thefact that dominant promotion and tenure systems reward other output (e.g. scientific publications). For many, theresult is that outreach work takes place primarily during personal time and is therefore limited. Guidance is neededto support learning scientists in the daunting but rewarding task of shaping research-practice interactions such thatnew scientific insights become accessible and usable in practice. The remainder of this paper describes, analyzes,and reflects upon three cases of research-practice interactions intended to facilitate outreach in the learningsciences.MethodsFocus and approachUltimately, this study was undertaken to facilitate learning scientists in perceiving and shaping fruitful researchpractice interactions. To reach that goal, we sought an answer to the overarching research question, “How are thethree modalities (RDD, design-based research, and teacher communities) and factors (linkage, structure,openness, capacity, reward, proximity and synergy) reified in existing learning sciences projects?” The nature ofthis largely descriptive and exploratory question necessitated the articulation of a set of case studies (Yin, 2014)to help identify observed patterns in factors associated with particular modalities. As this was an initial,exploratory analysis, we choose to focus on projects we already know very well and for which information wasreadily available (convenience sampling). Within those, we sought one project of each type, i.e. RDD, designbased research, and teacher communities. A final selection criterion was that projects would be sufficiently maturethat their core orientation toward research-practice interaction had stabilized (even if their specific activitiescontinued to evolve). Each project selected represents a unique case conducted in three unique contexts withdiverse, multifaceted designs, partners, and target populations. The modalities and factors associated with eachcase represent embedded units of analyses for development of an embedded, multiple-case study.Data collection and analysisThe data collection and analysis was based on first-hand knowledge of the projects as derived from documentanalysis, archival records, and attending project meetings and engaging firsthand in project work as participantobservers. While the present study was conducted in a post-hoc fashion (after project design and data collection),its reliability and validity are enhanced by access to similar data sources in each project. These variant datasources, as well as the role of each author in providing project leadership, enables a significant degree of dataICLS 2016 Proceedings640© ISLStriangulation for embedded analyses within each case. The data analysis was guided by the theoretical frameworkabove, and three sub-questions in particular. Specifically, we sought to understand:•What are the goals of research-practice interactions in this project, and how explicitly were outreachgoals part of the project agenda?•What features are salient to understanding this project as an example of its type (RDD, design-basedresearch or teacher communities)?How does this project realize the factors that are crucial for uptake and use of new knowledge (linkage,structure, openness, capacity, reward, proximity and synergy)?Each factor (linkage, structure, openness, capacity, reward, proximity and synergy) was examined for eachproject. The presence of each factor was ranked as being high, moderate, low or variable.•ResultsRDD: Science Literacy InitiativeHow can we successfully feed 2.4 billion more people by 2050? How can we utilize the Earth’s natural resourcesin a sustainable manner to do so? These are critical questions that face the global community in the 21st Centuryand lie at the heart of notions of science literacy. Ultimately, scientists, policymakers, and members of the publicmust work together to find solutions to these significant challenges and pave the way to a sustainable future. Thisinvolves as an enhanced capacity, both at the individual and collective levels, to make effective decisionsgrounded in STEM-informed analyses of complex, real-world challenges associated with agricultural,environmental, natural resource, and technology issues. We confront these challenges and address this needthrough the Science Literacy Initiative (SLI) at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, which uses food, energy, andwater systems as a platform for a comprehensive suite of programs designed to foster science literacy among PK16 students, the public, and stakeholders.A critical dimension of the SLI involves the development of education and communication strategiesthat effectively reach a diverse array of audiences. This research-practice interaction involves translation ofrigorous empirical research on both a) food, energy, and water systems (science) and b) human learning andbehavior (social science) into program models and products that effectively foster intended outcomes with targetpopulations. This includes theoretical perspectives and research from basic and applied scientific disciplines,cognitive psychology, the decision sciences, organizational theory, and STEM education. Rather than servemerely as a translational intermediary, however, the SLI spans the research, development, and disseminationdomains of the RDD process through transdisciplinary partnerships involving individuals with a range of expertisein relation to specific programs and audiences. While accounting for stakeholder needs, goals, and objectives itan important part of this process, it is nonetheless largely one-directional in design. This linearity presentssignificant challenges for all research organizations involved in dissemination (e.g., Lavis et al., 2003).To address this challenge, we theorize and operationalize RDD as a form of ‘decision support’ forengagement with STEM-based dimensions of everyday life as consumer, citizens, and employees. This is adifficult process, however, as individuals are prone to snap judgments that are quick, irrational, and subject toerror. Research and theory from the decision sciences provides a multitude of perspectives on how humans arriveat decisions for complex systems and their associated challenges. These perspectives differ across a number ofdimensions that define decision-making along a continuum, such as a) the temporal scales within which decisionsare made and b) the number of factors for which decision-makers must account. Some perspectives emphasizeintuitive, experience- and instinct-driven decision-making in real-time in high-stress situations (naturalisticdecision-making). Others foreground weighing multiple options based upon a complex set of interacting andoverlapping criteria. This second perspective, often referred to as multi-criteria decision-making (MCDM),accounts for how decisions about complex issues are made over longer periods of time. We argue that makinghigh-quality, STEM-informed, actionable decisions about complex issues associated with diet, food production,natural resources, transportation, and other contemporary challenges involves being deliberate, rational, andattuned to uncertainties, a process more aptly characterized by MCDM.To optimize the process and outcomes of the SLI, we emphasize procedural factors identified byHavelock (1971). Linkage is a defining element of the initiative itself, being designed to leverage significant anddiverse expertise to engage in RDD through multiple programmatic channels to reach a broad set of constituents.Contributors to SLI include faculty from STEM disciplines, social, behavioral, and learning scientists, K-16educators, and external stakeholders from government and industry. To facilitate initiative structure, we havebenchmarked all programs (including the resource and user systems) in a shared conceptual framework and set ofheuristics for science literacy defined by enhanced proficiency to engage in STEM-informed decision-making.ICLS 2016 Proceedings641© ISLSThese heuristics are grounded in theoretical perspectives on multi-criteria decision-making drawn from thedecision sciences that foreground framing and problematizing issues, defining their boundaries, identifying andinterrogating viable options and strategies for action, and justification of decisions. By grounding programmingin contemporary socio-environmental issues, such as water resource use, environmental degradation, foodproduction, and energy, initiative programming also foregrounds proximity and close relevance to the lives ofindividuals served. However, these factors also help illuminate challenges associated with SLI. For example, weremain highly attuned to capacity. Personnel resources are crucial not only to knowledge-based contributions toSLI, but also to translational development and engagement. However, the SLI often brings to the foreorganizational tensions associated with the allocation of personnel commitments across multiple and competingefforts. Openness and reward, being largely qualities of the target audience, remain important considerations forprogram design and for embedded research to understand how initiative efforts and enhanced science literacyinfluence social, cultural, economic, and civic dynamics. SLI programming must provide a ‘value proposition’with intrinsic benefits to its target audiences who, themselves, must be willing to envision change. Each of thesefactors influence the overall synergy contributing to the knowledge-utilization effect underlying the initiative andits emphasis on STEM-informed analyses of complex, real-world challenges associated with agricultural,environmental, natural resource, and technology issues.DB(I)R: PictoPalPictoPal is the name of a technology-rich learning environment for early literacy. The primary goal of the learningenvironment is to teach kindergarteners about the nature of written language. Supporting this goal, theenvironment also helps children recognize the relationship between spoken and written language; and variousfunctions of print. PictoPal consists of connected on-computer and off-computer activities. The on-computeractivities scaffold the creation of written products (e.g. letters, poems, lists). The off-computer activities use printsof the products created with computer support as literary props or for authentic purposes (e.g. letters are mailed,poems are read aloud, groceries are ‘bought’ in the store corner of the classroom, etc.). Teachers can easily tailorthe contents of on-computer and off-computer tasks within each PictoPal module.The PictoPal learning environment and related scientific understanding have evolved throughcollaboration between researchers and practitioners. The collaboration revolved around the iterative developmentof PictoPal prototypes, thereby addressing two challenges experienced by kindergarten teachers. Namely,designing and using PictoPal helped them (1) integrate activities that addressed crucial but typically underattended learning goals in the Dutch language curriculum for kindergarteners; and (2) develop their competenciesfor using technology and understanding early literacy. The PictoPal work has yielded both practical and scientificoutputs. From a practical standpoint, this work has produced a usable and effective tool that can easily be adaptedfor a wide range of kindergarten classrooms. From a scientific standpoint, this work has produced insights relatedto (Citations removed for review):•Developing (language) software for young children•Teacher roles during the design of technology-rich curriculum materials•Teacher knowledge, beliefs and reasoning as revealed through conversations during designTeacher beliefs about early literacy curriculum implementationThrough retrospective analysis, we see that this project did realize linkage, structure, openness, capacity,reward, proximity and synergy. Linkage was realized through the collaboration with over a dozen participantgroups, ranging from individuals to kindergarten teachers within a school, to entire school districts. Allparticipation was voluntary, and mutual benefits were present (data informed theoretical understanding and schooldecision making, the schools kept the PictoPal resources they helped created and gained access to ones made byothers). The structure featured systematic organization with regard to expectations and tasks from the researchteam (resource system), the teacher teams (user system), the implementation and use of PictoPal (disseminationutilization strategy), and what had been learned as a result (message). Openness was largely served by thesampling procedures. Even though individuals varied in their opinions of how desirable and feasible the changewould be in their own classrooms, the choice to work with schools that volunteered because they saw intrinsicvalue in PictoPal typically yielded a social climate ready for change. All iterations of PictoPal design researchbenefitted from capacity within the research team, and most also included involvement of participants withauthority and/or experience that further helped marshal resources. Early positive findings related to pupil learninggain from use of PictoPal increased the reward for all those involved. Further, the rich insights and usablematerials served as positive reinforcements. Proximity was achieved by the explicit choice to work face-to-facewith teachers in their own schools on a regular and (in bursts) intense schedule. For most participating teachers,•ICLS 2016 Proceedings642© ISLSthis may have been increased by early exposure to materials previously designed by other Dutch kindergartenteachers (familiarity, recency). Finally, synergy was present in all iterations through the extremely powerful,shared commitment to supporting pupil learning about early literacy (with different contributions from thoseinvolved). For most iterations, this was also the case for supporting teacher learning about technology and earlyliteracy through participation in design teams.Teacher communities: Knowledge BuildingKnowledge building (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014) is an educational innovation that emphasizes working as acommunity to advance the state of knowledge in that community (typically a class). It differs in important waysfrom other approaches that the learning sciences have produced; although a knowledge-building experiencealways addresses external requirements such as educational standards, it does not come with a scoped andsequenced curriculum, instructions for teachers, and an imagined endpoint. Instead, the teacher in a knowledgebuilding classroom needs to learn to help students to: explore their knowledge and interests in a domain, findimportant questions in that domain to pursue, and to investigate and discuss these questions—and ideas aboutthem—to advance the community’s state of knowledge as far as possible. There are principles and heuristics butfew prescriptions.To address the above challenge, we used a community-based approach to advance knowledge buildinglocally by creating synergy between two types of activity: graduate teaching, and collaboration with teachers whoare working on knowledge building in their classrooms (Chan & van Aalst, 2006; van Aalst & Chan, 2001). Thuswhen postgraduate students take our course on knowledge building, the “learning environment” includes teachersworking on knowledge building in their classrooms—some already having 8 to 10 years of experience. Thegraduate students can observe the classes of those teachers and their online work or collaborate with them to trya new idea out in the classroom; some of the teachers also visit the graduate course. This strategy brings togetherthe academic knowledge that graduate students acquire from their course, and which the teachers have limitedtime to acquire, with the practical knowledge of the teachers. Both the graduate students and teachers benefit fromthis interaction. In addition, we periodically organize events where graduate students, graduates and teachers cometogether to share their personal advances and learn about the latest research on knowledge building internationally.We also collaborate with the government to address problems that are important to the community at large (Chan,2011). As some examples, very early we organized symposia in which graduate students, teachers, and somestudents from their classrooms worked together on important questions that were holding knowledge buildingback at the time—how the teacher introduces a question in the online environment. Later on, K-12 student panelsshared about their experience with knowledge building. When we carried out a review of current theories oflearning for the local government, the most experienced teachers became important collaborators, providingdetailed examples of how their work exemplified the theories.Our group has many of the hallmarks of a learning community (Bielaczyc & Collins, 1999), includingshared goals, a sense of belonging to the community, ways of sharing accomplishments, and ways to regeneratemembership. The course and symposia provide regeneration. One important signal that we have a community iswhen teachers who have relied on our assistance in the past become more self-directed and only ask for advice orlimited assistance for their own initiatives. Another is that through the teachers own professional work we increasethe footprint of knowledge building; for instance, one teacher became a member of the Curriculum DevelopmentCommittee of the government; another hosted a group of teachers from Singapore who were on a study tour onknowledge building. While this community approach is not scalable to very large numbers of teachers it appearsto be sustainable and makes an important contribution to developing scalable practices. Recently we have begunto establish formal partnerships with some of the schools where the teachers work to provide a larger role inprofessional development for those schools.Which of the aforementioned elements are present in this approach? Linkages: There are a variety ofshort ad long-term collaborations: between graduate students, between graduate students and teachers, amongteachers, between researchers and teachers, and between the researchers, teachers and the government. Structure:We maintain websites to share resources for and on behalf of the teachers, create opportunities for collaboration,and opportunities for teachers to share their stories. Apart from symposia, we organize some social events thathelp to build community, and have recently begun to publish a newsletter. Openness: We believe that our modelis one in which various participants have voice. Examples are when we have done research that responded toteacher questions. We have created opportunities for graduate students to carry out trials of knowledge buildingin their own classes, and thereby prepare them for continued work in this area after they graduate. Teachers andgraduate students bring in knowledge of other technologies than Knowledge Forum® that enriches what we couldoffer via professional development. Capacity: We have benefitted from government initiatives that align withICLS 2016 Proceedings643© ISLSknowledge building and related funding schemes; for example, a major curriculum reform in the first decade ofthis century emphasized working with ICT, collaborative learning, inquiry-based learning, and formativeassessment, and knowledge building became a way to address all these goals. Currently, local emphasis onknowledge exchange (or valorization of research) stimulates our work. Reward: Locally, working with auniversity-based group to improve learning is desirable for schools. Opportunities to share work and be recognizedfor achievements also are seen as rewards. Proximity: The pedagogical requirements of knowledge building arenovel—thus less familiar—but the current climate of educational change is an asset to our work. Synergy:Everything is knowledge building—our research, the work of graduate students, and that of teachers and theirstudents.Cross-case analysisTable 1 provides an indication of the extent to which each feature is present in each case.Across these three cases, we can observe both parallels and significant variation in terms of Havelock’sprocedural factors. Each, for example, relies heavily on diverse and varied collaborative relationships (linkage)within parameters established to define the numbers, types, and norms of community interactions (structure).These factors serve to cultivate a productive organizational environment in which high levels of synergy can beachieved. For example, a teacher community, because it has a large number of participants with varying expertiseand interests, can have high degrees of linkage and synergy. Teacher communities also can require a great deal ofstructure, including the maintenance of technical infrastructure. Some communities such as large groups in socialmedia, however, also can be effective at sharing knowledge but perhaps less so at knowledge construction thatbuilds shared understanding of research results, agendas, and practical problems (Author, 2009). However,variations in individuals’ belief and commitment to changes in organizational activity (openness) and/or thesocial/cultural capital associated with change through these activities reward) can limit the capacity of researchdissemination to impact change. Efforts within teacher communities may not be focused on a specific short-termtarget, and there may not be clear rewards apart from being recognized in the community for one’s contributions.In non-professional contexts, SLI-focused activities have the potential to negatively impact one’s standing withina community by challenging prevailing norms or established identities.Table 1. Overview of features in each caseFeatureRDDDB(I)RLinkageNumber and typesof collaborativerelationshipsHigh—researchers,educators,policymakers,stakeholdersStructureDegree ofsystematicorganizationOpennessBelief that changeis desirable andpossibleAbility to retrieveand marshalresourcesHigh—grounding intheory-based programmodel for decisionmakingVariable—dependenton ‘change-readiness’of target audiencesModerate—needstypically exceedcapacity, particularlyfor personnelCapacityRewardFrequency,immediacy,amount ofpositivereinforcementsVariable—dependenton cultural costsassociated with targetaudiencesProximityNearness in time,place and contextHigh—directconnections toexpertise and livedexperience of targetaudiencesICLS 2016 Proceedings644Variable—multi-yearand multi-monthpartnerships betweenresearchers andpractitionersHigh—organized byuniversity teamTeacherCommunityHigh—short and longterm; researchers,teachers, governmentHigh—organized byuniversity teamHigh—due tovoluntary participationModerate—need tochange partly acceptedModerate—high inresearch team, high inthose school teams thatincluded educationalleadersVariable—learninggains and teacherprofessionaldevelopment generallypositive but in varyingdegreesHigh—directconnections toexpertise and practicesof participatingteachersHigh—if linked to agovernment changeagendaModerate—informalrecognition ofachievementsModerate—ongoing sowithout clear endpoint© ISLSSynergyNumber andvariety ofpersistent forcesthat can bemobilizedModerate—variablelasting impact onbehavior beyond finiteprogrammingHigh—Sharedcommitment to pupillearning, with differentcontributions fromthose involvedHigh—Participantscontribute in variety ofwaysConclusion and implicationsEnhancing the impact of research beyond academia—i.e., on policy-making, educational practice, and society,has never been more important. In an era in which society is much more interested in the return on investment ofresearch funding than in previous decades, governments, research institutions, funding agencies, and the public atlarge are paying more attention to the benefits of research to society. One aspect of this is increased attention toresearch integrity (Macrina, 2014), but another is a call to the research enterprise to enhance its impact. Forexample, in the United Kingdom, the 2014 Research Excellence Framework—its external assessment of fundedresearch—for the first time required “case studies” demonstrating the impact of research on policy-making(http://www.ref.ac.uk/). Indeed, across Europe, the last decade has witnessed increased attention to valorization.Here, valorization refers to the process of value-creation out of knowledge. Specifically, it is concerned withmaking new knowledge suitable and available for economic or societal use, usually by translating it into highpotential products, services, processes and industrial activity. These considerations seem especially applicable tothe RDD modality. In thinking about the products, services, processes and industrial activity in the field ofeducation, it would seem especially important to consider how to establish and maintain connections with theprimary creators of broadly used curricula, assessments, and professional development opportunities, becausesuch educational designers wield powerful influence on teaching and learning enactment (Author). These are keylinkages and synergies underlying RDD efforts. However, even when these program- and organizational-levelfactors are high, characteristics of the population to be served are critical, including perceived need for and withincommunity incentives for change. Findings from learning sciences research can be directly translated into thedesign of educational programs and resources with potential for significant reach and impact when these factorsare aligned effectively.For DB(I)R and teacher communities, in which the research activities themselves simultaneouslycontribute to knowledge building among practitioners, Levin’s (2013) notion of knowledge mobilization maymore accurately describe the vehicles at play, because it stresses the interactive, social and gradual nature of thebilateral connections between research and practice in the field of education. In DB(I)R and teacher communities,researchers and practitioners take each other seriously in genuine collaboration that yields both scientific andpractical benefits.From its inception, the field of the learning sciences has aimed to impact teaching, learning, and behaviorin schools, universities and everyday contexts where learning happens. Despite some exceptions, the field has yetto make substantial progress in this direction. Furthermore, public understanding of what learning scientists knowabout how people learn remains extremely limited. As such, there remain significant opportunities for the field totackle the problems of research, practice and public understanding of learning. Findings presented here begin toaddress these challenges. This paper makes a useful contribution by considering three common extant approachesto realizing research-practice connections. It describes various manifestations of the factors that are crucial foruptake and use of new knowledge (linkage, structure, openness, capacity, reward, proximity and synergy). Byoffering framework for analysis and initial findings based on three projects in the learning sciences, this papermakes a modest but clear contribution toward helping learning scientists conceptualize a range of researchpractice connection modalities, and envision how they can be shaped in learning sciences projects. Subsequentwork could further operationalize the factors for each modality, as those shaping research-practice connectionsseek not only conceptual tools, but also instruments that can help investigate and monitor the nature andfunctionality of specific research-practice connections.ReferencesBauer, K. & Fischer, F. (2007). The Educational Research-Practice Interface Revisited: A scripting perspective.Educational Research and Evaluation, 13(3), 221-236.Bielaczyc, K., & Collins, A. (1999). Learning communities in classrooms: A reconceptualization of educationalpractice. In C. M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional design theories and models, Vol II (pp. 269-292).Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Broekkamp, H. & Van Hout-Wolters, B. (2007) The gap between educational research and practice: A literaturereview, symposium and questionnaire, Educational Research and Evaluation,13, 203–220.ICLS 2016 Proceedings645© ISLSBurkhardt, H., & Schoenfeld, A. (2003). Improving educational research: Toward a more useful more influentialand better-funded enterprise. Educational Researcher, 32(9), 3-14.Chan, C. K. K. (2011). Bridging research and practice: Implementing and sustaining knowledge building in HongKong classrooms. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6, 147-186.doi: 10.1007/s11412-011-9121-0Chan, C. K. K., & Van Aalst, J. (2006). Teacher development through computer supported Knowledge Building:Experience from Hong Kong and Canadian teachers. Teaching Education, 17(1), 7-26.De Vries, B., & Pieters, J. (2007). Bridging the gap between research and practice: Exploring the role ofknowledge communities in educational design. European Educational Research Journal, 6(4), 382-392.Design-Based Research Collective (DBRC) (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm foreducational inquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5–8.Hargreaves, D. H. (1999). The knowledge-creating school. British Journal of Educational Studies, 47(2), 122144.Havelock, R. (1971). Planning for innovation through dissemination and utilization of knowledge. Ann Arbor:Center for Research on Utilization of Scientific Knowledge.Lavis, J., Robertson, D., Woodside, J., McLeod, C., Abelson, J., and the Knowledge Transfer Study Group. (2003).How can research organizations more effectively transfer research knowledge to decision makers? TheMilbank Quarterly, 81(2), 221­248.Levin, B. (2004). Making research matter more. Education Policy Analysis Archives, 12(56), 1-22.Levin, B. (2013). To know is not enough: Research knowledge and its use. Review of Education, 1(1), 2-31.Macrina, F. L. (2014). Scientific integrity: Text and cases in responsible conduct in research (4th ed.). Washington,DC: ASM Press.Ormel, B., Pareja Roblin, N., McKenney, S., Voogt, J., & Pieters, J. (2012). Research-practice interactions asreported in recent design studies: Still promising, still hazy. Educational Technology Research &Development, 60(6), 967-986.Pareja Roblin, N. N., Ormel, B. J., McKenney, S. E., Voogt, J. M., & Pieters, J. M. (2014). Linking research andpractice through teacher communities: a place where formal and practical knowledge meet? Europeanjournal of teacher education, 37(2), 183-203.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development at theintersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331-337.Rogers, E. (2003). Diffusion of innovations (5th ed.). New York: Free Press.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, andtechnology. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (2nd ed., pp. 397417). New York: Cambridge University Press.Thomas, G. & Pring, R. (2004). Evidence-based practice in education. Maidenhead: Open University Press.Vanderlinde, R., & van Braak, J. (2010). The gap between educational research and practice: Views of teachers,school leaders, intermediaries and researchers. British Educational Research Journal, 36(2), 299-316.Van Aalst, J., & Chan, C. K. K. (2001). “Beyond sitting next to each other:” A design experiment on knowledgebuilding in teacher education. In P. Dillenbourg, A. Eurelings, & K. Hakkarainen (Eds.), Europeanperspectives on computer-supported collaborative learning: Proceedings of the first EuropeanConference on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 20-28). Maastricht, the Netherlands:ISLS.Voogt, J., McKenney, S., Pareja Roblin, N., Ormel, B., & Pieters, J. (2012). De R&D functie in het onderwijs:Drie modellen voor kennisbenutting en –productie. Pedagogische Studiën, 89(6), 335-337.Yin, R. (2014). Case study research: Design and methods. London: Sage.AcknowledgmentsThis paper results from and builds on work from a pre-conference workshop held at ICLS 2014 (referenceremoved for blind review). The authors express their gratitude to Wil Doane, Kim Gomez, and Brian Reiser forhelping establish the cooperation through which this paper came to fruition.ICLS 2016 Proceedings646© ISLS