Young Children’s Inquiry Within and Across SettingsDanielle Teodora Keifert, University of California at Los Angeles, keifert@ucla.eduIntroductionMy research expands representations of young children’s (2-8yrs) science sensemaking. Three commitmentsinform my conceptualization of children’s activity: (1) Everyday life makes sense, (2) children draw uponsensemaking resources in their everyday lives that help them understand the world, and (3) a primary challengefor educators is taking advantage of children’s existing sensemaking resources while introducing newdisciplinary sensemaking practices and ideas. My approach contrasts with approaches that emphasize children’sinability, their misconceptions, or “deficits”. Instead, I assume that it is the researcher’s responsibility tounderstand the ways that the participants’ activity makes sense and is well adapted to their experiences. In thisway, my research aligns with asset-based approaches, expanding representations of children’s sensemakingrepertoires to better understand a broader array of young children’s resources for learning science. Additionally,I do not see classrooms as isolated containers, sealed off from the family or the community. I recognize a centralchallenge for educators is to draw upon children’s prior experience, including their cultural repertoires andfamily sensemaking practices. The result of these commitments is an approach that values all children’ssensemaking as a resource for learning science regardless of age, class, race, religion, ethnicity, or languagefluency.Focusing on inquiry to expand resources for science learningI study young children as they engage in inquiry—moments during which participants orient to a phenomenonas a shared puzzle and explore that phenomenon by drawing upon sensemaking resources (they deem relevant)to the point of their own satisfaction (Keifert & Stevens, accepted, Journal of the Learning Sciences). Thisconceptualization of inquiry was developed using data from the Early Learning Across Contexts project (PIReed Stevens) consisting of hundreds of hours of video observational data of the same children in families andpreschool, and again four years later in families and in elementary school. Here is an illustrative vignette:As Catherine (2y 11m) and Dad played in their backyard, Catherine was startled by a bee.Dad asked if she was asking the bee to “give you some honey, please”. Catherine and Dadthen engaged in a thought experiment. Dad asked, “Catherine if you grabbed a bee and ate it,do you think it would be as sweet as honey?” to which Catherine replied, “yes”. Dad asked ifshe would eat it dead, and Catherine suggested that if it was dead they could chop it up.Catherine oriented to ended inquiry by turning away.Through imagining eating a bee they explored relationships between themselves, honey which they like to eat,and bees that produce honey in a playful way. Moreover, they explored a situation that in reality would beundesirable (eating a bee) to explore these relations. This moment, and others like it from my prior work, maynot seem like the inquiry typically seen in school. However, it is inquiry as a members’ phenomenon—definedby participants’ activity, rather than a definition managed exclusively by researchers. By examining whatparticipants’ count as inquiry, we can better recognize sensemaking resources children find relevant to exploringthe world. For instance, in the moment above, Catherine and Dad engaged in a thought experiment about eatinga bee to explore their relationship to bees and honey. By understanding what children think inquiry is and howthey engage in inquiry, researchers and teachers make space for children’s competence, and are betterpositioned to recognize and draw upon that competence for learning.Recognizing children’s competence prepares researchers and teachers to take advantage of children’ssensemaking repertories. The Science Through Technology Enhanced Play project (STEP; PIs Noel Enyedy,Joshua Danish) does that by privileging resources that are familiar to children, but which are often overlookedas productive for science disciplinary learning: collaborative play and imaginative embodiment. STEP supportsstudents to imaginatively embody water particles in our physical sciences unit (states of matter), and bees in ourbiological sciences unit (bees, flowers, and pollination). Once they take on this imaginative identity, theyexplore a mixed-reality environment, allowing them to learn science concepts through iterative cycles ofstudent-driven inquiry. My analyses of STEP extend my previous work, showing how even very young childrencan learn about complex science phenomenon when supported to draw upon familiar sensemaking resources(Keifert, Lee, Dahn, Illum, DeLiema, Enyedy, & Danish, 2017; Keifert, Enyedy, Dahn, Lee, Lindberg, 2018).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1863© ISLSFamily cultureThrough further analysis of ELAC data I conceptualize family culture to explore how families engage inparticular inquiry practices (Keifert, under review). I draw on M.H. Goodwin’s family ethos (Goodwin, 2007)and Nasir, Rosebery, Warren, & Lee’s culture (2006) to define family culture as constellations of practices infamilies, nested within larger cultural communities. For instance, while Catherine engaged in a particular kindof thought experiment in her family inquiry practice, thought experiments more generally are common inscientists’ professional practice, a community to which her father belongs. In this way, Catherine’s familypractice is embedded within a broader constellation of practices of her father’s professional community. Likelarger communities of practice, families are locally organized cultures. In my analyses, I show how youngchildren transform their world into culturally-relevant activity (C Goodwin, 1994; C Goodwin, 2017), and areseen by others in their family community as competent inquirers (Keifert 2012, under review). However,members of other communities may not share their understanding of practices and competence.Connecting learning across settingsThis nested nature of culture has implications for supporting children to learn as they move across settings. Myprior work documented the family sensemaking practices of Catherine and her classmate Charlie and examinedhow these practices were differentially afforded in interactions with their teachers in their preschool classroom(Keifert, 2015). Charlie often attempted to engage teachers in inquiry of story narratives by asking questionslike “Remember what this was like when this happened?” Several of Charlie’s teachers engaged with him inresponse. However, Catherine attempted to engage others in her family practice of thought experiments byasking questions like “Imagine what this would be like if this happened?” just as she did with Dad and the bees.A series of these attempts about crickets were rejected (“What if the crickets got out?”), one after the other, byher preschool teacher. Even though both children shared a similar socioeconomic and cultural background(white, middle class), one encountered more difficulty in drawing on her family practice. In a conference paperthat won best student paper award at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (Keifert, 2012), Iargued Catherine’s family inquiry practice was constrained because there were few adults in the classroom whoengaged in this form of imaginative exploration. Teachers’ roles here are critical for supporting learning acrosssettings.This work illustrates that mismatches between cultural communities’ practices across home and schoolsettings have profound implications for children’s experience—children may give up on trying to engage infamiliar practices, may be told their practices are inappropriate or bad, or they may even be constructed as bador problem children. After four more years of schooling, Catherine (age 7) articulated to me having abandonedattempts to engage in her family inquiry practice at school altogether, yet she was not constructed as a problemchild by her teacher. Furthermore, she felt comfortable claiming that her own family activity more closelyresembled science than what happened in school (she engaged in “experimenting” at home while at school itwas just “testing” where “the teacher knows what’s gonna happen”). A nested understanding of culture helps toarticulate both the constraints on her family inquiry practice, and the protective layers of culture at the level ofher father’s professional science practice and her membership in white middle-class culture. Thus, anunderstanding of culture as nested positions researchers to recognize the constraints and affordances of cultureat multiple levels for children as they move within and across settings for learning. This understanding alsoprepares researchers and teachers to better design to support children to develop horizontal expertise (Cole &Gajdamashko, 2009) as they move across learning settings.Designing learning environments that privilege family practicesIn future work, I hope to develop partnerships with teachers and families in a diversity of communities. I aminterested in exploring how to create contexts for very young children from nondominant communities to sharetheir family practices, and professional learning for teachers to support their noticing of these practices.Historically, classrooms have been created with expectations that children learn the canonical versions ofdisciplinary practices. Furthermore, extensive research in the learning sciences has illustrated that thesensemaking resources of children from nondominant communities is often excluded as non-scientific and nonacademic (see Warren, Ogonowski, & Pothier, 2005 for thorough discussion). However, by supporting teachersto notice and value children’s family inquiry practices as resources for science learning, I hope to shiftclassrooms into spaces for collaborative learning that privileges these resources.In collaboration with families, I will document and explore a wide variety of children’s competencies inengaging in family sensemaking practices. I will also develop video clubs and other professional learningopportunities to support teachers to notice and draw upon children’s family sensemaking practices withinICLS 2018 Proceedings1864© ISLSclassrooms. In collaboration with teachers, I hope to develop learning opportunities that are (a) aligned withNext Generation Science Standards and/or state standards for science, (b) create opportunities for children toengage directly with scientific phenomena, (c) create interactional spaces that support children to draw uponfamily sensemaking practices and their cultural repertoires of practice, and (d) support children to learn with andfrom classmates. Through reflection and analysis with teachers, I hope to collaboratively design learningenvironments for young children that support bridges between home and school rather than barriers. This futureresearch agenda is where the power of my commitments and my prior research and experience will combine toallow me to reconceptualize classrooms to empower all children, particularly those from nondominantcommunities, to learn through connected experiences across home and school.AcknowledgmentsThank you to Déana Scipio, Ananda Marin, Noel Enyedy, Rogers Hall, and Reed Stevens for their support. Thiswork has been supported by National Science Foundation grants to the Learning in Informal and FormalEnvironments Center (SMA-0835854) and to Noel Enyedy and Joshua Danish (DRL-0733218, IIS-1522945,IIS-1628918, and IIS-1323767), a training grant from IES to Northwestern University (R205B080027), and thedissertation fellowship of the School of Education and Social Policy at Northwestern University.ReferencesCole, M., & Gajdamashko, N. (2009): The concept of development in Cultural-Historical Activity Theory:Vertical and horizontal. In A. Sannino, H. Daniels, & K. D. Gutiérrez (Eds.), Learning and expandingwith Activity Theory, (pp. 129-143). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.Goodwin, C. (2017). Co-operative action. Cambridge University Press.Goodwin, M.H. (2007). Occasioned knowledge exploration in family interaction. Discourse Society, 18(1), 93110.Keifert, D. (2012). Young children's everyday inquiry: A field study of a young girl's play across contexts.Proceedings of the 10th International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Sydney AU, 1, 315-322.Keifert, D. (2015). Young children participating in inquiry: Moments of joint inquiry and questioning practicesat home and in school (Doctoral dissertation, Northwestern University). Retreived from Proquest.(3724286)Keifert, D. Enyedy, N., Dahn, M., Lee, C., Lindberg, L. (2018). Tracing bodies through liminal blends duringplay-based inquiry in a mixed reality environment. Proceedings of the 13th International Conference ofthe Learning Sciences, London, UK (this volume).Keifert, D., Lee, C., Dahn, M., Illum, R., DeLiema, D., Enyedy, N., & Danish, J. (2017). Agency, embodiment,& affect during play in a mixed-reality learning environment. Proceedings of the 16th Interaction Child& Design Conference, Palo Alto CA.Nasir, N., Rosebery, A., Warren, B., & Lee, C. (2006). Learning as cultural process: Achieving equity throughdiversity. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences. New York:Cambridge University Press.Warren, B., Ogonowski, M., & Pothier, S. (2005). Everyday” and “scientific”: Rethinking dichotomies in modesof thinking in science learning. Everyday matters in science and mathematics: Studies of complexclassroom events, 119-148.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1865© ISLS