“Your Turn!”: Playing Cooperative Modern Board Games toPromote Perspective Taking and Cooperative AttitudesYu-Chi Wang, Jenifer Doll, and Keisha Varma,wang6691@umn.edu, dollx066@umn.edu, keisha@umn.eduUniversity of Minnesota – Twin CitiesAbstract: Though social and emotional learning (SEL) interventions successfully fosterenhanced social, emotional, and academic outcomes, the research on engaging methods forteaching specific skills has been limited. This study investigates the potential for modern boardgames to foster SEL competencies through Cooperative Learning Theory. Because cooperativemodern board games combine motivating gameplay and designs that align with elements fromCooperative Learning Theory, they may enhance cooperative attitudes and perspective takingskills. In this pre-test/post-test quasi-experiment, middle school students played either acooperative or competitive board game. Students who played and highly enjoyed thecooperative game showed significantly greater increases in perspective taking skills aftergameplay (F=11.42, p=.001), suggesting that playing enjoyable cooperative modern boardgames may be associated with increased perspective taking skills. Our findings suggest theneed for further investigation into board games as a low-cost platform for students to practiceSEL skills outside of the formal classroom environment.Keywords: Social and Emotional Learning, Cooperative Learning, Board Games, GamesIntroductionIn our collaborative society, strong social and emotional competencies are a must for working with otherssuccessfully in the classroom, the workplace, and throughout daily interactions. Social and Emotional Learning(SEL) interventions enhance the competencies of self awareness, self management, social awareness, relationshipskills, and responsible decision making (Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning, 2015) andlead to increased academic achievement and reduced behavioral misconduct (Durlak, Weissberg, Dymnicki,Taylor, & Schellinger, 2011). However, research has not fully examined the effectiveness of teaching specificskills within these competencies (Durlak, et al, 2011) or the effectiveness of different teaching methods (Hromek& Roffey, 2009). Further, current research on SEL interventions has not focused on the extent to which studentsenjoy or are engaged in these interventions.Games are an engaging way for students to participate in experiential learning. Some games are usedwithin SEL interventions, alongside role playing for students to practice certain skills (Durlak, et al, 2011). Forexample, Hromek and Roffey (2009) explore the potential of therapeutic board games to promote SEL for youngchildren. Commercial modern board games have not been studied in this context. These games are developedwithin game design paradigms oriented toward consumer engagement rather than education, so we predict thatthey should be more enjoyable and engaging. They can potentially also be a way to reach students who may notenjoy collaborative learning in formal learning environments. Because players have to work together to play thegame and regulate the rules (Xu, Barba, Radu, Gandy, & MacIntyre, 2009), they are already cooperating bysuccessfully playing a game together. Cooperative play has been shown to increase cooperation and perspectivetaking skills (Zan & Hildebrandt, 2003). In particular, cooperative modern board games further necessitate thatplayers work together due to the goals structure and mechanisms and may be especially successful for increasingthese outcomes. Thus, we predict that cooperative modern board games are an accessible and low cost mediumthrough which players can practice and enhance cooperative attitudes and perspective taking skills.Modern board gamesBoth popularity of and innovation within board games have soared during the current Board Game Renaissance(Wingfield, 2014), despite the prevalence of digital games. Since many modern board game players identify“social interaction” as the most enjoyable aspect of gameplay (Woods, 2012), the face-to-face, rather thandigitally-mediated, interactions may be a major draw to play these games. We propose that these board gamesprovide a supportive environment where players can develop and practice social skills. Players are physicallypresent and have guiding principles – the game rules – to structure and facilitate social interactions. They can alsolearn through social learning by observing other players’ behaviors in spontaneous interactions.ICLS 2018 Proceedings913© ISLSCooperative learningAlthough many have distinguished between cooperation and collaboration (e.g. Jeong & Hmelo-Silver, 2016),there is considerable overlap in practice. Because Cooperative Learning Theory has been cited as a theoreticalbasis for many SEL interventions, and this theory does not draw significant distinctions between the two, thispaper will use “cooperation” simply to include both concepts. Cooperative Learning is a way of structuringeducation so that students work cooperatively towards learning goals (Johnson & Johnson, 1969). It is based onSocial Interdependence Theory, which posits that the way goals are structured influences how individuals interactand, subsequently, the outcomes (Deutsch, 1949) Cooperative Learning has been shown to result in greaterinterpersonal attraction, academic achievement, and cooperativity (Slavin, 1990). Also, “students learn how tocommunicate effectively, provide leadership, help the group make good decisions, build trust, repair hurt feelings,and understand other's perspectives” (Johnson & Johnson, 1999). These skills fall under the “relationship skills”and “social awareness” SEL competencies.Johnson & Johnson (1989) proposed that successful cooperative learning environments have fiveessential elements: (1) positive interdependence, that participants perceive they are reliant on one another toachieve their goals; (2) individual and group accountability, that both the individual and the group perceiveresponsibility for completing their tasks; (3) promotive interaction, that participants are supportive and takepersonal responsibility for the success of others; (4) appropriate use of social skills; and (5) group processing,time for the students to reflect on their abilities as a group. Modern board games present a case for increasingcooperative attitudes, because many of their design elements align with these essential elements of cooperativelearning. First, task interdependence occurs because players will have to wait for others to complete their turn(s)in order to continue to their own turn(s). Also, because all players are sharing one set of game components (e.g.one board or one deck of cards), there is also positive resource interdependence. Second, modern board gamesusually require in-person, face-to-face promotive interaction. Additionally, playing modern board games tends torequire interpersonal and small group skills, as most games take two to four players and can only be continued ifeveryone works together at least to a certain degree.In addition to these inherent qualities of most modern board games, regardless of goal structure, it waspredicted that cooperative modern board games would promote cooperative attitudes and perspective taking skillsmore than competitive modern board games. Cooperative modern board games have an added component ofpositive goal interdependence, sometimes positive role interdependence, individual accountability, and oftenspontaneous group processing. Although playing the competitive game may be associated with an increase incompetitive attitudes after play, it was expected that their cooperative attitudes may also increase, because mostmodern board games themselves include multiple forms of positive interdependence, as mentioned before.The focus of this research is to look into engaging and enjoyable ways for students to practice andenhance their social and emotional competencies. Because cooperative learning has been empirically shown to besuccessful in enhancing social skills, and because mechanisms of cooperative board games align well with theessential elements of cooperative learning, modern cooperative board games may be successful in enhancingsocial skills as well. Thus, the research questions are: 1) How does playing modern cooperative board games,compared to competitive ones, affect cooperative attitudes? and 2) How does playing modern cooperative boardgames, compared to competitive ones, affect perspective taking skills?MethodologyParticipants and proceduresThrough a partnership between the University of Minnesota and a local Midwestern middle school, 91 seventhgrade students, from 5 different class periods, participated in this quasi-experimental study. About 38.5% ofparticipants self-identified as “girl”, “woman”, or “female”, 55.8% “boy”/”man”/”male”, and 3.8% other.Approximately 37% of participants were people from traditionally underrepresented racial and ethnic populations.Classes were randomly assigned at the class level to either the cooperative or competitive game condition. Becauseof unequal numbers of students across class periods, there were 39 participants in the Competitive condition and52 in the Cooperative condition.Each student participated during one 45-minute school period a day for three consecutive days. On thefirst day, participants completed pre-test measures, learned the game, and played a practice round of the assignedgame. On the second day, participants played the game in a randomly assigned group of 3-5 students during thewhole class period, playing the game an average of 1.5 times. On the last day, participants completed post-testmeasures.ICLS 2018 Proceedings914© ISLSMaterials and measuresParticipants in the Cooperative condition played Hanabi™ (Bauza, 2015), and those in the Competitive conditionplayed Abracada…What?™ (Kim, 2014). These games were chosen based on similar mechanics and were ratedequivalently difficult on the premier board game forum (http://boardgamegeek.com). Hanabi™ requires playersto work together to play cards one through five sequentially in each of five different suits. No player can see theirown hand and must work together to give hints to other players. Abracada...What? ™ also does not allow playersto know their own tiles. Players compete with one another to accurately guess what spells they have to defeat theiropponents.For the pre-test, participants were given print copies of the questionnaires, the order of which wasrandomized between classes. Each questionnaire included questions and answer choices in English and Spanish.Cooperative attitudes were measured through the Cooperative (COOP), Competitive (COMP), and Individualistic(IND) Attitudes scales (Johnson & Norem-Hebeisen, 1969). The 22 total questions across these subscales,measuring liking and valuing of each interdependence condition were randomized. The tendency to utilizeperspective taking skills was measured using the Perspective Taking (PT) subscale of the Interpersonal ReactivityIndex of empathy (Davis, 1983). This subscale consisted of 10 questions. Participants responded to each questionacross the subscales using a 4-point scale from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree”. During the post-test,students completed the same scales as well as a manipulation check to ensure that the games were indeed viewedas cooperative or competitive, respectively, demographics and a post-questionnaire regarding their understandingand enjoyment of the game, relationships with classmates, and an open-ended response on what students thoughtthey learnedAnalysis and resultsIn accordance with previous data analyses of these measures (e.g. Johnson, et al, 1979), the data were treated ascontinuous and scores for individual items were summed to create one value for each scale. Participants’ post-testscores on each of the scales (COOP, COMP, IND, and PT) were regressed onto the corresponding pretest scoresto provide a standardized residual. These represented differences of actual and expected posttest scores based onpretest, as was used by Jung, McMaster, and delMas (2017). The standardized residuals were used as the outcomevariables in a multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) comparing the students who played the cooperativeversus competitive game. Because students were randomized at the class level, we calculated intraclasscorrelations (ICCs) for each scale. All of these ICCs were less than .01, thus students were treated as the unit ofanalysis. Students’ open ended responses were analyzed using content analysis.Though we had predicted that the cooperative game would lead to greater cooperative attitudes andperspective taking skills, and these effects found were in the expected direction, there were no significant maineffects between the cooperative and competitive conditions on either the cooperative attitudes or perspectivetaking skills (F(4,84)=0.153, Wilks’ Λ=0.993, p=.961). In investigating potential confounding variables, weevaluated the students’ responses to the game conditions, we found that participants in the cooperative conditionreported significantly lower enjoyment of game (t(82.97)=2.76, p<.01). Thus, additional analyses were conductedto see whether enjoyment affected students’ results. Conducting a MANOVA with the game condition andenjoyment as predictors on the same dependent variables, the main effect of game condition was still notsignificant (F(4,81)=0.964, Wilks’ Λ=0.753, p=.559). However, enjoyment of game was marginally significant(F(4,81)=2.388, Wilks’ Λ=0.894, p=.059) and the interaction of game condition and enjoyment was significant(F(4,81)=3.935, Wilks’ Λ=0.837, p= .006). Upon conducting post-hoc tests and adjusting the alpha levels formultiple tests, COOP was not significant (F(3,84)=2.208, p=.09) though those in the cooperative condition didhave higher cooperative attitudes as predicted, PT was significantly affected by the interaction of game conditionand enjoyment (F=11.42, p=.001), with higher reported enjoyment in the cooperative game condition havingstatistically significant higher PT than expected from pretest.Students mostly reported learning game rules and strategies for gameplay in the open-ended response.However, some students in the cooperative game condition also noted that they learned cooperative skills whereasthose in the competitive condition more often reported learning deduction or probability skills.Discussion and limitationsBased on the statistically null main effects of game condition on cooperative attitudes and perspective takingskills, we do not have evidence to support our prediction that cooperative attitudes and perspective taking skillswill increase more when playing cooperative as opposed to competitive modern board games. However, furtheranalyses revealed a significant interaction between game condition and enjoyment on perspective taking skills,suggesting that enjoying playing a cooperative board game may be related to increases in students’ self-reportedICLS 2018 Proceedings915© ISLSperspective taking skills. Those who reported not enjoying the game were likely less meaningfully engaged and/ormotivated to fully participate. Differences in enjoyment between games could be due to the theme tied to themechanics or the physical game components, among other aspects that are game-specific. This finding suggeststhat the results may not have been solely based on goal structure, but also on other factors tied to the particulargamesThus, only having one game per condition was definitely a major limitation; utilizing only one game percondition cannot rule out that other games with the same goal structures may lead to different results. Additionally,participants were only exposed to the game for a total of one hour across the three days, which is likely not enoughexposure to truly change attitudes or skills. According to Johnson and Johnson (1989), cooperative learninginterventions require time. Further, even if these games can affect students’ perspective taking skills andcooperative attitudes, we must keep in mind that these results may not transfer to a formal learning environment.The next iteration of this study will include a series of different modern cooperative versus modern competitivegames, to be played over a series of months, so as to try to better control for enjoyment and provide a moreeffective dosage. Additionally, we plan to incorporate more observational and qualitative data collection andunobtrusive measures, such as how far apart students sit and how they interact with one another when setting upor cleaning up games.The findings of this study support that further research in this domain may be warranted. This researchhas the potential to help students work on social and emotional competencies in an enjoyable and engaging waythat may not require as much adult supervision or training. Because board games are low-cost and accessible, theyhave the potential to help reinforce SEL outcomes in a broad range of adolescents, including under-representedpopulations who may not have the resources or opportunities for learning SEL outside of the classroom. Moregenerally, connecting with a world of diverse individuals requires strong interpersonal and social skills andknowing how to interact with others can go a long way to bolster successful interactions with diverse others.ReferencesBauza, A. (2015). Hanabi. [Board Game]. United States: Spin Master Games.Berland, M., & Lee, V. R. (2011). Collaborative Strategic Board Games as a Site for Distributed ComputationalThinking. International Journal of Game-Based Learning, 1(2), 65–81.Davis, M. H. (1983). Measuring individual differences in empathy: Evidence for a multidimensional approach.Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 44(1), 113–126.Deutsch, M. (1949). A theory of cooperation and competition. Human Relations, 2, 129-152.Durlak, J. A., Weissberg, R. P., Dymnicki, A. B., Taylor, R. D., & Schellinger, K. B. (2011). The Impact ofEnhancing Students’ Social and Emotional Learning: A Meta-Analysis of School-Based UniversalInterventions. Child Development, 82(1), 405–432.Hromek, R., & Roffey, S. (2009). Promoting Social and Emotional Learning with Games: “It’s Fun and We LearnThings,” Simulation & Gaming, 40(5), 626–644.Jeong, H., & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2016). Seven affordances of computer-supported collaborative learning: Howto support collaborative learning? How can technologies help? Educational Psychologist, 51(October),247–265.Johnson, D.W. & Johnson, R.T. (1989) Cooperation and Competition: Theory and Research. Minnesota:Interaction Book Company.Johnson, D.W. & Johnson, R.T. (1999). Learning together and alone: Cooperative, competitive, andindividualistic learning (4th ed). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.Johnson, D. W., Johnson, R. T., & Stanne, M. B. (2000). Cooperative Learning Methods : A Meta-Analysis.Johnson, D. W., & Norem-Hebeisen, A. A. (1979). A Measure of Cooperative, Competitive, and IndividualisticAttitudes. The Journal of Social Psychology, 109(2), 253–261.Jung, P., McMaster, K.L., & delMas R.C. (2017). Effects of Early Writing Intervention Delivered Within a DataBased Instruction Framework. Exceptional Children, 83(3), 281-297.Kim, G. (2014). Abracada...What? [Board Game]. United States: Z-Man Games.Tjosvold, D., Johnson, D.W., & Johnson, R.T. (1984). Influence Strategy, Perspective-Taking, and Relationshipsbetween High- and Low-Power Individuals in Cooperative and Competitive Contexts. The Journal ofPsychology, 116:2, 187-202.Woods, S. (2012). Eurogames: The Design, Culture and Play of Modern Board Games. Jefferson, NC: McFarland& Co.Zan, B., & Hildebrandt, C. (2003). First Graders’ Interpersonal Understanding During Cooperative andCompetitive Games. Early Education & Development, 14(4), 397–410.ICLS 2018 Proceedings916© ISLS