Social Network Analysis for Signaling Pedagogical Shifts inChallenge-Based and Traditional Online STEM CoursesCatherine L. Dornfeld Tissenbaum, Northeastern University, c.dornfeld@northeastern.eduKemi Jona, Northeastern University, k.jona@northeastern.eduAbstract: Challenge-based learning (CBL) supports students’ learning and transfer of keydisciplinary principles, but students may need support when transitioning to the expectationsof CBL. One way to provide support is for instructors to monitor students’ understanding ofcourse challenges and content in discussion boards. Using SNA, we explored how twoinstructors participated in students’ discussions in CBL and traditional online courses to seehow instructors adapted support with CBL courses. Instead of differences across pedagogies,we found differences across instructors: one instructor contributed on the periphery ofstudents’ discussions, while another instructor directly contributed to students’ discussions.Based on sociograms and instructors’ feedback, we found that the instructors took differentapproaches to providing formative feedback (e.g., private communication versus publicdiscussion) intended to scaffold students’ knowledge construction.IntroductionChallenge-based learning (CBL) is an inquiry-learning approach that contextualizes learning within authenticchallenges (Martin, Rivale, & Diller, 2007). Students develop real-world solutions that help them learn keydisciplinary concepts and skills that are connected to future work. CBL’s benefits include improved attitudesabout learning, conceptual outcomes, and knowledge sharing (Martin et al., 2007; O’Mahony et al., 2012).Implementing CBL, however, can be challenging, as instructors must develop challenges that highlightkey disciplinary principles that transfer to new situations (Martin et al., 2007). When adopting CBL withinonline courses, instructors often monitor discussion boards to assess students’ understanding of challenges andunderlying principles, and to provide support as formative feedback (Wise & Paulus, 2016). Students’participation in online discussions opens opportunities to co-construct knowledge with others. Interactions withinstructors and classmates on online discussion boards can improve course satisfaction and perceived learning(Swan, 2001), but students may need guidance for engaging in online knowledge and community building(Covelli, 2017). One way to assess students’ discussions is through social network analysis, or SNA(Wasserman & Faust, 1994). SNA provides a lens for understanding the interactions between and roles ofstudents and instructors. SNA also helps assess students’ sense of community (Stepanyan, Mather, &Dalrymple, 2014) as facilitated by the instructor to support online knowledge construction (Covelli, 2017).To understand participation in online discussions, we created weekly SNA sociograms of discussionboards for two courses, each with a CBL and a traditional section. We examined sociograms for changes overtime, especially students’ and instructors’ roles and connectedness within the course. We hypothesized that theshift from instructor-centered traditional course formats to a learner-centered pedagogy embodied by CBLwould be signaled by differences in the positioning of the instructor within online discussion boards. Ourresearch question was: How did the instructors situate themselves within students’ online discussions for CBLand traditional courses? This question has implications for how we understand patterns of interaction betweenstudents and instructors in different instructional approaches, and can help us determine the suitability of SNAas a tool for characterizing pedagogical shifts in online courses at scale.MethodsParticipants were two instructors and 40 undergraduate students participating in online courses in fall of 2017,offered by a university on the U.S. East Coast that hosts programs for post-traditional adult learners pursuingprofessional degrees. Instructor AJV taught two sections of a human-computer interaction course (Course 1),with 7 students enrolled in the CBL section and 8 students in the traditional section. Instructor BC taught twosections of a web development course (Course 2), with 18 students in the CBL section and 7 students in thetraditional section. Students were assigned to CBL or traditional instruction using stratified random assignmentand were informed of the new CBL approach in the course syllabus. Instructors received training on CBL,which focused on authentic assessments (“deliverables”) situated within challenges, and support frominstructional designers. For CBL sections, the instructors shifted to a mentor and/or client role and expectedstudents to take on greater agency in their learning. For traditional sections, instructors continued their businessas-usual approach of weekly lectures, quizzes, and assignments.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1069© ISLSWe collected student and instructor posts from discussion boards for each week from September 1 toOctober 29, the semester midpoint. Discussion participation was a grade requirement. We then performed aninitial qualitative analysis of online discussions and instructor feedback about transitioning to CBL. For SNA,we created adjacency pairs of participants’ posts for each week, which we used to make directed network graphswith Gephi and to calculate mean degree centrality for each participant with the NetworkX library in Python.FindingsOur initial qualitative analysis of online discussions and instructor feedback indicated that the instructors haddifferent approaches to scaffolding students’ knowledge construction in their courses. Therefore, we examinedthe weekly sociograms for the CBL and traditional sections nested within the instructors.Table 1 shows sociograms of interactions between students and Instructor AJV over time. With theCBL section (top), we see a strong connection between Instructor 1 and student RM in Week 1, and betweenstudents AB and MK in Week 2. However, the following weeks showed similar, decreased levels of interactionamong participants, especially for weeks 4, 5, and 8. Also, students posted messages that did not receive replies(node NULL) in Weeks 1-7. With traditional instruction (bottom), we found strong connections betweenstudents JB and PF in Week 4 and JB and TS in Week 8. Overall, though, we found similar levels of interactionamong participants. Students posted responses with no replies (node NULL) in weeks 4-8. In summary, bothsections of Course 1 showed fairly balanced participation, but the traditional section showed more balancedparticipation over time compared to the CBL section.Table 1: SNA sociograms of Course 1 online discussion posts during the first eight weeksTraditional SectionCBL SectionWeekly Sociograms (Left to Right, Top to Bottom)Table 2 shows sociograms of interactions between students and Instructor BC over time. With the CBLsection (top), we see that students’ discussion was often directed toward Instructor BC, resulting in connectionswith several students (NT, WR, SH, WCL, and WW) over time. Participation decreased slightly over time, butall students received replies to their posts. With traditional instruction (bottom), fewer students directed theirICLS 2018 Proceedings1070© ISLSposts toward the instructor. The instructor still connected with several students (NG, RM, and MK) over time.Students NG, RM, and MK also connected with each other at different times. As with CBL, participationdecreased slightly over time, but only week 8 included a posting without reply. Overall, we see greaterinteraction among participants in Course 2 (with Instructor BC) than Course 1 (with Instructor AJV).Table 2: SNA sociograms of Course 2 online discussion posts during the first eight weeksCBL Section*Weekly Sociograms (Left to Right, Top to Bottom)Traditional Section*Only 6 discussions in Course 2 CBL.Table 3: Mean degree and centrality values for students in each sectionCourse12SectionCBLTraditionalCBLTraditionalMean Degree CentralityInstructor AJV = 1.2; Student AB = 1.7, TT = 0.8, JL = 1.2, MK = 2.0, S = 1.3, JK= 1.4, RM = 0.7, JF = 1.6, NULL = 0.6Instructor AJV = 1.3; Student RP = 1.7, RS = 0.5, AK = 0.4, TS = 1.5, NG = 1.2,PF = 1.6, MR = 1.6, NB = 1.4, JB = 1.4, NULL = 0.6Instructor BC = 1.5; Student JL = 0.2, CH = 0.6, SH = 1.1, LGB = 0.2, DR = 0.1,MB = 0.7, AF = 0.7, KM = 0.4, WW = 0.4, NK = 0.5, OL = 0.1, WR = 0.8, SM =0.2, DW = 0.1, NT = 0.8, WCL = 0.6, AR = 0.3, NULL= 1.0Instructor BC = 1.8; Student BL = 1.0, AK = 0.9, NB = 1.0, TS = 0.1, MK = 1.3, NG= 1.5, RM = 1.5, NR = 0.8, EW = 0.4, NULL = 0.3We also quantified connectedness as mean degree centrality, which indicated how closely connectedeach participant was to other participants over the eight weeks (see Table 3). In both sections of Course 1,Instructor AJV was less connected than her students, as indicated by values in bold font. In contrast, InstructorBC was the most connected participant in both sections of Course 2. This finding is echoed by our initialqualitative analysis, which found that Instructor AJV typically replied to students at the end of discussions, decentralizing her role in the discussion, and preferred private email communication for feedback. In contrast,Instructor BC replied to students’ posts throughout discussions, which more firmly centralized his role.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1071© ISLSDiscussionThis study leveraged SNA as an initial assessment of participation in online discussions as instructors began toadopt CBL for online courses targeted at post-traditional adult learners. CBL contextualizes learning byforegrounding authentic challenges and assessments, which help students to grasp key disciplinary concepts andskills (Martin et al., 2007). Online discussion boards encourage students to share and negotiate ideas aboutcourse content, and offer opportunities for formative feedback (Swan, 2001). To understand students’ andinstructors’ roles and connectedness in online discussion boards, we created week-by-week SNA sociograms ofonline discussion participation for both CBL and traditional (i.e., business-as-usual) sections.Regardless of the type of instruction, students demonstrated relatively balanced participation over time.The CBL section of Course 1 showed a decrease in participation over time, possibly explained by theinstructor’s preference for email communication over discussion boards. This foregrounds our unexpectedfinding that differences among instructors were more salient. We found differences in the two instructors’ rolesand connections with students in discussion participation, regardless of the type of instruction. This differencepoints to a need for future research about instructors’ approaches to scaffolding online courses, especially aboutformative feedback as public versus private communication.Identifying patterns of participation, especially early in the adoption of a new instructional approach,may help instructors to support students by showing high or low levels of connectedness in discussion boards(Covelli, 2017). Analyzing sociograms may help instructors to adopt and/or reinforce effective knowledge andcommunity building practices, such as revising discussion prompts or rotating responsibilities for leadingdiscussions. Pedagogical feedback may also help reassure instructors adopting instructional approaches that arenew to them. Implementing CBL is often difficult for instructors (Martin et al., 2007), and more objectivefeedback mechanisms like SNA may help instructors to identify areas for improvement as they arise. While thisexploratory study is limited by its small sample size and focus on participation in discussion boards, we see thisas a promising first step to support the identification of pedagogical shifts and practices as we integrate CBLinto online courses at a larger scale.ConclusionChallenge-based learning (CBL) supports students’ conceptual outcomes, but students may need support as theytransition to CBL instruction. For online courses, instructors may monitor students’ understanding and providesupport via discussion boards. We used SNA as an early signal of the adoption of CBL in online courses toidentify differences across instructional approaches. Instead, we found differences across instructors regardingtheir roles and level of connectedness to students over time. While we did not find notable differences acrossCBL and traditional instruction, we discovered a need to understand differences in instructors’ scaffoldingapproaches for online courses, especially when providing formative feedback.ReferencesCovelli, B. J. (2017). Online discussion boards; The practice of building community for adult learners. TheJournal of Continuing Higher Education, 65(2), 139-145.Martin, T., Rivale, S. D., & Diller, K. R. (2007). Comparison of student learning in challenge-based andtraditional instruction in biomedical engineering. Annals of Biomedical Engineering, 35(8), 1312-1323.O'Mahony, T. K., Vye, N. J., Bransford, J. D., Sanders, E. A., Stevens, R., Stephens, R. D., ... & Soleiman, M.K. (2012). A comparison of lecture-based and challenge-based learning in a workplace setting: Coursedesigns, patterns of interactivity, and learning outcomes. J. Learning Sciences, 21(1), 182-206.Stepanyan, K., Mather, R., & Dalrymple, R. (2014). Culture, role and group work: A social network analysisperspective on an online collaborative course. BJET, 45(4), 676-693.Swan, K. (2001). Virtual interaction: Design factors affecting student satisfaction and perceived learning inasynchronous online courses. Distance Education, 22(2), 306-331.Wasserman, S. & Faust, K. (1994). Social network analysis: methods and applications. New York: CambridgeUniversity Press.Wise, A. F., & Paulus, T. M. (2016). Analyzing learning in online discussions. In The SAGE Handbook of eLearning Research, 2nd ed. (pp. 270-290). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.AcknowledgmentsThis work is supported by funding from the U.S. Department of Education under the Fund for Improvement ofPost-Secondary Education (FIPSE), First in the World award P116F140245.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1072© ISLS