A Look at the First Two Years of a 5-Year Longitudinal Study of anOST Program’s Impact on STEM Career InterestC. Aaron Price, Museum of Science and Industry, Chicago, aaron.price@msichicago.orgAngela Skeeles-Worley, University of Virginia, ads4d@virginia.eduRobert Tai, University of Virginia, rht6h@virginia.eduAbstract: We report on the first two years’ of data for a longitudinal study about the impact ofa STEM-based high school OST program on career interests. Quasi-experimental survey datafrom 132 youth across two annual cohorts is analyzed. Results show the treatment group(program alumni) dropped by 10% while the control group’s STEM career interest dropped by34% after their first year of college. Results suggest this program’s impact may extend into earlycollege experiences.IntroductionThis study focuses on a museum-based, positive youth development program based on scientific inquiry, publicspeaking/self-efficacy and college readiness. Typically beginning at the start of high school, youth visit for 10Saturdays in a session with up to 3 sessions per year. The average youth is active in the program for 2.6 years.Developing YOUth! is a multi-year study of the program supported by the National Science Foundation(DRL#1514593). Following a quasi-experimental design, the study includes an annual, longitudinal survey ofgraduates from the SMA program along with a control group consisting of youth who have recently visited ascience themed cultural institution. Three cohorts will be followed for at least 5 years after graduation.Literature reviewSTEM-based out-of-school time (OST) programs have shown consistent success in supporting STEM careerinterests of those in middle and high school (Young, Ortiz & Young, 2017). However, beyond high school thereis less evidence about their impact. Retrospective studies looking at long-term impacts have suggested that theycan provide opportunities to engage in STEM-related activities and practices, ways of thinking, and communities(McCreedy & Dierking, 2013). Jaber & Hammer (2016) found that opportunities in learning environments thatallow students to meaningfully engage with science learning positively affect their science identity developmentand prolonged interest in science. Also, despite the national trend of female youth losing interest in STEM careersin high school at a higher rate than males, an earlier retrospective study of this particular program found theopposite – that female youth’s STEM career interest increased more than their male counterparts (Price, Kares,Segovia & Brittian Lloyd, 2018). However, such retrospective studies are subject to positive response bias andmay overstate their effect (Storksdieck, Haley-Goldman & Jones, 2002). The framework for our study is basedon Social Cognitive Career Theory (Lent, Brown, & Hackett, 1994) and ethnic identity, an individual’s sense ofbelonging to an ethnic group defined by one’s cultural heritage (Phinney & Ong, 2007), which has been linked tocareer decision making (Duffy & Klingaman, 2009).MethodsThe survey is first given to graduates of the SMA program (treatment) and Museum visitors (control) in thesummer after high school graduation and every summer thereafter. The survey has three sections: culturalexperiences in education, attitudes towards persistence in science, and career interests. The cultural items wereLikert and constructed-response items (ex: “Race mattered in my educational experience” followed by “Providean example of when race did or did not matter in your educational experience”). The attitudes items come from ascale to measure science aspirations and related factors by Dewitt, Archer, Osborne, Dillon, Willis & Wong (2011)(Hereafter: “DeWitt scale”). Two constructed response items asked about their current career goals. They werecategorized as being STEM or non-STEM based on definitions established by the National Science Foundationexcept that we included medical and computer science careers. Our first cohort consists of 23 treatment and 20control group youth who took the survey in year one and 21 and 16 (respectively) who took it in year two. Oursecond cohort consists of 19 treatment and 72 control who took the year one survey and have not yet been giventheir year two survey. A third cohort will be recruited next summer. Youth self-report as 57% female, 43% male,<1% nonbinary. Ethnicity/Race reported as 46% White, 15% Hispanic, 15% multi-racial, 13% African American,10% Asian and 2% other race/ethnicities.Preliminary resultsICLS 2018 Proceedings1475© ISLSWhile in college, the control group’s interest in STEM careers dropped from 67% to 33% (Table 1). This is inline with the 2013 NCES study of undergraduates that showed a drop in STEM career interest from 64% to 36%their first year of college (Chen, 2013). However, the treatment group’s STEM career interest only dropped from90% to 80%.Using repeated-measures ANOVAs, we also looked for changes in the cultural items and in the DeWittscale factors between years 1 and 2. In the cultural items, we found no differences between groups that werestatistically significant. However, we did find overall that both groups reported race mattered less and also feltmore empowered in their first year of college than in high school. In the DeWitt scale, we only found a differencein a factor linked to aspirations in science, F(2,37) = 4.35, p < .05, eta2 =.12. In that factor, mean ratings from thecontrol group dropped from 3.52 to 3.25 while the treatment group increased from 4.30 to 4.43. We did not finddifferences in levels of confidence that they can achieve their career. We did not find any relationship betweenracial identity and career interest.Table 1. Reported interest in STEM careers.Control(N=91)Year 1 Year 2DiffTreatment(N=42)Year 1 Year 2DiffSTEM Career Goal67%33%-34%90%80%-10%STEM Dream Job65%29%-36%81%75%-6%ImplicationsThe first year of college poses substantial challenges for those majoring in STEM careers, with nearly one-thirdof early STEM majors switching to a non-STEM disciplines by the end of the academic year. Our data shows thata long duration, science themed OST program can help attenuate that decline. Dabney, et al. (2012) found arelationship between high school STEM OST experiences and initial STEM career interest in college. This studypresents evidence that the association may persist through college. Results and ability to derive factorscontributing to them are limited by our sample size, which is not yet large enough to allow us to do betweensubjects comparisons.ReferencesChen, X. (2013). STEM Attrition: College Students' Paths into and out of STEM Fields. Statistical AnalysisReport. NCES 2014-001. National Center for Education Statistics.Dabney, K. P., Tai, R. H., Almarode, J. T., Miller-Friedmann, J. L., Sonnert, G., Sadler, P. M., & Hazari, Z.(2012). Out-of-school time science activities and their association with career interest in STEM.International Journal of Science Education, Part B, 2(1), 63-79.DeWitt, J., Archer, L., Osborne, J., Dillon, J., Willis, B., & Wong, B. (2011). High aspirations but low progression:the science aspirations–careers paradox amongst minority ethnic students. International Journal ofScience and Mathematics Education, 9(2), 243-271.Duffy, R. D., & Klingaman, E. A. (2009). Ethnic identity and career development among first-year collegestudents. Journal of Career Assessment, 17(3), 286-297.Jaber, L.Z., & Hammer, D. (2016). Engaging in science: A feeling for the discipline. Journal of Learning Sciences,25(2), 156-202.McCreedy, D., & Dierking, L. D. (2013). Cascading Influences. Philadelphia: The Franklin Institute ScienceMuseumPhinney JS, Ong AD. (2007). Ethnic identity development in immigrant families. In: Langford E, editor.Immigrant families in contemporary society. New York, NY: Guilford Press. pp. 51–69.Price, C. A., Kares, F. K., Segovia, G. & Lloyd, A. B. (2018). Staff Matter: Gender differences in STEM careerinterest development in adolescent youth. Applied Developmental Science.Storksdieck, M., Haley-Goldman, K., & Jones, M. C. (2002). Impact of the New York Hall of Science career ladderprogram on its former participants. Unpublished technical report, Annapolis, MD, Institute for LearningInnovation. Retrieved from http://www.informalscience.org/sites/default/files/report_236.PDF.Young, J., Ortiz, N., & Young, J. (2017). STEMulating Interest: A Meta-Analysis of the Effects of Out-of-SchoolTime on Student STEM Interest. International Journal of Education in Mathematics, Science andTechnology, 5(1), 62-74.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1476© ISLS