Knowledge Building Inquiry and Reflection inDeveloping Children’s Epistemology of ScienceCarol K. K. Chan, The University of Hong Kong, ckkchan@hku.hkGuangxin Xu, The University of Hong Kong, xgx0625@163.comFeng Lin, University of Wisconsin-Madison, irisfeng83@gmail.comAbstract: This study examined how elementary-school students developed their epistemologyof science in a knowledge-building environment that involves idea-driven discourse andreflective inquiry. Twenty-two grade-4 students participated inquiring into a topic in earthscience; they worked collectively on knowledge-building inquiry supported by KnowledgeForum®, a computer-supported collaborative learning environment. The key designs includedstudents engaging in idea-driven discourse on Knowledge Forum augmented with epistemictalk and reflection, and linking the understanding of their own inquiry process with scientists’inquiry. Results indicated that students changed towards more sophisticated views of sciencefrom concrete-absolutist to evolving views of science. Analysis of classroom eventsillustrated how students reflected on their inquiry and KF discourse in relation to epistemicfeatures of scientific practice, and developing the notions that they can be little scientistsemulating the practice of scientists. Implications of designing knowledge building enrichedwith explicit and collective reflection to promote epistemic change are discussed.IntroductionIt is widely recognized that students’ epistemology of science, what they understand about the nature of scienceand scientific inquiry, is important both as an educational goal and for its role in scientific understanding (Elby,Macrander, & Hammer, 2016). Current reforms in science education emphasize scientific practices as waysstudents develop and use scientific ideas (NRC, 2012, and the Next Generation Science Standards, NGSS).These changes indicate the need to shift from hands-on and activity-based science to helping students engage inauthentic inquiry working together to build knowledge. For students to develop scientific practice, they alsoneed to think like scientists and develop ways to think about what science is about, what it means to developscientific ideas, and how scientists go about creating knowledge; scientific practice involves epistemicunderstandings of science. The emphasis of scientific epistemology and science practice can also be related tothe social-situated perspective of learning in which students learn through participating in a community ofpractice -- Scientific practice involves collective inquiry to construct explanations and scientific discourse.There is increasing interest in examining students’ science practices related to epistemologicaldevelopment (Elby et al., 2016) but relatively less attention has been given to examining scientific epistemologyfrom a community of learning perspective supported by technology. This study uses the knowledge buildingapproach (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014) premised on the idea that participants, even as school-aged children,can be a community of scientists working creatively with ideas and, adding value to the community. Whileknowledge-building research has made substantial progress in scientific inquiry, there is still limited systematicinvestigation of how knowledge-building works to help young students develop more sophisticated scientificepistemology (Lin & Chan, 2018). A key theme in science education examines explicit reflection in promotingstudents’ understanding of nature of science (NOS) (Lederman, Abd-El-Khalick, Bell & Schwartz, 2002) andthere are diverse approaches for developing explicit reflection. This study investigated how knowledge buildinginquiry and practice enriched with reflective discourse can promote students’ scientific epistemology.Epistemology of scienceDifferent research strands have examined students’ understandings of the nature of science (Elby et al., 2016).Researchers have adopted psychometric and multi-dimensional approaches (Hofer & Pintrich, 1997), such asexploring certainty, source, justification, and development of knowledge to examine epistemic beliefs inscience; intervention studies have examined changes in epistemology based on these dimensions (Conley et al.,2004). Research in science education (Lederman et al., 2002) focused on examining the nature of science(NOS), including its empirical, tentative, creative and inferential aspects. Another tradition has examined howstudents understand the nature of science as constructive and evolving (Carey et al., 1989) involving idea-drivenand theory-building processes (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014). Carey et al. (1989) examined children’sscientific epistemology and identified three general patterns: science as simply carrying out activities; science astentative and uncertain; science as a constructive process for generating deeper explanations of naturalICLS 2018 Proceedings895© ISLSphenomena. Smith et al. (2000) examined children’s scientific epistemology in terms of how studentsunderstand the goals of science, the nature of scientific questions, purpose of experiments, and the nature of theidea-change process. Chuy et al. (2010) identified four aspects of fourth graders’ understanding of science: thenature of theoretical progress; theory-fact understanding; the role of ideas in scientific inquiry; and, invention.Chinn, Buckland and Samarapungavan (2011) developed an epistemic cognition model for examiningepistemic goals, the structure of knowledge, and justification involving epistemic aims, ideals, and reliability ofknowledge; epistemic cognition needs to be examined in situated and complex learning environments. Sinatra(2016) argued for the importance of examining both what students say what they believe about science, and howthey engage in scientific process and practices. Sandoval (2005) postulated two kinds of epistemology, theformal epistemology of what students understand about the nature of science and scientists’ work, and thepractical epistemology pertaining to students’ understandings of their own inquiry. These studies indicate theneed to examine the intertwined relations of students’ epistemic understandings of science and their epistemicpractices of building knowledge in science.Knowledge building for epistemic developmentKnowledge building is an educational model that postulates students taking collective cognitive responsibilityfor community knowledge advancement (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014). In knowledge building classrooms, acommunity or class of students posted problems, co-constructed explanations, and refined their theories onKnowledge Forum® (KF) in ways that emulate what scientists do in advancing the frontier of knowledge.Knowledge building is premised on the idea of students creating and improving new knowledge working as acommunity of scientists; focus is placed on how science knowledge is generated involving explanation andtheory building. Researchers have investigated knowledge building from the vantage point of epistemicdevelopment. Hakkarainen (2003) analyzed the discourse on CSILE (an earlier version of KF), and showedschool-aged children were engaged in explanatory-driven epistemological inquiry like scientists. Chuy et al.(2010) examined how students experiencing knowledge building had more sophisticated views about sciencecompared to those using project learning. We have also examined the role of knowledge-building designs usingexplicit reflection to promote grade 5/6 students’ epistemology of science (Lin & Chan, 2018; in press).In this study, we followed our previous work and designed a KB environment focusing on collectiveinquiry, discourse and reflection, extending the design incorporating model building in earth sciences, adifferent curricula area. There are two design themes: First, we emphasize students’ idea-driven inquiry anddiscourse both online and offline, when they worked together for idea improvement and to advance collectiveknowledge. In doing so, students would better understand nature of progressive science and theory building. Asecond theme is explicit epistemic reflection in a community KB context - There are diverse meanings ofexplicit reflection, and in this study “explicit” refers to an intentional design and not didactic or “telling.”“reflection” involves students reflecting on their inquiry/ discourse in a collective space; and “epistemic”involves the notion that reflection is conducted in relation to epistemic criteria/standards. Specifically, weexamined how young students develop an understanding of science, focusing on linking their practicalepistemology (what they experience in their knowledge-building inquiry) and formal epistemology (what theyunderstand about scientists’ inquiry) (Lin & Chan, 2018). In sum, this study aimed to examine how a KBenvironment facilitates scientific epistemology through knowledge-building inquiry and reflection. Weexamined the following questions: (1) What characterized students’ views of science and how were they relatedto domain understanding and KF engagement? (2) How did knowledge-building classroom processes andepistemic talk/reflection support students’ scientific epistemology and practice? And (3) How did students linktheir inquiry processes with scientists’ inquiry processes in developing their understanding of nature of science?MethodsParticipants and contextTwenty-Two Grade-4 students aged between 9 and 10 participated in a Hong Kong classroom and they camefrom an average to below average academic class. The teacher had previously conducted knowledge buildingpedagogy for several years and welcomed the opportunity to extend to diverse students. During 10 weeks’study, students worked on an earth sciences unit (volcanoes, earthquakes, and tsunamis).Designing the knowledge-building environmentStudents were encouraged to engage in scientific practice and build knowledge together in a KB environment.The specific designs included: (1) Initiating collective inquiry with authentic problems: To stimulate thinking,the teacher showed video clips about an earthquake/tsunami in Japan. Students posed questions after watching,ICLS 2018 Proceedings896© ISLSthen worked collaboratively to identify good questions through discussion, and started inquiry on theknowledge-building wall. (2) Classroom inquiry was followed with collaborative online discussions on KF anddeepening inquiry through knowledge building talk related to principles (3) Students drew diagrams as modelsto explain the mechanism of different earth sciences phenomena and reflected on such practice related toexplanation. (4) Students engaged in epistemic talk and reflection examining how their classroom and onlinework reflected knowledge building and good scientific practice; they wrote reflection portfolio with the supportof designed scaffolds in KF.Data sourcesThe following data sources were included: (1) Epistemology of science. A set of five open-ended questionsadapted from Lin and Chan (2018) was administered to students at pre-posttests to explore their understandingsof nature of science. A Likert-scale questionnaire was administered to assess their epistemic beliefs of sciencelearning. It contained 26 items with 4 dimensions of epistemic beliefs (source, certainty, development, andjustification) adapted from Conley et al. (2003). (2) Domain understanding. Pre- and post-test domainknowledge (e.g., causes of earthquake) were examined using a set of written questions. Students wereencouraged to draw diagrams to help express their understanding. (3) KF participation and writing: (a) Datalogs based on Analytic Toolkit, an assessment tool within KF, was used to measure students’ participation inonline KF discourse. (b) Depth of explanation. Students’ notes were coded on a 4-point scale for level ofexplanation adapted from the epistemology of inquiry scale (Hakkarainen, 2003), and (c) KF portfolio noteswere analyzed qualitatively to gauge students’ reflection in relation to knowledge building inquiry. (4)Classroom process and discourse of students’ scientific practice and understanding supported by knowledgebuilding dynamics were examined. (5) Students’ understanding of knowledge building process was examinedusing focus group interviews.Results and analysisCharacterization of students’ scientific epistemology and change over timeDifferent patterns of students’ views about science were identified using a theory-building perspective (Lin &Chan, 2018; in press; Chuy et al., 2010). Key dimensions included role of ideas, theory change, and socialprocess. For the question on what scientists do (i.e., what do scientists want to achieve?) one student wrote that“scientists invent things to help people” [NJC]; another wrote that scientists want to find out the right answers(WYT); for higher-level responses, a student wrote that “scientists work to think about new theory. They areinvolved in observation, conducting experiments, and inquiry (TYX). In response to another question onwhether they think theory will change, one student wrote that “theory will not change. We always have gravityon our earth.” (TYX); another student said that “every theory will change once in a while for example in everyfive years” (WSY); for more sophisticated responses, the student wrote that “scientists will continue theirinquiry to make science better; they will not only do experiments once; they will do different experiments; andif the results are different, they will think about the problems and make changes; they may change their originaltheory to some different theories” (WZY).Students’ responses to the five open-ended questions were coded on a 4-point scale ranging from naïveto sophisticated responses (Cohen Kappa, 0.91). Analysis of open-ended responses showed significant changeson students’ scores between pretest 1.68 (.58) and posttest 2.54 (.80), t=3.65, p<.001. Overall, students seemedto exhibit better understandings of the purpose and development of science for explaining or creating newtheory; students also had a general sense of some key elements in scientific inquiry including data, experiments,and theory. Findings from questionnaires on epistemic beliefs (Conley et al. 2004) (source, certainty,development, and justification) showed pre-posttest differences on the dimension of “development” (3.65 (.69)to 4.06 (.54), t =-.23, p<.007). Students seemed to be most influenced after instruction in viewing knowledge asevolving and changing, and not static; such results also align more with the knowledge-building perspective.Scientific epistemology, domain understanding and KF engagementStudent engagement in KF discourse was examined using data logs information in KF notes. The mean numberof notes written was 6.6 (3.4); 20.6% (9.7) of notes were read; keyword use totals were 55.3 (31.47); and themean number of notes revision was 3.73 (3.61). Correlation analysis indicated that the number of notes written(productivity) showed no association with explanatory notes; however, the number of notes read (collaboration)was significantly correlated with the explanatory quality of notes (r=.66, p<.01). These results suggest that themore students read others’ notes and as they were aware of community work, the more they wrote high-qualityexplanatory notes. Students showing low levels of epistemological understanding also wrote notes with lowerICLS 2018 Proceedings897© ISLSexplanatory value (r=-.425, p<.05). Quantitative analysis also showed pre/post-test changes on students’ domainunderstandings. Post-test domain scores were also shown to be correlated with the scientific epistemologyscores. These quantitative findings were generally consistent with other studies in knowledge-building researchand provided some validation that the identified science epistemology scores are meaningful.Knowledge building inquiry, discourse and reflectionWe analyzed key themes emerging in the knowledge building classroom reflecting students’ epistemic inquiryand reflection; online and offline discourse were integrated. These selected themes were guided by ourframework emphasizing knowledge building inquiry and epistemic reflection.Theme 1: Formulating problems for inquiry and selection of productive questionsGenerating productive questions and formulating problems is key to scientific practice and progress. In theknowledge building classroom, from the start, the focus is about helping students develop the practice of askingquestions and formulating these questions into more specific problems. The knowledge-building wall (Fig 1)provided a public space where students posted ideas and questions and made their ideas public and visible forimprovement. A developing epistemic culture is that ideas are out there to be improved as in the classroom talk.TS24TS22S21TS25S8S24Please look at the knowledge-building wall. What are some questions youare interested in?How do computers or earthquake warning systems predict earthquakes?Could you share what you wrote?There is vibration in the mantle when earthquakes happen; after ten seconds,the warning system can detect the earthquake.I think the detector is put in the mantle but the detecting time is different…um… I think it should be longer than 10 seconds.Do you have questions about these responses? Do you want to build on theseideas?How could the warning system detect the vibration in the mantle?Why must the detector be placed in the mantle but not other parts [crust]?Why must we use a detector or electromagnetic wave to detect the P wave?This excerpt illustrated how the teacher helped students to make ideas visible using KF wall; how theybegan to engage in the scientific practice of asking questions; different ideas were put forward and considered asstudents worked together to deepen the inquiry problem.Figure 1. Student posting ideas on the knowledge-building wall.In addition to the scientific practice of asking questions, students were also encouraged to explicitlyreflect on their practice of formulating problems; they discussed how they chose the questions for inquiry.TS4TS12S14TICLS 2018 ProceedingsAll groups have written several questions and you chose two each. What arethe questions you did not use?How big is the mantle?And why?This question has a definite answer.Some questions you can find in the textbook.How do you choose your questions then?898© ISLSS15S18TMy other questions are broader with more to find out.We can talk more about these questions, we can all discuss more.Let’s go to the KF wall and put more ideas there, and keep building on them.As they discussed their selection of questions alluding to features such as certainty [S12], scope forinquiry [S15], community interest [S18], the teacher engaged students in reflection relating to epistemic aspects –he was helping students to develop the epistemic criteria for problem formulation, analogous to scientistschoosing productive questions for inquiry. In this process, students would gradually develop the epistemichabits of generating questions, sharing ideas, choosing productive questions, and building on each other’s ideasto advance collective understanding.Theme 2: Co-construction of explanation and criteria of good discourseExplanatory inquiry and co-construction of ideas is important in scientific practice. After posting questions andideas on the KF wall, they continued their inquiry in KF. Here are some examples of KF notes that show howstudents co-constructed explanation on a problem they posted on the KF wall.[INTU][My theory][My theory][My theory][My theory]Why are there earthquakes in Japan but not in Hong Kong? [YHH]I think Japan is in between two plates. [LCH]The plate is near Japan but far from Hong Kong [WTL]Near Japan there are different plates…Pacific, Eurasia…the Japanese islandsare there near these 4 plates.. so there are more earthquakes and volcano inJapan. [WCY]Most strong earthquakes in our world occur at the edge of the tectonicplates. Hong Kong is located within the Eurasian plate and not at the edge.The famous Pacific earthquake belt is found at the edge of the Eurasia andPacific plates that go through Japan and Taiwan... Hong Kong is far fromthis active belt so I think the chance of major earthquake is smaller. [LHY]Although student understanding is still rudimentary, they are moving from general responses to morespecific ones and progressively improving their explanations together using information and evidence. The lastresponse suggested that the student [LHY], in comparing earthquakes in Hong Kong and Japan, has moved upto a general principle and using the location of plates to explain the occurrences of earthquake. Following theirKF writing, the teacher conducted a knowledge-building talk, to help students reflect explicitly on their inquiry.TS6TS5S12S21TS18What do you think are the good notes on Knowledge Forum?They provided detailed information....yes…details. and what others?not just something else. Good notes add on.. it is about our original problem.I like the notes that answer my question.Not just answer one question… the good notes follow on. We can continuethe inquiryWhich are some notes you like?I like CX’s note because he provided explanation about the volcanoeruption; he also had some source information.As the excerpt showed, these young students, in their intuitive and simple language, seemed to bedeveloping some notions that it is important to address the key conceptual problem; they need to continue theinquiry; and ideas need to be explanatory. In this classroom, student engaging in KF writing and discourse wasenhanced with explicit reflection on epistemic standards of good discourse moves; discussion on reflection wasenhanced with the collaborative space of knowledge forum.Theme 3: Drawing models and evaluating quality relating to processes and mechanismsAnother aspect of scientific practice is the use of model for explaining scientific phenomena. Students drewdiagrams as a model to explain their understanding of volcanic eruption; they shared their artifacts with the classand refined their diagrams through collaborative discussion, as they continued their discussion on KF, then theyrepeated the drawing of the model and they explained the change in classroom discourse (Figure 2).ICLS 2018 Proceedings899© ISLSTS5S11S2Could you share with us your diagrams? Can you explain them?This is only a diagram without words or explanation [refers to the first one].My second one explains the reasons and mechanism and I included words.Both diagrams explained that volcanic eruption is caused by the movementof the plate. However, the first one is not as detailed as the second. I havedrawn the whole process of the volcano eruption in the second diagram.When I drew the second diagram, I referred to the movement of magma andthree types of plate movement. I also referred to my first diagram, anddiscussed with WZL about what other reasons could cause volcaniceruption. And here I also drew the harmful effects of volcano eruption.Students through drawing these diagrams depicted their model of how volcanic eruption took place. Thediscussion suggested that these students seemed to have recognized the important role of process and mechanismin explaining scientific phenomena. They were not just describing how volcanic eruption took place; they wereevaluating the quality of the diagrams and alluded to epistemic features and role of explanation. Students alsonoted the positive effects of working together and social interaction in improving ideas.Figure 2. A student’s first and second drawings on volcano eruption (left and center) and a KF view onformation of volcanos and student drawings (right).Knowledge Forum provides the environment that emerging ideas and different models can be madepublic for continuing inquiry; selected diagrams and models were posted on KF for students’ further inquiry in adeepening view when students continued their discourse (Figure 2).Theme 4: Epistemic talk and epistemic reflectionThe teacher also helped students to engage in epistemic talk and reflection to develop ways of thinking in linewith what scientist do and how they think.TS1S5TS9S6TS8TS9S10TS12What do you think about geologists and scientists’ work?They also learn things.They search information from the internet?What are the differences between our inquiry and scientist inquiry?They do many experiments.….um…We also search information like the scientists..Do scientists trust the information?No... not all information is true. They would do some investigation; then testagain to find out about the informationHow then do they test the information?Do some research…they also do experiments… they go to places with earthquake for field workSo scientists know a lot?...more than we do......they will always continue their work …and improve the knowledge.The excerpt suggested that some students began with intuitive ideas, but through dialogue, diverseideas emerged suggesting some understanding about science as involving experiments and source ofICLS 2018 Proceedings900© ISLSinformation; how scientists go about doing experiments and field inquiry in testing external information; and thecontinual work of scientists for progress.Students were engaged in reflection on their inquiry related to the epistemic processes of knowledgebuilding. A set of KB principles have been used to inform knowledge-building design (Scardamalia & Bereiter,2014) that reflect the epistemic standards of knowledge work. Throughout the program, the teacher helpedstudents to talk about selected key principles using simple language including “all ideas can be better” (ideaimprovement), “questions start us thinking” (epistemic agency) and “we work together to move forward”(community knowledge). Towards the latter part of the program, students were provided with a diagram thatillustrated the epistemic criteria of knowledge building as related to scientific practice (Figure 3); they reflectedand provided examples from their own experience in relation to these features. Their epistemic reflection on theirown inquiry and scientist’s inquiry was extended in their writing of portfolio notes on KF (next section).Figure 3. Knowledge-building principles as epistemic prompts for reflective inquriy.Students linking their own inquiry with scientific inquiryWe included examples from KF reflective portfolio notes and interviews to illustrate how students link theirinquiry processes with scientists’ inquiry processes as they discussed their understanding of nature of science.Scientists use their observation to help them pose questions…Before they do the experiments theywould predict… and after that, they would analyze the data and information, they would also worktogether to ask more questions... they would continue with their inquiry…For us, we also construct knowledge together. Using KF we read others’ ideas... to help enrich ourideas... we also go and research and look for information so we can have better ideas... We also havechanged our ideas... [about volcanic eruption]. When we worked on that first... we don’t knowmuch…we find more information and improve the explanation [TWT].This response suggested how this student drew upon her KF inquiry and connected the similarities withscientists considering the need to search for information, to test and improve these ideas; and these ideas can bechanged to provide better explanation. The interview excerpt shows some similar patterns.S5um...it seems yes. .. we are somewhat like scientists..IDo you want to tell us more..S5We are now finding out more about volcano... these are things that expertsdo research on…but we are also trying to inquire about volcano; somehowwe are beginning to follow.. model after scientistsS5Yes.. We can do that..S9I think we are also like scientists looking for information and doing research;um we are also working to find out why volcano erupt.S16We are not like scientists.. they know a lot more than we do…ISo you think scientists have a lot more knowledge than us?…S5um. I still think we are like scientists.. we also know something aboutvolcano eruption ..something [in the area of scientists] We are like littlescientists.. um following the examples of what scientists do..S9um…we are also working together like a community.and scientists do that.In this excerpt, these students indicate how they could be like scientists working on researchInterestingly, one student disagreed and noted that scientists have more knowledge [S16]. This brought aboutICLS 2018 Proceedings901© ISLSfurther explanations that they can be like little scientists, working in the same inquiry area, emulating thescientists [S5]and how they can work collectively just as scientists do [S9]. These data suggested for theseyoung children, even in their simple language, had some intuitive sense that while they do not know as much asscientists, they can follow the scientists’ practice on developing knowledge.Implications and significanceThis study contributed to the knowledge building literature and investigated how school-aged studentsdeveloped epistemologies of science supported by knowledge building inquiry and reflection. The findingssupported our earlier work and extended to a younger group in a different curricula area, including both whatstudents said about their epistemic understanding of science as well as how they approached the epistemic workof building knowledge. This study illuminates the ideas that if students are to understand certain aspects ofnature of science, they must experience those aspects and make reflection on such experience. Our findingsshow that knowledge-building supported by KF provides opportunities for students to experience scientificinquiry and practice involving formulating questions, construction of ideas, model building and explanation, andcommunity processes. The findings also show how epistemic talk and reflection on collective work, relating towhy and how and criteria, help students to link their practice with their understandings -- they are linking theirpractical epistemology of knowledge-building experience with the formal epistemology of how scientists buildknowledge. Theoretically, this line of research in knowledge building may enrich the notion of explicitreflection examining how it may be enhanced as collective reflection in a community context. There are alsodesign implications of scaffolding young students in idea-driven inquiry and discourse and engaging them inepistemic talks to help them to reflect on their practice as little scientists and knowledge builders.ReferencesCarey, S., Evans, R., Honda, M., Jay, E., & Unger, C. (1989). An experiment is when you try it and see if itworks: a study of grade 7 students' understanding of the construction of scientific knowledge.International Journal of Science Education, 11(5), 514-529.Chinn, C. A., Buckland, L. A., & Samarapungavan, A. L. A. (2011). Expanding the Dimensions of EpistemicCognition: Arguments From Philosophy and Psychology. Educational Psychologist, 46(3), 141-167.Chuy, M., Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., Prinsen, F., Resendes, M., Messina, R., Angela Chow, T. C. Y. (2010).Understanding the nature of science and scientific progress: A theory-building approach. CanadianJournal of Learning and Technology, 36(1).Conley, A. M., Pintrich, P. R., Vekiri, I., & Harrison, D. (2004). Changes in epistemological beliefs inelementary science students. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 29(2), 186-204.Elby, A., Macrander, C., & Hammer, D. (2016). Epistemic cognition in Science. In J. A. Greene, W. A.Sandoval, & I. Bråten (Eds.), Handbook of epistemic cognition (pp. 113-127). New York: Routledge.Hakkarinen, K. (2003).Emergence of progressive inquiry culture in computer-supported collaborative learning.Learning Environment Research, 6,199-220.Lederman, N. G., Abd-El-Khalick, F., Bell, R. L., & Schwartz, R. e. S. (2002). Views of nature of sciencequestionnaire: Toward valid and meaningful assessment of learners' conceptions of nature of science.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39(6), 497-521.Khishfe, R., & Abd-El-Khalick, F. (2002). Influence of explicit and reflective versus implicit inquiry-orientedinstruction on sixth graders' views of nature of science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,39(7), 551-578.Lin, F. & Chan, C.K.K. (2018). Promoting elementary-school students’ epistemology of science throughcomputer-supported knowledge building discourse and epistemic reflection. International Journal ofScience Education.Lin, F. and Chan, C.K.K. (in press). Examining the role of computer-supported knowledge-building discourse inepistemic and conceptual understanding. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning.Sandoval, W. A. (2005). Understanding students' practical epistemologies and their influence on learningthrough inquiry. Science Education, 89(4), 634-656.Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge cration: Theory, pedagogy andtechnology. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Scences (pp. 397-417).Sinatra, G. (2016). Thoughts on knowledge about thinking about knowledge. In J. A. Greene, W. A. Sandoval,& I. Bråten (Eds.), Handbook of epistemic cognition (pp. 479-491). New York: Routledge.Smith, C. L., Maclin, D., Houghton, C., & Hennessey, M. G. (2000). Sixth-Grade Students' Epistemologies ofScience: The Impact of School Science Experiences on Epistemological Development. Cognition andInstruction, 18(3), 349-422.ICLS 2018 Proceedings902© ISLS