Becoming Facilitators of Creative Computing inOut-of-School SettingsRicarose Roque, University of Colorado Boulder, ricarose@colorado.eduRupal Jain, Woodrow Wilson Academy of Teaching and Learning, jain@woodrow.orgAbstract: Educators in informal learning environments are often called “facilitators” tohighlight the role that they play in guiding youth interests rather than prescribing or directingtheir activities. This paper presents research on the development of adult facilitators in out-ofschool programs that engage youth in creative computing experiences, where youth create,design, and build with technology. Facilitators are typically volunteers recruited from the localcommunity, schools, and companies with varied backgrounds with youth, education, andtechnology. We examined the experiences of adult facilitators in an intergenerational learningprogram that supported youth and their parents to learn and create with technology. Wedescribe three case studies of adults who developed multiple practices and roles and discusswhat supported their development as facilitators. This study has implications for how informallearning organizations and programs can support facilitators from varied backgrounds tosupport diverse learners in creative computing.IntroductionIn the last decade, researchers, policymakers, and industry leaders have recognized the importance of supportingyouth in learning to code, or creating and designing with computing, to become full and empowered participantsin our increasingly digital society. Many efforts have emerged in out-of-school settings, such as after schoolclubs like CodeClub, international challenges like Technovation, and libraries like Ready to Code.To support these experiences in informal learning spaces and to engage more diverse groups incomputing, adult facilitators can play important roles in developing welcoming spaces that enable youth to learnwith computing (Vossoughi, Escude, Kong, & Hooper, 2013). In this paper, we focus on the experiences ofadult facilitators in out-of-school settings designed to engage youth in creative computing, or making, designing,and tinkering with computing. Adult facilitators may be students, professionals, or community volunteers. Theymight help for a few days or remain for a few years. Some might have extensive experience with computing asengineers or technology designers, while others might have limited experience. Some might have backgroundsas educators with experience working with youth, while others might have very little. Facilitators might range inage from teenagers to retirees. These adult facilitators are often recruited and trained by staff from informallearning organizations. With these varying backgrounds and circumstances, staff in informal learning spacesface challenges in supporting facilitators to develop the practices that can meaningfully engage diverse learners.While many studies have examined the experiences of youth in these programs, relatively fewer studieshave examined adult facilitators and what supports they need to facilitate empowering and enrichingexperiences for learners of many backgrounds, different interests, and vastly different expertise with technology.Past studies have primarily focused on the practices of facilitators, such as surfacing learners’ interests,providing encouragement, guiding rather than directing, and deepening their engagement (Gutwill, Hido, andSindorf, 2015). Other studies of adult caretakers such as parents and mentors highlight the different roles theycan play such as teacher, collaborator, and learner (Barron, et al 2009; Nacu et al, 2016; Kafai et al., 2008). Theidentification of these roles and practices are important to help define what facilitators can do, but how dostudents, professionals, and volunteers learn to take on these roles?In this paper, we take an initial step to more closely examine the development of adult facilitators andwhat supports their development of the practices and roles highlighted by these past studies. We present theexperiences of facilitators participating in an intergenerational learning program called Family CreativeLearning (Roque, 2016). Within this program, facilitators support kids and parents to create and learn togetherusing creative technologies like the Scratch programming language. Facilitators were recruited from localuniversities, companies, and from the staff at a community organization hosting the workshops. Facilitators hadmixed backgrounds as former classroom teachers, software developers, and community organizers.Our analysis of facilitators’ experiences builds on sociocultural frameworks of learning, where learningis embedded in shared activities and involves taking on a variety of practices and roles that change over time(Lave and Wenger, 1991; Rogoff, 1994). We ask (1) what kinds of roles did facilitators play as they engagedfamilies in creating and learning with technology? (2) what supported facilitators in the development of theseroles? We focus our study on facilitators in this family program, using collected ethnographic data to describeICLS 2018 Proceedings592© ISLSfacilitators’ development. We argue that for facilitators to develop roles to effectively support learners, theymust also engage in the process of learning themselves. The adults in our case studies were continually learningas they encountered challenges, responded to learners’ interests and needs, and tried to support families.BackgroundEducators in informal learning environments are often called “facilitators” to highlight the role that they play inguiding youth and supporting youth interests rather than prescribing or directing their activities (NationalResearch Council, 2009). Supporting such learning experiences require facilitators to negotiate a variety ofpractices such as knowing when to step back and observe or when to intervene to provide encouragement andfeedback. Studies of facilitators in spaces such as makerspaces and afterschool programs reveal the depth oftheir practices to spark interest, sustain engagement, and deepen learning trajectories (Gutwill et al., 2015).Facilitators must carefully balance offering enough support so that learners can actualize theirideas with maintaining enough distance so that learners truly drive the experience forthemselves. Striking the right tenor can be challenging, forcing facilitators to question theirown interactions constantly: Should I intervene yet or allow that girl to be frustrated for a fewmore seconds? (Gutwill et al., 2015, pg. 161)Additionally, facilitators play critical roles in engaging non-dominant youth and supporting them toaccess new and emerging opportunities with technology (Barron, Gomez, Martin & Pinkard, 2014). Facilitatorshelp to create an environment of intellectual and emotional safety and build on the “funds of knowledge” and“repertoires of practice” of learners (Vossoughi et al., 2013). Facilitators can play important roles positioninglearners as creators, pushing back against narratives of being consumers of technology (Barron et al., 2014).While facilitators enact important practices to support creative and inclusive learning experiences,facilitators themselves may not necessarily be professional educators with a background in supporting diverseyouth to engage with digital opportunities. Staff at informal learning organizations may recruit local STEMprofessionals, students, and community volunteers with a variety of backgrounds and experiences withtechnology and education. Some facilitators may engage with an informal space for a few weeks to years.Such varied backgrounds and participation patterns pose challenges for training and ongoingprofessional development. In a study of three makerspaces, Litts et al. (2015) described the challenges ofmakerspaces in equipping facilitators with the necessary skills and training. The disciplinary backgrounds andpast experiences of facilitators tended to influence the moves and decisions they made as facilitators. Forexample, facilitators with a background building bikes might facilitate bike building activities. Those withbackgrounds supporting physical making might lean towards supporting activities and trajectories in thephysical realm — limiting learning opportunities with digital media.Researchers of informal spaces emphasize the need to better understand how facilitators develop andwhat supports their development (McNamara, Akiva, Wardrip, & Brahms, 2016). This paper focuses on thesequestions in the context of a family learning program.Facilitators in Family Creative LearningIn this paper, we explore the role of facilitators and what supports them to take on different roles within acommunity-based program called Family Creative Learning (FCL). FCL invites families to learn together usingcreative technologies (Roque, 2016). FCL has five workshops and are held in a community center once a weekfor two hours each. Each workshop is divided into four parts: Eat, Meet, Make, and Share. In Eat, families havea meal from a restaurant, allowing all families and facilitators to eat with each other. In Meet, facilitators checkin separately with parents and children to talk about their experiences in the workshops. In Make, parents andchildren engage in design activities with the Scratch programming environment and Makey Makey inventionkit. In Share, families talk about their projects to other families and receive feedback and questions.Unlike instructionist learning environments where there is a central instructor and pre-determinedactivities, the design of FCL draws on constructionist traditions of learning, which argue that people learn bestwhen they are building things that are personally and socially meaningful (Papert, 1980; Kafai, 2006).Constructionism builds upon constructivist traditions that knowledge is not something that is transmitted oracquired, but something that is actively constructed through experience (Piaget, 1976). As people build projects,they build ideas. To be personally meaningful, the design of FCL invites families to build on their diverse“repertoires of practices” and “funds of knowledge” (Gutiérrez & Rogoff, 2003; Moll, Amanti, Nef & Gonzalez,1992). To be socially meaningful, the design of FCL has also leveraged learning theories that emphasize theICLS 2018 Proceedings593© ISLSsocial aspects of learning (Brown, Duguid, & Collins, 1989; Lave & Wenger, 1991). Families are encouraged towork together as well as interact with other families participating in FCL.Prior to the workshops, facilitators met as a team to become familiar with the tools, activities, andfacilitation. Both authors met with facilitators and highlighted the role they play in supporting families to engagein personally and socially meaningful experiences with computing. They shared the Family Creative LearningFacilitator Guide (Roque & Leggett, 2014), particularly the Facilitating Fundamentals, which included practicessuch as “build relationships and trust”, “ask questions rather than giving answers,” and “surface their interests.”For example, to build relationships and trust, facilitators are encouraged to eat with families and focus on a fewfamilies rather than the whole room so that facilitators can form deeper connections with families. Additionally,the authors prepared some facilitation dilemmas for facilitators to discuss such as what to do if someone asks achallenging question or what to do if someone becomes frustrated with the making process.During the workshops, facilitators supported the workshop implementation and worked with families tohelp them with their projects. Immediately after a workshop session, facilitators met to debrief for 30 minutes todiscuss what went well, what questions they have, or things that could be improved or challenging interactionsthey witnessed. Between the workshops, the facilitators met again to consider their reflections from the previousworkshops and to discuss changes or strategies to implement in the next workshop.Studying the experiences of facilitatorsParticipantsIn this paper, we focus on facilitators who participated in the design and implementation of FCL workshopsconducted in the Spring of 2015 at a public housing community center in an urban community in thenortheastern United States. Six facilitators facilitated and six families participated in the workshops (13 familymembers). Facilitators were recruited through local universities and through volunteers and staff from theparticipating community center. Two facilitators were graduate students pursuing a one-year, professionalmasters in education, one facilitator was an engineering undergraduate student, one facilitator was a softwaredeveloper, and two facilitators were staff from the community center. Students were recruited by emailingstudents lists at two local universities. Facilitators’ backgrounds with computer programming ranged fromlimited exposure to Scratch programming in a class to using programming as part of their educational andprofessional background. Facilitators were not paid to participate in the FCL workshops. Roque served as afacilitator during this program, while Jain served as a facilitator in past FCL programs.Families were recruited from the community, with kids between 7 to 13 years old and parents between35 to 82 years old. (We use parents loosely to mean any adult caretaker such as grandparents and familyfriends.) Five of the six parents were women. All parents were immigrants from countries in Latin America. Allkids qualified for free/reduced lunch in school. All families created and shared a project at the final showcase.Data collection and analysisWhile the data in this study focuses on facilitators, this data is also part of a larger qualitative study usingethnographic and case study methods to examine the learning experiences of families within the context ofcomputing (Roque, Lin, & Liuzzi, 2016). We used individual interview data to understand child and parentinteractions and perceptions of facilitators. To understand the experiences of facilitators, we used multiplemethods of data collection. During the workshops, we collected photo, audio, and video documentation offacilitator and family interactions. We audio-recorded, and later transcribed, team reflections after theworkshops. Between workshops, facilitators wrote field notes to describe the experience from their perspective.We also documented team meetings, where we discussed plans for the next workshop based on reflections fromthe prior workshop. Three facilitators (the two staff members and the software developer) were unable toparticipate in writing field notes and meetings between workshops due to their work schedules. After theprogram ended, we conducted 60-90 minute semi-structured interviews with the six facilitators. Prior to theinterviews, we asked facilitators to reflect on three to five moments that mattered to their experience. In additionto asking questions about these moments, such as why they chose them and what they took away from thosemoments, we asked them questions to surface their motivations, their facilitation challenges, and the strategiesthey developed. These multiple methods of data collection before, during, and after the program allowed us totriangulate their experiences as well as capture their development as facilitators over time.We used grounded theory strategies (Charmaz, 2006) to uncover experiences of development or changeby examining what facilitators did, how they interacted with families, and what they said about their experience.In particular, we examined the moments that facilitators identified in their interviews — moments where theylearned, where they encountered a dilemma, or where they shifted their thinking. We then used field notes,ICLS 2018 Proceedings594© ISLSfacilitation workshop debrief sessions, and audio and video documentation to further examine these particularmoments of learning or change. We used roles identified by other studies of adult caretakers, such as teacher,collaborator, learner, and audience roles, and we used the grounded approach to uncover additional roles andpractices (Barron et al., 2009; Nacu et al., 2014; Brahms & Crowley, 2016; Kafai et al., 2008). Both authorsparticipated in data collection, transcription, coding, and analysis. We met weekly during a seven-month periodto discuss data analysis, making sure that each analysis was approved by both team members.Of the six facilitators, we focused on three facilitators to develop case studies to highlight the ways thatfacilitators took on varied roles and what supported them to take on these roles as they supported families. Thesethree facilitators were selected to showcase different experiences of development, but they are no meansrepresentative of all facilitators. While we focus on these three, the other facilitators in the workshop areembedded in their experiences since the facilitators interacted in several ways throughout the workshop.ResultsIn the following sections, we present three case studies of facilitators’ experiences that reveal how they wereable to shift roles, practices, and perspectives to support and guide families. We focus on their practices (e.g.sharing reflections, asking questions), their interactions with families (e.g. making suggestions, co-creating), andtheir perspectives on themselves and the families (e.g. feeling insecure about their expertise, seeing how openparents can be). We use pseudonyms to refer to the facilitators and families.Maria: Developing a tinkering mindsetMaria, a former classroom teacher and graduate student at a local university, was looking forward to helpingwith the workshops. As a native Spanish speaker, she was especially interested in helping Spanish-speakingfamilies. However, she worried how helpful she could be with her limited experience with computing.During Workshop 1, Maria helped parents get started with Scratch, who were engaging in an activity toanimate the letters of their name in Scratch. She helped one parent, Andres, who recently immigrated andprimarily spoke Spanish. He was having trouble getting started because the activity handouts were in English.She showed him how to add letters, and after watching him add two letters, she continued walking around theroom. When she came back, he proudly shared his project with Maria. She asked him what he wanted to donext. He mentioned that he wanted to add sounds because his nephew liked music. Maria pointed out the soundfeatures in Scratch. During the debrief with other facilitators after the workshop, Maria shared how surprisedshe was to see how open the parents were to trying things out and being vulnerable to not knowing. Meanwhile,she shared her desire to continue improving her experience with Scratch.During Workshop 2, Andres worked with another parent, Julia, and they called over Maria for help.They were trying to program their project to play a drum sound whenever the space key was pressed. Maria sawthat their Scratch program looked correct and became puzzled as to why their project was not working. Shecalled over another facilitator, Alex, who was a software developer and had past experience running Scratchcamps. He also recognized their blocks, but wondered if the Scratch editor did not have the keyboard focus,which allows the Scratch editor to notice keypresses. He asked the two parents to click on the Scratch editor andafter they pressed the spacebar again, the project worked. Soon after this interaction, they called on Maria againto help them make their sprites dance. Maria was unsure and she called on another facilitator to help. Maria feltfrustrated that she could not immediately help the two parents.Maria shared these feelings of frustration during the team debrief. Another facilitator, Pia, who hadpast experience facilitating Scratch workshops, responded, “I don’t think you should feel that it’s all on you [toknow]... You don’t have to know. What you have to focus on is modeling the tinkering and exploration and theexperimenting. I think it’s the attitude that’s more important.” In a post-workshop interview, Maria noted howPia’s comment changed her mindset and approach as a facilitator. She became less self-conscious and insteadfocused on showing participants how to go about realizing their ideas. When she was unsure, she would askherself: “What could I do? Where could I go? Who could I ask?” rather than worrying about her lack ofexpertise. She added, “That's big for me because before that I was a teacher and a teacher always has to know.”Maria’s experiences also shifted her notions of what it meant to be a teacher. Instead of being someonewho “always has to know,” she shifted her role to model how to tinker, experiment, and learn from challenges.Additionally, in her post-workshop interview, Maria noted that her perspectives on parents had shifted. Whenshe was a teacher, her interactions with parents were often about homework and discipline. “For the first time, Iconnected with a parent. That never happened before for and that was powerful. They're so curious and full ofjoy. I never saw that side of parents before.”ICLS 2018 Proceedings595© ISLSCase analysisMaria’s experience is not unlike many of the other new facilitators who had limited experience with computing.Through pre-workshop facilitation meetings, Maria gained some basic experience with Scratch. At the start ofFCL, Maria took on a teacher role (which she was familiar with as a former classroom teacher) and she sharedher expertise with Andres. However, as families continued to advance and their ideas became more complex,Maria’s knowledge of Scratch reached its limits and she felt frustrated at her inability to fulfill her teacher role.The facilitation team was an important resource for her to help her answer questions from families andto shift her role in the workshops. Maria pulled on different members of the team who had varying expertisewith Scratch, such as Alex, to aid in her facilitation. Rather than being someone who had the expertise, Mariarealized that what was important was her ability to model how to learn through tinkering and exploration as wellas through pulling on different people in the room.Sam: Helping them pursue their ideasSam, a former special education teacher and graduate student at a local university, had past experience helpinghis students learn with technologies, such as robots, construction kits, and virtual worlds. However, he had littleexperience working with families and looked forward to learning how he could engage parents and kids.He met Julia and Eric, a mother and son, early in the workshop series, and noticed that both were shyand quiet. He sometimes had to lean in to hear them speak. However, once he sat down and engaged with themone-on-one, he learned that Eric liked building things, and had just started to play with a new computer thatJulia got from participating in computer classes at their community center. When they began their familyproject, Sam watched Eric and Julia as they quietly discussed their project and Eric drew their project idea. Samchecked in with them and learned about their rollercoaster idea. However, it was near the end of Workshop 3and Sam was concerned about what Julia’s body language communicated:She was directing Eric more, and she would be like, "Do that." She was looking a lot at what[another family] Estella and Carlos were doing. And I don't think she was competing withthem, but I think that she wanted to produce something that she was proud of. And they [Juliaand Eric] definitely liked their idea. They wanted to make the roller coaster.He watched as they tried to find a rollercoaster image through Google. After searching for some time,he stepped in and suggested drawing their rollercoaster on Scratch showing them the paint editor in Scratch.However, as they got started, he noticed they had trouble working the mouse, frequently right-clicking insteadleft-clicking. They were unable to make much progress and by the Share portion of the workshop, and he felt alow energy from them as they described what they tried to do.In Workshop 4, Sam decided to work more closely with Julia and Eric, asking them questions aboutwhat they wanted to do next, and then showing them how they might accomplish it. He worried if he was “overfacilitating,” providing too much guidance in their project process. However, Sam felt that they needed a bitmore guidance than other families because they were still struggling with some computer basics like using themouse. Sometimes Sam had to put his hand over Eric’s hand on the mouse to help him. He shared his feelingsabout over-facilitation during the team debrief. Another facilitator, Alex, shared similar feelings, but becausethe young girl he was working with accidentally lost her project, he felt it was necessary to step in moredirectly. Alex sat with her as she tried to recreate her project.During an extra workshop session before the community showcase, Sam shared an idea about adding“riders” and he modified a plastic cup with two googly eyes. Eric liked the idea and he and Julia each createdtheir own. As he was watching them, Sam felt he had crossed into the over-facilitation and directed a part oftheir vision towards his ideas rather than theirs.Case analysisFor Sam, it was a balancing act between his actions and ideas and Julia and Eric’s actions and ideas. Thisconstant tension has been highlighted in other studies of facilitators (Gutwill et al, 2015). If a facilitatorprovides too much guidance and direction, learners may miss opportunities for discovery and exploration. Onthe other hand, too little guidance may frustrate and discourage learners as they run into challenges. In Sam’sexperience, his practice of stepping in or out was informed by his close observation of Julia and Eric as well ascritical reflection, on his own and with the facilitation team. Sam’s observations and interpretations of theseinteractions mirror the practices of researchers who collect data, make interpretations, and ask new questions.Eleanor Duckworth in The Having of Wonderful Ideas (1987) highlighted how the teacher is like a researcher:ICLS 2018 Proceedings596© ISLSJust as a researcher's knowledge guides her further questioning and gives rise to the nextproblem she asks them to consider, so a teacher, convinced that he cannot put his ownunderstanding into the learners' heads, uses that understanding to help the learners take theirown thoughts further. (Duckworth, p. 162)In a post-workshop series interview, Sam continued to reflect on his facilitation between workshops.During Workshop 3, he felt like he “under-facilitated,” giving them too much space. He shared, “I wanted themto be proud of what they're doing and I wanted them to realize their vision, so if I maneuver them a little moreeffectively, I thought it would be a better overall experience for them.” His uses of the words “over” and“under” highlight the continual balancing act of facilitators. As he continued to help them, he struggled withthat balance. Through critical reflection on his experience as well as with other facilitators, he later came tounderstand an important question for him to assess if he was over-facilitating: whose ideas are beingrepresented? To him, over-facilitation occurred when his ideas were incorporated rather than their ideas.Alex: Building relationships with learnersAlex, a software developer, joined the facilitation team late and started at Workshop 2. When he was in college,he facilitated technology-based camps for middle and high school students. However, he was new to thiscommunity site as well as to engaging families with limited backgrounds in computing.At dinner during Workshop 2, Alex sat with another family who came late to the series: a retired greatgrandmother, Sarah, who came with her 10-year old great-granddaughter, Mariah. Sarah shared with Alex howshe was here for Mariah since Mariah’s mother could not attend. During Share, Sarah, who had limited mobilityand moved with a walker, was unable to walk around each project. Facilitators including Alex noticed thischallenge and discussed ways to better include and support Mariah in future workshops.In Workshop 3, Alex noticed that Sarah came in with a cane. During dinner, Sarah shared with Alexthat it was her first time not using her walker for 2.5 years because she felt comfortable that people would takecare of her in this workshop. Her comment impressed him. He sat with them as they got started on their familyproject. Mariah sat forward as she worked on the laptop, while Sarah sat back watching Mariah andoccasionally asking her questions. During team debrief, he shared Sarah’s decision to use a cane with the rest ofthe facilitators during the debrief. Jorge, another facilitator who worked as staff at the community center,praised the team for helping Sarah feel a sense of physical safety.In the next workshop, Mariah came alone as there was a miscommunication with Sarah about theworkshop. Alex watched as Mariah signed into her Scratch account, she was unable to find her last project.Mariah seemed upset and Alex became anxious. He tried to reassure her that they could recreate it. Alexwondered how much he should guide her and remembered one of the FCL facilitating fundamentals was to “askquestions rather than give answers.” He felt conflicted and checked in with another facilitator, who shared hisanxiety. He decided to work closely with her so that she would not fall behind. As she shared ideas, Alex madesuggestions for how they could implement it. Together they made a pool party with friends dancing to music byBeyoncé. Throughout the process, Alex made encouraging comments about her ideas.Sarah attended the next workshop with Mariah. In addition to her cane, Sarah carried a large bagcontaining a blanket she knitted for Mariah’s family. She proudly showed it off during dinner and again duringthe Parent Meet session. When the Make portion of the workshop started, Mariah opened their Scratch project,while Sarah took out her knitting needles and started to work on another blanket. Alex noticed immediately andwas worried that Sarah might be disengaged for the remainder of the workshop. However, he knew from hisearlier conversation with Sarah that she came to the workshops for Mariah — something that Sarah repeated tohim multiple times. He sat next to them and asked Mariah to explain her project progress to Sarah. Once Mariahbegan describing the project, Sarah put down her knitting work and started making suggestions.Case analysisIn a post-workshop interview, Alex shared how proud he felt in supporting Sarah and Mariah, particularly howhe re-engaged Sarah when she brought out her knitting needles. He intervened, but without being intrusive byasking Mariah to describe the project as a way to bring Sarah in. He also discussed the feeling of being part of afamily. He shared, “Having to be a part and not a part another family’s dynamic [was new]. It’s reallyinteresting to see how that works and to understand my role in that when it comes to both the social and thetechnological aspects of it.” Alex provided technical support when they needed it, but he also providedemotional and social support with his encouragement when they faced challenges.In a study of families in a makerspace, Brahms and Crowley (2014) described the ways in whichfacilitators can become part of a family’s learning dynamic and an important social resource. Brahms andICLS 2018 Proceedings597© ISLSCrowley noted that as children engaged in making, they are not only building relationships with materials, butalso with the people that support them. For Sarah, her relationships with facilitators helped her feel comfortable.For Alex, relationship building was an instrumental part of his development as a facilitator as it helped himknow how to intervene and interact with families. In his past experiences helping with technology-based camps,Alex shared how their top priority was making sure kids were continually “doing stuff and being engaged.”However, in these workshops, facilitators were encouraged to build relationships with families (which was oneof the Facilitating Fundamentals). For example, through facilitators’ dinner conversations with families, helearned about Mariah’s interests and Sarah’s main motivation, which was being present for Mariah.DiscussionThis research highlights the different possibilities for adults to engage in facilitation. There was not one role thatdefined a facilitator, but instead multiple entry points and pathways that built on facilitators’ backgrounds andinterests. Their experience was a process of becoming — shifting roles, perspectives, and practices within theshared activity of facilitating creative computing experiences (Lave & Wenger, 1992; Rogoff, 1994). Maria hada background as an educator with limited technology experience. Her role shifted to being a learner and herviews of parents expanded to see them as joyful and curious learners. While Sam had some experiences teachingwith technology, he continued to negotiate his level guidance and he learned what mattered: families’ ideas.Alex, as a software developer, had technical experience to contribute, but learned the value of buildingrelationships and connecting with families in his role as a facilitator.We are also interested in what supported these adults to take on the responsibilities and practices offacilitation. First, the facilitation team became an important context for facilitators’ development as they learnedfrom one another in the shared activity of supporting families’ learning (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Rogoff, 1994).Facilitators recognized and pulled on one another’s strengths and complemented their varying backgrounds. Forexample, Maria connected with Alex to troubleshoot families’ challenges with Scratch. Secondly, collective andcritical reflection allowed facilitators to strategize around challenges as well as provide emotional support asfacilitators confronted their different anxieties. Sam and Alex’s discussions about over-facilitation helped themunderstand how to recognize if their actions crossed the line into over-facilitation or if their actions still alignedwith their values of helping learners realize their ideas. Maria shared her insecurities around her technicalexpertise during team debrief and received feedback from other facilitators on how to shift her practice towardsa tinkering mindset. This collective and critical reflection was supported by their personal field notes as well asteam meetings between and after workshops, where they discussed close observations, asked questions, andprovided suggestions. Finally, building relationships with families was important for facilitators to understandfamilies’ needs, interests, and motivations. This understanding informed their decisions as facilitators. Forfacilitators, eating dinner and connecting with families was just as important as working together on projects.In these coding and making experiences with technology, staff at youth programs or other informallearning spaces might lean towards recruiting students, professionals, and other volunteers who have expertisewith computing. However, these facilitators’ trajectories highlight the variety of expertise needed to supportfamilies in a creative learning experience. Maria and Sam had backgrounds as former teachers and children withspecial needs. The community staff played important roles in helping facilitators understand the backgrounds ofthe different families. Additionally, these facilitators’ experiences highlight what practices might beundervalued when we focus on STEM knowledge and expertise. For example, Maria felt anxiety about herlimited experience with programming. However, facilitators highlighted the importance of modeling explorationand experimentation as well as providing encouragement and suggestions. These facilitation moves have alsobeen highlighted in other studies of facilitators (Gutwill et al., 2015; Vossoughi et al., 2013).This study is a first step in deepening our understanding of what supports facilitators to take on themany roles that they play to facilitate creative and inclusive learning environments in computing. We areinterested to continue exploring what might support adults to carry out different facilitation practices, such assurfacing learners’ interests or encouraging exploration and experimentation while facing different challenges.For example, we hope to explore some of the tensions that emerged in facilitators’ experiences. How canfacilitators help guide learners’ exploration, development, and implementation of their ideas, while under theconstraints of a workshop’s time limits or other obstacles (e.g. lost projects or challenging collaborativedynamics)? The FCL environment created an interesting context to study the dynamics between facilitators andfamilies and what facilitation strategies matter when supporting a family unit, each with its own dynamics andtensions between parents and their children. Future research could contribute to how facilitators support familydynamics in the context of creative computing experiences where different family members have differentexpertise and perspectives on computing. For some families, the role of an expert parent and novice child arereversed in the context of computing as children develop their expertise and confidence beyond their parents’ICLS 2018 Proceedings598© ISLSabilities (Correa, Straubhaar, Chen, and Spence, 2013). Additionally, we understand that not all informallearning contexts with creative computing have the level of engagement and structure like FCL, but we believethat calling out the different features of facilitators’ experiences in FCL could be helpful to other settings, suchas drop-in sessions in some museums and other learning environments (Brahms and Crowley, 2016). Moreresearch could focus on the development of facilitators in settings beyond workshops.Often when out-of-school organizations onboard facilitators, the mindset is to “train” facilitators.However, our studies of facilitators’ experiences and the roles that they enacted suggest, instead, to “facilitatethe facilitators.” We argue that learning environments should support a community of learning where facilitatorsalso take on the role of learners — people who are learning to welcome, support, and guide diverse learners indesigning, tinkering, and making with computing. In these case studies, facilitators were given manyopportunities to support one another, to reflect and discuss their experiences, and to build relationships withworkshop participants. These were valuable opportunities to allow them to become a facilitator. In her postworkshop interview, Maria wondered “Am I the right fit?” when she was recruited as a facilitator. She laterlearned through her experience that fitting in was not necessary because FCL was learning environment. “Ibecame the right fit, and FCL became the right fit for me. It's a learning experience.”ReferencesRoque, R. (2016) Family Creative Learning. In Peppler, K., Kafai, Y., & Halverson, E. (Eds.) Makeology in K12, Higher, and Informal Education. New York, NY: Routeledge.Roque, R., Lin, K., & Liuzzi, R. (2016) “I’m not just a mom”: Parents developing multiple roles in creativecomputing. In proceedings of ICLS 2016, Volume 1 (pp. 663-670). Singapore: ISLS.Barron, B., Martin, C.K., Takeuchi, L., Fithian, R. (2009). Parents as learning partners in the development oftechnological fluency. The International Journal of Learning and Media.Barron, B., Gomez, K., Martin, C. K., & Pinkard, N. (2014). The digital youth network: Cultivating digitalmedia citizenship in urban communities. MIT Press.Brahms, L & Crowley, K. (2016) Learning to make in the museum: The role of maker educators. In Peppler, K.,Kafai, Y., & Halverson, E. (Eds.) Makeology in K-12, Higher, and Informal Education. New York,NY: Routledge.Brown, J.S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. EducationalResearcher, 18(1), 32-42.Duckworth, E. R. (1987). "The having of wonderful ideas" & other essays on teaching & learning. New York:Teachers College Press.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Rogoff, B. (2003). Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits or repertoires of practice.Educational Researcher, 32(5), 19–25.Gutwill, J. Hido, N., & Sindorf, L. (2015) Research to practice: Observing learning in tinkering activities.Curator: The Museum Journal, 58(2), 151-168.Kafai, Y. B., Desai, S., Peppler, K. A., Chiu, G. M., & Moya, J. (2008). Mentoring partnerships in a communitytechnology centre: A constructionist approach for fostering equitable service learning. Mentoring &Tutoring: Partnership in Learning, 16(2), 191-205.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Litts, B. K. (2015). Resources, facilitation, and partnerships: three design considerations for youth makerspaces.In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on IDC (pp. 347-350). ACM.Moll, L. C., Amanti, C., Neff, D., & Gonzalez, N. (1992). Funds of knowledge for teaching: Using a qualitativeapproach to connect homes and classrooms. Theory into Practice, 31(2), 132–141.Nacu, D, Martin, C., Pinkard, N., & Gray, T. (2016). Analyzing educators’ online interactions: A framework ofonline learning support roles. Learning, media, and technology, 41(2), 283-305.National Research Council. (2009). Learning science in informal environments: People, places, and pursuits.National Academies Press.Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York, NY, USA: Basic Books.Rogoff, B. (1994) Developing an understanding of communities of learning. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 1(4),209-229.Vossoughi, S. & Bevan, B. (2014). Making and tinkering: A review of the literature. National Research CouncilCommittee on Out of School Time STEM, 1-55.Vossoughi, S., Escude, M., Kong, F., & Hooper, P. (2013) Tinkering, learning & equity in the after-schoolsetting. In annual FabLearn conference. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University.ICLS 2018 Proceedings599© ISLS