Understanding, Redefining, and Designing for BroadeningParticipationDéana Aeolani Scipio, University of California at Davis, aeolani@gmail.comIntroductionI study broadening participation. As a learning sciences researcher with a critical sociocultural stance to learningand development, I believe that our work is inextricably linked to questions of social justice, power, and culturalrepertoires of practice. My research is oriented around two core beliefs—persons develop in structures of socialpractice and we can come to understand these structures by examining participants’ cultural learning pathways(Bell, Tzou, Bricker & Baines, 2012). Given this stance to learning and development, I choose design-basedresearch and ethnographic methods as my dominant approaches because they both privilege the experiences ofparticipants. By leveraging ethnographic methods within the larger context of design-based research, two typesof findings emerge from my work that pertain to design and theory: 1) design principles—findings aboutprogram design, curricula, pedagogies, mentorship, and implementation within communities and 2) broadeningparticipation theory—findings about learning, Deep Hanging, deepening participation, and identity developmentfor participants from non-dominant communities.Design principlesDesign-based research in STEM OST environments has been central to my research on broadeningparticipation. From September 2010 - June 2015, I ran an out-of-school time (OST) chemical oceanographyprogram called Project COOL (Chemical Oceanography Outside the Laboratory) that served middle schoolyouth from mostly non-dominant communities. COOL was a design-based research and broadeningparticipation initiative funded by the National Science Foundation and the LIFE Center. During years 3-6 of theprogram, we brought undergraduate and graduate students into COOL to serve as mentors and facilitators.Learning sciences researchers have paid much attention to OST environments as transformative spaces foryouth participants. My interest in layered learning environments expands this to include the learning trajectoriesof adult participants within OST broadening participation programming.Broadening participationMy research on broadening participation resists catastrophizing narratives of underrepresentation within STEMcareers and learning environments while exploring experiences of participants from non-dominant communities.I explore the notion of broadening participation as a tension between the need to add more people from nondominant groups to existing STEM disciplinary paradigms and transforming definitions of participation toinclude the experiences of STEM participants from non-dominant communities. What follows is an illustrativenarrative in action from my data:Angelica self-identified as Peruvian American and was a graduate student in Botany whocame to graduate school with the goal of becoming like her undergraduate mentor, “the kindof person who could inspire students” (3/15/11). Angelica wanted to use her PhD to becomean undergraduate professor. She wanted to create a program of Botany research that couldalso serve as a context for broadening STEM participation opportunities for students likeherself. However, her dissertation committee’s expectations of who and what she shouldbecome dominated any conversations she tried to have with them, “In my situation theexpectation was just for me to primarily be a research student, and my training to be one forthe person who would want to go into an R1 institution, though I’d never seen that to be whatI wanted from the beginning. I got no help in how to develop myself as an educator”(3/15/11).Settled expectations (Bang, Warren, Rosebery & Medin, 2012) constrained Angelica’s available STEMparticipation pathways. When Angelica found COOL she viewed it as a pathway to creating her owneducational theory and practice curriculum. She and other mentors from non-dominant groups explained ininterviews that they saw the COOL program as a context within which they could resist settled expectations andredefine what counted to them as STEM participation.As a sociocultural researcher with an equity-oriented frame, I take a critical stance towardsunderstanding how individuals learn within structures of social practice (Bell et al., 2012; Dreier, 2009). I viewICLS 2018 Proceedings1866© ISLSlearning as deeply relational and situated. In my work, I define learning as the ways that participants deepenparticipation in complex activity systems (Bang & Vossoughi, 2016; Gutiérrez & Jurow, 2016), develop criticalepistemic agency (Basu, Barton, Clairmont, Locke, 2009), develop identification within STEM disciplines(Carlone & Johnson, 2007), resist settled expectations (Bang et al., 2012), and develop science-linked identities(Nasir & Hand, 2008). I take a critical stance to understanding the affordances of out-of-school time (OST)learning environments and designing for broadening participation by considering powered relationships inSTEM learning spaces. I am aiming towards a theoretical and practice-based understanding of the role OSTlearning environments can play in broadening STEM participation for people from non-dominantcommunities—Deep Hanging. This approach allows me to attend to both increasing participation in existingSTEM paradigms and also redefining participation in learning spaces that honor participants and epistemologiesfrom non-dominant communities which have historically been underrepresented in STEM.Current workI currently work on a project jointly funded by the National Science Foundation and Wellcome Trust—Learningand Environmental science Agency Research Network for Citizen Science (LEARN CitSci). Citizen Science isanother space for broadening participation which positions the public to participate in contemporary science,learn scientific practices, and contribute to ongoing research. Citizen scientists ask their own questions, conducttheir own analyses, and leverage the resources of science institutions to conduct research in their owncommunities. Ballard, Dixon, & Harris (2016) expanded upon Basu & Barton’s (2009) notion of critical physicsagency to define Environmental Science Agency (ESA)—youth enacting agency in environmental and citizenscience contexts. Our goals in the LEARN CitSci project are to understand the ways that youth participate inenvironmental and citizen science programming facilitated by natural history museums and to characterizeindividual programs as designed environments which present affordances and constraints for youth engaging inESA.An emerging research agendaI am interested in studying the affordances and constraints of designed learning environments in order tounderstand ways to maximize opportunities to redefine and broaden STEM participation. I introduce DeepHanging as a theory of learning in practice. Deep Hanging entails authentic tasks in rich contexts, providingaccess, capitalizing on opportunity, and building interpersonal relationships which in turn strengthenidentification with the discipline, facilitate learning, and redefine participation. I leverage my findings aboutnon-dominant youth and adult participants’ experiences to consider the affordances and constraints of designedlearning environments for broadening participation. These findings have coalesced into a set of designprinciples for layered learning environments- spaces that support mentor learning in broadening participationprogramming while supporting science learning and identity outcomes for youth. As my critical orientationcontinues to develop, I explore the narratives of participants from non-dominant communities in STEM,participatory design-based research (Bang & Vossoughi, 2017), and desettled expectations (Bang et al., 2012)to reevaluate my theory building about youth and adult experiences within broadening participationprogramming. I resist narrow definitions of STEM participation by examining the limits of epistemic agency(Scipio, 2017b), pushing back against the metaphor of the Leaky Pipeline, and exploring pedagogies of joy inbroadening participation learning environments (Scipio et al., 2017a).ReferencesBallard, H. L., Dixon, C. G. H., & Harris, E. M. (2017). Youth-focused citizen science: Examining the role ofenvironmental science learning and agency for conservation. Biological Conservation, 208, 65–75.Bang, M., & Vossoughi, S. (2016). Participatory Design Research and Educational Justice: Studying Learningand Relations Within Social Change Making. Cognition and Instruction, 34(3), 173–193.Basu, S. J., & Calabrese Barton, A. (2009). Critical physics agency: Further unraveling the intersections ofsubject matter knowledge, learning, and taking action. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 4(2),387–392.Basu, S. J., Calabrese Barton, A., Clairmont, N., & Locke, D. (2009). Developing a framework for criticalscience agency through case study in a conceptual physics context. Cultural Studies of ScienceEducation, 4(2), 345–371.Bell, P., Tzou, C., Bricker, L., & Baines, A. D. (2012). Learning in diversities of structures of social practice:Accounting for how, why and where people learn science. Human Development, 55, 269–284.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1867© ISLSCarlone, H. B., & Johnson, A. (2007). Understanding the Science Experiences of Successful Women of Color :Science Identity as an Analytic Lens. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 44(8), 1187–1218.Dreier, O. (2009). Persons in Structures of Social Practice. Theory & Psychology, 19(2), 193–212.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Jurow, A. S. (2016). Social Design Experiments: Toward Equity by Design. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 25(4), 565–598.Scipio, D. (2017a). Authoring Joy: Multimodal artifacts as tools for broadening definitions of STEMparticipation. In D. Scipio (chair). Pedagogies of Joy. Paper presented in symposia at the annualmeeting of the American Educational Research Association. April 28, 2017. San Antonio, TX.Scipio, D. (2017b). Broadening Participation: Inclusive and transformative epistemic agency within a chemicaloceanography laboratory. In C. Krist & D. Keifert (chairs). Epistemic Agency as a Members’Experience. Paper presented in symposium at the annual meeting of the National Association forResearch in Science Teaching. April 22, 2017. San Antonio, TX.AcknowledgmentsI wish to thank Danielle Keifert, Ann Rosebery, Beth Warren, Philip Bell, and Heidi Ballard for their support.This work has been supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF#9014483) is partly supported by theLearning in Informal and Formal Environments (LIFE) Science of Learning Center (http://life-slc.org/) (NSF#0354453), and a postdoctoral fellowship with the Chèche Konnen Center at TERC.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1868© ISLS