Playing and Designing Games for Systems Thinking: A DesignBased Research ProjectAmanda Bell, Vanderbilt University, amanda.m.bell@vanderbilt.eduAbstract: Systems thinking (ST) is an important skill for making sense of the complex systemsin our world. This design-based research study tested conjectures around students’understanding of ST in elementary grades. We tested how students learn ST skills throughdesigning and playing digital and board games. We looked for students to identify componentsof a system, describe interconnections, and explain how those interconnections affect theoutcomes of the overall system. We discuss changes to our designs and conjectures over twolarge design cycles. We hope findings from this study can inform research examining howgames support the development of ST and other critical thinking skills.IntroductionSystems thinking (ST) is an important skill for making sense of the complex systems in our world, includingnavigating everyday professional and social life (Hogan, 2000). Systems thinking helps people see and experiencethe relationships “between the various physical and social subsystems that make up our reality” (Richmond, 1993,p. 113). It is considered an important 21st century skill for generating solutions to increasingly complex andinterconnected problems (Boardman & Sauser, 2008; P21 Framework Definitions, 2009). ST has receivedincreased attention in educational research (e.g. Goldstone & Wilensky, 2008; Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006;Sweeney, 2010). However, there are few studies focusing on students’ ST learning trajectories, especially inelementary grades.Hmelo-Silver, Marathe, and Liu (2007) articulated the main aspects of ST that we focus on in this study:components or structures - the elements of a system, behaviors - features of components or descriptions of whatthey can do, and interconnections or functions - the ways components or behaviors interact and how that impactsthe system. Ideally, we’re looking for students to identify components, describe how components and behaviorsinterconnect, and explain how those interconnections affect the outcomes of the overall system.We chose to approach ST through designing and playing games for several reasons. First, research clearlydemonstrates the benefits of playing games for learning (Barab et al., 2007; Gresalfi & Barnes, 2016; Pareto etal., 2011; Squire, 2006). Research also shows the value of learning through design (Harel & Papert, 1991; Haury,2002; Kafai & Resnick, 1996), including designing games (Kafai, 1996; Marchetti & Valente, 2014), but moreresearch is needed to unpack how playing and designing games impacts ST (Squire, 2002).Context and methodsStudy contextThe data for this project was collected at a summer camp at a southeastern U.S. university during summers 2013and 2014. Year 1 of the study included two rounds of implementations. There were some revisions to the designbetween rounds 1 and 2 based on initial findings, then more revisions before year 2.In year 1, our workshop focused on designing and playing digital games to learn about ST. The workshoplasted one week, followed by a second week with another group of students. The first week had 25 students, andthe second week had 23 students including 4 who repeated the workshop. In year 2, our workshop involveddesigning and playing digital and board games to learn about ST and ratio. We again taught the same week-longworkshop for two weeks to two different groups of students. There were 15 students in week 1 and 15 in week 2,with no repeaters. The workshops lasted all day with short breaks for lunch and exercise.ParticipantsThe students in this study were rising 4th and 5th graders from across the U.S. To qualify for the program, studentshad to perform at or above the 95th percentile on standardized achievement tests. Once accepted to the camp,students chose to participate in workshops based on their interests and areas with strongest test scores. Therefore,students in our workshops had some interest in games and mathematics. The research team designed, taught, andanalyzed each of the workshops.Data collectionICLS 2018 Proceedings917© ISLSDuring year 1, we focused data collection on the development of students’ ST skills. We designed and collectedpre and posttests for ST, kept copies of the digital games students designed, and took videos of whole classdiscussions. From year 2, we have copies of students’ digital games and videos of the board games studentsdesigned, videos of whole class discussions, and copies of students’ “let’s play” videos, described below.AnalysisWe used the ST framework from Hmelo-Silver, Marathe, and Liu (2007) to code students’ pre and posttests anddiscussions for evidence of components, behaviors, and interconnections. Test questions and student talk indiscussions were coded on a three-point scale. Responses received a 1 if the student only mentioned components,a 2 if he/she talked about behaviors or one interconnection, and a 3 if the solution included multipleinterconnections or their impact on the system. We also used the ST framework to count the number ofcomponents and connections in students’ digital games. In the digital game designs, each different kind of blockor character counted as a component. We then counted connections necessary to win the game. For instance, ifthere were many enemies in the game and the student chose an avatar (the character the player controls) with agun, we counted that as one connection because the player needed a gun to get past all the enemies.Starting points and conjecturesThe students in this study identified as “gifted” and tested about two grade levels ahead. They also chose toparticipate in this workshop, so they were already interested in games and motivated to participate. However, theyhad very few prior experiences with formal ST skills. Informal interviews indicated students had not spent muchtime playing or designing games in school. Although all of them played games at home, only a few students hadexperience designing games.To understand students’ starting points with ST, we gave pretests in year 1. We coded the tests forevidence of thinking in terms of components, behaviors, and interconnections. The average score on the pretestin the first week of year 1 was 42.8%, and the average score (without the repeat students) in the second week was45.9%. Students were able to identify components of different systems, but they didn’t understand how thosecomponents interacted to affect outcomes of the overall system.Our initial designs were informed by several conjectures. We thought playing some digital games firstwould help students generate ideas for their own designs. We planned to talk about the digital games in a wholeclass discussion, which focused on identifying components in each of the games students played. Next, we wantedstudents to design their own digital games, which gave them opportunities to plan and explore systems. Studentsdesigned in Gamestar Mechanic (https://gamestarmechanic.com/) because the program allows students to easilystart the game design process. We also thought that giving students an open goal, such as making the easiest orhardest game in the world, would allow them to explore many different aspects of the game system.Findings and revised conjecturesYear 1, Week 1The results after week 1 revealed some limitations of the initial designs. The average pre to posttest change wasonly 1% (increase from 42.8% pre to 43.8% post), so the tests didn’t reflect any ST learning. In whole classdiscussions, students mentioned an average of 5 components, 8 behaviors, and 4.7 interconnections per discussion.That means that in each discussion led by a researcher involving all 25 students, only 5 components and about 5interconnections were mentioned. The numbers are low considering the number of students, the amount of studenttalk, and the length of whole class discussions (30 minutes or more). We also saw few connections in the gamesstudents’ designed. On average, students’ digital games included 7.4 components and only 1.5 connections. Agame with 7 components and 1 connection implies there were extra components that didn’t affect the outcomesof the game system. These results led to some changes in the designs for week 2:•Researchers used ST vocabulary during whole class discussions to help students develop a sharedlanguage and understanding of basic ST skills. Researchers used the vocabulary to organize discussions,but students were not required to use the terms in their talk.•We changed the game design prompt to be “design around an avatar or enemy.” Each student chose anavatar or enemy in Gamestar Mechanic and designed his/her game around that character. This allowedstudents to think specifically about how components and their behaviors interact with the chosencharacter to help players win or lose the game.Year 1, Week 2ICLS 2018 Proceedings918© ISLSResults from the second week of the summer camp revealed some learning gains. First, students’ posttestsincreased an average of 10% (from 45.9% to 55.9%, ignoring students who repeated the workshop). Looking atstudents’ talk, we saw an average of 8.7 components, 25.3 behaviors, and 16 interconnections per whole classdiscussion. This is a large increase from 5 interconnections in week 1. We also saw an increase in the number ofconnections students used in their designed digital games. Students used an average of 9.1 components and 3.2connections per digital game.Year 2In year 1, we thought the quality of whole class discussions improved when teachers used ST vocabulary toorganize discussions. Therefore, in year 2, we added ST terms to the worksheets students used to guide their gamedesigns. We also had students design math board games, and we gave students cards with mathematics problemsto use in their games.While we have not yet completed a retrospective analysis of year 2, I can point to some initial findingsbased on videos and my own participation in the workshops. First, we found that giving students math cardsconstrained their game designs. All the student groups incorporated math cards into their board games in a similarmanner: a player lands on a particular space that requires them to pick up a math card, and if they get the answercorrect, the player collects points or money.Second, a few students asked to design their digital games in pairs instead of individually. Designing inpairs helped students articulate their ideas and talk more clearly about how the pieces in the games interconnected.In future iterations, we’d like all students to work in small groups.Third, students created “let’s play” videos of the games. “Let’s plays” are videos people post onlineshowing themselves playing games and talking about strategies to complete difficult sections. Thinking about anaudience encouraged students to analyze the difficult parts of the games and how the player interacted withcomponents to win the game. It also forced students to make their thinking explicit. In future workshops, we wantto keep using “let’s play” videos as a way to engage students in articulating their ideas.DiscussionAfter two years of studying games for ST, we have made some important changes to our conjectures and designs.We now have a better idea of what we can expect from students’ ST skills during each activity and how we cansupport their learning. I’ve adjusted the hypothetical learning trajectory to build in ST skills more gradually.Rather than expecting students to go from identifying important components to talking about outcomes of asystem, the trajectory now includes a set of activities that supports students to think about components, thenbehaviors, then interconnections and system outcomes. Our findings also point to some ideas about how to supportstudents’ design processes, including using designer worksheets with systems vocabulary, having students playmany different games and brainstorm ideas, letting students think creatively about how to use math in their games,and designing digital games around a specific character or component. Table 1 summarizes the updated learningtrajectory with design changes to explore in future iterations. We hope findings and design changes from thisstudy can inform research examining how games support the development of ST and other critical thinking skills.It is important to remember that the context of this study was special: all the students tested above the95th percentile on state tests, students chose to participate in this workshop, and the workshops lasted all day fora week. However, our designs could be implemented in a regular classroom over a longer period of time. Insteadof one week devoted to playing and designing games, the activities could be dispersed over a month or a semesterof instruction. As we continue to refine our designs and learning trajectory, it will be interesting to explore howteachers might use these activities to improve students’ ST skills in more diverse classrooms.Table 4: Updated learning trajectory and designsSystems Thinking Learning GoalsActivityRecognize important components of thegames students playStudents play math board games and digital games. Teacherslead a whole class discussion of the games using systemsthinking vocabulary.Articulate important components and theirbehaviors in the games students playStudents make “let’s play” videos about some of the digitalgames they played.ICLS 2018 Proceedings919© ISLSRecognize important components and howthey interconnect to make a game work(focusing on the games students played andtheir game design ideas)Teachers lead whole class discussions brainstorming ideas formath games. Students plan their board game and digital gamedesigns by answering questions (written with systemsthinking terms) on a worksheet.Talk with peers about components andinterconnections in students’ designedgamesStudents work in groups to design math board games.Think about components, their behaviors,and how they interconnect in the digitalgames students makeStudents work in pairs to make digital games in GamestarMechanic using the prompt “design around an avatar” or“design around an enemy.”Talk about components, behaviors,interconnections, and game systemoutcomes (in terms of digital games, boardgames, and students’ designs)Teachers lead a whole class discussion wrapping-up students’game playing and designing experiences. They discussplaying versus making games, the different features of digitalversus board games, and how digital and board games helppeople learn or practice mathematics.ReferencesBarab, S., Dodge, T., Tuzun, H., Job-Sluder, K., Jackson, C., Arici, A., ... & Heiselt, C. (2007). The Quest AtlantisProject: A socially-responsive play space for learning. The design and use of simulation computer gamesin education, 159-186.Boardman, J., & Sauser, B. (2008). Systems thinking: Coping with 21st century problems. CRC Press.Goldstone, R. L., & Wilensky, U. (2008). Promoting transfer by grounding complex systems principles. TheJournal of the Learning Sciences, 17(4), 465-516.Gresalfi, M. S., & Barnes, J. (2016). Designing feedback in an immersive videogame: supporting studentmathematical engagement. Educational Technology Research and Development, 64(1), 65-86.Harel, I. E., & Papert, S. E. (1991). Constructionism. Ablex Publishing.Haury, D. L. (2002). Learning science through design. ERIC Clearinghouse for Science Mathematics andEnvironmental Education.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Marathe, S., & Liu, L. (2007). Fish swim, rocks sit, and lungs breathe: Expert-noviceunderstanding of complex systems. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(3), 307-331.Hogan, K. (2000). Assessing students' systems reasoning in ecology. Journal of Biological Education, 35(1), 2228.Jacobson, M. J., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educational importanceand implications for the learning sciences. The Journal of the learning sciences, 15(1), 11-34.Kafai, Y. B. (1996). Learning design by making games. Constructionism in practice: Designing, thinking andlearning in a digital world, 71-96.Kafai, Y. B., & Resnick, M. (1996). Constructionism in practice: Designing, thinking, and learning in a digitalworld. Routledge.Marchetti, E., & Valente, A. (2014, October). Design Games to Learn: A new Approach to Playful LearningThrough Digital Games'. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Games Based Learning (Vol.1, pp. 356-363).Pareto, L., Arvemo, T., Dahl, Y., Haake, M., & Gulz, A. (2011, June). A teachable-agent arithmetic game’s effectson mathematics understanding, attitude and self-efficacy. In Artificial Intelligence in Education (pp.247-255). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.P21 Framework Definitions (2009). Partnership for 21st Century Skills. Retrieved fromhttp://www.p21.org/storage/documents/P21_Framework_Definitions.pdf.Richmond, B. (1993). Systems thinking: critical thinking skills for the 1990s and beyond. System dynamicsreview, 9(2), 113-133.Squire, K. (2002). Cultural framing of computer/video games. Game studies, 2(1), 1-13.Squire, K. (2006). From content to context: Videogames as designed experience. Educational researcher, 35(8),19-29.Sweeney, L. B. (2010). Systems thinking: A means to understanding our complex world. PegasusCommunications.ICLS 2018 Proceedings920© ISLS