Neurocognitive Task Analysis: What Happens as Medical StudentsDevelop Perceptual Abilities?Liam Rourke, Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, lrourke@ualberta.caAbstract: Cognitive task analyses help educators identify the knowledge, skills, andabilities that comprise successful performances and thereby develop relevant learningexperiences. Here we argue that it is now possible, and helpful, to investigate the neurocognitive bases of performance.Diagnostic imaging is a central component of modern medical practice, with millions of images ordered andread daily. The differences between normal and abnormal results are subtle, and interpreting imagesaccurately and consistently is difficult even for experienced clinicians. The ability of medical educators toimpart this ability to trainees is uneven, as multiple meta-analyses have concluded (Rourke, Oberholtzer,Chatterly, & Brassard; 2015; Rourke, Leong, & Chatterly; 2018).One problem, we argue, is that medical educators construe the ability as a cognitive one that drawson declarative knowledge and clinical reasoning rather than a visual skill drawing on cortical networks tunedsharply to the task. Thus, training emphasizes the acquisition of a large amount of basic knowledge alongwith some clinical experience, but it marginalizes the visual categorization diagnostic images.Researchers in the cognitive neurosciences have studied visual experts from a number of domainsincluding birders, dog-show judges, lepidopterists, handwriting and fingerprint analysts, mycologists, andchicken sexers. Some of the researchers have demonstrated convincingly that many instances of visualexpertise are stimulus driven, bottom-up, forms of processing that occur very quickly after the onset of animage—too quickly to involve top-down, attentional and conceptual input in any substantial way.If diagnostic image interpretation is isomorphic with these forms of visual expertise, training shouldinclude guided, structured visual categorization in addition to the acquisition of basic knowledge.Unfortunately, image interpretation has rarely been conceptualized or studied in this framework. Moreover,there are many reasons to think that image interpretation is different—behaviorally, cognitively, andneurally—than other forms of visual expertise. Briefly, images such blood smears or skin lesions are unlikethe other stimuli that have been studied (cars, birds, dogs, etc.,) in that they do not have a natural top-bottomorientation, they are not small variations of a central prototype, and the task of the expert is not to individuatestimuli that are otherwise homogeneous.In our study we asked cardiologists and pulmonologists to read electrocardiograms and chestxrays—one being their specialty and the other a general ability—while we recorded their brain activity usingscalp electroencephalography. We found patterns of activity similar to those of previously studied visualexperts while the physicians read images from their area of expertise, but not while they read the othercategory of images. This suggests, provisionally, that reading diagnostic images is isomorphic with otherforms of visual expertise and therefore should be trained and assessed in the same manner that other types ofvisual experts are trained.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1615© ISLSFigures 1 and 2. Wave plots of the cardiologists’ (Fig 1) and pulmonologists (Fig 2) brain activity as theyread 64 EKGs and 64 chest radiographs. The plots represent the grand average of the N170 ERP recorded atchannels T5 and T6 across the 520 trials that were performed by each of the participants.ReferencesRourke, L. (2018). Conditions-based learning theory as a framework for comparative-effectiveness reviews.Teaching and Learning in Medicine, 30.Rourke, L. (2015). Learning to detect, categorize, and identify skin lesions: a meta-analysis. JAMAdermatology, 151(3), 293-301.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1616© ISLS